LeGrand Richards, Israel! Do You Know? ( 1954)

CHAPTER 7

THE SECOND COMING OF JESUS CHRIST

Christ's Second Coming Distinguished from His First Coming

Having considered the prophecies relating to His first coming, including those contained in the Stick of Joseph, we will now consider those pertaining to His second coming. Let us begin this consideration with the words of the Christ in answer to the question of the high priest when He was brought before Caiaphas:

But Jesus held his peace. And the high priest answered and said unto him, I adjure thee by the living God, that thou tell us whether thou be the Christ, the Son of God.

Jesus saith unto him, Thou hast said: nevertheless I say unto you, Hereafter shall ye see the Son of man sitting on the right hand of power, and coming in the clouds of heaven. (St. Matthew 26:63-64.)

The Prophet Daniel saw this coming "in the clouds of heaven" to which Jesus referred:

I saw in the night visions, and, behold, one like the Son of man came with the clouds of heaven, and came to the Ancient of days, and they brought him near before him.

And there was given him dominion, and glory, and a kingdom, that all people, nations, and languages, should serve him: his dominion is an everlasting dominion, which shall not pass away, and his kingdom that which shall not be destroyed. (Daniel 7:13-14.)

Jesus' coming in the "clouds of heaven" to receive the kingdom prepared for Him, as described by Daniel, is quite different from His first coming as described by the Prophet Isaiah:

. . . unto us a child is born, unto us a son is given: and the government shall be upon his shoulder: and his name shall be called Wonderful, Counsellor, The mighty God, The everlasting Father, The Prince of Peace. (Isaiah 9:6.)

Christ's coming in the "clouds of heaven" to which Daniel referred was to be at a much later date than "when a child is born" to which Isaiah referred. There was no kingdom prepared for Him when He was born of the virgin Mary. But when He shall come in the "clouds of heaven," the kingdom will already have been prepared for Him. Unless a kingdom is prepared how can it be given to Him?

Christ Will Come to His Temple

Speaking of the second coming of the Lord, and the preparation to be made therefor, the Prophet Malachi states:

Behold, I will send my messenger, and he shall prepare the way before me: and the Lord, whom ye seek, shall suddenly come to his temple, even the messenger of the covenant, whom ye delight in: behold, he shall come, saith the Lord of hosts.

But who may abide the day of his coming? and who shall stand when he appeareth? for he is like a refiner's fire, and like fullers' soap:

And he shall sit as a refiner and purifier of silver: and he shall purify the sons of Levi, and purge them as gold and silver, that they may offer unto the Lord an offering in righteousness.

Then shall the offering of Judah and Jerusalem be pleasant unto the Lord, as in the days of old, and as in former years.

And I will come near to you to judgment; and I will be a swift witness against the sorcerers, and against the adulterers and against false swearers, and against those that oppress the hireling in his wages, the widow, and the fatherless, and that turn aside the stranger from his right, and fear not me, saith the Lord of hosts.

For I am the Lord, I change not; therefore ye sons of Jacob are not consumed. (Malachi 3:1-6.)

Jesus testified that the messenger herein promised who would be sent to prepare the way before Him was John the Baptist:

For this is he, of whom it is written, Behold, I send my messenger before thy face, which shall prepare thy way before thee. (St. Matthew 11:10.)

From the reading of Malachi's prophecy, it is apparent that he saw far beyond the time of Christ's first coming, for he states that he shall "suddenly come to his temple." This He did not do at His first coming.

Then Malachi adds: "But who may abide the day of his coming?" All were able to abide the day of His first coming.

The Wicked Shall Cry

When He shall come the second time, "in the clouds of heaven," the wicked shall cry out for the mountains and rocks to fall upon them, to hide them from His face:

And the kings of the earth, and the great men, and the rich men, and the chief captains, and the mighty men, and every bondman, and every free man, hid themselves in the dens and in the rocks of the mountains;

And said to the mountains and rocks, Fall on us, and hide us from the face of him that sitteth on the throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb:

For the great day of his wrath is come; and who shall be able to stand? (Revelations 6:15-17.)

The Lord to Judge His People

Again Malachi saw the coming of the Lord when He should come in power to judge His people:

For, behold, the day cometh that shall burn as an oven; and all the proud, yea, and all that do wickedly, shall be stubble: and the day that cometh shall burn them up, saith the Lord of hosts, that it shall leave them neither root nor branch. (Malachi 4:1.)

The prophecy of Isaiah is added in support of the words of Malachi:

The earth shall reel to and fro like a drunkard, and shall be removed like a cottage; and the transgression thereof shall be heavy upon it; and it shall fall, and not rise again.

And it shall come to pass in that day, that the Lord shall punish the host of the high ones that are on high, and the kings of the earth upon the earth.

And they shall be gathered together, as prisoners are gathered in the pit, and shall be shut up in the prison, and after many days shall they be visited.

Then the moon shall be confounded, and the sun ashamed, when the Lord of hosts shall reign in mount Zion, and in Jerusalem, and before his ancients gloriously. (Isaiah 24:20-23.)

In describing what would happen to the earth and the moon and the inhabitants of the earth "when the Lord of hosts shall reign in mount Zion," it is very apparent that Isaiah was referring to His second coming and not to His first coming.

The Lord to Reward His People

Isaiah further describes the coming of the Lord to reward His people:

Behold, the Lord God will come with strong hand, and his arm shall rule for him: behold, his reward is with him, and his work before him. (Isaiah 40:10.)

Behold, the Lord hath proclaimed unto the end of the the world, Say ye to the daughter of Zion, Behold, thy salvation cometh; behold, his reward is with him, and his work before him. (Isaiah 62:11.)

Who is this that cometh from Edom, with dyed garments from Bozrah? this that is glorious in his apparel, travelling in the greatness of his strength? I that speak in righteousness, mighty to save.

Wherefore art thou red in thine apparel, and thy garments like him that treadeth in the winefat?

I have trodden the winepress alone; and of the people there was none with me: for I will tread them in mine anger, and trample them in my fury; and their blood shall be sprinkled upon my garments, and I will stain all my raiment.

For the day of vengeance is in mine heart, and the year of my redeemed is come. (Isaiah 63:1-4.)

Time of the Second Coming Foretold

The Prophet Isaiah foresees the coming of the "Redeemer" to the seed of Jacob:

And the Redeemer shall come to Zion, and unto them that turn from transgression in Jacob, saith the Lord. (Isaiah 59:20.)

Isaiah gives us further light pertaining to the time of the coming of the Redeemer, and gives us some idea of the period in the world's history when this glorious event would occur:

Arise, shine; for thy light is come, and the glory of the Lord is risen upon thee.

For, behold, the darkness shall cover the earth, and gross darkness the people: but the Lord shall arise upon thee, and his glory shall be seen upon thee.

And the Gentiles shall come to thy light, and kings to the brightness of thy rising. (Isaiah 60:1-3.)

Note particularly these words of Isaiah:

Who are these that fly as a cloud, and as the doves to their windows? (Isaiah 60:8.)

Clearly, Isaiah was referring to individuals and not to birds. Surely there has never been a time in the history of this world when men flew "as a cloud" or "as the doves to their windows," until our present time since the advent of the airplane.

Again, in referring to the time of the second coming of the Messiah, Isaiah said:

And there shall come forth, a rod out of the stem of Jesse, and a Branch shall grow out of his roots:

And the spirit of the Lord shall rest upon him, the spirit of wisdom and understanding, the spirit of counsel and might, the spirit of knowledge and of the fear of the Lord;

And shall make him of quick understanding in the fear of the Lord: and he shall not judge after the sight of his eyes, neither reprove after the hearing of his ears:

But with righteousness shall he judge the poor, and reprove with equity for the meek of the earth: and he shall smite the earth with the rod of his mouth, and with the breath of his lips shall he slay the wicked.

And righteousness shall be the girdle of his loins, and faithfulness the girdle of his reins.

The wolf also shall dwell with the lamb, and the leopard shall lie down with the kid; and the calf and the young lion and the fatling together; and the little child shall lead them.

And the cow and the bear shall feed; their young ones shall lie down together: and the lion shall eat straw like the ox.

And the sucking child shall play on the hole of the asp, and the weaned child shall put his hand on the cockatrice' den.

They shall not hurt nor destroy in all my holy mountain: for the earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord, as the waters cover the sea.

And in that day there shall be a root of Jesse, which shall stand for an ensign of the people; to it shall the Gentiles seek: and his rest shall be glorious.

And it shall come to pass in that day, that the Lord shall set his hand again the second time to recover the remnant of his people, which shall be left, from Assyria, and from Egypt, and from Pathros, and from Cush, and from Elam, and from Shinar, and from Hamath, and from the islands of the sea.

And he shall set up an ensign for the nations, and shall assemble the outcasts of Israel, and gather together the dispersed of Judah from the four corners of the earth.

The envy also of Ephraim shall depart, and the adversaries of Judah shall be cut off: Ephraim shall not envy Judah, and Judah shall not vex Ephraim. (Isaiah 11:1-13.)

The promises declared by Isaiah did not have their fulfillment in the first coming of Christ as the promised Messiah. They relate to the time of the establishment of His latter-day kingdom which Daniel saw would be set up in the earth by the God of Heaven to prepare the way for Christ's second coming when he would come "in the clouds of heaven."

Of the second coming of the Messiah, the Prophet Jeremiah foretells the day when the Lord would raise up unto David a righteous branch, and a King whose name is, "The Lord Our Righteousness," who would reign and prosper, and execute judgment and justice in the earth:

Behold, the days come, saith the Lord, that I will raise unto David a righteous Branch, and a King shall reign and prosper, and shall execute judgment and justice in the earth.

In his days Judah shall be saved, and Israel shall dwell safely: and this is his name whereby he shall be called, THE LORD OUR RIGHTEOUSNESS.

Therefore, behold, the days come, saith the Lord, that they shall no more say, The Lord liveth, which brought up the children of Israel out of the land of Egypt.

But, the Lord liveth, which brought up and which lead the seed of the house of Israel out of the north country, and from all countries whither I had driven them; and they shall dwell in their own land. (Jeremiah 23:5-8.)

We include verses 7 and 8 in the above quotation to fix the time when the Lord would "raise unto David a righteous Branch" and a King who would "execute judgment and justice in the earth."

The Psalmist saw the coming of the Lord to judge His people, which vision clearly relates to His second coming—not to His first coming:

The mighty God, even the Lord, hath spoken, and called the earth from the rising of the Sun unto the going down thereof.

Out of Zion, the perfection of beauty, God hath shined.

Our God shall come, and shall not keep silence: a fire shall devour before him, and it shall be very tempestuous around about him.

He shall call to the heavens from above, and to the earth, that he may judge his people.

Gather my saints together unto me; those that have made a covenant with me by sacrifice.

And the heavens shall declare his righteousness: for God is judge himself. Selah. (Psalms 50:1-6.)

Second Coming to be "at the Latter Day"

In Job's great physical distress, he bore testimony that he knew his Redeemer would stand upon the earth at the latter day:

For I know that my redeemer liveth, and that he shall stand at the latter day upon the earth:

And though after my skin worms destroy this body, yet in my flesh shall I see God:

Whom I shall see for myself, and mine eyes shall behold, and not another; though my reins be consumed within me. (Job 19:25-27.)

What Job was given to know was that his Redeemer would stand upon the earth at the latter day and that in his flesh, though it had been destroyed by the worms, he would see God, his Redeemer. This, of course, has reference to Christ's second coming.

"And They Shall Look upon Me Whom They Have Pierced"

Zechariah clearly foretold the second coming of our Lord:

In that day will I make the governors of Judah like an hearth of fire among the wood, and like a torch of fire in a sheaf; and they shall devour all the people round about, on the right hand and on the left: and Jerusalem shall be inhabited again in her own place, even in Jerusalem.

The Lord also shall save the tents of Judah first, that the glory of the house of David and the glory of the inhabitants of Jerusalem do not magnify themselves against Judah.

In that day shall the Lord defend the inhabitants of Jerusalem; and he that is feeble among them at that day shall be as David; and the house of David shall be as God, as the angel of the Lord, before them.

And it shall come to pass in that day, that I will seek to destroy all the nations that come against Jerusalem.

And I will pour upon the house of David, and upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem, the spirit of grace and of supplication: and they shall look upon me whom they have pierced, and they shall mourn for him, as one mourneth for his only son, and shall be in bitterness for him, as one that is in bitterness for his firstborn. (Zechariah 12:6-10.)

Obviously, the words of Zechariah could only have reference to Christ's second coming since at His first coming, He was born a little child, as the prophets had foretold. Zechariah further described what he meant when he said: "and they shall look upon me whom they have pierced":

And one shall say unto him, What are these wounds in thine hands? Then he shall answer, Those with which I was wounded in the house of my friends. (Zechariah 13:6.)

"Forgive Them, for They Know Not What They Do"

Surely there will never be another who will have met all the requirements foretold by the prophets as did Jesus the Christ, even to the wounds which He received in the house of His friends. Even though they pierced and crucified Him, yet He loved them for they were His chosen people. That He loved them dearly is evidenced by His statement as He hung upon the cross:

Then said Jesus, Father, forgive them; for they know not what they do. And they parted his raiment, and cast lots. (St. Luke 23:34.)

"Blessed are They that Have Not Seen and Yet Have Believed"

It will be wonderful for those of the House of Judah who accept their Messiah without having to wait to see the wounds in His hands. Consider the words of Jesus to His Apostle Thomas, who doubted Christ's resurrection when told thereof by the disciples:

Jesus saith unto him, Thomas, because thou hast seen me, thou hast believed: blessed are they that have not seen, and yet have believed. (St. John 20:29.)

Jerusalem Shall Be Safely Inhabited

The Prophet Zechariah made other important predictions concerning the coming of the Lord in the latter days, His second coming, and the winding up scenes and the preparation therefor:

Behold, the day of the Lord cometh, . . .

For I will gather all nations against Jerusalem to battle; . . .

Then shall the Lord go forth, and fight against those nations, as when he fought in the day of battle. . . .

. . . and the Lord my God shall come, and all the Saints with thee. . . .

And the Lord shall be king over all the earth: in that day shall there be one Lord, and his name one. . . .

And men shall dwell in it, and there shall be no more utter destruction; but Jerusalem shall be safely inhabited. . . .

And Judah also shall fight at Jerusalem; and the wealth of all the heathen round about shall be gathered together, gold, and silver, and apparel, in great abundance. (Zechariah 14:1-3, 5, 9, 11, 14.)

Thus Zechariah saw, as did Daniel, that "the Lord my God shall come, and all the Saints with thee, and the Lord shall be king over all the earth." This had no reference to His first coming, but referred only to His second coming.

Stick of Joseph Predicts Second Coming of the Messiah

Of this final triumphant coming of the Lord to deliver and save His people, the Prophet Jacob, the brother of Nephi, as recorded in the Stick of Joseph, declared what the Lord had shown him:

And now I, Jacob, would speak somewhat concerning these words. For behold, the Lord has shown me that those who were at Jerusalem, from whence we came, have been slain and carried away captive.

Nevertheless, the Lord has shown unto me that they should return again. And he also has shown unto me that the Lord God, the Holy One of Israel, should manifest himself unto them in the flesh; and after he should manifest himself they should scourge him and crucify him, according to the words of the angel who spake it unto me.

And after they have hardened their hearts and stiffened their necks against the Holy One of Israel, behold, the judgments of the Holy One of Israel shall come upon them. And the day cometh that they shall be smitten and afflicted.

Wherefore, after they are driven to and fro, for thus saith the angel, many shall be afflicted in the flesh, and shall not be suffered to perish, because of the prayers of the faithful; they shall be scattered, and smitten, and hated; nevertheless, the Lord will be merciful unto them, that when they shall come to the knowledge of their Redeemer, they shall be gathered together again to the lands of their inheritance. . . .

And behold, according to the words of the prophet, the Messiah will set himself again the second time to recover them; wherefore, he will manifest himself unto them in power and great glory, unto the destruction of their enemies, when that day cometh when they shall believe in him; and none will he destroy that believe in him.

And they that believe not in him shall be destroyed, both by fire, and by tempest, and by earthquakes, and by bloodsheds, and by pestilence, and by famine. And they shall know that the Lord is God, the Holy One of Israel. (2 Nephi 6:8-11, 14-15.)

Thus the angel of the Lord showed Jacob the coming of the Holy One of Israel and His crucifixion, and the scattering and scourging of His people, and their gathering to Jerusalem prior to His second coming. He showed Jacob how those who would not be willing to accept Him would be destroyed until they who remained would "know that the Lord is God, the Holy One of Israel." It is of great importance, therefore, that The House of Judah come to this knowledge.

Jesus Ascends—He Will Come Again

Even the Apostles of Jesus seemed to be looking for the literal coming of His kingdom while He was with them. After His crucifixion and resurrection, and the forty days while He ministered among them following His resurrection, His apostles inquired again regarding the restoration of His kingdom:

When they therefore were come together, they asked of him, saying, Lord, wilt thou at this time restore again the kingdom to Israel?

And he said unto them, it is not for you to know the times or the seasons, which the Father hath put in his own power.

But ye shall receive power, after that the Holy Ghost is come upon you: and ye shall be witnesses unto me both in Jerusalem, and in all Judaea, and in Samaria, and unto the uttermost part of the earth.

And when he had spoken these things, while they beheld, he was taken up; and a cloud received him out of their sight.

And while they looked stedfastly toward heaven as he went up, behold, two men stood by them in white apparel;

Which also said, Ye men of Galilee, why stand ye gazing up into heaven? this same Jesus which is taken up from you into heaven, shall so come in like manner as ye have see him go into heaven. (Acts 1:6-11.)

Parley P. Pratt, an apostle of the Lord Jesus Christ, in this dispensation, summarized, in verse, a moving account of both the first and the second coming of our Lord:

Jesus, once of humble birth,

Now in glory comes to earth;

Once he suffered grief and pain,

Now he comes on earth to reign.

Once a meek and lowly Lamb,

Now the Lord, the great I AM:

Once upon the cross He bowed,

Now His chariot is the cloud.

Once he groaned in blood and tears,

Now in glory he appears;

Once rejected by His own,

Now their King He shall be known.

Once forsaken, left alone,

Now exalted to a throne;

Once all things He meekly bore,

But he now will bear no more.
