LeGrand Richards, Israel! Do You Know? ( 1954)

CHAPTER 8

EVENTS TO TRANSPIRE BEFORE CHRIST'S SECOND COMING

A Choice Seer to be Raised Up "in the latter days"

We have pointed out that John the Baptist was the messenger sent to prepare the way for the first coming of our Lord. (St. Matthew 11:10.) It seems consistent that the Messiah would also send His messenger to prepare the way for His second coming. We have the promise of the Lord to this effect as recorded in the Stick of Joseph in the words of the Prophet Lehi to his son Joseph:

And now, Joseph, my last-born, whom I have brought out of the wilderness of mine afflictions, may the Lord bless thee forever, for thy seed shall not utterly be destroyed.

For behold, thou art the fruit of my loins; and I am a descendant of Joseph who was carried captive into Egypt. And great were the covenants of the Lord which he made unto Joseph.

Wherefore, Joseph truly saw our day. And he obtained a promise of the Lord, that out of the fruit of his loins the Lord God would raise up a righteous branch unto the house of Israel; not the Messiah, but a branch which was to be broken off, nevertheless, to be remembered in the covenants of the Lord that the Messiah should be made manifest unto them in the latter days in the spirit of power, unto the bringing of them out of darkness unto light—yea, out of hidden darkness and out of captivity unto freedom.

For Joseph truly testified, saying: A seer shall the Lord my God raise up, who shall be a choice seer unto the fruit of my loins.

Yea, Joseph truly said: Thus saith the Lord unto me: A choice seer will I raise up out of the fruit of thy loins; and he shall be esteemed highly among the fruit of thy loins. And unto him will I give commandment that he shall do a work for the fruit of thy loins, his brethren, which shall be of great worth unto them, even to the bringing of them to the knowledge of the covenants which I have made with thy fathers.

And I will give unto him a commandment that he shall do none other work, save the work which I shall command him. And I will make him great in mine eyes; for he shall do my work.

And he shall be great like unto Moses whom I have said I would raise up unto you, to deliver my people, O house of Israel.

And Moses will I raise up, to deliver thy people out of the land of Egypt.

But a seer will I raise up out of the fruit of thy loins; and unto him will I give power to bring forth my word unto the seed of thy loins—and not to the bringing forth my word only, saith the Lord, but to the convincing them of my word, which shall have already gone forth among them.

Wherefore, the fruit of thy loins shall write; and the fruit of the loins of Judah shall write; and that which shall be written by the fruit of thy loins, and also that which shall be written by the fruit of the loins of Judah, shall grow together, unto the confounding of false doctrines and laying down of contentions and establishing peace among the fruit of thy loins, and bringing them to the knowledge of their fathers in the latter days and also to the knowledge of my covenants, saith the Lord.

And out of weakness he shall be made strong, in that day when my work shall commence among all my people, unto the restoring thee, O house of Israel, saith the Lord.

And thus prophesied Joseph, saying: Behold, that seer will the Lord bless; and they that seek to destroy him shall be confounded; for this promise, which I have obtained of the Lord, of the fruit of my loins, shall be fulfilled. Behold, I am sure of the fulfilling of this promise;

And his name shall be called after me; and it shall be after the name of his father. And he shall be like unto me; for the thing, which the Lord shall bring forth by his hand, by the power of the Lord shall bring my people unto salvation.

Yea, thus prophesied Joseph: I am sure of this thing, even as I am sure of the promise of Moses; for the Lord hath said unto me, I will preserve thy seed forever. (2 Nephl 3:3-16.)

The mighty work to be done to prepare the way for the second coming of the Messiah could not be accomplished without such a prophet and seer being raised up by the Lord for this very purpose. Remember the words of Amos:

Surely the Lord God will do nothing, but he revealeth his secret unto his servants the prophets. (Amos 3:7.)

Judah Divided into Many Groups

Obviously, there would be no need of the Lord sending a prophet "in the latter-days" if His children of the House of Judah and Israel were already under the leadership of a prophet.

Consider the condition of the House of Judah. If the Lord had a seer and prophet among them "like unto Moses," or like any of the ancient Hebrew prophets, the Lord could speak to that prophet who, in turn, could speak to the entire House of Judah. But such is impossible today, for Judah is divided into many groups, each with its own interpretations of the written word of the Lord, and with its own leaders, none of whom profess to speak in the name of the Lord, as did the prophets of old. All this, notwithstanding the statement of Amos: "Surely the Lord God will do nothing, but he revealeth his secret unto his servants the prophets." (Amos 3:7.) Under such divided leadership, how could the Lord establish His kingdom preparatory to the second coming of the Messiah?

"A Famine in the Land"

The Lord declared unto Joseph that from his seed he would raise up a "choice seer . . . like unto Moses" in the latter days. He also inspired others of His prophets to declare how the leaders of His people would go astray and how spiritual darkness would spread over the earth as witness the words of Amos:

Behold, the days come, saith the Lord God, that I will send a famine in the land, not a famine of bread, nor a thirst for water, but of hearing the words of the Lord:

And they shall wander from sea to sea, and from the north even to the east, they shall run to and fro to seek the word of the Lord, and shall not find it. (Amos 8:11-12.)

If there were any place in the world where the word of the Lord could be heard, surely the Prophet Amos would not have made such a statement.

"No Answer of God"

The Prophet Micah also foresaw the day when there would be "no answer of God." He described the apostate condition of Israel as follows:

Thus saith the Lord concerning the prophets that make my people err, that bite with their teeth, and cry, Peace; and he that putteth not into their mouths, they even prepare war against him.

Therefore night shall be unto you, that ye shall not have a vision; and it shall be dark unto you, that ye shall not divine; and the sun shall go down over the prophets, and the day shall be dark over them.

Then shall the seers be ashamed, and the diviners confounded: yea, they shall all cover their lips; for there is no answer of God. . . .

The heads thereof judge for reward, and the priests thereof teach for hire, and the prophets thereof divine for money: yet will they lean upon the Lord, and say, Is not the Lord among us? none evil can come upon us. (Micah 3:5-7, 11.)

Can anyone question the fact that such a condition exists in Judah today? Yet their leaders "lean upon the Lord, and say, Is not the Lord among us?"

The Prophet Isaiah was also privileged to see this apostate condition of Israel and described it in these words:

Behold, the Lord maketh the earth empty, and maketh it waste, and turneth it upside down, and scattereth abroad the inhabitants thereof.

And it shall be, as with the people, so with the priest; as with the servant, so with his master; as with the maid, so with her mistress; as with the buyer, so with the seller; as with the lender, so with the borrower; as with the taker of usury, so with the giver of usury to him.

The land shall be utterly emptied, and utterly spoiled: for the Lord hath spoken this word.

The earth mourneth and fadeth away, the world languisheth and fadeth away, the haughty people of the earth do languish.

The earth also is defiled under the inhabitants thereof; because they have transgressed the laws, changed the ordinance, broken the everlasting covenant.

Therefore hath the curse devoured the earth, and they that dwell therein are desolate: therefore the inhabitants of the earth are burned, and few men left. (Isaiah 24:1-6.)

The need of a new prophet "like unto Moses" to be sent by the Lord "in the latter days" can well be understood when one considers the condition of Israel as described by the Prophet Isaiah. What an indictment!: "They have transgressed the laws, changed the ordinances, broken the everlasting covenant." And as Micah stated: "There is no answer of God."

Apostate Condition of the Christian World

The Apostles of the Christ had foretold this condition also, as had the prophets of Judah, with respect to the condition of the descendants of Judah. Paul declared:

This know also, that in the last days perilous times shall come.

For men shall be lovers of their own selves, covetous, boasters, proud, blasphemers, disobedient to parents, unthankful, unholy,

Without natural affection, trucebreakers, false accusers, incontinent, fierce, despisers of those that are good,

Traitors, heady, highminded, lovers of pleasure more than lovers of God;

Having a form of godliness, but denying the power thereof: from such turn away. (II Timothy 3:1-5.)

From this statement we are given to understand that it takes more than "a form of godliness," to constitute worship acceptable to God. Paul declared this would be the condition that would exist "in the last days." We repeat the admonition of Paul: "From such turn away."

A Falling Away Foretold

Paul further warned the followers of Christ who were already looking forward to His second coming, that that day would not come "except there come a falling away first." That there has been a falling away is clearly evidenced by the fact that there are hundreds of denominations and cults all professing to believe in Christ, but worshiping Him through man-made doctrines. Had there been no falling away, there would be but one Church of Jesus Christ upon the earth today. Note Paul's warning:

Now we beseech you, brethren, by the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, and by our gathering together unto him,

That ye be not soon shaken in mind, or be troubled, neither by spirit, nor by word, nor by letter as from us, as that the day of Christ is at hand.

Let no man deceive you by any means: for that day shall not come, except there come a falling away first and that man of sin be revealed, the son of perdition;

Who opposeth and exalteth himself above all that is called God, or that is worshipped; so that he as God sitteth in the temple of God, shewing himself that he is God. (II Thessalonians 2:1-4.)

Further describing this departure from the truth, Paul declared:

For the time will come when they will not endure sound doctrine; but after their own lusts shall they heap to themselves teachers, having itching ears;

And they shall turn away their ears from the truth and shall be turned unto fables. (II Timothy 4:3-4.)

Satan to Overcome the Saints

The universality of this departure from the truth was proclaimed by John when he described the power which would be given to Satan:

And it was given unto him to make war with the saints, and to overcome them: and power was given him over all kindreds, and tongues, and nations. (Revelation 13:7.)

While Satan was to be given power over the peoples of all nations, it should not be supposed that this would leave them without churches and religious teachings, for as the Apostle Paul stated, they would have "a form of godliness." Satan's policy seems to be to imitate the truth, i.e., when men "will not endure sound doctrine," as Paul stated, Satan sends teachers who will teach them "after their own lusts" since they have "itching ears." Such teachers Jesus referred to as "false prophets, which come to you in sheep's clothing, but inwardly they are ravening wolves." (St. Matthew 7:15.)

A Marvelous Work and a Wonder to Come Forth

Even though the prophets understood that Satan would have power to overcome the Saints, and scatter the people of the Lord, nevertheless, the Lord gave His prophets to understand that His truth would ultimately triumph in the earth, and that His kingdom would subdue all other kingdoms, powers and dominions. This kingdom would be established "in the latter days" to prepare for the second coming of the Messiah. Witness the following statement of Isaiah:

Wherefore the Lord said, Forasmuch as this people draw near me with their mouth, and with their lips do honour me, but have removed their heart far from me, and their fear toward me is taught by the precept of men:

Therefore, behold, I will proceed to do a marvellous work among this people, even a marvellous work and a wonder; for the wisdom of their wise men shall perish, and the understanding of their prudent men shall be hid. (Isaiah 29:13-14.)

Without a full consideration of the magnitude of this promise, it would be difficult for the layman to understand and comprehend that which, in the eyes of the Lord, would constitute "a marvellous work and a wonder," which would cause the wisdom of their wise men to perish, and the understanding of their prudent men to be hid. It should be noted that the Lord said He would proceed to do "a marvellous work" among the people. Thus it would be the work of God and not of man.

The God of Heaven to Set Up His Kingdom

This "marvellous work and a wonder" is nothing more nor less than the establishment of the Kingdom of God upon the earth in the latter days in direct fulfillment of the prophecy of Daniel, quoted again for emphasis:

But there is a God in heaven that revealeth secrets, and maketh known to the king Nebuchadnezzar what shall be in the latter days. . . .

And in the days of these kings shall the God of heaven set up a kingdom, which shall never be destroyed: and the kingdom shall not be left to other people, but it shall break in pieces and consume all these kingdoms, and it shall stand for ever. (Daniel 2:28, 44.)

Thus the God of Heaven decreed that He would set up a kingdom, and who can prevent His doing the thing He has decreed He would do "in the latter days?"

This, therefore, is the message we have to offer both to the House of Judah and to the House of Joseph, or Israel. The "marvellous work and a wonder" has been established in the earth through the prophet and seer "like unto Moses" who should "by the power of the Lord . . . bring my people unto salvation." (2 Nephi 3:15.)

An Angel to Restore the Gospel

When the Apostle John was banished upon the Isle of Patmos, in relating his experiences, he said:

After this I looked, and behold, a door was opened in heaven; and the first voice which I heard was as it were of a trumpet talking with me; which said, Come up hither, and I will shew thee things which must be hereafter. (Revelation 4:1.)

After John was shown the power that would be given Satan to make war with the Saints (Revelation 13:7), he also saw the everlasting gospel brought back to the earth again by an angel of the Lord:

And I saw another angel fly in the midst of heaven, having the everlasting gospel to preach unto them that dwell on the earth, and to every nation, and kindred, and tongue and people,

Saying with a loud voice, Fear God, and give glory to him: for the hour of his judgment is come; and worship him that made heaven, and earth, and the sea, and the fountains of waters. (Revelation 14:6-7.)

If there had been any nation, kindred, tongue, or people upon the earth still in possession of "the everlasting gospel," the sending of an angel to restore it would have been entirely unnecessary. According to the Apostle John, the coming of this angel with "the everlasting gospel" was an event which "must be hereafter." This vision was given to John years after the crucifixion of the Lord, and at a time when "the everlasting gospel" was still upon the earth, which is but another evidence that it would be taken from the earth, else there would be no need for a restoration.

Restitution of All Things Foretold

The Apostle Peter must have understood the "marvellous work and a wonder" to be a "restitution of all things." In speaking to those who had crucified the Lord he said:

Repent ye therefore, and be converted, that your sins may be blotted out, when the times of refreshing shall come from the presence of the Lord;

And he shall send Jesus Christ, which before was preached unto you:

Whom the heaven must receive until the times of restitution of all things, which God hath spoken by the mouth of all his holy prophets since the world began. (Acts 3:19-21.)

Since Peter's words were spoken following the crucifixion of Jesus Christ, they constitute a promise that the Lord will send Him to the earth again. Peter makes perfectly clear that the second coming of the Messiah cannot occur "until the times of restitution of all things, which God hath spoken by the mouth of all his holy prophets since the world began."

In his epistle to the Ephesians, the Apostle Paul must also have envisioned the "restitution of all things" as foretold by Peter:

Having made known unto us the mystery of his will, according to his good pleasure which he hath purposed in himself:

That in the dispensation of the fulness of times he might gather together in one all things in Christ, both which are in heaven, and which are on earth; even in him: (Ephesians 1:9-10.)

These statements of Peter and Paul are very comprehensive. They seem to include all that would be done to establish the Kingdom of God upon the earth to prepare the way for the second coming of the Messiah. What they beheld and foretold seems to be nothing less than "the marvellous work and a wonder," which Isaiah saw that the Lord would establish upon the earth. Many of the prophets seemed to have been given a vision of this "marvellous work and a wonder" the Lord would accomplish in the latter days to prepare for the glorious second coming of His Son in power and great glory, as King of kings and Lord of lords (Revelation 19:16); when all men shall know Him in His true character; when "the government shall be upon his shoulder; and his name shall be called Wonderful, Counsellor, the Mighty God, the Everlasting Father, the Prince of Peace. (Isaiah 9:6.)

It was this glorious coming which the Prophet Daniel was privileged to see "in the night visions," when he saw one "like the Son of man" come "with the clouds of heaven . . . and there was given him dominion, and glory, and a kingdom, that all people, nations, and languages, should serve him: his dominion is an everlasting dominion, which shall not pass away, and his kingdom that which shall not be destroyed." (Daniel 7:13-14.)

This is the final day Jesus taught His disciples to pray for when He gave them what is known as the Lord's Prayer, as a sample of how they should pray:

"Thy kingdom come. Thy will be done in earth, as it is in heaven. (St. Matthew 6:10.)

End Declared from the Beginning

As we follow these prophecies, we can better understand what Isaiah meant when he said:

Remember the former things of old: for I am God, and there is none else; I am God, and there is none like me,

Declaring the end from the beginning and from ancient times the things that are not yet done, saying, My counsel shall stand, and I will do all my pleasure. (Isaiah 46:9-10.)

Surely the Lord is able to declare "the end from the beginning." This is evidenced by the fact that the words of the prophets have been literally fulfilled. Had the Lord not had a pattern for His work, the prophets could not have made such definite statements of things which would come to pass in the distant future, "declaring the end from the beginning." The Lord's way of making known His plan to His children for their guidance is through His servants, the prophets. (Amos 3:7.)

Of the importance of prophecy, the Apostle Peter stated:

We have also a more sure word of prophecy; whereunto ye do well that ye take heed, as unto a light that shineth in a dark place, until the day dawn, and the day star arise in your hearts:

Knowing this first, that no prophecy of the scripture is of any private interpretation.

For the prophecy came not in old time by the will of man: but holy men of God spake as they were moved by the Holy Ghost. (II Peter 1:19-21.)

Keeping in mind the Prophet Isaiah's statement that God can declare "the end from the beginning," let the sons of Judah remember the promises made unto them by the Messiah when He visited His people in America as recorded in the Stick of Joseph:

And I will remember the covenant which I have made with my people; and I have covenanted with them that I would gather them together in mine own due time, that I would give unto them again the land of their fathers for their inheritance, which is the land of Jerusalem, which is the promised land unto them forever, saith the Father.

And it shall come to pass that the time cometh, when the fulness of my gospel shall be preached unto them:

And they shall believe in me, that I am Jesus Christ, the Son of God, and shall pray unto the Father in my name.

Then shall their watchmen lift up their voice, and with the voice together shall they sing; for they shall see eye to eye.

Then will the Father gather them together again, and give unto them Jerusalem for the land of their inheritance.

Then shall they break forth into joy—Sing together, ye waste places of Jerusalem; for the Father hath comforted his people, he hath redeemed Jerusalem.

The Father hath made bare his holy arm in the eyes of all the nations; and all the ends of the earth shall see the salvation of the Father; and the Father and I are one. (3 Nephi 20:29-35.)

In these scriptures, the Savior indicated that when the fulness of His gospel is preached to the Jews, and when they shall believe in Him, that He is Jesus Christ, the Son of God, and shall pray unto the Father in His name—then will the Father gather them together again, and give unto them Jerusalem for the land of their inheritance.

This promise was published with the coming forth of the Stick of Joseph in 1829, long before the Jews commenced to return to Jerusalem. The complete fulfillment of these promises could be greatly hastened if Judah would but accept Jesus Christ as the Son of God, if they would pray to the Father in His name. To achieve this great objective, the Lord has raised up a seer "like unto Moses" in these latter days, through whom He has brought forth the Stick of Joseph, that through the information contained therein, Judah will be influenced to accept Jesus Christ as the Son of God, their promised Messiah.
