LeGrand Richards, Israel! Do You Know? ( 1954)

CHAPTER 9

"A CHOICE SEER . . . LIKE UNTO MOSES"

Promises Made to Joseph

In the beginning of Chapter Eight, we quoted from the Stick of Joseph the promise of the Lord that He would raise up, in the latter days "a choice seer . . . like unto Moses."

The Lord has fulfilled His promise. The "choice seer" has come forth. The prophet "like unto Moses" has been raised up. "A marvellous work and a wonder" (Isaiah 29:13-14) has been set in full motion among the children of men "in the latter days."

Let us analyze the promise of the Lord concerning the divinely appointed mission of the "latter day" prophet whom the Lord said "shall be great like unto Moses:" (See, 2 Nephi 3:3-15.)

Therefore, all Israel must look to him and heed his words which he shall receive of the Lord, for, said the Lord: "I will make him great in mine eyes; for he shall do my work." When one rejects a prophet sent of the Lord to do His work, he rejects the Lord Himself.

Properly understood, this means that this "choice seer . . . like unto Moses" would bring forth the Stick of Joseph; that he would be able to explain to Israel the teachings and prophecies of the Stick of Judah, the Holy Bible, "which shall have already gone forth among them." And that, as Moses received the word of the Lord direct from Him for the guidance of Israel in his day, so would the Lord deliver His word to this new prophet He promised to raise up for the guidance and direction of latter day Israel, for, said the Lord: "unto him will I give power to bring forth my word."

Therefore, by the power of the Lord, this new prophet of this dispensation has given us some one hundred and thirty revelations direct from the Lord, which are recorded in the Doctrine and Covenants, a book of some 250 pages. These revelations were given to direct this prophet and his successors in the establishment of the Church and Kingdom of God upon the earth in these latter days to prepare the way for the second coming of the Messiah.

This "choice seer" has also given us the Pearl of Great Price, which contains the word of the Lord to Abraham, the friend of God; also the word of the Lord to Moses as revealed to this latter-day prophet.

This new prophet has brought forth more of the word of the Lord unto Israel than any other one prophet of the past of whom we have record.

Can one look at the spiritually divided condition of the House of Judah and the House of Joseph, without realizing how much they need a prophet sent of God, with power given him to speak in the name of the Lord, "unto the confounding of false doctrines," that all of our Father's children may come to a unity of the faith?

And out of weakness he shall be made strong, in that day when my work shall commence among all my people, unto the restoring thee, O house of Israel, said the Lord. (Ibid, verse 13.)

Through this new prophet, the work of the Lord "shall commence among all my people." Hence all "my people" would have to look to him, and accept of the work the Lord would establish through him if they would be restored. All this new work would look "unto the restoring thee, O house of Israel, saith the Lord," or to the gathering of Israel, or the House of Joseph to their Zion of the latter days in the land of America, and the bringing in of the dispersed of Judah to the promised land of Palestine, and the rebuilding of the Holy City, Jerusalem.

The enemies of this "choice seer" did seek to destroy him as the wicked have done with many of the prophets of the past, thinking that if he were destroyed the work he had commenced under the power and direction of God would fail. Persecutions and imprisonment were heaped upon him, until he was martyred at the hands of a cruel mob, led by ministers of religion. But his enemies were confounded. The Lord had so directed this new prophet in the establishment of His Church upon the earth that there must be a Quorum of Twelve Apostles, who held, with this "choice seer", all the keys of the Kingdom. Therefore, when the prophet was martyred, June 27, 1844, the Quorum of Twelve Apostles carried forward the great work God had established in the earth until his successor was appointed.

And his name shall be called after me; and it shall be after the name of his father. And he shall be like unto me; for the thing, which the Lord shall bring forth by his hand, by the power of the Lord shall bring my people unto salvation. (Ibid, verse 15.)

According to this promise, the new prophet's name was to be Joseph, and his father's name was to be Joseph also.

This promise of the Lord has had a literal fulfillment "in the latter days"—the coming forth of Joseph Smith, Jr., the "choice seer . . . like unto Moses" whose father's name was Joseph Smith, Sr.

. . . for the thing which the Lord shall bring forth by his hand, by the power of the Lord, shall bring my people unto salvation. (Ibid, verse 15.)

The promise has been fulfilled. The new prophet has been raised up, and "by the power of the Lord shall bring . . . [all Israel] unto salvation" if they will accept and participate in this "marvellous work and a wonder" established "in the latter days."

A Seer "Like Unto Moses" Has Come Forth

The Prophet Joseph Smith, Jr., by the power of the Lord, conversed with the Father and His Son Jesus Christ, in the spring of 1820. He established anew upon the earth, the Church of Jesus Christ, with all the gifts and powers that existed in the primitive Church established by the Messiah during His earthly ministry. To distinguish the Church of this last dispensation from the Church established by our Redeemer, the Prophet Joseph Smith was directed by the Lord to name the restored Church, "The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints."

Since known unto God are all His works from the beginning, He also knew the spirit of Joseph Smith and sent him into the world at the time decreed by the Almighty to accomplish the work He had for him to do. Joseph Smith was the "choice seer . . . like unto Moses" whom the Lord promised Joseph He would raise up out of the fruit of his loins "in the latter days," and was the prophet who, "by the power of the Lord shall bring my people unto salvation."

Prophets Known to God Before Birth

When it is understood that the spirits of all men lived in the presence of God the Eternal Father before the world was formed, it is easy to understand how the Lord could declare in such definite terms the work He would require at the hands of Joseph Smith.

We read that the Prophet Jeremiah was chosen for his ministry before he was born:

Then the word of the Lord came unto me, saying, Before I formed thee in the belly I knew thee; and before thou camest forth out of the womb I sanctified thee, and ordained thee a prophet unto the nations. (Jeremiah 1:4-5.)

The Stick of Joseph affirms that when Jesus Christ, the Messiah, visited His people in the land of America, He told them that it was He who gave the law unto Moses, showing that before Jesus was born in the flesh His mission was fully assigned unto Him by the Father. He was therefore the Jehovah of the Old Testament:

Behold, I am he that gave the law, and I am he who covenanted with my people Israel; therefore, the law in me is fulfilled, for I have come to fulfill the law; therefore it hath an end. (3 Nephi 15:5.)

We also learn from the Stick of Joseph that Jesus Christ spoke to Nephi, the son of Helaman, the day before He was born into the world, and announced that on the morrow He would come into the world to fulfill all that He had caused the holy prophets to speak concerning Him:

Lift up your head and be of good cheer; for behold, the time is at hand, and on this night shall the sign be given, and on the morrow come I into the world, to show unto the world that I will fulfill all that which I have caused to be spoken by the mouth of my holy prophets. (3 Nephi 1:13.)

From the Book of Abraham we obtain a very clear understanding of the fact that the spirits of all men existed before they were born into this world, and that many had achieved greatness, even as had the Christ:

Now the Lord had shown unto me, Abraham, the intelligences that were organized before the world was; and among all these there were many of the noble and great ones;

And God saw these souls that they were good, and he stood in the midst of them, and he said: These I will make my rulers; for he stood among those that were spirits, and he saw that they were good; and he said unto me: Abraham, thou art one of them; thou wast chosen before thou wast born. (Pearl of Great Price, Abraham 3:22-23.)

In the light of these few references, it is easy to understand how the Lord could inform Joseph, the son of Jacob (Israel), that the "choice seer . . . like into Moses" would come through his lineage and bear his name, "Joseph", which would also be the name of his father. Not only did the Lord designate his greatness, and know what his name in mortality would be, but He knew that Joseph Smith would be born some 3600 years later, "in the latter days."

The Seer "Like Unto Moses" Tells His Own Story

Knowing the great work He had for His new prophet of this dispensation, the Lord put it into his heart, when but a boy, to be dissatisfied with the teachings of the various religious denominations of his day. Therefore, while but a young man in his fifteenth year, in answer to his earnest supplication for wisdom as to which of all the then existing churches he should join, the Father and His Son Jesus Christ appeared to Joseph Smith and gave him instructions to guide him in the accomplishment of the work to which the Lord had called him long before he was born. It seems proper that we should let this promised prophet from the fruit of the loins of Joseph, tell his own story of the glorious events connected with the restoration of all things "in the latter days."

Owing to the many reports which have been put in circulation by evil-disposed and designing persons, in relation to the rise and progress of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, all of which have been designed by the authors thereof to militate against its character as a Church and its progress in the world—I have been induced to write this history, to disabuse the public mind, and put all inquirers after truth in possession of the facts, as they have transpired, in relation both to myself and the Church, so far as I have such facts in my possession.

In this history I shall present the various events in relation to this Church, in truth and righteousness, as they have transpired, or as they at present exist, being now the eighth year since the organization of the said Church.

I was born in the year of our Lord one thousand eight hundred and five, on the twenty-third day of December, in the town of Sharon, Windsor county, State of Vermont. . . . My father, Joseph Smith, Sen., left the State of Vermont, and moved to Palmyra, Ontario (now Wayne) county, in the State of New York, when I was in my tenth year, or thereabouts. In about four years after my father's arrival in Palmyra, he moved with his family into Manchester in the same county of Ontario—

His family consisting of eleven souls, namely, my father, Joseph Smith; my mother, Lucy Smith (whose name, previous to her marriage, was Mack, daughter of Solomon Mack); my brothers, Alvin (who died November 19th, 1824, in the 27th year of his age), Hyrum, myself, Samuel Harrison, William, Don Carlos; and my sisters, Sophronia, Catherine, and Lucy.

Some time in the second year after our removal to Manchester, there was in the place where we lived an unusual excitement on the subject of religion. It commenced with the Methodists, but soon became general among all the sects in that region of country. Indeed, the whole district of country seemed affected by it, and great multitudes united themselves to the different religious parties, which created no small stir and division among the people, some crying, "Lo, here!" and others, "Lo, there!" Some were contending for the Methodist faith, some for the Presbyterian, and some for the Baptist.

For notwithstanding the great love which the converts to these different faiths expressed at the time of their conversion, and the great zeal manifested by the respective clergy, who were active in getting up and promoting this extraordinary scene of religious feeling, in order to have everybody converted, as they were pleased to call it, let them join what sect they pleased; yet when the converts began to file off, some to one party and some to another, it was seen that the seemingly good feelings of both the priests and the converts were more pretended than real; for a scene of great confusion and bad feeling ensued—priest contending against priest, and convert against convert; so that all their good feelings one for another, if they ever had any, were entirely lost in a strife of words and a contest about opinions.

I was at this time in my fifteenth year. My father's family was proselyted to the Presbyterian faith, and four of them joined that church, namely, my mother, Lucy; my brothers Hyrum and Samuel Harrison; and my sister Sophronia.

During this time of great excitement my mind was called up to serious reflection and great uneasiness; but though my feelings were deep and often poignant, still I kept myself aloof from all these parties, though I attended their several meetings as often as occasion would permit. In process of time my mind became somewhat partial to the Methodist sect, and I felt some desire to be united with them; but so great were the confusion and strife among the different denominations, that it was impossible for a person young as I was, and so unacquainted with men and things, to come to any certain conclusion who was right and who was wrong.

My mind at times was greatly excited, the cry and tumult were so great and incessant. The Presbyterians were most decided against the Baptists and Methodists, and used all the powers of both reason and sophistry to prove their error, or, at least, to make the people think they were in error. On the other hand, the Baptists and Methodists in their turn were equally zealous in endeavoring to establish their own tenets and disprove all others.

In the midst of this war of words and tumult of opinions, I often said to myself: What is to be done? Who of all these parties are right; or, are they all wrong together? If any one of them be right, which is it, and how shall I know it?

While I was laboring under the extreme difficulties caused by the contests of these parties of religionists, I was one day reading the Epistle of James, first chapter and fifth verse, which reads: If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God, that giveth to all men liberally, and upbraideth not; and it shall be given him.

Never did any passage of scripture come with more power to the heart of man than this did at this time to mine. It seemed to enter with great force into every feeling of my heart. I reflected on it again and again, knowing that if any person needed wisdom from God, I did; for how to act I did not know, and unless I could get more wisdom than I then had, I would never know; for the teachers of religion of the different sects understood the same passages of scripture so differently as to destroy all confidence in settling the question by an appeal to the Bible.

At length I came to the conclusion that I must either remain in darkness and confusion, or else I must do as James directs, that is, ask of God. I at length came to the determination to "ask of God," concluding that if he gave wisdom to them that lacked wisdom, and would give liberally, and not upbraid, I might venture.

So, in accordance with this, my determination to ask of God, I retired to the woods to make the attempt. It was on the morning of a beautiful, clear day, early in the spring of eighteen hundred and twenty. It was the first time in my life that I had made such an attempt, for amidst all my anxieties I had never as yet made the attempt to pray vocally.

After I had retired to the place where I had previously designed to go, having looked around me, and finding myself alone, I kneeled down and began to offer up the desire of my heart to God. I had scarcely done so, when immediately I was seized upon by some power which entirely overcame me, and had such an astonishing influence over me as to bind my tongue so that I could not speak. Thick darkness gathered around me, and it seemed to me for a time as if I were doomed to sudden destruction.

But, exerting all my powers to call upon God to deliver me out of the power of this enemy which had seized me, and at the very moment when I was ready to sink into despair and abandon myself to destruction—not to an imaginary ruin, but to the power of some actual being from the unseen world, who had such marvelous power as I had never before felt in any being—just at this moment of great alarm, I saw a pillar of light exactly over my head, above the brightness of the sun, which descended gradually until it fell upon me.

It no sooner appeared than I found myself delivered from the enemy which held me bound. When the light rested upon me I saw two Personages, whose brightness and glory defy all description, standing above me in the air. One of them spake unto me, calling me by name and said, pointing to the other—This is My Beloved Son. Hear Him!

My object in going to inquire of the Lord was to know which of all the sects was right, that I might know which to join. No sooner, therefore, did I get possession of myself, so as to be able to speak, than I asked the Personages who stood above me in the light, which of all the sects was right—and which I should join.

I was answered that I must join none of them, for they were all wrong; and the Personage who addressed me said that all their creeds were an abomination in his sight; that those professors were all corrupt; that: "they draw near to me with their lips, but their hearts are far from me, they teach for doctrines the commandments of men, having a form of godliness, but they deny the power thereof."

He again forbade me to join with any of them; and many other things did he say unto me, which I cannot write at this time. When I came to myself again, I found myself lying on my back, looking up into heaven. When the light had departed, I had no strength; but soon recovering in some degree, I went home. And as I leaned up to the fireplace, mother inquired what the matter was. I replied, "Never mind, all is well—I am well enough off." I then said to my mother, "I have learned for myself that Presbyterianism is not true." It seems as though the adversary was aware, at a very early period of my life, that I was destined to prove a disturber and an annoyer of his kingdom; else why should the powers of darkness combine against me? Why the opposition and persecution that arose against me, almost in my infancy?

Some few days after I had this vision, I happened to be in company with one of the Methodist preachers, who was very active in the before mentioned religious excitement; and, conversing with him on the subject of religion, I took occasion to give him an account of the vision which I had had. I was greatly surprised at his behavior; he treated my communication not only lightly, but with great contempt, saying it was all of the devil, that there were no such things as visions or revelations in these days; that all such things had ceased with the apostles, and that there would never be any more of them.

I soon found, however, that my telling the story had excited a great deal of prejudice against me among professors of religion, and was the cause of great persecution, which continued to increase; and though I was an obscure boy, only between fourteen and fifteen years of age, and my circumstnaces in life such as to make a boy of no consequence in the world, yet men of high standing would take notice sufficient to excite the public mind against me, and create a bitter persecution; and this was common among all the sects—all united to persecute me.

It caused me serious reflection then, and often has since, how very strange it was that an obscure boy, of a little over fourteen years of age, and one, too, who was doomed to the necessity of obtaining a scanty maintenance by his daily labor, should be thought a character of sufficient importance to attract the attention of the great ones of the most popular sects of the day, and in a manner to create in them a spirit of the most bitter persecution and reviling. But strange or not, so it was, and it was often the cause of great sorrow to myself.

However, it was nevertheless a fact that I had beheld a vision. I have thought since, that I felt much like Paul, when he made his defense before King Agrippa, and related the account of the vision he had when he saw a light, and heard a voice; but still there were but few who believed him; some said he was dishonest, others said he was mad; and he was ridiculed and reviled. But all this did not destroy the reality of his vision. He had seen a vision, he knew he had, and all the persecution under heaven could not make it otherwise; and though they should persecute him unto death, yet he knew, and would know to his latest breath, that he had both seen a light and heard a voice speaking unto him, and all the world could not make him think or believe otherwise.

So it was with me. I had actually seen a light, and in the midst of that light I saw two Personages, and they did in reality speak to me; and though I was hated and persecuted for saying that I had seen a vision, yet it was true; and while they were persecuting me, reviling me, and speaking all manner of evil against me falsely for so saying, I was led to say in my heart: Why persecute me for telling the truth? I have actually seen a vision; and who am I that I can withstand God, or why does the world think to make me deny what I have actually seen? For I had seen a vision; I knew it, and I knew God knew it, and I could not deny it, neither dared I do it; at least I knew that by so doing I would offend God, and come under condemnation.

I had now got my mind satisfied so far as the sectarian world was concerned—that it was not my duty to join with any of them, but to continue as I was until further directed. I had found the testimony of James to be true—that a man who lacked wisdom might ask of God, and obtain, and not be upbraided.

I continued to pursue my common vocations in life until the twenty-first of September, one thousand eight hundred and twenty-three, all the time suffering severe persecution at the hands of all classes of men, both religious and irreligious, because I continued to affirm that I had seen a vision.

During the space of time which intervened between the time I had the vision and the year eighteen hundred and twenty-three—having been forbidden to join any of the religious sects of the day, and being of very tender years, and persecuted by those who ought to have been my friends and to have treated me kindly, and if they supposed me to be deluded to have endeavored in a proper and affectionate manner to have reclaimed me—I was left to all kinds of temptations; and, mingling with all kinds of society, I frequently fell into many foolish errors, and displayed the weakness of youth, and the foibles of human nature; which I am sorry to say, led me into divers temptations, offensive in the sight of God. In making this confession, no one need suppose me guilty of any great or malignant sins. A disposition to commit such was never in my nature. But I was guilty of levity, and sometimes associated with jovial company, etc., not consistent with that character which ought to be maintained by one who was called of God as I had been. But this will not seem very strange to any one who recollects my youth, and is acquainted with my native cheery temperament.

In consequence of these things, I often felt condemned for my weakness and imperfections; when, on the evening of the above-mentioned twenty-first of September, after I had retired to my bed for the night, I betook myself to prayer and supplication to Almighty God for forgiveness of all my sins and follies, and also for a manifestation to me, that I might know of my state and standing before him; for I had full confidence in obtaining a divine manifestation, as I previously had one.

While I was thus in the act of calling upon God, I discovered a light appearing in my room, which continued to increase until the room was lighter than at noonday, when immediately a personage appeared at my bedside, standing in the air, for his feet did not touch the floor.

He had on a loose robe of most exquisite whiteness. It was a whiteness beyond anything earthly I had ever seen; nor do I believe that any earthly thing could be made to appear so exceedingly white and brilliant. His hands were naked, and his arms also, a little above the wrists; so, also, were his feet naked, as were his legs, a little above the ankles. His head and neck were also bare. I could discover that he had no other clothing on but this robe, as it was open, so that I could see into his bosom.

Not only was his robe exceedingly white, but his whole person was glorious beyond description, and his countenance truly like lightning. The room was exceedingly light, but not so very bright as immediately around his person. When I first looked upon him, I was afraid; but the fear soon left me.

He called me by name, and said unto me that he was a messenger sent from the presence of God to me, and that his name was Moroni; that God had a work for me to do; and that my name should be had for good and evil among all nations, kindreds, and tongues, or that it should be both good and evil spoken of among all people.

He said there was a book deposited, written upon gold plates, giving an account of the former inhabitants of this [the American] continent, and the source from whence they sprang. He also said that the fulness of the everlasting Gospel was contained in it, as delivered by the Savior to the ancient inhabitants;

Also, that there were two stones in silver bows—and these stones, fastened to a breastplate, constituted what is called the Urim and Thummim—deposited with the plates; and the possession and use of these stones were what constituted "seers" in ancient or former times; and that God had prepared them for the purpose of translating the book.

After telling me these things, he commenced quoting prophecies of the Old Testament.

He first quoted part of the third chapter of Malachi; and he quoted also the fourth or last chapter of the same prophecy, though with a little variation from the way it reads in our Bibles. Instead of quoting the first verse as it reads in our books, he quoted it thus:

For behold, the day cometh that shall burn as an oven, and all the proud, yea, and all that do wickedly shall burn as stubble; for they that come shall burn them, saith the Lord of Hosts, that it shall leave them neither root nor branch.

And again, he quoted the fifth verse thus: Behold, I will reveal unto you the Priesthood, by the hand of Elijah the prophet, before the coming of the great and dreadful day of the Lord.

He also quoted the next verse differently: And he shall plant in the hearts of the children the promises made to the fathers, and the hearts of the children shall turn to their fathers. If it were not so, the whole earth would be utterly wasted at his coming.

In addition to these, he quoted the eleventh chapter of Isaiah, saying that it was about to be fulfilled. He quoted also the third chapter of Acts, twenty-second and twenty- third verses, precisely as they stand in our New Testament. He said that that prophet was Christ; but the day had not yet come when "they who would not hear his voice should be cut off from among the people," but soon would come.

He also quoted the second chapter of Joel, from the twenty-eighth verse to the last. He also said that this was not yet fulfilled, but was soon to be. And he further stated that the fulness of the Gentiles was soon to come in. He quoted many other passages of scripture, and offered many explanations which cannot be mentioned here.

Again, he told me, that when I got those plates of which he had spoken—for the time that they should be obtained was not yet fulfilled—I should not show them to any person; neither the breastplate with the Urim and Thummim; only to those to whom I should be commanded to show them; if I did I should be destroyed. While he was conversing with me about the plates, the vision was opened to my mind that I could see the place where the plates were deposited, and that so clearly and distinctly that I knew the place again when I visited it.

After this communication, I saw the light in the room begin to gather immediately around the person of him who had been speaking to me, and it continued to do so until the room was again left dark, except just around him; when, instantly I saw, as it were, a conduit open right up into heaven, and he ascended till he entirely disappeared, and the room was left as it had been before this heavenly light had made its appearance.

I lay musing on the singularity of the scene, and marveling greatly at what had been told to me by this extraordinary messenger; when, in the midst of my meditation, I suddenly discovered that my room was again beginning to get lighted, and in an instant, as it were, the same heavenly messenger was again by my bedside.

He commenced, and again related the very same things which he had done at his first visit, without the least variation; which having done, he informed me of great judgments which were coming upon the earth, with great desolations by famine, sword, and pestilence; and that these grievous judgments would come on the earth in this generation. Having related these things, he again ascended as he had done before.

By this time, so deep were the impressions made on my mind, that sleep had fled from my eyes, and I lay overwhelmed in astonishment at what I had both seen and heard. But what was my surprise when again I beheld the same messenger at my bedside, and heard him rehearse or repeat over again to me the same things as before; and added a caution to me, telling me that Satan would try to tempt me (in consequence of the indigent circumstances of my father's family) to get the plates for the purpose of getting rich. This he forbade me, saying that I must have no other object in view in getting the plates but to glorify God, and must not be influenced by any other motive than that of building his kingdom; otherwise I could not get them.

After this third visit, he again ascended into heaven as before, and I was again left to ponder on the strangeness of what I had just experienced; when almost immediately after the heavenly messenger had ascended from me for the third time, the cock crowed, and I found that day was approaching, so that our interviews must have occupied the whole of that night.

I shortly after arose from my bed, and, as usual, went to the necessary labors of the day; but, in attempting to work as at other times, I found my strength so exhausted as to render me entirely unable. My father, who was laboring along with me, discovered something to be wrong with me, and told me to go home. I started with the intention of going to the house; but, in attempting to cross the fence out of the field where we were, my strength entirely failed me, and I fell helpless on the ground, and for a time was quite unconscious of anything.

The first thing that I can recollect was a voice speaking unto me, calling me by name. I looked up, and beheld the same messenger standing over my head, surrounded by light as before. He then again related unto me all that he had related to me the previous night, and commanded me to go to my father and tell him of the vision and commandments which I had received.

I obeyed; I returned to my father in the field, and rehearsed the whole matter to him. He replied to me that it was of God, and told me to go and do as commanded by the messenger. I left the field, and went to the place where the messenger had told me the plates were deposited; and owing to the distinctness of the vision which I had had concerning it, I knew the place the instant that I arrived there.

Convenient to the village of Manchester, Ontario County, New York, stands a hill of considerable size, and the most elevated of any in the neighborhood. On the west side of this hill, not far from the top, under a stone of considerable size, lay the plates, deposited in a stone box. This stone was thick and rounding in the middle on the upper side, and thinner towards the edges, so that the middle part of it was visible above the ground, but the edge all around was covered with earth.

Having removed the earth, I obtained a lever, which I got fixed under the edge of the stone, and with a little exertion raised it up. I looked in, and there indeed did I behold the plates, the Urim and Thummim, and the breast-plate, as stated by the messenger. The box in which they lay was formed by laying stones together in some kind of cement. In the bottom of the box were laid two stones crossways of the box, and on these stones lay the plates and other things with them.

I made an attempt to take them out, but was forbidden by the messenger, and was again informed that the time for bringing them forth had not yet arrived, neither would it, until four years from that time; but he told me that I should come to that place precisely in one year from that time, and that he would there meet with me, and that I should continue to do so until the time should come for obtaining the plates.

Accordingly, as I had been commanded, I went at the end of each year, and at each time I found the same messenger there, and received instruction and intelligence from him at each of our interviews, respecting what the Lord was going to do, and how and in what manner his kingdom was to be conducted in the last days. . . .

At length the time arrived for obtaining the plates, the Urim and Thummim, and the breastplate. On the twenty-second day of September, one thousand eight hundred and twenty-seven, having gone as usual at the end of another year to the place where they were deposited, the same heavenly messenger delivered them up to me with this charge: that I should be responsible for them; that if I should let them go carelessly, or through any neglect of mine; I should be cut off; but that if I would use all my endeavors to preserve them, until he, the messenger, should call for them, they should be protected.

I soon found out the reason why I had received such strict charges to keep them safe, and why it was that the messenger had said that when I had done what was required at my hand, he would call for them. For no sooner was it known that I had them, than the most strenuous exertions were used to get them from me. Every stratagem that could be invented was resorted to for that purpose. The persecution became more bitter and severe than before, and multitudes were on the alert continually to get them from me if possible. But by the wisdom of God, they remained safe in my hands, until I had accomplished by them what was required at my hand. When, according to arrangements, the messenger called for them, I delivered them up to him; and he has them in his charge until this day, being the second day of May, one thousand eight hundred and thirty-eight. (Pearl of Great Price, pages 46-54.)

This account of the calling of the Prophet Joseph Smith constitutes one of the greatest and most inspiring events in the entire history of the world.

From this account it will be observed that Satan did all within his power to stop the work the Lord had set His hand to accomplish. Joseph Smith was persecuted in a most cruel and unwarranted manner. Nevertheless, the Lord sustained him and raised up friends to assist him in the great work of translating the word of the Lord engraved on the gold plates.

Stick of Joseph Translated

The Lord sent one, Martin Harris, a resident of Palmyra, New York, to the prophet, and Martin gave him $50.00 to assist in the work of translation. On the 5th day of April, 1829, Oliver Cowdery called at the home of the prophet who had never seen him before. Cowdery had been teaching school in the vicinity and had heard the report that the prophet had the gold plates, and he came to make inquiry. Two days after his arrival, April 7, 1829, Joseph Smith commenced to translate and Oliver Cowdery began to write for him. Of this experience, Oliver Cowdery gave the following account:

These were days never to be forgotten—to sit under the sound of a voice dictated by the inspiration of heaven, awakened the utmost gratitude of this bosom! Day after day I continued, uninterrupted to write from his mouth, as he translated with the Urim and Thummim, or, as the Nephites would have said, 'Interpreters,' the history or record called "The Book of Mormon." (Times and Seasons, Vol. 2, p. 201.)

The translation of the characters on the gold plates was called the Book of Mormon and is the Stick of Joseph.

Mormon was a prophet who made an abridgment of the many records kept by the Nephite prophets, which, together with the plates from which the abridgment was made, with other valuable articles, including the Urim and Thummim, he turned over to his son Moroni who buried them in a stone box in the hill Cumorah, in the State of New York, U. S. A., until commanded by the Lord to deliver them to Joseph Smith for translation.

Contents of the Stick of Joseph

On the fly-leaf of the Book of Mormon (Stick of Joseph) we read the following, setting forth what the record consists of, and the purpose for which it had been preserved:

The Book of Mormon, an account written by the hand of Mormon upon plates taken from the plates of Nephi. Wherefore, it is an abridgment of the record of the people of Nephi, and also of the Lamanites—Written to the Lamanites, who are a remnant of the house of Israel; and also to Jew and Gentile—Written by way of commandment, and also by the spirit of prophecy and of revelation—Written and sealed up, and hid up unto the Lord, that they might not be destroyed—To come forth by the gift and power of God unto the interpretation thereof—Sealed by the hand of Moroni, and hid up unto the Lord, to come forth in due time by way of the Gentile—The interpretation thereof by the gift of God.

An abridgment taken from the Book of Ether also, which is a record of the people of Jared, who were scattered at the time the Lord confounded the language of the people, when they were building a tower to get to heaven—Which is to show unto the remnant of the House of Israel what great things the Lord hath done for their fathers; and that they may know the covenants of the Lord, that they are not cast off forever—and also to the convincing of the Jew and Gentile that JESUS is the CHRIST, the ETERNAL GOD, manifesting himself unto all nations—And now, if there are faults they are the mistakes of men; wherefore, condemn not the things of God, that ye may be found spotless at the judgment-seat of Christ.

Testimony of the Three Witnesses

Also, in the forepart of the Book of Mormon are recorded the testimonies of three witnesses to whom an angel of the Lord showed the plates, and eight witnesses to whom the Prophet Joseph Smith was authorized to show the plates. Following is the testimony of the three witnesses:

Be It Known unto all nations, kindreds, tongues, and people, unto whom this work shall come: That we, through the grace of God the Father, and our Lord Jesus Christ, have seen the plates which contain this record, which is a record of the people of Nephi, and also of the Lamanites, their brethren, and also of the people of Jared, who came from the tower of which hath been spoken. And we also know that they have been translated by the gift and power of God, for his voice hath declared it unto us; wherefore we know of a surety that the work is true. And we also testify that we have seen the engravings which are upon the plates; and they have been shown unto us by the power of God, and not of man. And we declare with words of soberness, that an angel of God came down from heaven, and he brought and laid before our eyes, that we beheld and saw the plates, and the engravings thereon; and we know that it is by the grace of God the Father, and our Lord Jesus Christ, that we beheld and bear record that these things are true. And it is marvelous in our eyes. Nevertheless, the voice of the Lord commanded us that we should bear record of it; wherefore, to be obedient unto the commandments of God, we bear testimony of these things. And we know that if we are faithful in Christ, we shall rid our garments of the blood of all men, and be found spotless before the judgment-seat of Christ, and shall dwell with him eternally in the heavens. And the honor be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost, which is one God. Amen.

Oliver Cowdery

David Whitmer

Martin Harris

Testimony of the Eight Witnesses

Following is the testimony of the eight witnesses:

Be It Known unto all nations, kindreds, tongues, and people, unto whom this work shall come: That Joseph Smith, Jun., the translator of this work, has shown unto us the plates of which hath been spoken, which have the appearance of gold; and as many of the leaves as the said Smith has translated we did handle with our hands; and we also saw the engravings thereon, all of which has the appearance of ancient work, and of curious workmanship. And this we bear record with words of soberness, that the said Smith has shown unto us, for we have seen and hefted, and know of a surety that the said Smith has got the plates of which we have spoken. And we give our names unto the world, to witness unto the world that which we have seen. And we lie not, God bearing witness of it.

Christian Whitmer

Jacob Whitmer

Peter Whitmer, Jun.

John Whitmer

Hiram Page

Joseph Smith, Sen.

Hyrum Smith

Samuel H. Smith

Even though, in future years, some of these witnesses did not remain true to their friendship toward the Prophet Joseph Smith, nevertheless, not one of them ever repudiated the testimony he had given that he had seen the plates.

Aaronic Priesthood Restored by John the Baptist

While Oliver Cowdery was assisting Joseph Smith in translating from the gold plates, they went into the woods to inquire of the Lord concerning baptism for the remission of sins, which they found mentioned in the translation of the plates. Following is the prophet Joseph Smith's account of this event and the wonderful results thereof:

We still continued the work of translation, when, in the ensuing month (May, 1829), we on a certain day went into the woods to pray and inquire of the Lord respecting baptism for the remission of sins, that we found mentioned in the translation of the plates. While we were thus employed, praying and calling upon the Lord, a messenger from heaven descended in a cloud of light, and having laid his hands upon us, he ordained us, saying:

Upon you my fellow servants, in the name of Messiah I confer the Priesthood of Aaron, which holds the keys of the ministering of angels, and of the gospel of repentance, and of baptism by immersion for the remission of sins; and this shall never be taken again from the earth, until the sons of Levi do offer again an offering unto the Lord in righteousness.

He said this Aaronic Priesthood had not the power of laying on hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost, but that this should be conferred on us hereafter; and he commanded us to go and be baptized, and gave us directions that I should baptize Oliver Cowdery, and that afterwards he should baptize me.

Accordingly we went and were baptized. I baptized him first, and afterwards he baptized me—after which I laid my hands upon his head and ordained him to the Aaronic Priesthood, and afterwards he laid his hands on me and ordained me to the same Priesthood—for so we were commanded.

The messenger who visited us on this occasion and conferred this Priesthood upon us, said that his name was John, the same that is called John the Baptist in the New Testament, and that he acted under the direction of Peter, James and John, who held the keys of the Priesthood of Melchizedek, which Priesthood, he said, would in due time be conferred on us, and that I should be called the first Elder of the Church, and he (Oliver Cowdery) the second. It was on the fifteenth day of May, 1829, that we were ordained under the hand of this messenger, and baptized. (Pearl of Great Price, page 56, verses 68-72.)

Power of the Holy Ghost Made Manifest

Immediately following their baptism and ordination, the Holy Ghost fell upon Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery and they prophesied concerning the rise of the Church which had not yet been organized. Then Joseph Smith made this further statement:

Our minds being now enlightened, we began to have the scriptures laid open to our understandings, and the true meaning and intention of their more mysterious passages revealed unto us in a manner which we never could attain to previously, nor ever before had thought of. . . . (Pearl of Great Price, page 57, verse 74.)

In this manner the Lord proceeded to train and qualify the new prophet of this dispensation for the work assigned to the "choice seer . . . like unto Moses." The experience Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery had when they received the Aaronic Priesthood from John the Baptist, and, under his direction, baptized each other, should put an end to all disputations, for all time to come, as to the proper form and purpose of baptism, and the authority necessary to perform this sacred ordinance.

Melchizedek Priesthood Restored by Peter, James and John

Not long after this glorious event transpired, Peter, James and John, Apostles of the Lord Jesus Christ, conferred upon Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery the Melchizedek Priesthood, as promised by John the Baptist, which included the Holy Apostleship. The Melchizedek Priesthood gave them the necessary authority to organize the Church and Kingdom of God upon the earth in this dispensation. Accordingly, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints was organized with six members at Fayette, Seneca County, New York, U.S.A., April 6, 1830.

In a revelation on Priesthood given through the Prophet Joseph Smith on March 28, 1835, the Lord stated:

There are, in the Church, two priesthoods, namely, the Melchizedek and Aaronic, including the Levitical Priesthood.

Why the first is called the Melchizedek Priesthood is because Melchizedek was such a great high priest.

Before his day it was called the Holy Priesthood, after the Order of the Son of God.

But out of respect or reverence to the name of the Supreme Being, to avoid the too frequent repetition of his name, they, the church, in ancient days, called that priesthood after Melchizedek, or the Melchizedek Priesthood.

All other authorities or offices in the church are appendages to this priesthood.

But there are two divisions or grand heads—one is the Melchizedek Priesthood, and the other is the Aaronic or Levitical Priesthood. (Doctrine and Covenants 107:1-6.)

Modern Revelation Given the Seer "Like Unto Moses"

Now that these two Priesthoods had been restored to the earth, and men had been given the power and authority to officiate therein, the Lord proceeded to reveal unto the Church through His prophet, the necessary steps to be taken that the establishment of His Church may achieve all its objectives as foretold by the prophets of Judah and Joseph. To accomplish this, it was necessary for the Lord to give to this "choice seer" some 130 revelations which have all been recorded in the book, Doctrine and Covenants.

Many Records of God's Word to be Kept

We have already shown that when the day should come that the Lord would proceed to do "a marvellous work and a wonder" among the children of men, as declared by Isaiah, that it would partly consist of the bringing together, in one, the Stick of Judah and the Stick of Joseph, and other records that had been kept:

Wherefore, because that ye have a Bible ye need not suppose that it contains all my words; neither need ye suppose that I have not caused more to be written.

For I command all men, both in the east and in the west, and in the north, and in the south, and in the islands of the sea, that they shall write the words which I speak unto them; for out of the books which shall be written I will judge the world, every man according to their works, according to that which is written.

For behold, I shall speak unto the Jews and they shall write it; and I shall also speak unto the Nephites and they shall write it; and I shall also speak unto the other tribes of the house of Israel, which I have led away, and they shall write it; and I shall also speak unto all nations of the earth and they shall write it.

And it shall come to pass that the Jews shall have the words of the Nephites, and the Nephites shall have the words of the Jews; and the Nephites and the Jews shall have the words of the lost tribes of Israel; and the lost tribes of Israel shall have the words of the Nephites and the Jews.

And it shall come to pass that my people, which are of the house of Israel, shall be gathered home unto the land of their possessions; and my word also shall be gathered in one. And I will show unto them that fight against my word and against my people, who are of the house of Israel, that I am God, and that I covenanted with Abraham that I would remember his seed forever. (2 Nephi 29:10-14.)

While we do not now have the records of the lost tribes of Israel, we look forward to their coming in the own due time of the Lord, for so hath He promised.

Scriptures Available Today

We do, however, have the Stick of Judah, the Holy Bible; the Stick of Joseph, the Book of Mormon; the Doctrine and Covenants, or the revelations of the Lord through the Prophet Joseph Smith. We also have another volume of scripture known as the Pearl of Great Price, which, among other writings, contains the translation of certain papyrus taken from catacombs near the place where formerly stood the ancient city of Thebes, Egypt, obtained by the French Explorer, Antonio Sebolo, in 1831. In 1835 they fell into the hands of the Prophet Joseph Smith who translated some of the ancient hieroglyphic characters, which proved to be the writings of Abraham.

The Pearl of Great Price also contains the Visions of Moses as revealed to Joseph Smith, the Prophet, in June 1830.

Since the Lord promised that "my word also shall be gathered in one," we will feel free in our further discussions to quote from each of these four records. Since the Book of Mormon (Stick of Joseph) is a record of over 500 pages, and the Doctrine and Covenants over 250 pages, and the Pearl of Great Price over 50 pages, it will be impossible to do more than refer briefly to the information and prophecies contained therein. We shall not attempt to consider details with respect to the organization of His Church with its officers and Priesthood quorums in this writing. We will confine our discussion to a consideration of the visits of heavenly messengers to the Prophet Joseph Smith. We will also consider those matters which must be understood in order that the Kingdom of Judah and the Kingdom of Israel may ultimately be brought together as the prophets have foretold, that each may contribute its part to the fulfillment of the promises of the Lord to Abraham, Isaac and Jacob.

Jesus Christ, Jehovah, Appears in this Dispensation

A week following the dedication of the Kirtland Temple in the State of Ohio, U.S.A., April 3, 1836, the Prophet Joseph Smith gave the following account of the appearance of the Lord, Jesus Christ, to Oliver Cowdery and himself:

The veil was taken from our minds, and the eyes of our understanding were opened.

We saw the Lord standing upon the breastwork of the pulpit, before us; and under his feet was a paved work of pure gold, in color like amber.

His eyes were as a flame of fire; the hair of his head was white like pure snow; his countenance shone above the brightness of the sun; and his voice was as the sound of the rushing of great waters, even the voice of Jehovah, saying:

I am the first and the last; I am he who liveth, I am he who was slain; I am your advocate with the Father. (Doctrine and Covenants 110:1-4.)

Moses Returns with the Keys for Gathering Scattered Israel

The same day, the Prophet Moses appeared to Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery, and conferred upon them the keys of the gathering of Israel from the four parts of the earth. Of this visit, Joseph Smith gives this account:

After this vision closed, the heavens were again opened unto us; and Moses appeared before us, and committed unto us the keys of the gathering of Israel from the four parts of the earth, and the leading of the ten tribes from the land of the north. (Doctrine and Covenants 110:11.)

This commitment seems to cover all necessary keys and authority to gather all branches of the House of Israel to the lands of their inheritance, withersoever they may have been scattered, even the ten tribes from the land of the north.

Coming of Elias

The same day, April 3, 1836, Elias appeared to Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery in the temple, and committed the keys as recounted by Joseph Smith in these words:

After this, Elias appeared, and committed the dispensation of the gospel of Abraham, saying that in us and our seed all generations after us should be blessed. (Doctrine and Covenants 110:12.)

This seems to renew to the seed of Abraham and Isaac, through Jacob, all the promises of the Lord unto them, as they apply to this dispensation, with their accompanying responsibility, that through them all generations would be blessed.

Elijah Returns with the Keys of Salvation for the Dead

When Joseph Smith was visited by Moroni, to which we have already referred, he quoted from the fourth chapter of Malachi in the Stick of Judah regarding the promised coming of Elijah, although his quotation was slightly different than it appears in the Holy Bible (King James Version) saying that this promise was about to be fulfilled:

And again, he quoted the fifth verse thus: Behold, I will reveal unto you the Priesthood, by the hand of Elijah the prophet, before the coming of the great and dreadful day of the Lord.

He also quoted the next verse differently: And he shall plant in the hearts of the children the promises made to the fathers, and the hearts of the children shall turn to their fathers, if it were not so, the whole earth would be utterly wasted at his coming. (Pearl of Great Price, page 51, verses 38-39. See also Malachi 4:5-6.)

Obviously one cannot believe the promises contained in the Holy Bible, the Stick of Judah, without knowing that Elijah must come "before the coming of the great and dreadful day of the Lord." This promise was reaffirmed by Moroni when he visited Joseph Smith three times during the night of September 21, 1823.

On April 3, 1836, following the dedication of the Kirtland Temple, Elijah the prophet appeared to Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery in the temple at Kirtland, Ohio. His visit followed that of the Savior, Moses and Elias. Of Elijah's coming, the Prophet Joseph Smith gives us this account:

After this vision had closed, another great and glorious vision burst upon us; for Elijah the prophet, who was taken to heaven without tasting death, stood before us, and said:

Behold, the time has fully come, which was spoken of by the mouth of Malachi—testifying that he [Elijah] should be sent, before the great and dreadful day of the Lord come—

To turn the hearts of the fathers to the children, and the children to the fathers, lest the whole earth be smitten with a curse—

Therefore, the keys of this dispensation are committed into your hands; and by this ye may know that the great and dreadful day of the Lord is near, even at the doors. (Doctrine and Covenants 110:12-16.)

The importance of Elijah's coming was emphasized by Malachi, for he stated that if Elijah failed to come and "turn the hearts of the fathers to the children, and the children to the fathers" the whole earth would be smitten "with a curse."

As far as we know, no other church than the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints claims the fulfillment of this prophecy, nor do others seem to understand the nature of Elijah's mission. Neither would we understand had Elijah not come and conferred the keys of his mission and ministry upon Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery.

When the keys of this dispensation for the turning of the hearts of the fathers to the children, and the hearts of the children to their fathers, had been committed, by Elijah, into the hands of Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery, they proceeded to explain the new and strange doctrine of baptism for the dead to their associates and the membership of the Church. They made it plain that those living upon the earth can be baptized for their loved ones who have passed away without enjoying this privilege. The knowledge of this great truth has caused the "hearts of the children" to turn "to their fathers," and the children to seek out their genealogy so they can be baptized for their kindred dead. It was for this purpose that the Lord sent Elijah back to this earth as promised by Malachi, and as announced by Moroni to Joseph Smith. Much more could be said on this subject, but this seems sufficient to indicate the nature of Elijah's mission.

Joseph Smith, the "Choice Seer . . . Like Unto Moses"

Surely Joseph Smith can be compared to Moses, for as the Lord appeared unto Moses and "spake unto him face to face, as a man speaketh unto his friend," (Exodus 33:11) so the Lord, with His Son Jesus Christ, appeared unto Joseph Smith when he prayed in the grove near his father's house in Palmyra, New York, in the spring of 1820.

The Lord promised Joseph, the son of Jacob, that, when He raised up "a choice seer . . . like unto Moses" in "the latter days," He would give him "power to bring forth my word unto the seed of thy loins, for the thing which the Lord shall bring forth by his hand, by the power of the Lord shall bring my people unto salvation." (2 Nephi 3:15.) Thus the Lord gave Joseph Smith power to bring forth His word, the Stick of Joseph, containing the prophecies and teachings of the Nephite prophets. The Lord also gave him many revelations for his guidance in establishing the Kingdom of God in the earth for the last time to prepare the way for the second coming of the Messiah.
