LeGrand Richards, Israel! Do You Know? ( 1954)

CHAPTER 10

TWO GATHERING PLACES FOR ISRAEL IN THE LATTER DAYS

"And He Shall Set Up an Ensign for the Nations"

When the Angel Moroni appeared to Joseph Smith three times during the night of September 21, 1823, he quoted from the eleventh chapter of Isaiah saying that this prophecy was about to be fulfilled:

And in that day there shall be a root of Jesse, which shall stand for an ensign of the people; to it shall the Gentiles seek: and his rest shall be glorious.

And it shall come to pass in that day, that the Lord shall set his hand again the second time to recover the remnant of his people, which shall be left, from Assyria, and from Egypt, and from Pathros, and from Cush, and from Elam, and from Shinar, and from Hamath, and from the islands of the sea.

And he shall set up an ensign for the nations, and shall assemble the outcasts of Israel and gather together the dispersed of Judah from the four corners of the earth.

The envy also of Ephraim shall depart, and the adversaries of Judah shall be cut off: Ephraim shall not envy Judah, and Judah shall. not vex Ephraim. (Isaiah 11:10-13.)

From this prophecy we learn:

First: That the Lord would establish an ensign among the Gentiles.

Second: That the Lord would set his hand again the second time to recover the remnant of His people.

Third: It will be noted that when the Lord would set His hand "the second time" to gather Israel, it would be twofold in nature: (1) That He would "assemble the outcasts of Israel, and gather together the dispersed of Judah." (2) That this great movement would have its inception among the Gentiles, the Kingdom of Israel or Ephraim.

Fourth: That "The envy also of Ephraim shall depart, and the adversaries of Judah shall be cut off: Ephraim shall not envy Judah, and Judah shall not vex Ephraim."

Since the Angel Moroni made this declaration to Joseph Smith, this work has been going forth in the earth. The Lord established His Church among the seed of Joseph scattered among the Gentile nations. In a revelation from the Lord to the Prophet Joseph Smith, March 8, 1833, on his responsibility as President of the Church, the Lord said:

That through your administration they may receive the word, and through their administration the word may go forth unto the ends of the earth, unto the Gentiles first, and then, behold, and lo, they shall turn unto the Jews.

And then cometh the day when the arm of the Lord shall be revealed in power in convincing the nations, the heathen nations, the house of Joseph, of the gospel of their salvation. (Doctrine and Covenants 90:9-10.)

This revelation was given three years after The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints was organized. In it, the Lord clearly indicated that His word, or the Gospel, as it had been restored, would go forth unto the Gentiles first, and then unto the Jews. He further reaffirmed what the prophets had foretold that the seed of Joseph would be found among the Gentile or heathen nations.

Gentiles to Take the Gospel to Judah

In a revelation to the Prophet Joseph Smith, March 7, 1831, less than a year after the organization of His Church, the Lord indicated the time that the Gospel would be taken by the Gentiles to the Jews:

As ye have asked of me concerning the signs of my coming, in the day when I shall come in my glory in the clouds of heaven, to fulfill the promises that I have made unto your fathers. . . .

Ye say that ye know that the end of the world cometh; ye say also that ye know that the heavens and the earth shall pass away;

And in this ye say truly, for so it is; but these things which I have told you shall not pass away until it shall be fulfilled.

And this I have told you concerning Jerusalem; and when that day shall come, shall a remnant be scattered among all nations;

But they shall be gathered again; but they shall remain until the times of the Gentiles be fulfilled. . . .

And when the times of the Gentiles is come in, a light shall break forth among them that sit in darkness, and it shall be the fulness of my gospel;

But they receive it not; for they perceive not the light, and they turn their hearts from me because of the precepts of men.

And in that generation shall the times of the Gentiles be fulfilled. (Doctrine and Covenants 45:16, 22-25, 28-30.)

Thus, "the times of the Gentiles" would be recognized by the fact that "a light shall break forth among them that sit in darkness, and it shall be the fulness of my gospel. . . . And in that generation shall the times of the Gentiles be fulfilled."

It would seem, therefore, that the times of the Gentiles are nearing fulfillment. The fulness of His everlasting Gospel has been established among the Gentile nations of the earth. "And then, behold, and lo, they shall turn unto the Jews." (Doctrine and Covenants 90:9.) Therefore, all that the Lord revealed to the House of Joseph in this last dispensation through the Prophet Joseph Smith, that "choice seer . . . like unto Moses," is now being offered to the Jews, according to the promise of the Lord.

Israel and Judah are being Gathered

The Father has commenced His work to accomplish the gathering of His covenant people; His Church has been established among the Gentiles since the sixth day of April, 1830. Since that time, He has been gathering to His Zion the seed of Joseph scattered among the Gentile nations. His spirit has been working with the rulers of nations which has made it possible for the Jews to commence to gather back to Palestine, the land of their inheritance, as the prophets have declared they would.

As the gathering to these two centers continues, the seed of Joseph in the Rocky Mountains of America, and the descendants of Judah to the land of Palestine, one can well understand Isaiah's words concerning this great event:

O Zion, that bringest good tidings, get thee up into the high mountain; O Jerusalem, that bringest good tidings, lift up thy voice with strength; lift it up, be not afraid; say unto the cities of Judah, Behold your God! (Isaiah 40:9.)

The prophet Jeremiah seemed to have had quite a clear vision of the time when the Lord would seek to bring together the House of Joseph, and the House of Judah, since each was to be gathered to his own land:

And the Lord said unto me, The backsliding Israel hath justified herself more than treacherous Judah.

Go and proclaim these words toward the north, and say, Return thou backsliding Israel, saith the Lord; and I will not cause mine anger to fall upon you: for I am merciful, saith the Lord, and I will not keep anger for ever.

Only acknowledge thine iniquity, that thou hast transgressed against the Lord thy God, and hast scattered thy ways to the strangers under every green tree, and ye have not obeyed my voice, saith the Lord.

Turn, O backsliding children, saith the Lord; for I am married unto you: and I will take you one of a city, and two of a family, and I will bring you to Zion;

And I will give you pastors according to mine heart, which shall feed you with knowledge and understanding. . . .

In those days the house of Judah shall walk with the house of Israel, and they shall come together out of the land of the north to the land that I have given for an inheritance unto your fathers. (Jeremiah 3:11-15, 18.)

It is evident that, since the Lord had made a covenant with Israel, "for I am married unto you, and I will take you one of a city, and two of a family, and I will bring you to Zion," He intended to fulfill that covenant at the time when He would establish His Church among the children of Israel, the House of Joseph. He further declared: "And I will give you pastors according to mine heart, which shall feed you with knowledge and understanding." The Lord added: "In those days the House of Judah shall walk with the House of Israel." He knew that in that day Israel would take to Judah a knowledge of the restoration of the Gospel, including the bringing forth of the Stick of Joseph, which He would accomplish through the Prophet Joseph Smith.

Since therefore, the Lord made the declaration that "In those days the house of Judah shall walk with the house of Israel," Judah should realize how important it is that she listen to the message and invitation that shall come to her from Israel, to accept and listen to those the Lord promised to send: "And I will give you pastors according to mine heart, which shall feed you with knowledge and understanding."

A New Covenant with Israel and Judah

The prophet Jeremiah speaks again of the new covenant the Lord would make with the House of Israel, and with the House of Judah, realizing that they were separate and apart from each other, and that the covenant would go from Israel to Judah:

Behold the days come, saith the Lord, that I will make a new covenant with the house of Israel, and with the house of Judah:

Not according to the covenant that I made with their fathers in the day that I took them by the hand to bring them out of the land of Egypt; which my covenant they brake, although I was an husband unto them, saith the Lord:

But this shall be the covenant that I will make with the house of Israel: After these days, saith the Lord, I will put my law in their inward parts, and write it in their hearts; and will be their God, and they shall be my people.

And they shall teach no more every man his neighbour, and every man his brother, saying, Know the Lord: for they shall all know me, from the least of them unto the greatest of them, saith the Lord; for I will forgive their iniquity, and I will remember their sin no more. (Jeremiah 31:31-34.)

The prophet Zechariah looked to the time that the Lord would turn again to the House of Judah and the House of Joseph, indicating that He realized they were separated from each other:

And I will strengthen the house of Judah, and I will save the house of Joseph, and I will bring them again to place them; for I have mercy upon them: and they shall be as though I had not cast them off: for I am the Lord their God, and will hear them.

And they of Ephraim shall be like a mighty man, and their heart shall rejoice as through wine: yea, their children shall see it, and be glad; their heart shall rejoice in the Lord.

I will hiss for them, and gather them; for I have redeemed them: and they shall increase as they have increased.

And I will sow them among the people: and they shall remember me in far countries; and they shall live with their children, and turn again. (Zechariah 10:6-9.)

Thus the Lord declared that He would "bring them again to place them," for "I will strengthen the house of Judah, and I will save the house of Joseph."

Jesus Outlines the Gathering of Israel and Judah

When Jesus appeared to the Nephites, as recorded in the Stick of Joseph, He spoke to them of the gathering of Israel in the latter days from the "face of the earth" whithersoever they had been scattered. He made it plain that the land of America had been given to the seed of Joseph, and that the Jews would be gathered to Jerusalem:

And it came to pass that when they had all given glory unto Jesus, he said unto them: Behold now I finish the commandment which the Father hath commanded me concerning this people, who are a remnant of the house of Israel.

Ye remember that I spake unto you, and said that when the words of Isaiah should be fulfilled—behold they are written, ye have them before you, therefore search them—

And verily, verily, I say unto you, that when they shall be fulfilled then is the fulfilling of the covenant which the Father hath made unto his people, O house of Israel.

And then shall the remnants, which shall be scattered abroad upon the face of the earth, be gathered in from the east and from the west, and from the south and from the north; and they shall be brought to the knowledge of the Lord their God, who hath redeemed them.

And the Father hath commanded me that I should give unto you this land, for your inheritance.

And I say unto you, that if the Gentiles do not repent after the blessing which they shall receive, after they have scattered my people—

Then shall ye, who are a remnant of the house of Jacob, go forth among them; and ye shall be in the midst of them who shall be many; and ye shall be among them as a lion among the beasts of the forest, and as a young lion among the flocks of sheep, who, if he goeth through both treadeth down and teareth to pieces, and none can deliver.

Thy hand shall be lifted up upon thine adversaries, and all thine enemies shall be cut off.

And I will gather my people together as a man gathereth his sheaves into the floor.

For I will make my people with whom the Father hath covenanted, yea, I will make thy horn iron, and I will make thy hoofs brass. And thou shalt beat in pieces many people; and I will consecrate their gain unto the Lord, and their substance unto the Lord of the whole earth. And behold, I am he who doeth it.

And it shall come to pass, saith the Father, that the sword of my justice shall hang over them at that day; and except they repent it shall fall upon them, saith the Father, yea, even upon all the nations of the Gentiles.

And it shall come to pass that I will establish my people, O house of Israel.

And behold, this people will I establish in this land, unto the fulfilling of the covenant which I made with your father Jacob; and it shall be a New Jerusalem. And the powers of heaven shall be in the midst of this people; yea, even I will be in the midst of you.

Behold, I am he of whom Moses spake, saying: A prophet shall the Lord your God raise up unto your brethren, like unto me; him shall ye hear in all things whatsoever he shall say unto you. And it shall come to pass that every soul who will not hear that prophet shall be cut off from among the people.

Verily I say unto you, yea, and all the prophets from Samuel and those that follow after, as many as have spoken, have testified of me.

And behold, ye are the children of the prophets, and ye are of the house of Israel; and ye are of the covenant which the Father made with your fathers, saying unto Abraham: And in thy seed shall all the kindreds of the earth be blessed.

The Father having raised me up unto you first, and sent me to bless you in turning away every one of you from his iniquities; and this because ye are the children of the covenant—

And after that ye were blessed then fulfilleth the Father the covenant which he made with Abraham, saying: In thy seed shall all the kindreds of the earth be blessed—unto the pouring out of the Holy Ghost through me upon the Gentiles, which blessing upon the Gentiles shall make them mighty above all, unto the scattering of my people, O house of Israel.

And they shall be a scourge unto the people of this land. Nevertheless, when they shall have received the fulness of my gospel, then if they shall harden their hearts against me I will return their iniquities upon their own heads, saith the Father.

And I will remember the covenant which I have made with my people; and I have covenanted with them that I would gather them together in mine own due time, that I would give unto them again the land of their fathers for their inheritance, which is the land of Jerusalem, which is the promised land unto them forever, saith the Father.

And it shall come to pass that the time cometh, when the fulness of my gospel shall be preached unto them;

And they shall believe in me, that I am Jesus Christ, the Son of God, and shall pray unto the Father in my name.

Then shall their watchmen lift up their voice, and with the voice together shall they sing; for they shall see eye to eye.

Then will the Father gather them together again, and give unto them Jerusalem for the land of their inheritance,

Then shall they break forth into joy—Sing together, ye waste places of Jerusalem; for the Father hath comforted his people, he hath redeemed Jerusalem.

The Father hath made bare his holy arm in the eyes of all the nations; and all the ends of the earth shall see the salvation of the Father; and the Father and I are one. . . .

Verily, verily, I say unto you, all these things shall surely come, even as the Father hath commanded me. Then shall this covenant which the Father hath covenanted with his people be fulfilled; and then shall Jerusalem be inhabited again with my people, and it shall be the land of their inheritance. (3 Nephi 20:10-35, 46.)

From this declaration of Jesus there can be no doubt but that the land of America was given to the descendants of Joseph for an everlasting inheritance, and that, in the Lord's own due time, He would gather again the children of Judah to the land of their fathers, which was given them for their inheritance, "which is the land of Jerusalem, which is the promised land unto them forever." Jesus further indicated that this would come to pass at the time "when the fulness of my gospel shall be preached unto them."

A New Jerusalem for the Seed of Joseph

From the Stick of Joseph, we have the words of the Prophet Ether who was privileged to see the time when the earth would pass away, and there would be a new heaven and a new earth. In his description of these glorious events, he makes it very plain that there would be two gathering places:

And now I, Moroni, proceed to finish my record concerning the destruction of the people of whom I have been writing.

For behold, they rejected all the words of Ether; for he truly told them of all things, from the beginning of man; and that after the waters had receded from off the face of this land it became a choice land above all other lands, a chosen land of the Lord; wherefore the Lord would have that all men should serve him who dwell upon the face thereof;

And that it was the place of the New Jerusalem, which should come down out of heaven, and the holy sanctuary of the Lord.

Behold, Ether saw the days of Christ, and he spake concerning a New Jerusalem upon this land.

And he spake also concerning the house of Israel, and the Jerusalem from whence Lehi should come—after it should be destroyed it should be built up again, a holy city unto the Lord; wherefore, it could not be a new Jerusalem for it had been in a time of old; but it should be built up again, and become a holy city of the Lord; and it should be built unto the house of Israel.

And that a New Jerusalem should be built upon this land, unto the remnant of the seed of Joseph, for which things there has been a type.

For as Joseph brought his father down into the land of Egypt, even so he died there; wherefore, the Lord brought a remnant of the seed of Joseph out of the land of Jerusalem, that he might be merciful unto the seed of Joseph that they should perish not, even as he was merciful unto the father of Joseph that he should perish not.

Wherefore, the remnant of the house of Joseph shall be built upon this land; and it shall be a land of their inheritance; and they shall build up a holy city unto the Lord, like unto the Jerusalem of old; and they shall no more be confounded, until the end come when the earth shall pass away.

And there shall be a new heaven and a new earth; and they shall be like unto the old save the old have passed away, and all things have become new.

And then cometh the New Jerusalem; and blessed are they who dwell therein, for it is they whose garments are white through the blood of the Lamb; and they are they who are numbered among the remnant of the seed of Joseph, who were of the house of Israel.

And then also cometh the Jerusalem of old; and the inhabitants thereof, blessed are they, for they have been washed in the blood of the Lamb; and they are they who were scattered and gathered in from the four quarters of the earth, and from the north countries, and are partakers of the fulfilling of the covenant which God made with their father, Abraham.

And when these things come, bringeth to pass the scripture which saith, there are they who were first, who shall be last; and there are they who were last, who shall be first. Ether 13:1-12.)

Two Gathering Places—Zion and Jerusalem

On November 3, 1831, the Prophet Joseph Smith received a revelation from the Lord explaining certain events in connection with the second coming of the Messiah; the establishment of Zion and Jerusalem; the coming of the lost tribes from the north countries to receive their blessings at the hands of Ephraim:

Wherefore, prepare ye for the coming of the Bridegroom; go ye, go ye out to meet him.

For behold, he shall stand upon the mount of Olivet, and upon the mighty ocean, even the great deep, and upon the islands of the sea, and upon the land of Zion.

And he shall utter his voice out of Zion, and he shall speak from Jerusalem, and his voice shall be heard among all people;

And it shall be a voice as the voice of many waters, and as the voice of a great thunder, which shall break down the mountains, and the valleys shall not be found.

He shall command the great deep, and it shall be driven back into the north countries, and the islands shall become one land;

And the land of Jerusalem and the land of Zion shall be turned back into their own place; and the earth shall be like as it was in the days before it was divided.

And the Lord, even the Savior, shall stand in the midst of his people, and shall reign over all flesh.

And they who are in the north countries shall come in remembrance before the Lord; and their prophets shall hear his voice, and shall no longer stay themselves; and they shall smite the rocks, and the ice shall flow down at their presence.

And an highway shall be cast up in the midst of the great deep.

Their enemies shall become a prey unto them,

And in the barren deserts there shall come forth pools of living water; and the parched ground shall no longer be a thirsty land.

And they shall bring forth their rich treasures unto the children of Ephraim, my servants.

And the boundaries of the everlasting hills shall tremble at their presence.

And there shall they fall down and be crowned with glory, even in Zion, by the hands of the servants of the Lord, even the children of Ephraim.

And they shall be filled with songs of everlasting joy.

Behold, this is the blessing of the everlasting God upon the tribes of Israel, and the richer blessing upon the head of Ephraim and his fellows.

And they also of the tribe of Judah, after their pain shall be sanctified in holiness before the Lord, to dwell in his presence day and night, forever and ever. (Doctrine and Covenants 133:19-35.)

The Lord thus made it plain to the Prophet Joseph Smith that there would be two centers or gathering places, Zion and Jerusalem, and that He would utter His voice from both: "And he shall utter his voice out of Zion, and he shall speak from Jerusalem."

Gathering to be "in the Last Days"

The Prophet Isaiah also seemed to know of these events when he said:

And it shall come to pass in the last days, that the mountain of the Lord's house shall be established in the top of the mountains, and shall be exalted above the hills; and all nations shall flow unto it.

And many people shall go and say, Come ye, and let us go up to the mountain of the Lord, to the house of the God of Jacob; and he will teach us of his ways, and we will walk in his paths: for out of Zion shall go forth the law, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem. (Isaiah 2:2-3.)

Isaiah leaves no doubt as to when the gathering would take place: "And it shall come to pass in the last days." Surely, we are living in the last days. The Lord's house has been established in the top of the mountains. For more than one hundred years, people from all nations have been coming to Zion, "to the house of the God of Jacob," that He might teach them of His ways, that they might walk in His paths. The law of His Gospel has been going forth "out of Zion," and ultimately, as the prophet Isaiah declared, "the word of the Lord" will go forth "from Jerusalem."
