LeGrand Richards, Israel! Do You Know? ( 1954)

CHAPTER 11

THE GATHERING OF ISRAEL

Keys Restored for Gathering Scattered Israel

On the night of September 21, 1823, the angel Moroni told Joseph Smith many things concerning the gathering of latter-day Israel. In reporting the visits of Moroni, Joseph Smith wrote—"He quoted the eleventh chapter of Isaiah, saying it was about to be fulfilled."

More than twelve years later (April 3, 1836), following the dedication of the temple in Kirtland, Ohio, Moses appeared to Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery and conferred upon them the keys for the gathering of scattered Israel. This glorious event marked the beginning of the fulfillment of Moroni's prediction that the prophecy of Isaiah concerning the gathering of Israel "was about to be fulfilled."

Joseph Smith's account of the visit of the ancient Prophet Moses is as follows:

Moses appeared before us, and committed unto us the keys of the gathering of Israel from the four parts of the earth, and the leading of the ten tribes from the land of the north. (Doctrine and Covenants 110:11.)

In a revelation to the Prophet Joseph Smith in September, 1830, the Lord instructed him in regard to the gathering of His people:

And ye are called to bring to pass the gathering of mine elect; for mine elect hear my voice and harden not their hearts;

Wherefore the decree hath gone forth from the Father that they shall be gathered in unto one place upon the face of this land, to prepare their hearts and be prepared in all things against the day when tribulation and desolation are sent forth upon the wicked. (Doctrine and Covenants 29:7-8.)

Thus, in the establishment of the Church and Kingdom of God on the earth in these latter days, it will be noted that from the very beginning, the "gathering of mine elect" was fully understood to be one of the great objectives to be achieved. Such was the announcement made by the angel Moroni in 1823, six and one half years before the Church was organized, and more than twelve years before Moses restored the keys for accomplishing the gathering of Israel.

Seed of Joseph to be Gathered in the Land of America

The angel Moroni gave the Prophet Joseph Smith to understand that the gathering of Israel would be two fold in nature: (1) "He shall set up an ensign for the nations;" (2) He "shall assemble the outcasts of Israel." This contemplated the organization of the Lord's Church and Kingdom here upon the earth, "in the latter-days", to which would be gathered, in this land of America, the seed of Joseph which had been scattered among the Gentile nations. The gathering of Joseph (Israel) has been going forward ever since the organization of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, April 6, 1830.

Joseph Smith was given to understand that the Lord would also "gather together the dispersed of Judah from the four corners of the earth," as a part of His great latter-day Gospel dispensation, and that this gathering would be to the land of Jerusalem and Palestine. (The gathering of Judah will be discussed in the following chapter.) We will now concern ourselves with the gathering of Israel to this land of America.

In a revelation from the Lord to the Prophet Joseph Smith, December 16, 1833, the Lord made plain that His people were to be gathered together:

Behold, it is my will, that all they who call on my name and worship me according to mine everlasting gospel, should gather together, and stand in holy places;

And prepare for the revelation which is to come, when the veil of the covering of my temple, in my tabernacle, which hideth the earth, shall be taken off, and all flesh shall see me together. . . .

That the work of the gathering together of my saints may continue, that I may build them up unto my name upon holy places; for the time of harvest is come, and my word must needs be fulfilled.

Therefore, I must gather together my people, according to the parable of the wheat and the tares, that the wheat may be secured in the garners to possess eternal life, and be crowned with celestial glory, when I shall come in the kingdom of my Father to reward every man according as his work shall be. (Doctrine and Covenants 101:22-23, 64-65.)

The following quotations from the revelations of the Lord to the Prophet Joseph Smith are given merely to confirm the statements already made:

And even so will I gather mine elect from the four quarters of the earth, even as many as will believe in me, and hearken unto my voice. (Doctrine and Covenants 33:6; October, 1830.)

And Israel shall be saved in mine own due time; and by the keys which I have given shall they be led, and no more be confounded at all. (Doctrine and Covenants 35:25; December, 1830.)

And again, I say unto you, I give unto you a commandment, that every man, both elder, priest, teacher, and also member, go to with his might, with the labor of his hands, to prepare and accomplish the things which I have commanded.

And let your preaching be the warning voice, every man to his neighbor, in mildness and in meekness.

And go ye out from among the wicked. Save yourselves. Be ye clean that bear the vessels of the Lord. . . . (Doctrine and Covenants 38:40-42; January 1831.)

That my covenant people may be gathered in one in that day when I shall come to my temple. And this I do for the salvation of my people. (Doctrine and Covenants 42:36; February 1831.)

And again, the Lord shall utter his voice out of heaven, saying: Hearken, O ye nations of the earth, and hear the words of that God who made you.

O, ye nations of the earth, how often would I have gathered you together as a hen gathereth her chickens under her wings, but ye would not! (Doctrine and Covenants 43:23-24; February, 1831.)

And it shall come to pass that the righteous shall be gathered out from among all nations, and shall come to Zion, singing with songs of everlasting joy. (Doctrine and Covenants 45:71; March 1831.)

Wherefore, prepare ye, prepare ye, O my people; sanctify yourselves; gather ye together, O ye people of my church, upon the land of Zion, all you that have not been commanded to tarry.

Go ye out from Babylon. Be ye clean that bear the vessels of the Lord.

Call your solemn assemblies, and speak often one to another. And let every man call upon the name of the Lord.

Yea, verily I say unto you again, the time has come when the voice of the Lord is unto you: Go ye out of Babylon; gather ye out from among the nations, from the four winds, from one end of heaven to the other.

Send forth the elders of my church unto the nations which are afar off; unto the islands of the sea; send forth unto foreign lands; call upon all nations, first upon the Gentiles, and then upon the Jews.

And behold, and lo, this shall be their cry, and the voice of the Lord unto all people: Go ye forth unto the land of Zion, that the borders of my people may be enlarged, and that her stakes may be strengthened and that Zion may go forth unto the regions round about. (Doctrine and Covenants 133:4-9; November 1831.)

It will be noted that these revelations were all given within two years after the Church was organized. There is no question but what the Lord had in mind that the seed of Joseph would be gathered out of the nations and be gathered together in one place, as the above quotations so clearly indicate.

Gathering of Joseph (Israel) Already in Progress

While the Lord has indicated that His Zion of the latter days would be established in the land of America, and that the new Jerusalem would be built upon this land, it is obvious that Israel would be gathered to more than one city in Zion. In fulfillment of the command of the Lord in this matter, the Latter-day Saints have built over six hundred cities, to which have been gathered converts to the new faith from many countries.

At the first gathering place of the saints in this dispensation which was Kirtland, Ohio, they erected their first temple to the Most High.

The second gathering was in the State of Missouri where they laid the cornerstones for two temples, one at Independence and the other at Far West. But the saints were compelled to leave Missouri because of cruel persecutions. However, until this day, the Church anticipates the time when its members will return and build a temple and the city of Zion to the Most High, at Independence, Missouri, in the land of Joseph (America).

From Missouri, the saints went to Nauvoo, Illinois, where they built a city of some 20,000 souls, and erected a beautiful temple to their God. It was while they were located here that the Prophet Joseph Smith and his brother, Hyrum, were martyred in cold blood, by a wicked mob, in Carthage jail, Illinois, on June 27, 1844. Soon after this, the saints were compelled to leave Nauvoo. Their homes were devasted; their beautiful new temple was burned by their enemies. From Illinois they turned their faces to the valleys of the Rocky Mountains, stopping at Winter Quarters, Iowa, only long enough to make preparations for their journey across the plains. The first main company arrived in what is now Salt Lake City, Utah, July 24, 1847, the headquarters of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints to this day.

In a revelation to Joseph Smith under date of March 8, 1833, the Lord referred to the House of Joseph as "the heathen nations":

And then cometh the day when the arm of the Lord shall be revealed in power in convincing the nations, the heathen nations, the house of Joseph, of the gospel of their salvation. (Doctrine and Covenants 90:10.)

The prophet Amos had declared that the House of Israel would be sifted among the nations, and this accounts for the fact that the seed of Joseph would be gathered from among "the heathen nations":

I will not utterly destroy the house of Jacob, saith the Lord.

For, lo, I will command, and I will sift the house of Israel among all nations, like as corn is sifted in a sieve, yet shall not the least grain fall upon the earth. (Amos 9:8-9.)

Predictions Concerning the Gathering of Israel

In the translation of the Book of Mormon (Stick of Joseph), the Prophet Joseph Smith learned much concerning the plan of the Lord to gather Israel in the latter days, and to establish His Zion in the land of Joseph.

We quote the words of Jesus Christ to the Nephites when He visited them in America following His resurrection:

And verily I say unto you, I give unto you a sign, that ye may know the time when these things shall be about to take place—that I shall gather in, from their long dispersion, my people, O house of Israel, and shall establish again among them my Zion;

And behold, this is the thing which I will give unto you for a sign—for verily I say unto you that when these things which I declare unto you, and which I shall declare unto you hereafter of myself, and by the power of the Holy Ghost which shall be given you of the Father, shall be made known unto the Gentiles that they may know concerning this people who are a remnant of the house of Jacob, and concerning this my people who shall be scattered by them;

Verily, verily, I say unto you, when these things shall be made known unto them of the Father, and shall come forth of the Father, from them unto you;

For it is wisdom in the Father that they should be established in this land, and be set up as a free people by the power of the Father, that these things might come forth from them unto a remnant of your seed, that the covenant of the Father may be fulfilled which he hath covenanted with his people, O house of Israel;

Therefore, when these works and the works which shall be wrought among you hereafter shall come forth from the Gentiles, unto your seed which shall dwindle in unbelief because of iniquity;

For thus it behooveth the Father that it should come forth from the Gentiles, that he may show forth his power unto the Gentiles, for this cause that the Gentiles, if they will harden not their hearts, that they may repent and come unto me and be baptized in my name and know of the true points of my doctrine, that they may be numbered among my people, O house of Israel;

And when these things come to pass that thy seed shall begin to know these things—it shall be a sign unto them, that they may know that the work of the Father hath already commenced unto the fulfilling of the covenant which he hath made unto the people who are of the house of Israel. . . .

For in that day, for my sake shall the Father work a work, which shall be a great and marvelous work among them; and there shall be among them those who will not believe it, although a man shall declare it unto them. . . .

And my people who are a remnant of Jacob shall be among the Gentiles, yea, in the midst of them as a lion among the beasts of the forest, as a young lion among the flocks of sheep, who, if he go through both treadeth down and teareth in pieces, and none can deliver. . . .

But if they will repent and hearken unto my words, and harden not their hearts, I will establish my church among them, and they shall come in unto the covenant and be numbered among this the remnant of Jacob, unto whom I have given this land for their inheritance;

And they shall assist my people, the remnant of Jacob, and also as many of the house of Israel as shall come, that they may build a city, which shall be called the New Jerusalem.

And then shall they assist my people that they may be gathered in, who are scattered upon all the face of the land, in unto the New Jerusalem.

And then shall the power of heaven come down among them; and I also will be in the midst.

And then shall the work of the Father commence at that day, even when this gospel shall be preached among the remnant of this people. Verily I say unto you, at that day shall the work of the Father commence among all the dispersed of my people, yea, even the tribes which have been lost, which the Father hath led away out of Jerusalem.

Yea, the work shall commence among all the dispersed of my people, with the Father, to prepare the way whereby they may come unto me, that they may call on the Father in my name.

Yea, and then shall the work commence, with the Father, among all nations, in preparing the way whereby his people may be gathered home to the land of their inheritance.

And they shall go out from all nations; and they shall not go out in haste, nor go by flight, for I will go before them, saith the Father, and I will be their rearward. (3 Nephi 21:1-7, 9, 12, 22-29.)

In considering this scripture, it should be remembered that the Book of Mormon (Stick of Joseph) was published and given to the world in 1829, a year before the Church was organized. Joseph Smith was only twenty-four years old. And yet this statement from that inspired record covers all the essential points with respect to the gathering of latter-day Israel, to-wit:

The Prophet Ether, as recorded in the Stick of Joseph, had a clear understanding of the gathering of Israel in the latter days and of the establishment of a New Jerusalem in this land of America, and the rebuilding of the Jerusalem of old by the Jews. (Ether 13:1-13.)

Predictions of the Prophets of Judah Concerning the Gathering of Israel

The prophet Jeremiah was privileged to see how complete would be the gathering of Israel to the lands the Lord had given "unto their fathers":

Therefore, behold, the days come, saith the Lord, that it shall no more be said, The Lord liveth, that brought up the children of Israel out of the land of Egypt;

But, The Lord liveth, that brought up the children of Israel from the land of the north, and from all the lands whither he had driven them: and I will bring them again into their land that I gave unto their fathers.

Behold, I will send for many fishers, saith the Lord, and they shall fish them; and after will I send for many hunters, and they shall hunt them from every mountain, and from every hill, and out of the holes of the rocks. (Jeremiah 16:14-16.)

This latter-day gathering, as seen by Jeremiah, was to exceed in magnitude the leading of Israel out of the land of Egypt, when, by the power of God, they passed through the Red Sea on dry ground.

At the time of this writing it is evident that the Lord has made bare His arm to fulfill His promise made by the Prophet Jeremiah with respect to the gathering of Israel in the latter days. The prophet indicated that the Lord would send fishers and hunters to "hunt them from every mountain, and from every hill, and out of the holes in the rocks," showing how completely He would fulfill His promise, that after Israel was sifted among the nations, "yet shall not the least grain fall upon the earth." (Amos 9:8-9.)

In the establishment of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints upon the earth in these latter days, the Lord has provided therein a great missionary program, through which a great many male members of the Church give two years or more of their lives, at their own expense, to preach the message of the restored gospel to all the inhabitants of the earth. Up to the present time, it is estimated that over 70,000 missionaries have filled such missions for the Church to acquaint the world with the "marvelous work and a wonder" the Lord has established in the earth in these latter days according to the promises of the prophets. These are the "fishers" and "hunters" the Lord promised to send. It is apparent that the Lord did not intend any should be overlooked.

Through Jeremiah, the Lord makes this further promise to Israel:

Turn, O backsliding children, saith the Lord; for I am married unto you: and I will take you one of a city, and two of a family, and I will bring you to Zion:

And I will give you pastors according to mine heart, which shall feed you with knowledge and understanding. (Jeremiah 3:14-15.)

From these prophecies it will be seen that Jeremiah realized that as Israel had been "sifted among the nations," the Lord would gather them, not in great multitudes, but "one of a city and two of a family," and that when He should bring them to Zion, He would give them "pastors according to mine heart, which shall feed you with knowledge and understanding." In other words, He would lead them to Zion where He had established His Church and Kingdom, restored His Priesthood, that they may be fed "with knowledge and understanding."

Jeremiah gave a vivid and detailed description of the gathering of the seed of Joseph or Ephraim, who were given the land of America for their inheritance:

For there shall be a day, that the watchmen upon the mount Ephraim shall cry, Arise ye, and let us go up to Zion unto the Lord our God.

For thus saith the Lord; Sing with gladness for Jacob, and shout among the chief of the nations: publish ye, praise ye, and say, O Lord, save thy people, the remnant of Israel.

Behold, I will bring them from the north country, and gather them from the coasts of the earth, and with them the blind and the lame, the woman with child and her that travaileth with child together: a great company shall return thither.

They shall come with weeping, and with supplications will I lead them: I will cause them to walk by the rivers of waters in a straight way, wherein they shall not stumble: for I am a father to Israel, and Ephraim is my firstborn.

Hear the word of the Lord, O ye nations, and declare it in the isles afar off, and say, He that scattered Israel will gather him, and keep him, as a shepherd doth his flock.

For the Lord hath redeemed Jacob, and ransomed him from the hand of him that was stronger than he.

Therefore they shall come and sing in the height of Zion, and shall flow together to the goodness of the Lord, for wheat, and for wine, and for oil, and for the young of the flock and of the herd: and their soul shall be as a watered garden; and they shall not sorrow any more at all.

Then shall the virgin rejoice in the dance, both young men and old together: for I will turn their mourning into joy, and will comfort them, and make them rejoice from their sorrow.

And I will satiate the soul of the priests with fatness, and my people shall be satisfied with my goodness, saith the Lord. (Jeremiah 31:6-14.)

Prophecies of Jeremiah Fulfilled

It would appear that Jeremiah wrote a portion of the history of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints approximately 2500 years before it occurred.

This was a cry from "the watchmen upon mount Ephraim. . . . Arise ye and let us go up to Zion unto the Lord our God." This has nothing to do with Judah as the prophet further indicated: "For I am a father to Israel, and Ephraim is my firstborn."

Recall that the birthright was taken from Reuben, the firstborn of the twelve sons of Israel, or Jacob, and was given to Joseph, and from him to his sons Ephraim and Manasseh, (I Chronicles 5:1-2.) Thereafter, the Lord regarded Ephraim as his "firstborn." (Jeremiah 31:9.) Therefore, this was to be a gathering of the descendants of Joseph and Ephraim, "to Zion unto the Lord our God."

"Sing with gladness for Jacob." Why? Because the day of his redemption was nigh.

"Shout among the chief of the nations." The Elders of this Church had been sent to Great Britain (1846), the Scandinavian countries, Germany, etc., the chief nations, and had gathered in many converts to Nauvoo, Illinois.

"I will bring them . . . a great company shall return thither." This was something the Lord was going to do. Note that Jeremiah does not say that they will return hither, or to the place where this prediction was made, but thither, or to a distant place. He understood that Joseph was to be given a new land in the "utmost bound of the everlasting hills." (See Genesis 49:22-26; Deuteronomy 33:13-17.)

A "great company" was to "return thither," and with them "the blind and the lame, the woman with child and her that travaileth with child together," and "they shall come with weeping, and with supplications will I lead them." About twenty thousand Latter-day Saints were driven out of Nauvoo, and with them "the blind and the lame, the woman with child." They did not leave their beautiful homes because they wanted to, hence they came "weeping" and with "supplications" unto the Lord, and He led them as He had promised.

"I will cause them to walk by the rivers of waters in a straight way, wherein they shall not stumble." In their trek from Nauvoo, Illinois, across the great American desert to the Salt Lake Valley, the saints traveled about six hundred miles along the North Platte River, as Jeremiah had seen.

"Therefore they shall come and sing in the height of Zion." At this writing (1954) the Tabernacle Choir, at Salt Lake City, Utah, consisting of approximately 375 unpaid voices broadcasts weekly "from the crossroads of the west." They are in their twenty-sixth year of weekly nation-wide broadcasts. This represents but a small part of the singing that is done "in the height of Zion."

". . . and shall flow together to the goodness of the Lord, for wheat, and for oil, and for wine, and for the young of the flock and of the herd." Compare this promise with the blessing pronounced upon the head of Joseph by Moses, when he referred to the land of Joseph:

And of Joseph he said, Blessed of the Lord be his land, for the precious things of heaven, for the dew, and for the deep that coucheth beneath.

And for the precious fruits brought forth by the sun, and for the precious things put forth by the moon.

And for the chief things of the ancient mountains, and for the precious things of the lasting hills,

And for the precious things of the earth and fulness thereof. . . . (Deuteronomy 33:13-16; For Jacob's blessing to Joseph, see Genesis 49:22-26.)

It is easy to believe that Joseph's land was to be "choice above all other lands," as the Stick of Joseph indicates, when one recalls how many times Moses used the word "precious" in describing the land and its blessings. One will find these predictions in actual fulfillment as he travels among the Latter-day Saints in the valleys of the Rocky Mountains.

Continuing our analyses of the prophecy of Jeremiah: "And they shall not sorrow any more at all. Then shall the virgin rejoice in the dance, both young men and old together: for I will turn their mourning into joy, and will comfort them, and make them rejoice from their sorrow." To understand how completely this has been fulfilled, one needed but to attend the testimony meetings of the Latter-day Saints, after their arrival in the valleys of the Rocky Mountains, and hear them express their gratitude to the Lord for having brought them here. To attend their dances and see how both young and the old "rejoice in the dance," is a revelation. Practically every organized ward or branch of Latter-day Saints have, adjoining their chapel, a recreation hall where the young and the old do rejoice together in the dance, and where other activities are carried on for their enjoyment. Surely the Lord has turned "their mourning into joy," and has comforted them and made "them to rejoice from their sorrow."

"And I will satiate the soul of the priests with fatness, and my people shall be satisfied with my goodness." While the members of the Priesthood in The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints are not paid for their services, and thousands of them have left their families for years at a time to do missionary work in the nations of the earth, paying their own expenses and without remuneration from the Church, yet, in their hearts, they feel they are better paid than any other religious leaders in the world, because of the joy and satisfaction the Lord plants in their hearts, which could not possibly be purchased with money. Thus He has satiated "the soul of the priests with fatness," and His people are satisfied with His goodness.

The Prophet Jeremiah speaks again of the gathering of Israel and of Judah when the Messiah shall make His second advent to judge His people, and to reign "as King of kings and Lord of lords:"

And I will gather the remnants of my flock out of all countries whither I have driven them, and will bring them again to their folds; and they shall be fruitful and increase.

And I will set up shepherds over them which shall feed them; and they shall fear no more, nor be dismayed, neither shall they be lacking, saith the Lord.

Behold, the days come, saith the Lord, that I will raise unto David a righteous Branch, and a King shall reign and prosper, and shall execute judgment and justice in the earth.

In his days Judah shall be saved, and Israel shall dwell safely: and this is his name whereby he shall be called, THE LORD OF RIGHTEOUSNESS.

Therefore, behold, the days come, saith the Lord, that they shall no more say, The Lord liveth, which brought up the children of Israel out of the land of Egypt;

But, the Lord liveth, which brought up and which led the seed of the house of Israel out of the north country, and from all countries whither I had driven them; and they shall dwell in their own land. (Jeremiah 23:3-8.)

In this prophecy, it is plain that Jeremiah saw the gathering of the House of Israel, and the House of Judah, in the days preceding the second coming of the Messiah.

Prophecies of Isaiah Concerning the Gathering of Israel

Only those who are associated with The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints can understand how literally the following prophecy of Isaiah has been fulfilled:

And it shall come to pass in the last days, that the mountain of the Lord's house shall be established in the top of the mountains and shall be exalted above the hills; and all nations shall flow unto it.

And many people shall go and say, Come ye, and let us go up to the mountain of the Lord, to the house of the God of Jacob; and he will teach us of his ways, and we will walk in his paths; for out of Zion shall go forth the law, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem. (Isaiah 2:2-3.)

In order that the saints may enjoy the privileges of the sealing ordinances performed in the "house of the God of Jacob," many have gathered from the nations of the earth where the missionaries have carried the message of the restored gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ. The law of the Lord (His Gospel) is going forth out of Zion, as will the "word of the Lord from Jerusalem" when the Messiah comes to reign as King of kings and Lord of lords.

This establishment of the "Lord's house" in the "top of the mountains," and the gathering of all nations unto it, must be "in the last days," as Isaiah declared, and would precede the judgments of the Lord which will be followed by a day when, "nation shall not lift up sword against nation, neither shall they learn war any more." (Isaiah 2:4.) With the close of World War II we are all hopeful that we are approaching the day when the condition Isaiah foretold may be anticipated. At least we know that it has not yet been fulfilled.

Isaiah Foresees the Coming of the Railroad and Airplane

In fixing the time of the great gathering, Isaiah seemed to indicate that it would take place in the day of the railroad train and the airplane:

And he will lift up an ensign to the nations from far, and will hiss unto them from the end of the earth: and, behold, they shall come with speed swiftly:

None shall be weary nor stumble among them; none shall slumber nor sleep; neither shall the girdle of their loins be loosed, nor the latchet of their shoes be broken:

Whose arrows are sharp, and all their bows bent, their horses' hoofs shall be counted like flint, and their wheels like a whirlwind:

Their roaring shall be like a lion, they shall roar like young lions: yea, they shall roar, and lay hold of the prey, and shall carry it away safe, and none shall deliver it. (Isaiah 5:26-29.)

Since there were neither trains nor airplanes in that day, Isaiah could hardly have mentioned them by name. However, he seems to have described them in unmistakable words. How better could "their horses' hoofs be counted like flint, and their wheels like a whirlwind" than in the modern train? How better could "their roaring . . . be like a lion" than in the roar of the airplane? Trains and airplanes do not stop for night. Therefore, was not Isaiah justified in saying: "none shall slumber nor sleep; neither shall the girdle of their loins be loosed, nor the latchet of their shoes be broken"? With this manner of transportation the Lord can really "hiss unto them from the end of the earth," that "they shall come with speed swiftly." Indicating that Isaiah must have foreseen the airplane, he stated: "Who are these that fly as a cloud, and as the doves to their windows?" (Isaiah 60:8.)

Isaiah Predicts the Desert Shall Blossom as the Rose

Isaiah also understood that this gathering of Joseph (Israel) would be to the mountains, and that the Lord would cause the desert to rejoice and blossom as the rose. In this respect, it is remarkable what part "water" was to play in redeeming the desert and the wilderness as the gathering place of latter-day Israel:

The wilderness and the solitary place shall be glad for them; and the desert shall rejoice, and blossom as the rose.

It shall blossom abundantly, and rejoice even with joy and singing: the glory of Lebanon shall be given unto it, the excellency of Carmel and Sharon, they shall see the glory of the Lord, and the excellency of our God. . . .

Then the eyes of the blind shall be opened, and the ears of the deaf shall be unstopped.

Then shall the lame man leap as an hart, and the tongue of the dumb sing: for in the wilderness shall waters break out, and streams in the desert.

And the parched ground shall become a pool, and the thirsty land springs of water: in the habitation of dragons, where each lay, shall be grass with reeds and rushes. . . .

And the ransomed of the Lord shall return, and come to Zion with songs of everlasting joy upon their heads: they shall obtain joy and gladness, and sorrow and sighing shall flee away. (Isaiah 35:1-2, 5-7, 10.)

This has, in part at least, been fulfilled. The desert has been made to "rejoice and blossom as the rose." Waters have broken out "in the wilderness." (flowing wells) "and streams in the desert," (irrigation canals) "and the ransomed of the Lord" have returned, "and come to Zion with songs and everlasting joy upon their heads."

Isaiah continued his description of the gathering of Israel and the reclaiming of the wilderness:

Fear not: for I am with thee: I will bring thy seed from the east, and gather thee from the west;

I will say to the north, Give up; and to the south, Keep not back; bring my sons from far, and my daughters from the ends of the earth;

Even every one that is called by my name; for I have created him for my glory, I have formed him; yea, I have made him. . . .

Behold, I will do a new thing; now it shall spring forth; shall ye not know it? I will even make a way in the wilderness, and rivers in the desert.

The beasts of the field shall honour me, the dragons and the owls: because I give waters in the wilderness, and rivers in the desert, to give drink to my people, my chosen.

This people have I formed for myself; they shall shew forth my praise. (Isaiah 43:5-7, 19-21.)

Introduction of Irrigation may Fulfill Isaiah's Prophecy

"Behold, I will do a new thing." What is this new thing the Lord speaks of through the Prophet Isaiah? Could it not be the great system of "irrigation" which the Lord inspired His servants to teach to His people when they entered the valleys of the mountains? It was irrigation which caused the desert to "rejoice, and blossom as the rose;" to "make a way in the wilderness, and rivers in the desert." The great irrigation canals are larger than many rivers as they flow through the desert, bringing tens of thousands of acres of otherwise arid lands under profitable cultivation.

Even the beasts of the field—and the dragons and the owls shall honor Him, "because I give waters in the wilderness, and rivers in the desert, to give drink to my people, my chosen." What the Lord has thus done, in this "new thing" has blessed His "people," His "chosen" with such measure of prosperity that they have been able to send most of their old and young men on missions to the peoples of all nations at their own expense, bearing witness of the restoration of the gospel in this dispensation. No doubt this is what the Lord had in mind for them to do, when He said, "This people have I formed for myself; they shall shew forth my praise." They become the "fishers" and "hunters" whom the Lord said He would send out to hunt Israel "from every mountain, and from every hill, and out of the holes of the rocks." (Jeremiah 16:14-16.)

The Prophet Isaiah continued:

I will open rivers in high places, and fountains in the midst of the valleys: I will make the wilderness a pool of water, and the dry land springs of water.

I will plant in the wilderness the cedar, the shittah tree, and the myrtle, and the oil tree; I will set in the desert the fir tree, and the pine, and the box tree together:

That they may see, and know, and consider, and understand together, that the hand of the Lord hath done this, and the Holy One of Israel hath created it. (Isaiah 41:18-20.)

"Rivers in high places" could have reference to the reservoirs built in the canyons to impound the winter run-off of water so it may be used for summer irrigation.

"And fountains in the midst of the valleys." If you have seen some of the flowing wells that have been drilled in some of the dry valleys, you can understand this part of the prophecy. All these fulfillments of prophecy have so changed the wilderness, that it has been possible to plant the various types of trees that otherwise would not grow.

"That they may see, and know, and consider, and understand together, that the hand of the Lord hath done this, and the Holy One of Israel hath created it." All this, therefore, may be regarded as the work of the Holy One of Israel, for the benefit of gathered Israel in the latter days.

President Brigham Young Meets Jim Bridger

The Lord must have had a great deal to do with the development of this western empire, for when Brigham Young and the Latter-day Saints were en route to the Salt Lake Valley, they met Jim Bridger, an early western trapper, who said: "Mr. Young, I would give a thousand dollars if I knew an ear of corn could be ripened in the Great Basin." (See Discourses of Brigham Young, p. 481.)

Statement of Senator McDuffie and Joseph Smith's Prophecy

As late as 1843, two years before the exodus of the Latter-day Saints from Illinois, the opinion held by the majority in the United States was that the whole territory of the Rocky Mountains was not worth a "pinch of snuff." Such was the expression made by Senator George H. McDuffie, of South Carolina, in the Senate that year. Discussing the settlement of Oregon, he said:

Who are to go there, along the line of military posts, and take possession of the only part of the territory fit to occupy—that part upon the seacoast, a strip less than one hundred miles in width. Why, sir, of what use will this be for agricultural purposes? I would not for that purpose give a pinch of snuff for the whole territory. I wish to God we did not own it. (Congressional Globe, 27th Congress, 3rd Session, pp. 198-201.)

About the time Senator McDuffie made this statement, the Prophet Joseph Smith made the following statement:

I prophesied that the Saints would continue to suffer much affliction, and would be driven to the Rocky Mountains, many would apostatize, others would be put to death by our persecutors or lose their lives in consequence of exposure or disease, and some of you will live to go and assist in making settlements and build cities, and see the Saints become a mighty people in the midst of the Rocky Mountains. (Documentary History of the Church, Vol. 5, p. 85.)

Since the Lord could make such a worthless land as described by Senator McDuffie to "blossom as a rose," and make the saints "become a mighty people in the midst of the Rocky Mountains," surely these are even greater accomplishments than when the Lord parted the Red Sea and led Israel of old through on dry land.

In the light of these prophecies, it seems logical that, in the restoration of the gospel in these latter days, Moses would be sent by the Father to restore the keys for the gathering of Israel to Joseph Smith "a choice seer . . . like unto Moses." In and of itself, the restoration of these keys of gathering constitutes "a marvellous work and a wonder," as promised by Isaiah. (Isaiah 29:13-14.)

Why did the prophets make such predictions, if we are not to look for their fulfillment? Have they been fulfilled? If so, when, and where, and by what people, if not by The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints?

Nephite Prophets Promise Understanding

The Nephite prophets, as recorded in the Stick of Joseph, understood the value of the prophecies of Isaiah, and that it would be given to the Lord's people to understand them in the day when they would be fulfilled:

For the eternal purposes of the Lord shall roll on, until all his promises shall be fulfilled.

Search the prophecies of Isaiah. . . . (Mormon 8:22-23.)

But behold, I proceed with mine own prophecy, according to my plainness; in the which I know that no man can err, nevertheless, in the days that the prophecies of Isaiah shall be fulfilled men shall know of a surety, at the times when they shall come to pass.

Wherefore, they are of worth unto the children of men, and he that supposeth that they are not, unto them will I speak particularly, and confine the words unto mine own people; for I know that they shall be of great worth unto them in the last days; for in that day shall they understand them; wherefore, for their good have I written them. (2 Nephi 25:7-8.)

It should be remembered that these words of prophecy were published in the Stick of Joseph (The Book of Mormon) in 1829, before the Church was organized in 1830. They were published before any of the prophecies with respect to the establishment of "a marvellous work and a wonder" or the gathering of latter-day Israel had been fulfilled. Many of us today have lived to see almost a complete fulfillment of the promises made.

From this study of the prophecies of Isaiah, it would appear that he almost lived more in our day than in the day when he was actually upon the earth because of the wonderful visions given him concerning the things the Lord promised to do in the latter days. Isaiah fully understood that all the promises of the Lord would be fulfilled:

The grass withereth, the flower fadeth: but the word of our God shall stand for ever. (Isaiah 40:8.)

He saw with great plainness the establishment of Zion in the land of Joseph (America), to which the seed of Joseph would be gathered. He beheld the rebuilding of Jerusalem by the Jews to which they would be gathered in the latter days. He loved to speak of Zion and Jerusalem:

O Zion, that bringest good tidings, get thee up into the high mountain; O Jerusalem, that bringest good tidings, lift up thy voice with strength; lift it up, be not afraid; say unto the cities of Judah, Behold your God! (Isaiah 40:9.)

Awake, awake; put on thy strength, O Zion; put on thy beautiful garments, O Jerusalem. . . . (Isaiah 52:1.)
