LeGrand Richards, Israel! Do You Know? ( 1954)

CHAPTER 12

THE GATHERING OF JUDAH

Nephite Prophets Predict the Gathering of Judah

Moroni, sent from the presence of God, quoted these words of Isaiah three times, during the night of September 21, 1823, to impress them upon the mind of Joseph Smith:

And he shall set up an ensign for the nations, and shall assemble the outcasts of Israel, and gather together the dispersed of Judah from the four corners of the earth (Isaiah 11:12.)

There probably was no fact established more definitely in the mind of Joseph Smith than that the Lord was about to "assemble the outcasts of Israel and gather together the dispersed of Judah."

In the translation of the records contained in the gold plates, the Stick of Joseph, this fact was confirmed in a very definite manner through the Nephite prophets who had lived in this land of America. We will, therefore, quote from a few of the prophecies of these Nephite prophets, indicating how unmistakably it was given them to understand that not only would this land of America be the gathering place of the seed of Joseph, but that "in the latter days" the seed of Judah would be gathered back to the land of Palestine to rebuild Jerusalem and to reclaim her waste places:

But behold, thus saith the Lord God: When the day cometh that they shall believe in me, that I am Christ, then have I covenanted with their fathers that they shall be restored in the flesh, upon the earth, unto the lands of their inheritance.

And it shall come to pass that they shall be gathered in from their long dispersion, from the isles of the sea, and from the four parts of the earth; and the nations of the Gentiles shall be great in the eyes of me, saith God, in carrying them forth to the lands of their inheritance. (2 Nephi 10:7-8.)

The Prophet Nephi was given to know that Jesus Christ would come in the flesh six hundred years from the time his father left Jerusalem with his family, and that the inhabitants of Jerusalem would be scourged and scattered. Then he added:

And because they turn their hearts aside, saith the prophet, and have despised the Holy One of Israel, they shall wander in the flesh, and perish, and become a hiss and a by-word, and be hated among all nations.

Nevertheless, when that day cometh, saith the prophet, that they no more turn aside their hearts against the Holy One of Israel, then will he remember the covenants which he made to their fathers.

Yea, then will he remember the isles of the sea; yea, and all the people who are of the house of Israel, will I gather in, saith the Lord, according to the words of the prophet Zenos, from the four quarters of the earth.

Yea, and all the earth shall see the salvation of the Lord, saith the prophet; every nation, kindred, tongue and people shall be blessed. (I Nephi 19:14-17.)

The seed of Judah cannot help but recognize in these words of Nephi a complete account of what has happened to the Jews. Surely they have wandered in the flesh; they have perished; they have become a hiss and a by-word, and have been hated among all nations. Yet the Lord promised that He would remember the covenant He made with their fathers, and gather them in from the isles of the sea, and from the four quarters of the earth.

Promises of the Messiah to Judah

When the Messiah appeared to the Nephites, following His resurrection, He spoke of the promises of the Lord to the fathers, and then said:

And I will remember the covenant which I have made with my people; and I have covenanted with them that I would give them again the land of their fathers for their inheritance, which is the land of Jerusalem, which is the promised land unto them forever, saith the Father.

And it shall come to pass that the time cometh, when the fulness of my gospel shall be preached unto them;

And they shall believe in me, that I am Jesus Christ, the Son of God, and shall pray unto the Father in my name.

Then shall their watchmen lift up their voice, and with the voice together shall they sing; for they shall see eye to eye.

Then will the Father gather them together again, and give unto them Jerusalem for the land of their inheritance.

Then shall they break forth into joy—Sing together, ye waste places of Jerusalem; for the Father hath comforted his people, he hath redeemed Jerusalem. (3 Nephi 20:29-34.)

This is a very definite promise that the Lord would gather again His people to Jerusalem, that He would redeem her waste places, and at a time when "the fulness of my gospel shall be preached unto them." There is nothing indefinite about this promise.

In speaking to the Nephites, Jesus Christ made this further statement in regard to His promises to the Jews:

Yea, and ye need not any longer hiss, nor spurn, nor make game of the Jews, nor any of the remnant of the house of Israel; for behold, the Lord remembereth his covenant unto them, and he will do unto them according to that which he hath sworn.

Therefore ye need not suppose that ye can turn the right hand of the Lord unto the left, that he may not execute judgment unto the fulfilling of the covenant which he hath made unto the house of Israel. (3 Nephi 29:8-9.)

It should be a great comfort to the Jews to know that the day of their afflictions shall cease, "for behold, the Lord remembereth his covenant unto them."

Modern Revelations Concerning Judah

In a revelation from the Lord Jesus Christ to the Prophet Joseph Smith, given at Kirtland, Ohio, March 7, 1831, He makes reference to the predictions made to His disciples of former days:

And ye have asked of me concerning the signs of my coming, in the day when I shall come in my glory in the clouds of heaven, to fulfil the promises that I have made unto your fathers,

For as ye have looked upon the long absence of your spirits from your bodies to be a bondage, I will show unto you how the day of redemption shall come, and also the restoration of the scattered Israel.

And now ye behold this temple which is in Jerusalem, which ye call the house of God, and your enemies say that this house shall never fall.

But, verily I say unto you, that desolation shall come upon this generation as a thief in the night, and this people shall be destroyed and scattered among all nations.

And this temple which ye now see shall be thrown down that there shall not be left one stone upon another.

And it shall come to pass, that this generation of Jews shall not pass away until every desolation which I have told you concerning them shall come to pass.

Ye say that ye know that the end of the world cometh; ye say also that ye know that the heavens and the earth shall pass away;

And in this ye say truly, for so it is; but these things which I have told you shall not pass away until all shall be fulfilled.

And this I have told you concerning Jerusalem; and when that day shall come, shall a remnant be scattered among all nations;

But they shall be gathered again; but they shall remain until the times of the Gentiles be fulfilled.

And in that day shall be heard of wars and rumors of wars, and the whole earth shall be in commotion, and men's hearts shall fail them, and they shall say that Christ delayeth his coming until the end of the earth.

And the love of men shall wax cold, and iniquity shall abound And when the times of the Gentiles is come in, a light shall break forth among them that sit in darkness, and it shall be the fulness of my gospel;

But they receive it not; for they perceive not the light, and they turn their hearts from me because of the precepts of men.

And in that generation shall the times of the Gentiles be fulfilled. (Doctrine and Covenants 45:16-30.)

Most of these predictions have been fulfilled. "Desolation" did come to the inhabitants of Jerusalem and the people were "destroyed and scattered among all nations." Their temple was "thrown down" that there was not one stone left upon another. But Jesus reassured them: "But they shall be gathered again; but they shall remain until the times of the Gentiles be fulfilled . . . and when the times of the Gentiles is come in, a light shall break forth among them that sit in darkness, and it shall be the fulness of my gospel."

The promised "light" has broken forth among the Gentiles, the seed of Joseph, through the restoration of "the fulness of my gospel" which was restored through the "choice seer . . . like unto Moses" the Lord promised to raise up in the latter days through the loins of Joseph the son of Jacob. The Lord promised that this seer of the latter days would bring forth His word, and added: "for the thing which the Lord shall bring forth by his hand, by the power of the Lord, shall bring my people unto salvation." (2 Nephi 3:15.)

It would seem that the "times of the Gentiles" are nearing fulfillment and that the time of the redemption of the Jews is drawing near when the "fulness of my Gospel" must be preached unto them, and they shall gather again unto the land of their inheritance and again rebuild the city of Jerusalem.

On March 27, 1836, the Prophet Joseph Smith dedicated the Temple at Kirtland, Ohio. According to the prophet's own statement, the prayer he offered was given by revelation. Note the words of the prayer which relate directly to Judah:

But thou knowest that thou hast a great love for the children of Jacob, who have been scattered upon the mountains for a long time, in a cloudy and dark day.

We therefore ask thee to have mercy upon the children of Jacob, that Jerusalem, from this hour, may begin to be redeemed;

And the yoke of bondage may begin to be broken off from the house of David;

And the children of Judah may begin to return to the lands which thou didst give Abraham, their father. (Doctrine and Covenants 109:61-64.)

It was made plain to the prophet of this dispensation, early in his ministry, that the return of the Jews to their Promised Land, and the rebuilding of Jerusalem was a very definite part of the Lord's plan in establishing His Kingdom upon the earth in these latter days to prepare the way for His second coming.

Holy Land Dedicated for the Gathering of the Jews

In preparation for the gathering of the Jews, the Prophet Joseph Smith and his counselors, as the Presidency of the Church, sent Elder Orson Hyde, a descendant of Judah, one of the Twelve Apostles of the Church, on a mission to Jerusalem, to dedicate the Holy Land for the ultimate return of Judah's scattered remnant according to the predictions of ancient prophets, for the rebuilding of Jerusalem. In keeping with this special assignment, on Sunday morning, October 24, 1841, Apostle Orson Hyde went up on the Mount of Olives and there performed the ceremony of dedication which had been assigned him. Following are excerpts from Elder Hyde's dedicatory prayer which should touch the heart of every living Jew, the world over:

O Thou! who art from everlasting to everlasting, eternally and unchangeably the same, even the God who rules in the heavens above, and controls the destinies of men on the earth, wilt Thou not condescend, through thine infinite goodness and royal favor, to listen to the prayer of Thy servant which he this day offers up unto Thee in the name of Thy holy child Jesus, upon this land, where the Sun of Righteousness set in blood, and thine Anointed One expired. . . .

Now, O Lord! Thy servant has been obedient to the heavenly vision which Thou gavest him in his native land; and under the shadow of Thine outstretched arm, he has safely arrived in this place to dedicate and consecrate this land unto Thee, for the gathering together of Judah's scattered remnants, according to the predictions of the holy Prophets—for the building up of Jerusalem again after it has been trodden down by the Gentiles so long, and for rearing a Temple in honor of Thy name. . . .

O Thou, Who didst covenant with Abraham, Thy friend, and Who didst renew that covenant with Isaac, and confirm the same with Jacob with an oath, that Thou wouldst not only give them this land for an everlasting inheritance, but that Thou wouldst also remember their seed forever. Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob have long since closed their eyes in death, and made the grave their mansion. Their children are scattered and dispersed abroad among the nations of the Gentiles like sheep that have no shepherd, and are still looking forward for the fulfillment of these promises which Thou didst make concerning them; and even this land, which once poured forth nature's richest bounty, and flowed, as it were, with milk and honey, has, to a certain extent, been smitten with barrenness and sterility since it drank from murderous hands the blood of Him who never sinned.

Grant, therefore, O Lord, in the name of Thy well-beloved Son, Jesus Christ, to remove the barrenness and sterility of this land, and let springs of living water break forth to water its thirsty soil. Let the vine and olive produce in their strength, and the fig-tree bloom and flourish. Let the land become abundantly fruitful when possessed by its rightful heirs; let it again flow with plenty to feed the returning prodigals who come home with a spirit of grace and supplication; upon it let the clouds distil virtue and richness, and let the fields smile with plenty. Let the flocks and the herds greatly increase and multiply upon the mountains and the hills; and let Thy great kindness conquer and subdue the unbelief of Thy people. Do Thou take from them their stony heart, and give them a heart of flesh; and may the Sun of Thy favor dispel the cold mists of darkness which have beclouded their atmosphere. Incline them to gather in upon this land according to Thy word. Let them come like clouds and like doves to their windows. Let the large ships of the nations bring them from the distant isles; and let kings become their nursing fathers, and queens with motherly fondness wipe the tear of sorrow from their eye.

Thou, O Lord, did once move upon the heart of Cyrus to show favor unto Jerusalem and her children. Do Thou now also be pleased to inspire the hearts of kings and the powers of the earth to look with a friendly eye towards this place, and with a desire to see Thy righteous purposes executed in relation thereto. Let them know that it is Thy good pleasure to restore the kingdom unto Israel—raise up Jerusalem as its capital, and constitute her people a distinct nation and government, with David Thy servant, even a descendant from the loins of ancient David to be their king.

Let that nation or that people who shall take an active part in behalf of Abraham's children, and in the raising up of Jerusalem, find favor in Thy sight. Let not their enemies prevail against them, neither let pestilence or famine overcome them, but let the glory of Israel overshadow them, and the power of the Highest protect them; while that nation or kingdom that will not serve Thee in this glorious work must perish, according to Thy word—"yea, those nations shall be utterly wasted." (Joseph Smith, Documentary History of the Church, Vol. 4, pp. 456-457.)

Concerning his visit to Jerusalem, Elder Hyde reported:

I have found many Jews who listened with intense interest. The idea of the Jews being restored to Palestine is gaining ground in Europe almost every day. . . . Many of the Jews who are old go to this place to die, and many are coming from Europe into this eastern world. The great wheel is unquestionably in motion, and the word of the Almighty has declared that it shall roll. (Ibid, page 459.)

Elder Hyde further stated:

In the early part of March last (1840), I retired to my bed one evening as usual, and while contemplating and enquiring out, in my own mind, the field of my ministerial labors for the then coming season, the vision of the Lord, like clouds of light, burst upon my view. The cities of London, Amsterdam, Constantinople, and Jerusalem all appeared in succession before me; and the Spirit said unto me, "Here are many of the children of Abraham whom I will gather to the land that I gave to their fathers, and here also is the field of your labors. (Joseph S. Hyde, Orson Hyde, p. 5.)

Prophets to be Raised Up to Judah

In March 1832, the Prophet Joseph Smith received a revelation explaining part of the revelation of John:

What is to be understood by the two witnesses, in the eleventh chapter of Revelations?

They are two prophets that are to be raised up to the Jewish nation in the last days, at the time of the restoration, and to prophesy to the Jews after they are gathered and have built the city of Jerusalem in the land of their fathers. (Doctrine and Covenants 77:15.)

Therefore, as the Jews gather and rebuild the city of Jerusalem in the land of their fathers, they have the promise of the Lord that two prophets shall be raised up unto them, "at the time of the restoration." No doubt these prophets will be called and ordained and sent by the First Presidency of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, for the Lord's house is a house of order, and true prophets are never self sent—they must be called and sent of God. That is why the Lord sent Holy Prophets of old back to this earth to confer upon Joseph Smith the keys of the authority they held, which keys and authority are in the Church today.

Descendants of Judah to Flee to Jerusalem

In a revelation given through the Prophet Joseph Smith at Hiram, Ohio, November 3, 1831, in response to questions by Elders of the Church regarding the preaching of the gospel and the gathering of scattered Israel, the Lord said:

Send forth the elders of my church unto the nations which are afar off; unto the islands of the sea; send forth unto foreign lands; call upon all nations, first upon the Gentiles, and then upon the Jews.

And behold, and lo, this shall be their cry, and the voice of the Lord unto all people: Go ye forth unto the land of Zion, that the borders of my people may be enlarged, and that her stakes may be strengthened, and that Zion may go forth unto the regions round about.

Yea, let the cry go forth among all people: Awake and arise and go forth to meet the Bridegroom; behold and lo, the Bridegroom cometh; go ye out to meet him. Prepare yourselves for the great day of the Lord.

Watch, therefore, for ye know neither the day nor the hour.

Let them, therefore, who are among the Gentiles flee unto Zion.

And let them who be of Judah flee unto Jerusalem, unto the mountains of the Lord's house. (Doctrine and Covenants 133:8-13.)

In this revelation, the Lord makes plain the fact that the Gentiles would be gathered to Zion, and that the Jews would "flee unto Jerusalem."

After discussing this matter further in this revelation, the Lord adds:

And he shall utter his voice out of Zion, and he shall speak from Jerusalem, and his voice shall be heard among all people. (Doctrine and Covenants 133:21.)

It is not difficult to understand how His voice would "be heard among all people," for we listen daily to voices over the radio coming from all nations of the earth. Then the Lord adds:

And they also of the tribe of Judah, after their pain shall be sanctified in holiness before the Lord, to dwell in his presence day and night, forever and ever. (Doctrine and Covenants 133:35.)

What a glorious promise to the tribe of Judah, and remember, all His promises shall be fulfilled.

To our brethren, the seed of Judah, we call attention to the fact that all these Promises concerning the gathering of the Jews to the land of Jerusalem in this dispensation, as quoted from the Stick of Joseph, and from the revelations of the Lord to the "choice seer . . . like unto Moses", were translated, published, and given to the world over one hunderd and fifteen years ago, when such a thing would have seemed more than a remote possibility. And yet the prophets spoke in most definite terms—no uncertainty whatsover about their promises.

Prophets of Judah Predict the Gathering of the Jews

These things were also foretold by the prophets of Judah, as recorded in the Stick of Judah, the Old Testament, centuries ago.

These are the words of the Prophet Zechariah:

Sing and rejoice, O daughter of Zion: for, lo, I come, and I will dwell in the midst of thee, saith the Lord.

And many nations shall be joined to the Lord in that day, and shall be my people; and I will dwell in the midst of thee, and thou shalt know that the Lord of hosts hath sent me unto thee.

And the Lord shall inherit Judah his portion in the holy land, and shall choose Jerusalem again. (Zechariah 2:10-12.)

Even though these words were spoken approximately three thousand years ago, there is no uncertainty about the promises given since all of God's works are known unto Him from the beginning—He works to a definite program.

Again, the Prophet Zechariah describes the restoration of Judah to her land of promise:

The burden of the word of the Lord for Israel, saith the Lord, which stretcheth forth the heavens, and layeth the foundation of the earth, and formeth the spirit of man within him.

Behold, I will make Jerusalem a cup of trembling unto all the people round about, when they shall be in the siege both against Judah and against Jerusalem.

And in that day will I make Jerusalem a burdensome stone for all people: all that burden themselves with it shall be cut in pieces, though all the people of the earth be gathered together against it.

In that day, saith the Lord, I will smite every horse with astonishment, and his rider with madness: and I will open mine eyes upon the house of Judah, and will smite every horse of the people with blindness.

And the governors of Judah shall say in their heart, The inhabitants of Jerusalem shall be my strength in the Lord of hosts their God.

In that day will I make the governors of Judah like an hearth of fire among the wood, and like a torch of fire in a sheaf; and they shall devour all the people round about, on the right hand and on the left: and Jerusalem shall be inhabited again in her own place, even in Jerusalem.

The Lord also shall save the tents of Judah first, that the glory of the house of David and the glory of the inhabitants of Jerusalem do not magnify themselves against Judah.

In that day shall the Lord defend the inhabitants of Jerusalem; and he that is feeble among them at that day shall be as David; and the house of David shall be as God, as the angel of the Lord before them.

And it shall come to pass in that day, that I will seek to destroy all the nations that come against Jerusalem.

And I will pour upon the house of David, and upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem, the spirit of grace and of supplications: and they shall look upon me whom they have pierced, and they shall mourn for him, as one mourneth for his only son, and shall be in bitterness for him, as one that is in bitterness for his firstborn. (Zechariah 12:1-10.)

A careful reading of the last verse quoted indicates that the Lord has definitely fixed the time for the fulfillment of these promises, "And they shall look upon me whom they have pierced," showing that it would be at the time of His second coming.

The Prophet Zechariah particularly refers to those things which will happen at the time of the coming of our Lord:

Behold, the day of the Lord cometh, and thy spoil shall be divided in the midst of thee.

For I will gather all nations against Jerusalem to battle; and the city shall be taken, and the houses rifled, and the women ravished; and half of the city shall go forth into captivity, and the residue of the people shall not be cut off from the city.

Then shall the Lord go forth, and fight against those nations, as when he fought in the day of battle. . . .

And the Lord shall be king over all the earth: in that day shall there be one Lord, and his name one. . . .

And men shall dwell in it, and there shall be no more utter destruction; but Jerusalem shall be safely inhabited. . . .

And Judah also shall fight at Jerusalem; and the wealth of all the heathen round about shall be gathered together, gold, and silver, and apparel, in great abundance. (Zechariah 14:1-3, 9, 11, 14.)

The Prophet Jeremiah speaks a forthright prophecy concerning both Judah and Israel:

In those days the house of Judah shall walk with the house of Israel, and they shall come together out of the land of the north to the land that I have given for an inheritance unto your fathers. (Jeremiah 3:18.)

It must be understood that when "the house of Judah shall walk with the house of Israel," that it will be at a time when the Lord would bring them together through the restoration of His gospel, as we have pointed out.

The word of the Lord to Jeremiah continues:

The word that came to Jeremiah from the Lord, saying,

Thus speaketh the Lord God of Israel, saying, Write thee all the words that I have spoken unto thee in a book.

For, lo, the days come, saith the Lord, that I will bring again the captivity of my people Israel and Judah, saith the Lord: and I will cause them to return to the land that I gave to their fathers, and they shall possess it. . . .

Therefore fear thou not, O my servant Jacob, saith the Lord; neither be dismayed, O Israel: for, lo, I will save thee from afar, and thy seed from the land of their captivity; and Jacob shall return, and shall be in rest, and be quiet, and none shall make him afraid. . . .

Thus saith the Lord; Behold, I will bring again the captivity of Jacob's tents, and have mercy on his dwelling-places; and the city shall be builded upon her own heap, and the palace shall remain after the manner thereof. . . .

The fierce anger of the Lord shall not return, until he have done it, and until he have performed the intents of his heart: in the latter days ye shall consider it. (Jeremiah 30:1-3, 10, 18, 24.)

At the same time, saith the Lord, will I be the God of all the families of Israel, and they shall be my people. (Jeremiah 31:1.)

It is worthy of emphasis that "in the latter days . . saith the Lord, will I be the God of all the families of Israel, and they shall be my people."

The Prophet Jeremiah further declared how the Lord at that time would "make a new covenant with the house of Israel, and with the house of Judah":

Behold, the days come, saith the Lord, that I will make a new covenant with the house of Israel, and with the house of Judah:

Not according to the covenant that I made with their fathers in the day that I took them by the hand to bring them out of the land of Egypt; which my covenant they brake, although I was an husband unto them, saith the Lord:

But this shall be the covenant that I will make with the house of Israel; After those days, saith the Lord, I will put my law in their inward parts, and write it in their hearts; and will be their God, and they shall be my people.

And they shall teach no more every man his neighbour, and every man his brother, saying, Know the Lord: for they shall all know me, from the least of them unto the greatest of them, saith the Lord: for I will forgive their iniquity, and I will remember their sin no more. (Jeremiah 31:31-34.)

Jeremiah provides a vivid description of how the Lord will proceed to gather His people; "every man to his land":

Thus saith the Lord against all mine evil neighbours, that touch the inheritance which I have caused my people Israel to inherit; Behold, I will pluck them out of their land, and pluck out the house of Judah from among them.

And it shall come to pass, after that I have plucked them out I will return, and have compassion on them, and will bring them again, every man to his heritage, and every man to his land. (Jeremiah 12:14-15.)

The Lord, through Jeremiah, reassures Judah concerning the gathering into the promised land from which they shall no more be driven:

And now therefore thus saith the Lord, the God of Israel, concerning this city, whereof ye say, It shall be delivered into the hand of the king of Babylon by the sword, and by the famine, and by the pestilence;

Behold, I will gather them out of all countries, whither I have driven them in mine anger, and in my fury, and in great wrath; and I will bring them again unto this place, and I will cause them to dwell safely:

And they shall be my people, and I will be their God:

And I will give them one heart, and one way, that they may fear me for ever, for the good of them, and of their children after them:

And I will make an everlasting covenant with them, that I will not turn away from them, to do them good; but I will put my fear in their hearts, that they shall not depart from me.

Yea, I will rejoice over them to do them good, and I will plant them in this land assuredly with my whole heart and with my whole soul.

For thus saith the Lord; Like as I have brought all this great evil upon this people, so will I bring upon them all the good that I have promised them.

And fields shall be bought in this land, whereof ye say, It is desolate without man or beast; it is given into the hand of the Chaldeans.

Men shall buy fields for money, and subscribe evidences, and seal them, and take witnesses in the land of Benjamin, and in the places about Jerusalem, and in the cities of Judah, and in the cities of the mountains, and in the cities of the valley, and in the cities of the south: for I will cause their captivity to return, saith the Lord. (Jeremiah 32:36-44.)

The Prophet Amos saw the day when Judah would return again and reconstruct the waste cities of their land:

And I will bring again the captivity of my people of Israel, and they shall build the waste cities, and inhabit them; and they shall plant vineyards, and drink the wine thereof; they shall also make gardens, and eat the fruit of them.

And I will plant them upon their land, and they shall no more be pulled up out of their land which I have given them, saith the Lord thy God. (Amos 9:14-15.)

The prophets often spoke of the House of Judah and the House of Israel in the same sense as the Prophet Amos in this quotation: "my people of Israel." This prophecy, can only have reference to the latter-day gathering when "they shall no more be pulled up out of their land."

The Prophet Isaiah referred to the time when the Lord would make new heavens and a new earth, at which time He would gather the seed of Israel from all nations:

And they shall bring all your brethren for an offering unto the Lord out of all nations upon horses, and in chariots, and in litters, and upon mules, and upon swift beasts, to my holy mountain Jerusalem, saith the Lord, as the children of Israel bring an offering in a clean vessel into the house of the Lord.

And I will also take of them for priests and for Levites, saith the Lord.

For as the new heavens and the new earth, which I will make, shall remain before me, saith the Lord, so shall your seed and your name remain. (Isaiah 66:20-22.)

Mourning of the Jews to End

Isaiah makes it clear that in preparation for the second coming of the Messiah, the Jews would be gathered home to their own land, and that even the kings of the Gentiles would assist in this gathering:

Arise, shine; for thy light is come, and the glory of the Lord is risen upon thee.

For, behold, the darkness shall cover the earth, and gross darkness the people: but the Lord shall arise upon thee, and his glory shall be seen upon thee.

And the Gentiles shall come to thy light, and kings to the brightness of thy rising.

Lift up thine eyes round about, and see: all they gather themselves together, they come to thee: thy sons shall come from far, and thy daughters shall be nursed at thy side.

Then thou shalt see, and flow together, and thine heart shall fear, and be enlarged; because the abundance of the sea shall be converted unto thee, the forces of the Gentiles shall come unto thee. . . .

Who are these that fly as a cloud, and as the doves to their windows?

Surely the isles shall wait for me, and the ships of Tarshish first, to bring thy sons from far, their silver and their gold with them, unto the name of the Lord thy God, and to the Holy One of Israel, because he hath glorified thee.

And the sons of strangers shall build up thy walls, and their kings shall minister unto thee: for in my wrath I smote thee, but in my favour have I had mercy on thee.

Therefore thy gates shall be open continually; they shall not be shut day nor night; that men may bring unto thee the forces of the Gentiles, and that their kings may be brought.

For the nation and kingdom that will not serve thee shall perish; yea, those nations shall be utterly wasted.

The glory of Lebanon shall come unto thee, the fir tree, the pine tree, and the box together, to beautify the place of my sanctuary; and I will make the place of my feet glorious.

The sons also of them that afflicted thee shall come bending unto thee; and all they that despised thee shall bow themselves down at the soles of thy feet; and they shall call thee, The city of the Lord, The Zion of the Holy One of Israel.

Whereas thou hast been forsaken and hated, so that no man went through thee, I will make thee an eternal excellency, a joy of many generations.

Thou shalt also suck the milk of the Gentiles, and shalt suck the breast of kings: and thou shalt know that I the Lord am thy Saviour and thy Redeemer, the mighty One of Jacob.

For brass I will bring gold, and for iron I will bring silver, and for wood brass, and for stones iron: I will also make thy officers peace, and thine exactors righteousness.

Violence shall no more be heard in thy land, wasting nor destruction within thy borders; but thou shalt call thy walls Salvation, and thy gates Praise.

The sun shall be no more thy light by day; neither for brightness shall the moon give light unto thee: but the Lord shall be unto thee an everlasting light, and thy God thy glory.

Thy sun shall no more go down; neither shall thy moon withdraw itself: for the Lord shall be thine everlasting light, and the days of thy mourning shall be ended. (Isaiah 60:1-5, 8-20.)

New Nation of Israel Fulfills Prophecy

The Jews will understand how literally this prophecy has been in the course of fulfillment in the establishment of the Nation of Israel, and the help that has been given by the Gentile nations. The part that Great Britain played in the liberation of Palestine from Turkish rule is a matter of history which occurred during World War I, in a remarkable manner. The issuance of the Balfour Declaration on November 2, 1917 had great significance. The text reads:

His Majesty's Government view with favor the establishment in Palestine of a National Home for the Jewish people, and will use their best endeavors to facilitate the achievement of this object, it being clearly understood that nothing shall be done which may prejudice the civil and religious rights of the existing non-Jewish communities in Palestine or the rights and political status enjoyed by Jews in any other country. (The Autobiography of Chaim Weizmann, Trial and Error, Harper and Brothers, publishers, page 208.)

On October 16, 1918, Colonel House, acting for President Woodrow Wilson of the United States, cabled the British Government, America's support of the substance of the declaration. This led to the approval of the League of Nations, and finally, after the close of World War II, to the recognition of a Jewish State in Palestine by the United States on May 14, 1948:

This Government has been informed that a Jewish State has been proclaimed in Palestine, and recognition has been requested by the Provisional Government itself. The United States recognizes the Provisional Government as the de facto authority of the new State of Israel. (Ibid, page 478.)

A few days later Chaim Weizmann received word while in New York that the Provisional Council of the State of Israel had elected him as its president. When Mr. Weizmann received word of this recognition on the part of the United States, he wired the Provincial Council as follows:

My heartiest greetings to you and your colleagues in this great hour. May God give you strength to carry out the task which has been laid upon you and to overcome the difficulties still ahead. Please accept and transmit the following message to the Yishuv in my name: "On the memorable day when the Jewish State arises again after two thousand years, I send expressions of love and admiration to all sections of the Yishuv and warmest greetings to its Government now entering on its grave and inspiring responsibility. Am fully convinced that all who have and will become citizens of the Jewish State will strive their utmost to live up to the new opportunity which history has bestowed upon them. It will be our destiny to create institutions and values of a free community in the spirit of the great traditions which have contributed so much to the thought and spirit of mankind." (Ibid, p. 479.)

Thus the man who was to assume the responsibility of becoming the first President of the "Jewish State" acknowledged the fulfillment of the promises of the prophets in these words: "on the memorable day when the Jewish State arises again after two thousand years."

While there may be troublesome times ahead, even as there have been up to the present time, yet Isaiah promised that "they shall inherit the land for ever, the branch of my planting, the work of my hands, that I may be glorified." (Isaiah 60:21.)

The Prophet Isaiah further declared that which the Lord gave him to see and understand with respect to the redemption of the Promised Land:

And they shall build the old wastes, they shall raise up the former desolations, and they shall repair the waste cities, the desolations of many generations.

And strangers shall stand and feed your flocks, and the sons of the alien shall be your plowmen and your vinedressers.

But ye shall be named the Priests of the Lord: men shall call you the Ministers of our God: ye shall eat the riches of the Gentiles, and in their glory shall ye boast yourselves. (Isaiah 61:4-6.)

When Isaiah stated: "they shall repair the waste cities, the desolations of many generations," he only wrote history in advance as evidenced when Chaim Weizmann acknowledged that in the establishment of the Jewish State it is the first "after two thousand years." Isaiah further declared the help that would be received from the Gentiles, a fact which history has fully vindicated.

The Lord spoke through Isaiah: "I will direct their work in truth, and I will make an everlasting covenant with them." (Ibid, verse 8.) The "everlasting covenant" is the establishment of the "fulness of my everlasting Gospel" among the Jews through the House of Joseph. (See 3 Nephi 20:30.)

We may then look for the fulfillment of the promise of the Lord through His Prophet Ezekiel:

Thus saith the Lord God; In the day that I shall have cleansed you from all your iniquities I will also cause you to dwell in the cities, and the wastes shall be builded.

And the desolate land shall be tilled, whereas it lay desolate in the sight of all that passed by.

And they shall say, This land that was desolate is become like the garden of Eden; and the waste and desolate and ruined cities are become fenced, and are inhabited.

Then the heathen that are left round about you shall know that I the Lord build the ruined places, and plant that that was desolate: I the Lord have spoken it, and I will do it. (Ezekiel 36:33-36.)

The Messiah, the Jehovah of the Jews, even Jesus Christ the Son of God declared to His disciples nearly two thousand years ago how the descendants of Judah would be scattered and persecuted "until the times of the Gentiles be fulfilled:"

But woe unto them that are with child, and to them that give suck, in those days! for there shall be great distress in the land, and wrath upon this people.

And they shall fall by the edge of the sword, and shall be led away captive into all nations: and Jerusalem shall be trodden down of the Gentiles, until the times of the Gentiles be fulfilled. (St. Luke 21:23-24.)

Two thousand years are nearly ended—"the times of the Gentiles" are being fulfilled. The Jews are now being gathered back to their own land. The "Jewish State" has been acknowledged by the nations. The Jews have commenced to rebuild their cities and waste places—the nations and wealth of the Gentiles are greatly assisting them.

The next and most important matter is that they accept the "choice seer. . . . Like unto Moses," Joseph Smith, the prophet, whom the Lord has raised up through the loins of Joseph "in the latter days"; that they accept the "word of the Lord," which He has brought forth in the Stick of Joseph (the Book of Mormon); that they accept the revelations of the Lord to His prophet "like unto Moses" as contained in the Doctrine and Covenants; that they accept the Pearl of Great Price, containing the sacred writings of Abraham and the Visions of Moses as revealed to the Prophet Joseph Smith in June 1830.

God is calling to the Jews. He invites them into the fold of Christ. He wants them to come and take their place in The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, the Kingdom of God which "shall stand forever." (Daniel 2:44.)
