LeGrand Richards, Israel! Do You Know? ( 1954)

CHAPTER 13

SUMMARY

End Known from the Beginning

We have endeavored to establish the fact that when a contractor has completed the erection of a building according to plans and specifications, he only brings into actual existence that which the architect has already created in his own mind. When the Lord created this earth, and placed man upon it, He only followed a plan He had previously worked out in His mind for the benefit of His children. He knew in advance how they would react to the circumstances and conditions they would be required to meet in mortality. He knew "the end from the beginning."

Remember the former things of old: for I am God, and there is none else; I am God, and there is none like me,

Declaring the end from the beginning, and from ancient times the things that are not yet done, saying, My counsel shall stand, and I will do all my pleasure: (Isaiah 46:9-10.)

The Lord Works Only Through His Prophets

The Lord's way of making known to His children what His purposes and plans are, is through His prophets. He gave His children prophets from time to time, unto whom He revealed His mind and will:

Surely the Lord God will do nothing, but he revealeth his secret unto his servants the prophets. (Amos 3:7.)

Purposes of the Lord Fail Not

The Apostle Peter understood the importance of the word of prophecy to guide us:

We have also a more sure word of prophecy; whereunto ye do well that ye take heed, as unto a light that shineth in a dark place, until the day dawn, and the day star arise in your hearts:

Knowing this first, that no prophecy of the scripture is of any private interpretation.

For the prophecy came not in old time by the will of man: but holy men of God spake as they were moved by the Holy Ghost. (II Peter 1:19-21.)

Therefore, when we have the Stick of Judah (Holy Bible), and the Stick of Joseph (Book of Mormon), we "do well" that we "take heed, as unto a light that shineth in a dark place, until the day dawn, and the day star arise in your hearts."

The Prophet Mormon gave us to understand that all the promises of the Lord would be fulfilled:

For the eternal purposes of the Lord shall roll on, until all his promises shall be fulfilled. (Mormon 8:22.)

In a revelation to the Prophet Joseph Smith given at Hiram, Ohio, February 16, 1832, the Lord gave the prophet to understand that "his purposes fail not:"

Hear, O ye heavens, and give ear, O earth, and rejoice ye inhabitants thereof, for the Lord is God, and beside him there is no Savior.

Great is his wisdom, marvelous are his ways, and the extent of his doings none can find out.

His purposes fail not, neither are there any who can stay his hand.

From eternity to eternity he is the same, and his years never fail. (Doctrine and Covenants 76:1-4.)

In light of these declarations, it is not difficult to understand how the Prophet Isaiah could declare, one hundred and seventy years in advance, the destruction of the great city Babylon, the greatest city in all the world at that time, and declare in positive terms that it should never be rebuilt. (See Isaiah 13:19-22.) And it never has been rebuilt. While at or near the same time, being over seven hundred years before the destruction of Jerusalem, and nearly twenty-seven hundred years in advance, he declared in equally positive terms that Jerusalem would be rebuilt together with her cities and waste places. (See Isaiah 61:4.)

It was because the Prophet Isaiah understood the importance of the word of God when given through His prophets, that he declared:

The grass withereth, the flower fadeth: but the word of our God shall stand for ever. (Isaiah 40:8.)

Since, "For the eternal purposes of the Lord shall roll on, until all his promises shall be fulfilled," (Mormon 8:22) the promises of the Lord through His prophets are but history in reverse.

Summary of the Promises of the Lord to Israel

We shall, therefore, summarize the promises of the Lord unto the house of Israel:

For thou art an holy people unto the Lord thy God: the Lord thy God hath chosen thee to be a special people unto himself, above all people that are upon the face of the earth. (Deuteronomy 7:6.)

Inasmuch as the Lord chose Israel "to be a special people unto himself," the reason for such preferment should be understood. The Lord made this reason plain in the covenant He made with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob:

And the Lord said, Shall I hide from Abraham that thing which I do;

Seeing that Abraham shall surely become a great and mighty nation, and all the nations of the earth shall be blessed in him? (Genesis 18:17-18.)

With the promises of the Lord, therefore, came unto Israel the responsibility to become a blessing to all the nations of the earth.

This responsibility has been discharged, at least in part, through the prophets of Israel, both of Judah and Joseph. We have the word of the Lord as recorded in the Stick of Joseph; in the Doctrine and Covenants; and in the Pearl of Great Price. These three latter volumes of scripture have come to us through the "choice seer . . . like unto Moses", even Joseph Smith, the prophet of "the latter days."

Of even greater importance in fulfilling this responsibility, as promised unto Abraham that "all the nations of the earth shall be blessed in him," (Genesis 18:18), was the coming of the Messiah, the Jehovah of the Jews, the giver of the law unto Moses, even Jesus Christ, the Son of God, the Redeemer of the world. Jesus Christ placed the gift of eternal life and resurrection from the grave within reach of all our Father's children who ever have lived, or who ever shall live, upon the face of the earth: "For as in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive." (I Corinthians 15:22.)

The Jehovah of the Jews gave unto the seed of Judah His gospel, with the keys and powers of the Holy Priesthood, saying:

Verily I say unto you, Whatsoever ye shall bind on earth shall be bound in heaven: and whatsoever ye shall loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven. (Matthew 18:18.)

The Last Shall be First and the First Shall be Last

The Lord inspired His servants, the prophets and apostles, to inform the people that after He would come first to the Jews and then to the Gentiles, He would then manifest Himself first to the Gentiles and then to the Jews:

And the time cometh that he shall manifest himself unto all nations, both unto the Jews and also unto the Gentiles; and after he has manifested himself unto the Jews and also unto the Gentiles, then he shall manifest himself unto the Gentiles and also unto the Jews, and the last shall be first, and the first shall be last. (I Nephi 13:42.)

A Falling Away Foretold

The Apostle Paul predicted a falling away from the truth:

For the time will come when they will not endure sound doctrine; but after their own lusts shall they heap to themselves teachers, having itching ears;

And they shall turn away their ears from the truth, and shall be turned unto fables. (II Timothy 4:3-4.)

It is easy to understand that when the conditions mentioned by Apostle Paul came to pass, there would be many varieties of churches. The people would not "endure sound doctrine, but after their own lusts shall they heap to themselves teachers, having itching ears, and they shall turn away their ears from the truth, and shall be turned unto fables." Had they not turned away their ears from the truth, there never would have been more than one church, for God is not divided, neither is His truth.

The prophets of Judah were also given to see this time when the Lord would cease to send prophets among His people:

Behold, the days come, saith the Lord God, that I will send a famine in the land, not a famine of bread, nor a thirst for water, but of hearing the words of the Lord:

And they shall wander from sea to sea, and from the north even to the east, they shall run to and fro to seek the word of the Lord, and shall not find it. (Amos 8:11-12.)

Thus, both the House of Joseph and the House of Judah would be left without the leadership of true prophets sent of God:

Thus saith the Lord concerning the prophets that make my people err, that bite with their teeth, and cry, Peace; and he that putteth not into their mouths, they even prepare war against him.

Therefore night shall be unto you, that ye shall not have a vision; and it shall be dark unto you, that ye shall not divine; and the sun shall go down over the prophets, and the day shall be dark over them.

Then shall the seers be ashamed, and the diviners confounded: yea, they shall all cover their lips; for there is no answer of God. . . .

The heads thereof judge for reward, and the priests thereof teach for hire, and the prophets thereof divine for money: yet will they lean upon the Lord, and say, Is not the Lord among us? none evil can come upon us. (Micah 3:5-7, 11.)

It is evident that the Lord permitted His prophets to see the time when there would be no divine leadership in the earth, either in the House of Judah or in the House of Joseph.

A Marvelous Work and a Wonder to Come Forth

Because of these apostate conditions, and the lack of divine leadership when there would be "no answer of God" the Lord decreed that He would again proceed to set up His work upon the earth:

Wherefore the Lord said, Forasmuch as this people draw near me with their mouth, and with their lips do honour me, but have removed their heart far from me, and their fear toward me is taught by the precept of men:

Therefore, behold, I will proceed to do a marvellous work among this people, even a marvellous work and a wonder: for the wisdom of their wise men shall perish, and the understanding of their prudent men shall be hid. (Isaiah 29:13-14.)

In light of such a declaration, how can one who believes that Isaiah was a prophet of God, doubt that the Lord would proceed to do this "marvelous work and a wonder"—so marvelous, in fact, that "the wisdom of their wise men shall perish, and the understanding of their prudent men shall be hid"?

The God of Heaven to Set Up His Kingdom

Daniel, the prophet, was given to see our day and to see the kingdom which the "God of Heaven" would set up on the earth which would subdue all other kingdoms:

Daniel answered in the presence of the king, and said, The secret which the king hath demanded cannot the wise men, the astrologers, the magicians, the soothsayers, shew unto the king;

But there is a God in heaven that revealeth secrets, and maketh known to the king Nebuchadnezzar what shall be in the latter days. Thy dream, and the visions of thy head upon thy bed, are these;

As for thee, O king, thy thoughts came into thy mind upon thy bed, what should come to pass hereafter: and he that revealeth secrets maketh known to thee what shall come to pass. . . .

Thou sawest till that a stone was cut out without hands, which smote the image upon his feet that were of iron and clay, and brake them to pieces.

Then was the iron, the clay, the brass, the silver, and the gold, broken to pieces together, and became like the chaff of the summer threshingfloors; and the wind carried them away, that no place was found for them: and the stone that smote the image became a great mountain, and filled the whole earth. (Daniel 2:27-29, 34-35.)

What a great destiny was decreed for the Lord's "latter day" Kingdom. This was to be the Kingdom of God as the Prophet Daniel further described:

And in the days of these kings shall the God of heaven set up a kingdom, which shall never be destroyed: and the kingdom shall not be left to other people, but it shall break in pieces and consume all these kingdoms, and it shall stand for ever. (Daniel 2:44.)

Daniel further beheld the glory and destiny of this kingdom:

I saw in the night visions, and, behold, one like the Son of man came with the clouds of heaven, and came to the Ancient of days, and they brought him near before him.

And there was given him dominion, and glory, and a kingdom, that all people, nations, and languages, should serve him: his dominion is an everlasting dominion, which shall not pass away, and his kingdom that which shall not be destroyed. (Daniel 7:13-14.)

Gospel Sent First to the Gentiles and Then to the Jews

With the setting up of this Kingdom in the earth came the responsibility to the entire House of Israel to carry its message of truth to all peoples of all nations, inviting them to join in establishing the Kingdom in the earth preparatory to His coming to claim the Kingdom for Himself. In what other way could "all people, nations, and languages" serve Him? (See Daniel 7:14.)

The Lord directed the Prophet Joseph Smith as to how this great responsibility should be discharged:

Send forth the elders of my church unto the nations which are afar off; unto the islands of the sea; send forth unto foreign lands; call upon all nations, first upon the Gentiles, and then upon the Jews. (Doctrine and Covenants 133:8.)

Prophecies Concerning the Latter Days and Their Fulfillment

Knowing the end from the beginning, the Lord revealed unto Lehi, a Nephite prophet, the promise He made to Joseph, who was sold into Egypt, that in the latter days He would raise up a "choice seer . . . like unto Moses" to accomplish the very thing He revealed unto Daniel:

Wherefore, Joseph truly saw our day. And he obtained a promise of the Lord, that out of the fruit of his loins the Lord God would raise up a righteous branch unto the house of Israel; not the Messiah, but a branch which was to be broken off, nevertheless, to be remembered in the covenants of the Lord that the Messiah should be made manifest unto them in the latter days, in the spirit of power, unto the bringing of them out of darkness unto light—yea, out of hidden darkness and out of captivity unto freedom.

For Joseph truly testified, saying: A seer shall the Lord my God raise up, who shall be a choice seer unto the fruit of my loins.

Yea, Joseph truly said: Thus saith the Lord unto me: A choice seer will I raise up out of the fruit of thy loins; and he shall be esteemed highly among the fruit of thy loins. And unto him will I give commandment that he shall do a work for the fruit of thy loins, his brethren, which shall be of great worth unto them, even to the bringing of them to the knowledge of the covenants which I have made with thy fathers.

And I will give unto him a commandment that he shall do none other work, save the work which I shall command him. And I will make him great in mine eyes; for he shall do my work.

And he shall be great like unto Moses, whom I have said I would raise up unto you, to deliver my people, O house of Israel.

And Moses will I raise up, to deliver thy people out of the land of Egypt.

But a seer will I raise up out of the fruit of thy loins; and unto him will I give power to bring forth my word unto the seed of thy loins—and not to the bringing forth my word only, saith the Lord, but to the convincing them of my word, which shall have already gone forth among them.

Wherefore, the fruit of thy loins shall write; and the fruit of the loins of Judah shall write; and that which shall be written by the fruit of thy loins, and also that which shall be written by the fruit of the loins of Judah, shall grow together, unto the confounding of false doctrines and laying down of contentions, and establishing peace among the fruit of thy loins, and bringing them to the knowledge of their fathers in the latter days, and also to the knowledge of my covenants, saith the Lord.

And out of weakness he shall be made strong, in that day when my work shall commence among all my people, unto the restoring thee, O house of Israel, saith the Lord.

And thus prophesied Joseph, saying: Behold, that seer will the Lord bless; and they that seek to destroy him shall be confounded; for this promise, which I have obtained of the Lord, of the fruit of my loins, shall be fulfilled. Behold, I am sure of the fulfilling of this promise;

And his name shall be called after me; and it shall be after the name of his father. And he shall be like unto me; for the thing, which the Lord shall bring forth by his hand, by the power of the Lord shall bring my people unto salvation. (2 Nephi 3:5-15.)

With the calling of such a prophet, the Lord was prepared to bring into fulfillment many promises made through His prophets concerning His Kingdom in the latter days. For instance: "Behold, the days come, saith the Lord, that I will make a new covenant with the house of Israel, and with the house of Judah:" (Jeremiah 31:31.) Peter promised a "restitution of all things, which God hath spoken by the mouth of all his holy prophets since the world began," before Christ's second coming. (See Acts 3:19-21.)

In fulfillment of these predictions, we remind the reader that the Father and His Son, Jesus Christ, did not only visit the new prophet of this dispensation in the spring of 1820, but the Lord sent the Angel Moroni, a former prophet of the Nephites, who had lived in the land of America about four hundred years A.D., who delivered to Joseph Smith the gold plates upon which was engraven the Stick of Joseph, together with the Urim and Thummim by which, with the power of God, he was able to translate the records. The translated record, The Book of Mormon, is the Stick of Joseph.

May 15, 1829, God sent John the Baptist to the earth and he conferred upon Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery the Aaronic Priesthood, giving them authority to baptive by immersion for the remission of sins.

About one month later, Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery, as promised by John the Baptist, were visited by the Apostles Peter, James and John who ordained them to the Melchizedek Priesthood, and conferred upon them the keys of this High Priesthood.

April 3, 1836, following the dedication of the Kirtland Temple, in the State of Ohio, the Prophet Joseph Smith recorded the experiences he and Oliver Cowdery enjoyed together:

The veil was taken from our minds, and the eyes of our understanding were opened.

We saw the Lord standing upon the breastwork of the pulpit, before us; and under his feet was a paved work of pure gold, in color like amber.

His eyes were as a flame of fire; the hair of his head was white like the pure snow; his countenance shone above the brightness of the sun; and his voice was as the sound of the rushing of great waters, even the voice of Jehovah, saying:

I am the first and the last; I am he who liveth, I am he who was slain; I am your advocate with the Father. . . .

After this vision closed, the heavens were again opened unto us; and Moses appeared before us, and committed unto us the keys of the gathering of Israel from the four parts of the earth, and the leading of the ten tribes from the land of the north.

After this, Elias appeared, and committed the dispensation of the gospel of Abraham, saying that in us and our seed all generations after us should be blessed.

After this vision had closed, another great and glorious vision burst upon us; for Elijah the prophet, who was taken to heaven without tasting death, stood before us, and said:

Behold, the time has fully come, which was spoken of by the mouth of Malachi—testifying that he (Elijah) should be sent, before the great and dreadful day of the Lord come—

To turn the hearts of the fathers to the children, and the children to the fathers, lest the whole earth be smitten with a curse—

Therefore, the keys of this dispensation are committed into your hands; and by this ye may know that the great and dreadful day of the Lord is near, even at the doors. (Doctrine and Covenants 110:1-4, 11-16.)

The appearance of the Father and His Son, Jesus Christ; the Angel Moroni; John the Baptist; Peter, James and John; the Savior, Moses, Elias and Elijah, gives meaning and fulfillment to the words of the Apostle Peter:

And he shall send Jesus Christ, which before was preached unto you:

Whom the heaven must receive until the times of restitution of all things, which God hath spoken by the mouth of all his holy prophets since the world began. (Acts 3:20-21.)

Their visits also fulfill the words of the Apostle John declaring what the Lord permitted him to behold when banished upon the Isle of Patmos:

After this I looked, and, behold, a door was opened in heaven: and the first voice which I heard was as it were of a trumpet talking with me; which said, Come hither, and I will shew thee things which must be hereafter. . . .

And I saw another angel fly in the midst of heaven, having the everlasting gospel to preach unto them that dwell on the earth, and to every nation, and kindred, and tongue, and people,

Saying with a loud voice, Fear God, and give glory to him: for the hour of his judgment is come: and worship him that made heaven, and earth, and the sea, and the fountains of waters. (Revelations 4:1; 14:6-7.)

There can only be one gospel acceptable unto the Lord, and that is "the everlasting gospel." If the gospel were upon the earth, there certainly would have been no need for an angel to bring it back to this earth that it may be preached to "every nation, and kindred, and tongue, and people."

The Dispensation of the Fullness of Times

The Apostle Paul declared what the Lord had made known unto him concerning the work of final preparation for the dispensation in which we now live:

Having made known unto us the mystery of his will, according to his good pleasure which he hath purposed in himself:

That in the dispensation of the fulness of times he might gather together in one all things in Christ, both which are in heaven, and which are on earth; even in him: (Ephesians 1:9-10.)

It is evident that it would be through the restoration of His everlasting gospel in the latter days, that all things might be gathered together in Christ.

Israel No Longer to be Two Nations

From the Stick of Joseph, we learn that America was given to Joseph's posterity; that it is a land "choice above all other lands;" that upon it is to be established the New Jerusalem in this dispensation; and that the House of Joseph will be established in this land in this dispensation, while the House of Judah will be gathered to the land of Palestine to rebuild her waste places and to rebuild the city of Jerusalem.

There is much valuable information Judah may obtain from the Stick of Joseph. Judah and Joseph are brothers, and the Lord has promised to bring them together in these latter days, even as he has brought their two records together, that they shall no longer be two nations:

At the same time, saith the Lord, will I be the God of all the families of Israel, and they shall be my people. . . .

Behold, the days come, saith the Lord, that I will make a new covenant with the house of Israel, and with the house of Judah: (Jeremiah 31:1, 31.)

And I will make them one nation in the land upon the mountains of Israel; and one king shall be king to them all: and they shall be no more two nations, neither shall they be divided into two kingdoms any more at all: (Ezekiel 37:22.)

Knowledge From the Stick of Joseph

The Stick of Joseph removes all doubt as to the fact that Jesus Christ was the promised Messiah; that His coming was made so plain through the Nephite prophets that there is no possible chance for misunderstanding, particularly after reading the account of Christ's visit to the Nephites following his crucifixion, resurrection and ascension.

Jesus the Giver of the Law of Moses

From the Stick of Joseph we also learn that Jesus Christ was the giver of the law of Moses, therefore, the Jehovah of the Jews:

Behold, I am he that gave the law, and I am he who covenanted with my people Israel; therefore, the law in me is fulfilled, for I have come to fulfill the law; therefore it hath an end. (3 Nephi 15:5.)

Christ's Message to the Descendants of Judah

The Messiah spoke to the Jews through the Stick of Joseph when He visited the Nephites in this land of America:

And I will remember the covenant which I have made with my people; and I have covenanted with them that I would gather them together in mine own due time, that I would give unto them again the land of their fathers for their inheritance, which is the land of Jerusalem, which is the promised land unto them forever, saith the Father.

And it shall come to pass that the time cometh, when the fulness of my gospel shall be preached unto them;

And they shall believe in me, that I am Jesus Christ, the Son of God, and shall pray unto the Father in my name.

Then shall their watchmen lift up their voice, and with the voice together shall they sing; for they shall see eye to eye.

Then will the Father gather them together again, and give unto them Jerusalem for the land of their inheritance.

Then shall they break forth into joy—Sing together, ye waste places of Jerusalem; for the Father hath comforted his people, he hath redeemed Jerusalem.

The Father hath made bare his holy arm in the eyes of all the nations; and all the ends of the earth shall see the salvation of the Father; and the Father and I are one. (3 Nephi 20:29-35.)

This is a definite promise that Judah will be gathered to the land of Jerusalem, "which is the promised land unto them forever."

We quote further from the words of Jesus :

And as surely as the Lord liveth, will he gather in from the four quarters of the earth all the remnant of the seed of Jacob, who are scattered abroad upon all the face of the earth.

And as he hath covenanted with all the house of Jacob, even so shall the covenant wherewith he hath covenanted with the house of Jacob be fulfilled in his own due time, unto the restoring all the house of Jacob unto the knowledge of the covenant that he hath covenanted with them.

And then shall they know their Redeemer, who is Jesus Christ, the Son of God; and then shall they be gathered in from the four quarters of the earth unto their own lands, from whence they have been dispersed; yea, as the Lord liveth so shall it be. Amen. (3 Nephi 5:24-26.)

Jesus made it plain that Judah would be gathered to her own promised land in the latter days when they are willing to accept Him as the Son of God. It should be remembered that these statements were made nearly two thousand years ago, and were published to the world through the translation of the Stick of Joseph, (The Book of Mormon) in 1829.

Remnants of Israel to be Grafted

The Prophet Lehi was shown many things pertaining to the house of Israel:

And after the house of Israel should be scattered they should be gathered together again; or, in fine, after the Gentiles had received the fulness of the Gospel, the natural branches of the olive-tree, or the remnants of the house of Israel, should be grafted in, or come to the knowledge of the true Messiah, their Lord and their Redeemer. (I Nephi 10:14.)

This was shown to Lehi nearly six hundred years before the birth of Jesus Christ or nearly twenty-six hundred years ago, and yet these words have been fulfilled to the very letter. Now the Gentiles are offering the "fulness of the Gospel" to the Jews. As they accept, they shall "be grafted in" to the Kingdom which the Lord has established in the earth in this dispensation, through the Gentiles.

The Nephite Prophet Jacob spoke of the covenant the Lord made with the House of Israel, and then with the House of Judah:

And now, my beloved brethren, I have read these things that ye might know concerning the covenants of the Lord that he has covenanted with all the house of Israel—

That he has spoken unto the Jews, by the mouth of his holy prophets, even from the beginning down, from generation to generation, until the time comes that they shall be restored to the true church and fold of God; when they shall be gathered home to the lands of their inheritance, and shall be established in all their lands of promise. (2 Nephi 9:1-2.)

Judah to Believe in Christ

The Prophet Nephi foretold the time when the Jews in their scattered condition would begin to believe in Christ:

And it shall come to pass that the Jews which are scattered also shall begin to believe in Christ; and they shall begin to gather in upon the face of the land; and as many as shall believe in Christ shall also become a delight-some people. (2 Nephi 30:7.)

The Prophet Nephi beheld the destruction of Jerusalem, after the Messiah had risen from the dead, and the consequent scattering of the Jews among all nations, and that after they had been scourged from generation to generation, "until they shall be persuaded to believe in Christ," the Lord would "set his hand again the second time to restore his people from their lost and fallen state:"

And behold it shall come to pass that after the Messiah hath risen from the dead, and hath manifested himself unto his people, unto as many as will believe on his name, behold, Jerusalem shall be destroyed again; for wo unto them that fight against God and the people of his church.

Wherefore, the Jews shall be scattered among all nations; yea, and also Babylon shall be destroyed; wherefore, the Jews shall be scattered by other nations.

And after they have been scattered, and the Lord God hath scourged them by other nations for the space of many generations, yea, even down from generation to generation until they shall be persuaded to believe in Christ, the Son of God, and the atonement, which is infinite for all mankind—and when that day shall come that they shall believe in Christ, and worship the Father in his name, with pure hearts and clean hands, and look not forward any more for another Messiah, then, at that time, the day will come that it must needs be expedient that they should believe these things.

And the Lord will set his hand again the second time to restore his people from their lost and fallen state. Wherefore, he will proceed to do a marvelous work and a wonder among the children of men.

Wherefore, he shall bring forth his words unto them, which words shall judge them at the last day, for they shall be given them for the purpose of convincing them of the true Messiah, who was rejected by them; and unto the convincing of them that they need not look forward any more for a Messiah to come, for there should not any come, save it should be a false Messiah which should deceive the people; for there is save one Messiah spoken of by the prophets, and that Messiah is he who should be rejected of the Jews. (2 Nephi 25:14-18.)

The Nephite Prophet Jacob spoke of the Jews and their rejection of the Messiah when He would come among them at Jerusalem, and of the renewal of the covenant made with their fathers:

But because of priestcrafts and iniquities, they at Jerusalem will stiffen their necks against him, that he be crucified.

Wherefore, because of their iniquities, destructions, famines, pestilences, and bloodshed shall come upon them; and they who shall not be destroyed shall be scattered among all nations.

But behold, thus saith the Lord God: When the day cometh that they shall believe in me, that I am Christ, then have I covenanted with their fathers that they shall be restored in the flesh, upon the earth, unto the lands of their inheritance. (2 Nephi 10:5-7.)

In the Prophet Mormon's abridgment of the records of the Nephite prophets, he wrote:

Now these things are written unto the remnant of the house of Jacob; and they are written after this manner, because it is known of God that wickedness will not bring them forth unto them; and they are to be hid up unto the Lord that they may come forth in his own due time.

And this is the commandment which I have received; and behold, they shall come forth according to the commandment of the Lord, when he shall see fit, in his wisdom.

And behold, they shall go unto the unbelieving of the Jews; and for this intent shall they go—that they may be persuaded that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of the living God; that the Father may bring about, through his most Beloved, his great and eternal purpose, in restoring the Jews, or all the house of Israel, to the land of their inheritance, which the Lord their God hath given them, unto the fulfilling of his covenant: (Mormon 5:12-14.)

The Jews should be grateful that in the providences of the Lord He caused this record "to be hid up" to come forth "in his own due time . . . to go unto the unbelieving of the Jews;" for the glorious purpose of persuading them that "Jesus is the Christ, the Son of the living God."

In a revelation given to the Prophet Joseph Smith at Kirtland, Ohio, March 7, 1831, the Lord spoke of His second coming in these words:

And then shall the Jews look upon me and say: What are these wounds in thine hands and in thy feet?

Then shall they know that I am the Lord; for I will say unto them: These wounds are the wounds with which I was wounded in the house of my friends. I am he who was lifted up. I am Jesus that was crucified. I am the Son of God.

And then shall they weep because of their iniquities; then shall they lament because they persecuted their king. (Doctrine and Covenants 45:51-53.)

Notwithstanding the things Jesus suffered at the hands of Judah, He still called them "my friends." Great are His promises to them when they are persuaded to accept Him as their Messiah.

In a revelation to the Prophet Joseph Smith given at Hiram, Ohio, November 3, 1831, the Lord spoke of the gathering of the ten tribes from the land of the north with their prophets to receive their blessings at the hands of the children of Ephraim, then added:

And they shall be filled with songs of everlasting joy.

Behold, this is the blessing of the everlasting God upon the tribes of Israel, and the richer blessing upon the head of Ephraim and his fellows:

And they also of the tribe of Judah, after their pain shall be sanctified in holiness before the Lord, to dwell in his presence day and night, forever and ever. (Doctrine and Covenants 133:33-35.)

From all these prophecies, it is evident that the Lord stands ready to keep the covenants and promises made with their fathers, if the children of Judah will but turn unto Him and acknowledge Him as their Savior and Redeemer, the Son of God, the Holy One of Israel.

Of the time when the Jews shall "be restored to the true church and fold of God," the Nephite Prophet Jacob declared:

And now, my beloved brethren, I have read these things that ye might know concerning the covenants of the Lord that he has covenanted with all the house of Israel—

That he has spoken unto the Jews, by the mouth of his holy prophets, even from the beginning down, from generation to generation, until the time comes that they shall be restored to the true church and fold of God; when they shall be gathered home to the lands of their inheritance, and shall be established in all their lands of promise. (2 Nephi 9:1-2.)

The Lord to Fight Judah's Battles

The Lord has even declared that He would fight their battles, for He has said, through His Prophet Zechariah:

Behold, I will make Jerusalem a cup of trembling unto all the people round about, when they shall be in the seige both against Judah and against Jerusalem.

And in that day will I make Jerusalem a burdensome stone for all people: all that burden themselves with it shall be cut in pieces, though all the people of the earth be gathered together against it. . . .

In that day shall the Lord defend the inhabitants of Jerusalem, and he that is feeble among them at that day shall be as David; and the house of David shall be as God, as the angel of the Lord before them.

And it shall come to pass in that day, that I will seek to destroy all the nations that come against Jerusalem.

And I will pour upon the house of David, and upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem, the spirit of grace and of supplications: and they shall look upon me whom they have pierced, and they shall mourn for him, as one mourneth for his only son, and shall be in bitterness for him, as one that is in bitterness for his firstborn. (Zechariah 12:2-3, 8-10.)

This clearly has reference to the events which shall precede the second coming of the Messiah, when the Jews shall again be gathered to Jerusalem, for the Lord said: "they shall look upon me whom they have pierced."

Of interest is the following quotation from an article by Arthur U. Michelson which was published in "The Jewish Hope," Issue No. 9, Vol. 22, September, 1950. The article suggests how the Lord may, even now, be fulfilling the prophecy of Zechariah, "In that day shall the Lord defend the inhabitants of Jerusalem . . .":

On my recent trip to Palestine I saw with my own eyes how God's prophecy is being fulfilled. In Gen. 17:8 God promised Abraham that he would give this land to him and his seed for an everlasting possession. The Jews waited 2,500 years for the fulfillment of this promise. After World War II, England, which had mandatory power over Palestine, suddenly gave it up and the Jews marched in. This was marvelous, for Palestine was one of the strongest fortresses England had in the Mediterranean Sea. Many contend today that the day of miracles is past, and that God does not intervene any more on behalf of His people, but they have learned through the events in Israel that they were mistaken.

It was marvelous what God did for the Jews, especially in Jerusalem, during the fighting with the Arabs. Though quite a few months had passed since the victory of Israel's army in Israel, they were still talking about what had taken place. Everywhere I went I heard how God had intervened in their behalf, and how He helped them to win the battles. One of the officials told me how much the Jews had to suffer. They had hardly anything with which to resist the heavy attacks of the Arabs, who were well organized and equipped with the latest weapons. Besides, they had neither food nor water because all their supplies were cut off.

The Arabs, who had a great army in strong position, were determined to destroy the Jews, while the Jews were few in number, without any arms and ammunition. The two or three guns they possessed had to be rushed from one point to another, to give the Arabs the impression that they had many of them. The Jews had quite a few tin cans which they beat as they shot the guns, giving the impression of many shots. But as the pressure was too great, they were unable to hold the lines any longer and finally decided to give up the city. At this critical moment God showed them that He was on their side, for He performed one of the greatest miracles that ever happened. The Arabs suddenly threw down their arms and surrendered. When their delegation appeared with the white flag, they asked, "Where are the three men that led you, and where are all the troops we saw?" The Jews told them that they did not know anything of the three men, for this group was their entire force. The Arabs said that they saw three persons with long beards and flowing white robes, who warned them not to fight any longer, otherwise they would all be killed. They became so frightened that they decided to give up. What an encouragement this was for the Jews, who realized that God was fighting for them.

The Lord moves in a mysterious way His wonders to perform. The Jews did not understand who the "three persons with long beards and flowing white robes" were who warned the Arabs "not to fight any longer, otherwise they would all be killed." The Stick of Joseph may throw some light upon this matter.

When Jesus Christ appeared to the Nephites in America, following His resurrection, He organized His Church among them, calling and appointing twelve disciples, as He had done in Jerusalem. Before leaving them, He permitted each of them to express his heart's desire:

And it came to pass when Jesus had said these words, he spake unto his disciples, one by one, saying unto them: What is it that ye desire of me, after that I am gone to the Father?

And they all spake, save it were three, saying: We desire that after we have lived unto the age of man, that our ministry, wherein thou hast called us, may have an end, that we may speedily come unto thee in thy kingdom.

And he said unto them: Blessed are ye because ye desired this thing of me; therefore, after that ye are seventy and two years old ye shall come unto me in my kingdom; and with me ye shall find rest.

And when he had spoken unto them, he turned himself unto the three, and said unto them: What will ye that I should do unto you, when I am gone unto the Father?

And they sorrowed in their hearts, for they durst not speak unto him the thing which they desired.

And he said unto them: Behold, I know your thoughts, and ye have desired the thing which John, my beloved, who was with me in my ministry, before that I was lifted up by the Jews, desired of me.

Therefore, more blessed are ye, for ye shall never taste of death; but ye shall live to behold all the doings of the Father unto the children of men, even until all things shall be fulfilled according to the will of the Father, when I shall come in my glory with the powers of heaven.

And ye shall never endure the pains of death, but when I shall come in my glory ye shall be changed in the twinkling of an eye from mortality to immortality; and then shall ye be blessed in the kingdom of my Father.

And again, ye shall not have pain while ye shall dwell in the flesh, neither sorrow save it be for the sins of the world; and all this will I do because of the thing which ye have desired of me, for ye have desired that ye might bring the souls of men unto me, while the world shall stand. . . .

And behold they will be among the Gentiles, and the Gentiles shall know them not.

They will also be among the Jews, and the Jews shall know them not.

And it shall come to pass, when the Lord seeth fit in his wisdom that they shall minister unto all the scattered tribes of Israel, and unto all nations, kindreds, tongues and people, and shall bring out of them unto Jesus many souls, that their desire may be fulfilled, and also because of the convincing power of God which is in them.

And they are as the angels of God, and if they shall pray unto the Father in the name of Jesus they can show themselves unto whatsoever man it seemeth them good.

Therefore, great and marvelous works shall be wrought by them, before the great and coming day when all people must surely stand before the judgment-seat of Christ; (3 Nephi 28:1-9; 27-31.)

Therefore, "the three persons with long beards and flowing white robes" could have been these three Nephite disciples, for Jesus said: "And behold they will be among the Gentiles, and the Gentiles shall know them not; they will also be among the Jews, and the Jews shall know them not."

We quote further from the article by Arthur U. Michelson:

God performed the same miracles on other fighting fronts, for He wanted to show the nations that He had turned to the Jews again, and like in the olden days, would help them to conquer the land. The Arabs were especially strong in the Negev District, not far from Beersheba, for they were backed by a large Egyptian army. The Jews were encircled by the Egyptians, and humanly speaking, had absolutely no chance to escape. One morning to the amazement of the Jews, the Arabs and the Egyptians suddenly gave up the fighting and surrendered. The Jews were at first very skeptical, because they couldn't believe that the Arabs and Egyptians would give up their strong position and surrender. But when they saw how the Arabs threw down their arms, they learned that God had intervened for them. When they asked the Arabs and Egyptians for the cause of their surrender, they told them that they saw an old man with a long beard who was dressed in a white robe, and who warned them not to fight any longer, otherwise they would all perish. This man was seen and heard by almost all the enemy troops. A great fear came over them and they decided to give up the fight. These and other stories I heard from various Jews who fought on the battle fronts. They said to me, "If God had not intervened we would all have been killed. We could never have conquered Palestine because we were so few and without arms and ammunition."

The man referred to "with a long beard who was dressed in a white robe," who warned the Arabs and Egyptians "not to fight any longer, otherwise they would all be killed" could have been one of these Nephite disciples, or he could have been the Apostle John who was with the Savior in Jerusalem, for Jesus explained unto the three Nephite disciples that they desired of him the same thing "which John, my beloved, who was with me in my ministry, before that I was lifted up by the Jews, desired of me." (3 Nephi 28:6.)

A "Mystical Force" Seems to be Working with Judah

That there is a "mystical force" working with the Jews was attested by Dr. Chaim Weizmann, President of both the Jewish Agency for Palestine and the World Zionist Organization, at Jerusalem when visited by members of the Anglo-American Committee on Palestine, appointed by President Harry S. Truman of the United States, when that committee visited Palestine in 1945. Of this fact, Bartley C. Crum ,a member of that committee, reports in his book, "Behind the Silken Curtain," published in 1947 by Simon and Schuster, Inc., that when the committee visited with Dr. Chaim Weizmann, they were told by him that it was their belief in a "mystical force" that would return the Jews to the land of Israel, that had kept them alive. This "mystical force" can only be accounted for through the coming of the Prophet Moses with the keys of the gathering of Israel in these latter days.

In Mr. Crum's book, he tells of the four months the committee, of which he was a member, spent visiting the camps of displaced persons, consisting principally of Jews, in the principal cities of Europe. In answer to questionnaires, they found that most of the remaining million Jews (six million having been put to death during the World War II) were desirous of returning to Palestine. In one city, for instance, a poll of 18,311 displaced Jews was taken with the following results: Thirteen said they wished to remain in Europe; 17,712 said they wished to go to Palestine. Some were asked to indicate their second choice, if they could not go to Palestine and hundreds answered: "Crematorium."

The suffering and persecutions which have been heaped upon the Jews in recent years are unparalleled in the history of the world, but are in fulfillment of the words of the prophets, nevertheless.

A Modern Prophet Reassures the Jews

In 1879 Wilford Woodruff, then an apostle of the Lord Jesus Christ, who later became the President of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, made the following statement concerning the gathering of the Jews to their promised land:

I wish in this testimony to say that the time is not far distant when the rich men among the Jews will be called upon to use their abundant wealth to gather the dispersed of Judah, and purchase the ancient dwelling places of their fathers in and about Jerusalem, and rebuild the holy city and temple.

For the fullness of the Gentiles has come in, and the Lord has decreed that the Jews should be gathered from all the Gentile nations where they have been driven, into their own land, in fulfillment of the words of Moses their law-giver. And this is the will of your great Elohim, O house of Judah, and whenever you shall be called upon to perform this work, the God of Israel will help you. You have a great future and destiny before you and you cannot avoid fulfilling it; you are the royal chosen seed, and the God of your father's house has kept you distinct as a nation for eighteen hundred years, under all the oppression of the whole Gentile world. You may not wait until you believe on Jesus of Nazareth, but when you meet with Shiloh your king, you will know him; your destiny is marked out, you cannot avoid it. It is true that after you return and gather your nation home, and rebuild your City and Temple, that the Gentiles may gather together their armies to go against you to battle, to take you a prey and to take you as a spoil, which they will do, for the words of your prophets must be fulfilled; but when this affliction comes, the living God, that led Moses through the wilderness, will deliver you, and your Shiloh will come and stand in your midst and will fight your battles; and you will know him, and the afflictions of the Jews will be at an end, while the destruction of the Gentiles will be so great that it will take the whole house of Israel who are gathered about Jerusalem, seven months to bury the dead of their enemies, and the weapons of war will last them seven years for fuel, so that they need not go to any forest for wood. These are tremendous sayings—who can bear them? Nevertheless they are true, and will be fulfilled, according to the sayings of Ezekiel, Zechariah and other prophets. Though the heavens and the earth pass away, not one jot or tittle will fall unfulfilled. (Matthias F. Cowley, The Life of Wilford Woodruff, page 509.)

A Prophet of the Latter Days Speaks of Judah

On October 19, 1952, David O. McKay, President of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, with headquarters in Salt Lake City, Utah, delivered an address which we commend to all Judah:

I invite your attention, young people, today, to this book, [Book of Mormon] because if it is what it purports to be, you may rest assured that Joseph Smith was inspired. I shall have time this afternoon to take only one point for your consideration. I take it because I can give some personal experiences in regard to it, and I believe you will accept my word as coming, at least, from a sincere heart.

Just one prophecy. You will find it in I Nephi 19:14, 15: "And because they [that means the Jews] turn their hearts aside, saith the prophet, and have despised the Holy One of Israel, they shall wander in the flesh, and perish, and become a hiss and a by-word, and be hated among all nations. Nevertheless, when that day cometh, saith the prophet, that they no more turn aside their hearts against the Holy One of Israel, then will he remember the covenants which he made to their fathers."

And if we turn to II Nephi, the tenth chapter, we shall find what that promise is. Commencing with the eighth verse: "And it shall come to pass that they shall be gathered in from their long dispersion, from the isles of the sea, and from the four parts of the earth; and the nations of the Gentiles shall be great in the eyes of me, saith God, in carrying them forth to the lands of their inheritance. Yea, the kings of the Gentiles shall be nursing fathers unto them, and their queens shall become nursing mothers: wherefore, the promises of the Lord are great unto the Gentiles, for he hath spoken it, and who can dispute?"

Now, that was printed in what is now known as the Book of Mormon in the year 1829. It is either Joseph Smith's guess or idea, or it is what it purports to be, a prophecy written about 500 years before Christ came. If it is Joseph Smith's writing, he could have known that the Jews were scattered and that they were persecuted (you and I knew that when we were boys), but he could not have known about a change of their hearts, because in 1829, I want to tell you that they were pretty bitter.

Sir Walter Scott depicts that persecution in several of his books, particularly in "Ivanhoe." It was manifested a way back in 1055 when the Normans came over to England, and even before that, and in the terrible massacres in Russia and other places. Now, Joseph Smith could have known about those persecutions; but, I repeat: He said, "When they no more turn aside their hearts against the Holy One"—it does not say believe, although it does in another place, but when they begin to look with favor—then he will remember the covenants which he made to their fathers.

That was in 1829. As an example of what intense bitterness existed even when this book was printed, I want to read to you a statement made by a Jew in California who printed a book in 1902, over 72 years after the Book of Mormon was printed. Mr. Harris Weinstock wrote a book entitled "Jesus, the Jew." It was put in my hands when I visited the California Mission for the first time, about 1912. This is what he says about the attitude of the Jews when he, the author of "Jesus, the Jew," was a boy.

"I recall that on one occasion one of the pupils by some chance brought [that would be about 1870] into the religious school a book containing the name of Jesus. I remember how wrought and excited the Rabbi became when he was made aware of its presence in the school room. 'Sacrilege! Sacrilege!' he cried indignantly, and seemed afraid to touch it. I remember how he delivered an impassioned discourse to his pupils upon the terrible sufferings to which the Jews had been subjected because of Jesus.

"He told them how the Jews had been made outcasts and wanderers over the face of the earth, how for hundreds of years they had been robbed and pillaged, tortured and plundered; how their beards had been torn from their roots, their teeth drawn from their jaws, their bodies cast into foul dungeons; how time and again they had been put on the rack, subjected to the thumbscrew and burned at the stake, all on account of Jesus.

"I remember how aroused and impassioned he became while recounting the frightful sufferings and calamities which had been inflicted upon the Jews, for all of which, in his opinion, Jesus was primarily responsible. 'How, then,' he concluded, 'can any self-respecting loyal Jew take into his hand a book containing the name of Jesus? How can the name of Jesus be thought of without connecting it, in the minds of the Jew, with the centuries of inhuman outrage and persecution heaped upon him by the followers of Jesus?'"

Mr. Weinstock comments: "His (Jesus') wisdom and gentleness, his unselfishness of spirit and his love for humanity, his desire to live in the spirit of the early Jewish prophets and to practice in his daily life the ethics of Judaism, are becoming better understood, so that the modern Jew looks upon Jesus as one of the greatest gifts that Israel has given to the world, and he is, therefore, proud to call Jesus his very own: blood of his blood, flesh of his flesh."

Keep in mind what was prophesied when "they no more turn aside their hearts from the Holy One." Note it, young man. "When that day cometh that they no more turn aside their hearts from the Holy One of Israel, then will he remember the covenants which he made with their fathers." I have read to you what those covenants are.

In 1830, Jerusalem was a waste. For over 400 years it had been under the domination of the Turks and the Arabs, principally the Turks. Bedouins in their camps could be seen. They oppressed the poor; one man who visited about that time tells how he was held up by bandits. You and I knew that when we were boys, just from the little geography we had read. I recall a conversation my father had with a friend who was visiting us, in which my father mentioned this prophecy, and he said, "The day will come when they will be returned to their homeland." I was about 12 or 14 years of age, and I said to myself:

"If I live to see that day, I'll know that Joseph Smith was a prophet." I didn't say it to father, but I think the Lord heard me say it.

I am going to tell you a personal experience this afternoon. In 1829, when that was written (so there is no getting around it), Jerusalem was a waste, and the Jews were not back there. For 1,500 years or more they had wandered homeless. A hiss and a by-word! Some would go back and drive nails in the old wall of the temple and then bewail their fate and pray for deliverance, and so on.

On November 2, 1917, following the World War, just five weeks after Lord Allenby entered Jerusalem, and the Turkish Army marched out of the opposite gate without firing a gun, Lord Balfour, at that time foreign secretary, had made, on behalf of the British Government, the following historic declaration (I will not have time to develop it, but you keep in mind this other statement, that the "Gentiles shall be great in mine eyes," in restoring them. How did Joseph Smith know?):

"His Majesty's Government [Great Britain] view with favor the establishment in Palestine of a national home for the Jewish people, and will use their best endeavours to facilitate the achievement of this object, it being clearly understood that nothing shall be done which may prejudice the civil and religious rights of existing non-Jewish communities in Palestine, or the rights and political status enjoyed by Jews in any other country."

The declaration (this is history) was endorsed by the principal Allied powers (the Gentiles) and embodied in the treaty of Sevres, where it was provided that the country should be entrusted to a mandatory power with a mandate to be approved by the League of Nations. After the Balfour declaration, the Zionist organization sent a commission, subsequently constituted as a part of the Zionist executive, to Palestine, to act as a link between the British authorities and the Jewish population. That was November 2, 1917.

Four years later, to the day, November 2, 1921, Brother Hugh J. Cannon and I found ourselves in Jerusalem, filling an appointment by the Church to visit the missions of the Church. We were then on our way to the Turkish Mission, as it was then. Michael, our guide, had promised to take us down to the Dead Sea on November 2, but he changed his plan and said, "Tomorrow, the second, we shall visit Jerusalem, instead." As we started out from the Allenby Hotel, which is outside the wall of Jerusalem, he said, "I will tell you as we go down, why I have changed."

Michael, who seemed apprehensive, motioned to us to follow him. We entered the gate and stood for awhile under David's Tower, off on our right, the Jewish quarter. There were about 45,000 Jews there then. Not a store open, nobody on those streets selling wares. Last night we had seen a busy town, donkeys heavily laden, walking up these stone steps; camels, also. That morning, Nov. 2, however, we didn't see a donkey; not a camel. The only store open was a stationery store kept by an Englishman. I said, "Michael, what does all this mean?"

He answered, "This means that today the Mohammedans and the Arabs, and some Christians, are protesting against Lord Balfour's declaration that the Holy Land should be set aside as a homeland for the Jews."

"Don't you believe that the Jews are coming back? You're a Christian."

"Yes, but the time hasn't come!" said Michael.

"Well," I said, "the time has come, and they will be coming back."

He replied, with vehemence, "Never! These stones will be bathed in blood first!"

"Well," I said, "Michael, these stones may be bathed in blood, but they are coming back!"

"Never!"

We walked down the stone steps, the three of us. We passed the old Wailing Wall, which is part of the old temple of Solomon. Not a Jew there that day, not one! We came up the steps to Mount Moriah and stood on the alleged spot where Abraham built his altar when he was about to offer Isaac. As we stood there, we heard a crowd, which sounded to me like students giving college yells. I said, "What is that?"

Michael said, "There is going to be trouble!"

"Well," I said, "Let's see it!" Brother Cannon and I started toward it, but there came round a street corner a crowd, crying:

"There is no God but Allah, and Mohammed is his prophet! There is no God but Allah, and Mohammed is his prophet!"

Michael said, "There will be trouble today!"

The crowd passed us, and we continued our visit of historical places, returning to David's street at about 11:30 a.m. Then we saw, coming towards us, fleeing from a mob, two women and a man, one woman clasping a child in her arms. I saw one of the pursuers throw a rock and hit the man in the back. Jews persecuted in Jerusalem because they wanted to come back to their homeland! Luckily, policemen were coming up, who stopped the mob, using a lash to whip them back, permitting the Jews to escape.

We followed those policemen as they whipped those fellows back, and came back again under David's Tower to a street leading up to the houses under that tower. There were the Jews, hiding for fear of the mob. They looked at us stealthily from behind curtains; we could see them through the doors left ajar, and by their dress we concluded that many were immigrant Jews. We wanted to find somebody to whom we could speak, for I forgot to tell you that Michael would not go up. He said, "If you go up there you go alone."

I said, "All right, Michael, here is where you and we part company. We shall see you this afternoon at 2 o'clock." And he let us go alone!

Beckoning, we found a young man who could speak English, and I said, "What does this all mean?"

Almost in the same words that Michael had used in the morning, he answered, "This means that the Mohammedans and the Christians are uniting, in protest against Lord Balfour's declaration that we should come back to our Holy Land. They won't fight us openly; we can't fight women and children." At that juncture, a gentleman who had been standing near by spoke in Yiddish or Jewish, whatever it was, evidently protesting to this young man.

I said, "Is he objecting to your speaking to us?"

The young man said, "Yes."

"Well, you tell him that we are Americans, and that we believe in the restoration of the Jews to the Holy Land."

A little boy about 14, who had been standing by, said, "Then why do you wear that?" and he pointed to a stickpin, the "star and crescent," that had been given me by Sister McKay. The older one looked at it and said, "That is all right." I learned afterwards that the four-point star and crescent is a Mohammedan sign, the five-point star and crescent a Jewish sign, and this happened to be five, and I was happy.

I cite these incidents merely to show you how tense and bitter was the feeling in Jerusalem that day.

As we came out of the street and saw the British soldiers with helmets on their heads, rifles in their hands, bayonets fixed, I said, "Boys, I am glad to see you here."

"Oh," said one, "I think we can hold them." And they did.

As Brother Cannon and I walked toward our hotel, he said, "And the Gentiles shall be great in the eyes of me in carrying them back."

The few Jews, approximately 45,000, who had returned to Jerusalem, were under the protecting care of the British government, backed by the League of Nations.

Young man, tell me: Who wrote that prophecy? Was it a guess by Joseph Smith? No! He was merely the translator. Through the eyes of prophecy, Jacob had looked down through the annals of time to the day when the Jews would persecute the Savior and He would be crucified, when they would be banished, would become a hiss and a by-word without a home for 1,600 year, and when they no more turned aside their hearts from the Holy One, then would he remember the promise he made to their fathers.

When we returned to the hotel and met Michael, I said, "Well, Michael, you see we are all right."

"Don't you laugh at me," he said. "When I left you, one man was killed and several injured by a bomb."

To verify this statement, I called up Governor Samuels' office (by the way, the first Jew to govern Palestine for hundreds of years). We received word from his office, "Yes, one man was killed, others were injured, and two other men beaten to death at the Jaffa gate."

Reference to that uprising you will find in the encyclopedia today.

Another item: On May 11, 1950, with a vote of 37 to 12, nine being absent, the State of Israel, the Jewish nation, was admitted to the United Nations in fulfillment of a prophecy made 2,000 years before.

I have taken only one point, two elements in it: One, the change of heart that must come and did come, beginning about 1860, 30 years after the statement; the other, that the Gentiles should help them to return to Palestine. Zionist rule began about 1870; in 1917 the Gentiles declared that they should go, and protected them, and in 1950 they were given a home for the first time since before Christ. (Published in The Church News Section of The Deseret News, Salt Lake City, Utah, October 25, 1952.)

Conclusion of the Summary

It should be obvious in light of all the promises of the Lord unto the entire House of Israel, Judah and Joseph, that these promises cannot find their fulfillment until the descendants of Judah and Joseph are brought together:

And I will make them one nation in the land upon the mountains of Israel; and one king shall be king to them all: and they shall be no more two nations, neither shall they be divided into two kingdoms any more at all: (Ezekiel 37:22.)

It is because the Lord declared that He would bring these two kingdoms together that we of the House of Joseph, the Kingdom of Israel, extend to the House of Judah an invitation to join us. We must come together into one kingdom, the Kingdom which, God declared through His Prophet Daniel (Daniel 2:44), would be established in the earth in the latter days to prepare for the second coming of Jesus Christ, the Messiah. The quicker we unite under the leadership of the prophets of the Lord whom He has raised up in the latter days, the earlier can the kingdom be prepared for His coming. This is the great work the Lord had in mind for us to accomplish when He promised Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, that through them and their seed would all the nations of the earth be blessed.

We have made it plain that Judah would have to look to Joseph for the establishment of the Church and Kingdom of God in the earth in the latter days, and that it would be taken by Joseph to Judah when the times of the Gentiles would be fulfilled.

Therefore, in the words of Isaiah, we say to our brethren, the House of Judah: "Come now and let us reason together." (Isaiah 1:18.)

The Angel Moroni fully understood this when he quoted to Joseph Smith, the "choice seer . . . like unto Moses":

The envy also of Ephraim shall depart, and the adversaries of Judah shall be cut off: Ephraim shall not envy Judah, and Judah shall not vex Ephraim. (Isaiah 11:13.)

What a glorious day to anticipate! We of the House of Ephraim are ready. Will you join us, Judah, our brethren? For the coming of this day we humbly and earnestly pray, and offer to you our hand in fellowship in the great work of the God of Israel in establishing His Kingdom in the earth, and the gathering of the whole House of Israel. This is our mutual task. It is a God-given assignment. The Messiah pleaded in the meridian of time, and he is pleading today:

O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that killest the prophets, and stonest them which are sent unto thee, how often would I have gathered thy children together, even as a hen gathereth her chickens under her wings, and ye would not!

Behold, your house is left unto you desolate.

For I say unto you, Ye shall not see me henceforth, till ye shall say, Blessed is he that cometh in the name of the Lord. (Matthew 23:37-39.)

Judah, do not procrastinate your acceptance of His loving call—accept the Elders of Israel when they come to you "in the name of the Lord," with the message of the restored Gospel of Jesus Christ, "in the latter days."
