Johanna Flynn, Anita R. Canfield, Visiting Teaching: A Call to Serve ( 1989)

The Call

Journal: Elizabeth

Entry: 015012-EON, Kolob

Sarah and I are still savoring all the beautiful things we've heard in our new classes. It is hard to believe I only have a little over two thousand years left before I go to mortality and gain my body. The thought of earth life both thrills and terrifies me. I am eager to have a body like Father and Mother. I want to be just like them. And I am truly willing to have the experiences we have been studying about in our classes. I know that the pain and joy, sorrow, suffering and trials are all for our good. No experience is wasted. Mother told me herself these things will make us become more like her and Father.

But the thought of the veil being drawn over my memory frightens me. To think that I shall have no recollection of former friends or birth or my home here is often more than I can bear. It is like being "cut off" from them. But Father says that we aren't cut off, we are just living away from home for a while. He said he will always be there for us; all we have to do is have faith and live worthily. He even said that for every 10 percent of work we do, he will do the other 90 percent and give us all the credit. He loves me so much, I just don't want to disappoint him. The veil sounds so foreign, so distant.

Entry: 015131-EON, Kolob

It seems as though it was just yesterday that the Great Council in Heaven was assembled, and yet.

My heart still pounds as I remember Father presenting his plan, and Satan and Jesus coming forth—Satan to alter the plan and Jesus to uphold it. It is still clear in my mind, as if it were just yesterday, the awful war that followed. I remember vividly the burning in my heart as my name was called and I stepped forward to be counted on the Lord's side. My heart still pounds but then aches as I see many who also stepped forward that day but have lost their way after they were born into mortality. It can easily happen to any of us if we aren't careful.

I can see how perfect Father's plan is. He has provided a Savior who will pay for all the sins that have ever been or ever will be committed, mine included. What a swelling in my heart it brings to know this, to know how much they love me and want me back. I feel great comfort—despite the knowledge of the veil—that repentance on Jesus' name will be a miracle and a blessing.

I guess the greatest fact of all is that I can inherit all Father has. It is possible for me to become like Father and Mother. Mother is so beautiful, so magnificent, so incredibly lovely—I want to be just like her.

My dearest sister in all eternity, my sweet friend Sarah, is such an inspiration to me. We truly communicate heart to heart, woman to woman. We think the same thoughts, we have the same fears and hopes and goals. We both plan to come home.

And yet, there are differences in our personalities that make a bonding friendship. She is strong where I am weak, and I am strong where she is weak. We are a perfect blend of friendship and personality.

Today we learned that we are going to earth within a few years of each other.

Entry: 015445-EON, Kolob

Here I was, selfishly excited yesterday, when I learned I was being born into a family of members of the Church. It never dawned on me that Sarah might not be born into a member family. Today as I was bubbling away about it, she looked so distant and forlorn. When I questioned her, she told me that she was going to be born into a nonmember family, and she would be an only child. She said that this knowledge made her all the more committed to absorb everything she could learn here in heaven. She said, "I am going down to mortality prepared to find the truth." Then she looked me eye to eye, as only Sarah can, and said, Elizabeth, I'm counting on you to teach me the gospel when we find each other there."

I will do my level best, because Sarah has taught me so much here, and I'm counting on her there, too.

Entry: 015498-EON, Kolob

In class today we heard from both Joseph and the Savior. Together they began to unfold what living the gospel would be like in the last days. I looked around the Great Assembly Hall and saw the multitude of spirits listening intently. None of them seemed to fear the veil being drawn over their memories. It is very comforting to know that all of us have to go through it, not just a few.

The organized Church on earth in my day will be just like the Savior's church in his day. Of course! Why should it be any different? The past few weeks I've been learning about the priesthood, Sunday School, tithing, officers, teachers, Primary, and the special sisterhood called Relief Society. It will be such a unique and sacred sisterhood on the earth that all the sisters are going to spend a whole year learning about just that. Today Joseph introduced it to us.

He is indeed a noble spirit. He counseled us today about what it would be like in our day. In his mortal life he will suffer mental and even physical persecution. The Saints will be mocked, ridiculed, hated, mobbed, raped, beaten, burned, and even murdered. He said that Satan will do everything in his power to discourage and torment and defeat the restoration of the gospel. Those who are going before me to lay the foundation of the last dispensation are indeed noble and courageous. I honor them.

But Brother Joseph grew quiet after a while and looked at those of us who are coming later. He said he was giving us a warning. He said that we would not have to endure physical persecution, but our test would be a much greater one. I was stunned. What could be worse than being beaten, raped, or murdered? He said it is easy to draw close to God—and easy to work hard in the kingdom—when adversity presses against you. During those times people band together in brotherhood, sisterhood, and work together harder. He said a far greater adversity will be peace and apathy. When people are comfortable, they forget why they were born, he said. They forget that they were born to serve each other, just as Father and Mother serve us. He counseled us against the excuses we would be tempted to say. He gave an example: If one of the Lord's living apostles were to come to one of our stake conferences, and that apostle told us that the Prophet wanted us all to leave for Jackson County by 5:00 A.M. the next morning, only four out of ten would even consider it. And in the final analysis, only one out of ten would actually prepare to go. I was shocked! He said it was because we will be used to making excuses. We would excuse ourselves right out of the trip. He even shared some of the excuses:

"Well, when I hear it from the prophet himself, then I'll go."

"I can't possibly go this week because my strawberries are coming on. But we sure will go as soon as we put them up."

"I don't think the Lord would want me to go. I'm not all that strong in the church; my husband is the strong one in our family, and I couldn't just up and leave my mother."

"I sure would like to go, but we don't have any money until we get paid next week."

"This could be the real thing. But this is the first we have heard about it. It could just be a trial run, like fire drills in school. Well, John just can't take off work for a drill."

Joseph said we would become masters at making excuses. I could hardly believe it! Many didn't believe him. Now I am really afraid of the veil. What if I excuse myself right out of exaltation.

Entry: 015513-EON, Kolob

Joseph held class today for the sisters only. He counseled us that our standard in every facet of life should be a standard of personal excellence. We are choice daughters of God, and we should look, act, and serve accordingly. He said our yardstick for serving in our stewardships on earth should never be, "What do I have to do?" or "Is this necessary?" But it must always be, "What can I do, how can I help the Savior and his work on earth?"

He asked how many of us will promise everything we will own, including our gifts, to the building up of the kingdom of God. Every hand went up. He wept as he told us that many will be called but few chosen, because many of us will let that promise be forgotten, even grow cold.

After class, Sarah and I talked for hours about our commitment. We know that our choices on earth must be eternal ones. Sarah pointed out that when we hear these truths in mortal life, those who have made firm commitments will recognize the truth. The Savior himself said that his "sheep" would hear his voice and follow him and his teachings.

Sarah and I are determined to keep our commitments. Nothing is as important to us as getting back home. And home would not be home without all our loved ones. I am so grateful to have a friend like Sarah who loves me so much.

Entry: 10160113-EON, Kolob

Today was the last class we had with Joseph Smith. He introduced a program to us that would be part of the Relief Society. It will be called visiting teaching. It will provide every sister in the Church with a friend, a helper, someone to care. Not one sister need ever feel alone. We need not feel that no one understands or cares. We will be called to be visiting teachers to our sisters, to each other. Our time with each other will be what we make it. Our sisters' needs will be our challenges. Some will need physical help, others spiritual or social help. But all will need something from their visiting teachers. He then asked several sisters who have been given specific gifts to share ideas of how this could be done. Sarah was one who stood up. She said one of her gifts was to be a good listener. She felt she could be of service to her sisters in mortal life by listening to the Holy Ghost, listening to the prophet, and listening to those who need to talk. We were shown many ways that we can bless others' lives with our gifts, our differences.

He concluded by saying that we should remember the promise we made to build the kingdom, to not fall prey to excuse-making. Serving means doing. We shouldn't let our Relief Society president do the work herself because she is tired of hearing all the excuses.

He said, "This charitable society is according to your nature. It is natural for females to have feelings of charity. You are now placed in a situation where you can act according to these sympathies, which God has planted in your bosoms. If you live up to these principles, how great and glorious! If you live up to your privileges, the angels cannot be restrained from being your associates!" (Minutes of the Female Relief Society of Nauvoo, p. 142, archives, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.)

When he finished, all of us were weeping; he took our breath away. Yes, I want angels as my associates.

What if I lose my way, what if I am an excuse-maker? What if my faith weakens? I told Sarah my deepest fears. She grew sober and looked into my eyes as she held my hands and said, "Elizabeth, I won't let go of you, ever. I'll be there, too. I promise I'll help you." I cried and cried and asked her if she realized that the veil meant no recollection of former friends and birth. Did she realize we would not remember each other?

She said, "Elizabeth, we may forget what it was like here and how we got here. And we may not be able to see friends as they were, but you can't tell me I won't feel your spirit when we meet on earth. I will find you and love you. Together, Elizabeth, together we will help each other home. I love you with all of my heart."

I believe her. Sarah is making the fear subside. I will make it now; I know it.

Entry: 1117630-EON, Kolob

Sarah and I held hands and listened with our whole hearts as we attended the last class before the Savior goes down to his birth. He said,

Every tree that bringeth not forth good fruit is hewn down, and cast into the fire. Wherefore by their fruits ye shall know them. Not every one that saith unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven; but he that doeth the will of my Father which is in heaven. (Matthew 7:19-21.)

He told us that by our fruits he would know us, that by our good works he would see our hearts. He would not force us, but let us choose according to our agency. But he warned:

Verily I say, men should be anxiously engaged in a good cause, and do many things of their own free will, and bring to pass much righteousness;

For the power is in them, wherein they are agents unto themselves. And inasmuch as men do good they shall in nowise lose their reward. (D&C 58:27-28.)

He commanded us to be anxiously engaged in a good cause, to bring to pass our own righteousness. Sarah and I agreed. We began to see that serving is just as much for us as it is for those we serve, maybe even more. How else can we become like Jesus?

Sarah shared this poem with me written by one of her friends.

"Give to the needy, sweet charity's bread For giving is living," the angel said. "But must I keep giving again and again?" My pitiless, selfish, curt answer ran. "Oh, no," said the angel, piercing me through, "Just give till the Savior stops giving to you." (Genevieve L. Bames.)

The Savior explained to us, "And if it so be that you should labor all your days in crying repentance unto this people, and bring, save it be one soul unto me, how great shall be your joy with him in the kingdom of my Father!" (D&C 18:15.)

And he also taught:

Verily I say unto you, Inasmuch as ye have done it unto one of the least of these my brethren, ye have done it unto me.

Then shall he say also unto them on the left hand, Depart from me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his angels:

For I was an hungered, and ye gave me no meat: I was thirsty, and ye gave me no drink:

I was a stranger, and ye took me not in: naked, and ye clothed me not: sick, and in prison, and ye visited me not.

Then shall they also answer him, saying, Lord, when saw we thee an hungered, or athirst, or a stranger, or naked, or sick, or in prison, and did not minister unto thee?

Then shall he answer them, saying, Verily I say unto you, Inasmuch as ye did it not to one of the least of these, ye did it not to me.

And these shall go away into everlasting punishment: but the righteous into life eternal. (Matthew 25:40-46.)

Sarah and I spent several hours after the class in silence, just feeling his love for each of us.

Entry: 118521-EON, Kolob

Tomorrow Sarah and I plan to meet by the seventh fountain near the twelfth column in the Great Assembly Hall. We are going early so we can find each other in the multitude. All of us here are anxious to witness the next three days. Father and Mother have told us that the Savior's atonement will mean even more to us who are yet unborn if we are to witness it personally.

Sarah has been such a support to me these last thirty-three years since the Savior's birth on earth. We have learned so much together. I'm not afraid of the veil anymore and neither is she, for we know we'll be there to help each other. I love her so much.

As I have grown in knowledge, I have grown in understanding. I have come to see the veil as a blessing to mortal life. We must go through mortality. We must have experiences that will teach us what we cannot learn here in heaven (because we have no physical bodies). Once we are mortal, if we could see how wonderful heaven is, the mortal pain and suffering would be even more intense. But the greatest blessing of the veil is that we will have to walk by faith. Faith is the power of God. As we develop faith I am beginning to see that we will become more powerful in subduing our weaknesses. Walking by faith will teach us to stretch beyond our reach. And unless our reach exceeds our grasp, how can we know of our opportunities.

If we could remember our premortal life all through mortality, we might not stretch ourselves. Then the day would come when we would have to face Father and all we could say is, "I'm not sure if I deserve this reward."

I truly did learn more during those three days than I have in all my existence. The poignant scene of the Savior's last supper with his disciples opened new understandings. I saw that it did for Sarah, too, as we wept together.

Can you imagine how our brother felt, knowing of the impending hour, the mockery, the torture, and pain he must surely suffer? Can you imagine how heavy those hours must have been upon him? It was so touching to watch him with his friends gathered there in that upper room—his apostles, men he had lived with and been a constant companion to for all his ministry. These were his choicest, his anointed. Now, except for Judas who betrayed him, they must carry on. It was so hard for our Savior to bid farewell. He loved them so much. It's beautiful the way he tenderly embraced each one and spent a few private moments individually to express his love and appreciation personally, one-on-one.

I could not hold back the tears as I saw him—The Great Jehovah, our Lord, our Master, the Savior of the World—get down upon his knees with no thoughts of his coming ordeal and lovingly wash each apostle's feet. My heart and mind will never forget what he said: "A new commandment I give unto you, that ye also love one another. By this shall all men know that ye are my disciples, if ye have love one to another." (John 13:34-35.)

At that moment I knew he wasn't talking to his apostles alone. He was talking to all of us. I realized that the withholding of love is the negation of the Spirit of Christ, the proof that we never knew him, that for us he lived in vain. It means he suggested nothing in all our thoughts, that he inspired nothing in all our lives.

At that moment I covenanted that when it was my turn to experience mortality, I would live my life so his would not have been in vain. I would love others as he loves me. I do know him. I think everyone present made that covenant. There was an overwhelming feeling as the heavens were silent and everyone felt the majesty of our Lord, Jesus Christ.

I ached and grieved as I saw him bleed from every pore at Gethsemane. I have never seen such a thing. At first I didn't understand. I thought the sins weighing upon him were causing all the suffering. Then I recognized that he was also experiencing great sorrow, that which I have seen accompany sin, the remorse felt after the sin has been committed. I saw my Lord suffer that great sorrow multiplied innumerably. Even though I haven't experienced mortality yet, I know my sins were numbered there, too, and I caused some of that pain. Yet I can take hope and not condemn myself, because I realize I am worth the price he paid or he would not have paid it. We are all worth it. I'm beginning to sense how much we should esteem one another, especially those who have lost their way. I never understood until now why he told the story of the joy of finding the one lost sheep while ninety-nine were safe. I know I am weak in so many areas. I can now clearly see the road home, and it is stained with his blood. I love him for that.

I could hardly watch as they scourged and flogged him. The cruel whip laced with bits of bone and glass tore open his flesh, and I wished they would stop. With every mocking word and gashing blow, my heart would reconfirm my covenant—"I will love you, my Savior, and try so hard to remember who I am."

As they drove the nails into his hands and wrists and feet, I can remember thinking of the blood everywhere, from Gethsemane, to the beatings, and then on the cross. He literally gave most of his own blood for us.

As he hung there, Sarah and I turned to see Father and Mother. They suffered, too. The looks on their faces were similar to the one on Mary's, and yet there was peace about them. They knew. They knew what that moment meant to the world.

I do not know exactly what mortal life will bring to me. I have a good understanding of some of my challenges there, and I know only too well my own personal weaknesses. But, I am grateful for this Brother who loves me so much that he was willing to lay down his life and then take it up again for my sake. I am so grateful for his teachings and gospel that will pilot me through mortality.

And I am no less grateful for those dear brothers and sisters here that will teach and inspire me there. I am especially grateful for Sarah, who can reach my heart like no other. I shall not let the veil end our friendship.

I shall strive with all my heart to serve the Lord, as he has served me.
