Johanna Flynn, Anita R. Canfield, Visiting Teaching: A Call to Serve ( 1989)

The Service

Journal: Sarah Marks

Entry: April 4, 1965

Am I ever burning mad! I don't know about this new ward we live in. Today Jim stayed home from the office until noon because he wasn't feeling well. Here I am, in our new home ten days, boxes everywhere, eight months pregnant with my first baby, a sick husband, and my visiting teachers unexpectedly ring the doorbell at 9:22 A.M. I was so embarrassed, my house was such a mess.

It might not have been so bad, but they brought all four of their own children as well as a neighbor's child one of the women was tending. After all, the woman was just going visiting teaching.

The children worked in teams during the one hour visit! Two took turns running in and out, leaving the front door open while the air conditioner kept clicking on and off. Two others took turns opening bedroom doors and exposing clutter, unmade beds, and poor Jim. One little girl kept popping the oven door open as she tried to wear out the light button. I waddled up and down stairs, shutting doors and escorting little darlings from room to room. My visiting teachers didn't seem to notice a thing. When they finally left, Jim said, "Looks like you didn't need compassionate service before they came, but after!"

I don't even remember their names. They never offered to help, seeing my predicament. Oh, well, I'm not going to feel sorry for myself. Besides, once the baby's born I can get more involved in the ward. Maybe I can even find the nerve to tell them to leave their children home.

Entry: April 16, 1965

Here I am, almost thirty-four, with my first baby. I've had such terrible allergies that in the labor I alternated screams and sneezes. Our beautiful little Jennie was born at 1:25 A.M. on April 10—she is so beautiful, and I am so thankful for her. She was breech, and my old bones gave very slowly to accommodate her eight pounds, eight ounces. It was such a trauma to my system that something went wrong, and I left the hospital weighing more than when I went in because of water retention. Every morning I wake up with all the water I am holding plus more. My skin is so tight that my ankles are cracking and bleeding. It is so hot that sweat drips off my elbows. I waddle around the house and wonder why my baby won't nurse.

I am an only child, and I have never been around babies. What should I do? Jennie was the first baby I saw without a diaper on. My breasts are so impacted, and Jennie cries constantly. As a matter of fact, so do I.

Unexpectedly, the doorbell rang today at 11:00, waking Jennie up. Guess who? My visiting teachers. They looked at the bloody ankles and my puffy face and said, "Gee, Sarah, you look awful. And it looks like your little girl has colic. Listen, if there is anything we can do for you, just let us know. The message is about prayer. Remember to pray. Well, we can see you're tired so we won't keep you." And they left! They never even came in!

I vow this night that if I am ever called to be a visiting teacher, I will never say, "If we can do anything for you, just let us know."

Entry: April 18, 1965

Thank heavens for sweet old Mrs. Rice in the house next door. Today she hobbled over and called my doctor. Now, after some medication for me and formula for the baby, I'm feeling better already.

The past three years have turned my life into a busy world. Here I am, a new wife, new member of the Church, and new mother! Now this move to Jim's new job in a town 2,500 miles from parents and friends has caused me additional need for flexibility. I want to be a good wife, mother, and Church member. Those first few months after I was baptized, I felt so overwhelmed. I looked in awe at those Relief Society sisters who could make their clothes, can their food, and repair anything with a glue gun. I'm just not talented like that.

But I learned that dwelling on the things I can't do impedes my personal progress. The Lord gave each of us gifts. I love that verse in the Doctrine and Covenants: "For all have not every gift given unto them; for there are many gifts, and to every man is given a gift by the Spirit of God. To some is given one, and to some is given another, that all may be profited thereby." (D&C 46:11-12)

Each of us have been given at least one gift "that all may be profited thereby." I'm not sure I know what special gift I've been given, but when I discover it, I'll use it to benefit the Lord. I feel that I promised him that once.

Entry: May 13, 1965

Today I got a phone call from my new visiting teachers. The ward shuffled things around, I guess, and I ended up with two new ones. She said she would like to make an appointment to come over (What a relief!) and get acquainted. I hope they don't bring a flock of kiddies; my house and nerves and new baby couldn't handle it.

Entry: May 15, 1965

I could hardly believe these two angels that came to my door. I have been feeling so separated lately—a new house, new city, new job for Jim, new baby. My whole life seems upside down. I've been blaming it on being thirty-four, but I guess I'm just shy and nervous like everyone else. But within ten minutes these two visiting teachers made me feel welcome to the city, to the ward, and to motherhood.

In five minutes they saw that I am still moving in because of the baby and other problems.

Sister Moore said, "Let me take your baby this afternoon and every afternoon this week so you can devote time to the sorting." Sister Lee said, "I'll bring dinner tonight and tomorrow, and with just the two of you, the leftovers will keep you fed for several days." And to top it all off, she asked what we like to eat.

They asked if the home teachers had been by since we moved in. When I said no, they said they'd see to it that we had them come this month. I believe they will.

And that wasn't all—they left with the baby and all the dirty laundry. Tonight they returned, food, baby, and folded laundry! I got more done today than in the past two months.

They came in neat, with clean dresses, looking as if they were going to church. That really made me feel important, and as if I was important to them. Oh, thank you, Heavenly Father, for two living angels!

Entry: May 20, 1965

Sister Moore called today to see how things were going. We had a long and warm conversation. She let me know her phone was open all hours, and that she'd be hurt if I didn't turn to her for help first. She is really a friend. And later on in the afternoon Sister Lee stopped by with brownies and a big hug for me. What strength I feel in them.

Entry: July 16, 1965

I cannot believe the service I have received over the past few months from Sister Moore and Sister Lee. They have called, dropped by with an unexpected dessert or pitcher of punch. They have sent me notes of encouragement or praise. They have taken time to prepare meaningful messages each month. And not just for me, but to all the sisters on their route. Last Sunday I heard a story about one of the prominent families in our ward, Barry and Barbara Jones. At one time Barry was not a member, and Sister Moore was one of Barbara's visiting teachers. One day, Barbara called Sister Moore to tell her that her grandfather, who had been like a father to her, had just died. She was very upset. She and her mother were discussing the problem of who would keep her little girls during the funeral when the mother said, "Why not call Sister Moore?" (The Relief Society president had held a visiting teaching convention for the ward just the week before and had stressed the need for compassionate service.)

Sister Moore told her not to worry about a thing. She told her that she and her companion would call soon and discuss how best they could serve. She promised that someone would be with her daughters at 1:00 P.M. Monday for the funeral.

Then she quickly whipped up a salad and took it over to the family. She called the Relief Society president and got permission to organize food for the family for the weekend and for the fifty or so relatives and acquaintances expected after the funeral. They did all the organizing. The delicious food came every day, and in abundance.

Barbara's husband, Barry, was already mellowed toward the Church. His home teacher had brought the crew from building the new chapel over, and they had poured some concrete for the new home he was building. He stood and watched in amazement. Two weeks after the funeral, Barry was commenting on how overwhelmingly generous everyone from her church had been during that trying time. Barbara saw her chance and asked if maybe he wouldn't consider letting their home teacher come and teach him the gospel. Well, no, he wasn't interested in hearing their doctrine, but maybe he did owe it to that home teacher to at least hear what he had to say.

Three months later the home teacher baptized him. Listening to this couple bear their testimonies reveals the working force of love in people's lives. Sister Moore was always there for them.

Entry: August 20, 1965

When Sisters Moore and Lee came today I asked how they came to be such great visiting teachers. Sister Lee said she believed they had been called to sacrifice, to serve the Lord. She said the more we serve and do, the more we love and are loved.

Then she told me the most incredible story:

Sister Lee had been married for fifteen years to an active member of the Church. One day he announced that he was leaving her; he'd met another woman. He was excommunicated and left town shortly afterward with his new wife. Sister Lee was forced to go to work to support their six children. Eventually she had to sell her home and take a second job. He never sent child support payments, and the state could not find him. With every monthly bill, every illness, every crisis, every teenage problem, every challenge, she grew more and more bitter. Year after year she pushed herself into more loneliness and more despair. She said she had never seen such dark and empty hours. (I could hardly believe it was the Sister Lee I knew!) Eight years went by, and she had become a bitter, hostile, self-centered woman. She felt unloved and unhappy.

Then one day, after complaining to her new visiting teacher, this woman simply challenged her to feel better about herself. "How?" asked Sister Lee. The visiting teacher said, "For the next thirty days go find someone to serve—a different person every day for thirty days. It doesn't even matter if you do it anonymously, just do it."

Sister Lee thought the idea was stupid and forgot about it. But after a few weeks, she wasn't feeling much better, so she decided to give it a try.

After seven days she ran out of people to serve. She'd done something for each of her six children and her mother. She realized she didn't know anyone else's needs. She tried to look around and pay attention, but found herself at a total loss. She called her Relief Society president and was able to take a meal here or there, tend children for an afternoon, and pick up an elderly brother for church one Sunday. But she never found thirty people who might need her.

When this visiting teacher came again, she asked Sister Lee to report. Sister Lee told her she really didn't feel much better about herself, but she did admit that it had taken her mind off her own problems. Now what should she do? The visiting teacher said, "Now double it. Find people to serve for sixty days."

Sister Lee thought she was crazy. If she couldn't find thirty people, how could she find sixty? But she agreed. She called the Relief Society president back and gathered more names. Then she began to canvas the neighborhood. She found an elderly widow down the block trying to weed her garden. Sister Lee showed up every Saturday with hoe in hand and helped the old woman get her lawn in shape. She discovered that a neighbor family was out of town, and she began collecting their newspapers for them. Everywhere she went and everywhere she turned, she began looking for ways to serve.

At the end of sixty days, she told her visiting teacher that it really gave her a rest from her own problems. Sister Lee said she suddenly began to realize how secluded she had been, how out of touch she had been with humanity. Now what should she do?

The visiting teacher said, "Now triple it, do it for ninety days."

Sister Lee looked longer and worked harder. Then she hit upon a great idea. She joined Candy Stripers, a volunteer hospital aide group. At the end of ninety days she told her visiting teacher, "I feel so good about this service, I can do it for 120 days!"

Sister Lee told me that at the end of 120 days her life had been changed. She found that she was useful and needed. She found that through service she came to love those whom she served. Then, she said, the miracle happened. They loved her in return. She bore testimony to me that she knew we were born to bless each other's lives. Through service we become more like the Savior.

After they left, a sweet feeling of peace entered my heart. The things she said are true.

Entry: September 27, 1965

I am so excited! Today I was called to be a visiting teacher. I have three active sisters and one inactive. I will record their names so I can report my progress to myself. I have been so moved by the example of my visiting teachers (I should call them friends) that I want to do just as good a job. Their names are Krista Thomas, Becky Miller, Sue Murphy, and Elizabeth Lowe.

I immediately set up appointments with all except Elizabeth. (She goes by Liz.) She is going to be a hard case. She was not at all receptive. In fact, she said, "What happened to my old visiting teachers? I liked them; they never bothered me." Boy, she is really a tough one! But I won't let this get me down.

I have decided to take this calling seriously and prayerfully. I have written a list of my goals.

I thank my Heavenly Father for this opportunity to grow beyond myself. I shall strive to be worthy of this calling and consider it my duty to:

Â attend all my Sunday meetings, Relief Society events, and visiting teaching meetings.

Â be spiritually worthy and prepared to take the sacrament.

Â set an example of tolerance, kindness, service, clean living, and humility.

Â seek the guidance and companionship of the Lord in this stewardship.

Â strive to develop and exercise my spiritual gifts as a visiting teacher.

Â strive to be honorable.

Â love my companion and love each sister we visit.

Â dress in a manner that shows my respect for the Savior (whose errand I am about) when I make my visits.

Â take no children along for these important visits.

Â never go alone for an official visit.

Â leave my own troubles at home.

Â speak no ill, avoid gossip.

Â be a true friend and sister to those we visit and leave them uplifted, cheered, and eager to have me return.

Â promote faith in Christ and courage in the face of difficulties.

Â be positive in any remarks made about others, especially ward and church leaders.

Â look for opportunities to serve and strive to be inspired and exercise wisdom in rendering that service.

Â prepare, long before I go, to take a special message and something tangible that is significant.

Â pray for my partner before and after our visits, thanking Heavenly Father for this privilege and asking for inspiration.

Â always give that special message, adapted to the needs of the one.

Â remember that I am my sister's keeper; that I am a daughter of God.

Entry: October 8, 1965

Found out I'm pregnant again. Have to get going on number two because I started so late. We are thrilled!

Entry: October 10, 1965

I have done my visiting teaching (at least the first visit; I intend to check up on each sister all month) except for Liz. She keeps making excuses not to see me. I'm not pushing it because I don't want to offend her, but I've got to come up with a way to visit her.

Entry: November 30, 1965

Oh—I am so sick! I guess morning sickness is my test. My sweet, wonderful visiting teachers have saved me again. All I do is send them thank you notes. Besides taking Jennie for a couple of afternoons this month so I could rest, they have brought food to poor, starving Jim whose dear wife can't even walk past the refrigerator, let alone open it. They brought him a birthday cake and even invited us to Thanksgiving dinner.

I feel bad, though, because I haven't lived up to my goal of being a better visiting teacher. I broke down and sobbed to Sister Moore. I told her what a great example she and Sister Lee were and that I wanted to be the same. I feel like a failure; I didn't even call Liz this month. I confided to Sister Moore that I hate the calling, and I really haven't even tried like I should have.

Bless her heart. She put her arm around me and said, "It takes time, dear." First she bore her testimony to me that she knew the Church was true and that visiting teaching was a special program that the Lord, himself, gave us. She said, "Now dear, do you think the Lord said:

" 'Well, I have them sewing their own clothes, making their own jeans, bread, soap, and candles. They spend four hours a month thinking of new ways to use a Clorox bottle or alphabet cereal and learning how to cook on a wood-burning stove. They have quality family nights on both Sunday and Monday, write in their journals daily, spend twenty-six hours a month on genealogy, sixteen on their family organization and eight on their poems and songs for the Eliza R. Snow contest each spring. They write letters to their senators and representatives and to all the elderly they know. They jog every Tuesday, Thursday and Saturday to enlarge their arteries and have aerobics each Monday, Wednesday, and Friday to enlarge their hearts. They produce a quality garden every year and can, preserve, bottle, or dry everything in sight. They do tole painting on their walls. They make their own slipcovers and drapes out of sheets, clip coupons out of the papers for two-and-a-half hours each night and read their scriptures for an hour before falling into bed.

" 'But I do believe that there might somehow be an afternoon or morning that they could manage to have free. So just in case, I'll have something called visiting teaching.' "

At that point I was laughing so hard I felt better all ready. Sister Moore then went on to tell me what she felt the Savior really said about visiting teaching. She asked, "Or do you think that just maybe the Savior said, 'I know these good sisters are so busy doing the other necessary things of life that often they forget to have true fellowship with each other. Some hardly even know other sisters in their wards. Yet the need for personal contact and friendship and love between sisters is great. Too often they forget part of the baptismal covenant that says they promise to bear one another's burdens.

" 'I know that they are busy providing for their families, living and dead. They cannot be all things to all people. But they can provide much happiness and share each other's burdens. I will inspire the Relief Society president to call teams where the companions can teach each other by example and love. I will inspire her to assign routes where I need special help, and as these visiting teachers come to me in prayer, they will draw even closer to me. Through this strengthened bond I will inspire these sisters in ways that they could not experience in other circumstances. Their own paths will be lighted as they light the way for others.

" 'I can remember all things, and I see the sisters of these wards as they were when we were all together in the premortal existence. Some are only waiting for the love and attention and efforts of others to inspire them to find their way back. It will not be easy. My own mission was not easy. But my mission made theirs possible. Now these sisters can show each other the way. The sacrifices they make for each other will not enslave them but will exalt them.' "

She looked me eye to eye and asked if I thought the Savior cared about our visiting teaching duties. She had me there.

I have never, until now, seen this program in this manner.

The Lord is counting on us. He needs us to help him. He knows doing it will be to our advantage. For every 10 percent of work we do, he'll do 90 percent and give us the credit.

Then Sister Lee said, "Now you know you cannot run faster than you have strength. The Lord doesn't expect us to be all things to all people. He just wants us to do our level best. He wants us to learn to love each other. The Lord wants us to look to him for help."

She also reassured me that as I pray for inspiration, I will receive it. And the more I serve and do, the more I will love and be loved. (She's a living example of that.)

I felt inspired. I have determined to put myself aside and concentrate on my sisters, especially Liz. This very night I began to pray earnestly for help and inspiration to be a better visiting teacher and to especially help Liz.

Entry: December 18, 1965

I'm feeling better; the nausea is subsiding. I have sent Liz a note a week for the past three weeks. I called today; she still won't let me in. What can I do? I'm still praying for an answer.

Entry: December 20, 1965

Five days till Christmas. I've fasted two meals in Liz's behalf. Tonight I decided to make some brownies and take them over with a Christmas card. I'll do it tomorrow.

Entry: December 21, 1965

Ruth and I had to go twice to Liz's to find her home. She opened the door and looked stern. I introduced us and said simply, "Here are some brownies. I hope we can make brownie points with you so you'll want us to come back each month." Then my companion gave her a beautiful ornament she had made. Liz did not invite us in, but she did break into a big smile and said, "I love brownies! Thank you, and Merry Christmas!"

I hope this means more success next month.

Entry: January 1, 1966

A new year! As I think of all my challenges and blessings of last year, I see that we need each other. How could I have adjusted so quickly to my new life, home, and roles (and being pregnant again) without Sisters Moore and Lee? I think of them when I need help. I desire so much to serve the Lord the way he wants me to. Over and over on Christmas Day I read his words: "Inasmuch as ye have done it unto one of the least of these my brethren, ye have done it unto me." (Matthew 25:40.)

It seemed he had said them to me before. Today I have lingered over his words, "Feed my sheep."

I realize that my visiting teaching calling is how I will do this right now. Above all, I must lay the groundwork with my sisters as I go along. We can't wait until a crisis comes and then think they'll confide in us. I see Sisters Moore and Lee have done just that. I would automatically call them if I needed help or advice. We are called to establish this type of heartline with the sisters in our stewardship. I feel so sorry for those sisters who are cheated out of loving visiting teachers and say that they are the last people they'd confide in. It usually means their visiting teachers haven't become their friends.

That's my goal for this year—to become Liz's friend and get her back to church. Tuesday, when we go to the temple, I'm putting her name on the prayer roll. I will fast two meals a month for her (with my companion) until she's back with us. That's a promise to the Lord to feed that particular little lamb.

Entry: January 8, 1966

I called Liz for an appointment. The brownies worked! She agreed to see us next week. I know the prayers and fasting have brought us to this point.

Entry: January 13, 1966

You know, Liz is really a neat girl! Look at my calling her "girl," and she's only two years younger than I am. She married a lot sooner than I did, married an inactive man. She's never really been active either. She hasn't been to church in six years. She has a six-year-old boy, a four-year-old girl, and a one-year-old boy. She really didn't respond well to the lesson at all; in fact, she kept interrupting to check on her children at play. Ruth and I decided not to give the lesson again until we think she'll be more open. We could tell she grew cold and stiffened as we tried to share the message. It's best to just gain her trust and friendship and let her know we care.

Entry: February 28, 1966

I have tried repeatedly to make an appointment with Liz. She just won't let us come back. Ruth took her a loaf of bread and wasn't even invited in. Today when I called her and jokingly said, "Hey, Liz, it's the end of the month. If we don't visit you, we won't get our reward," she did not laugh. Boy, did I feel awkward! It was the wrong thing to say. I guess we came on too strong last time. Tonight I sat down and wrote her a note and told her statistics meant nothing to me. She was my sister whether she let me visit or not, and I cared about her. I hope she'll soften her heart. Oh well, back to the prayers—not much fasting now. I'm afraid this pregnancy is getting to me. Six months down and three to go.

Entry: March 8, 1966

Dear Sisters Moore and Lee made their visit early this month so they could celebrate my birthday on March 20 "in style." Big secrets! They are such fun; even though they are grandmothers, they seem like close sisters to me. That has been such a delight to me, having been an only child.

I opened up again about how terrific they were, but I told how discouraging it was not to be received by Liz because I knew I could be the kind of visiting teacher to her that they are to me. Sweet Sister Lee chuckled and said, "Well, honey, you just have to look at this as though it's a creative challenge." Then she reflected on her most challenging assignment as a visiting teacher. She said, "I once was asked to visit a sister who did not even live in the ward. She was married to a young man who had been born and raised in the ward, and when they married they went to work for the circus. They had to leave their permanent records somewhere, so they chose his home ward. I began to write Lynn every month, and even though her routine was hectic, she found time to answer me on occasion. I was excited to have the association with her.

"Then we learned that the couple was expecting their first child, so we began to plan a shower. Most of the sisters in the ward knew the father or at least his parents, but even the ones who didn't wanted to be part of the fun.

"Right after their daughter was born we had an absentee baby shower. Everything was decorated like a circus, with as many stuffed animals as we could borrow. Everyone brought some kind of gift, and after we had admired them all we wrapped the gifts individually and put them into two large packing boxes and mailed them off to Lynn at the circus's winter quarters in Florida. Lynn later said it impressed all her circus colleagues that members of her church would do this.

"Two years later we were living in Midvale, Utah, and the circus came to Salt Lake City. We got a phone call that Sam and Lynn would leave tickets for us at the box office, and we were invited to either come early or stay late, and they would show us around behind the scenes. What a special evening that was for my children! And what a treat for me to get to meet Lynn after all the letters and time that had passed. I felt a real sisterhood with her and a genuine friendship for her husband.

We can never anticipate all the possible opportunities and experiences that a sister may share with us, so we should give each one our all."

I know what Sister Lee was saying: "Sarah, have you given your all?"

In all honesty I now admit that I haven't. I have said that I have, but inside I have really believed that Liz is a hopeless case. "Creative challenge" Sister Lee calls it? All right! Creative I will be! Look out Elizabeth Lowe. You are coming back to church, and you don't even know it!

Entry: March 20, 1966

What a surprise and lovely thirty-fifth birthday this has been! At 10:00 A.M. Jim called from the office and warned me to get my hair done; a special surprise was coming at 11:30. At precisely 11:30 the doorbell rang, and there was Sister Lee. She escorted me and the baby to her car for a "surprise ride." We drove to Sister Moore's, and there I was honored and feted with a birthday luncheon. The guests were all of their sisters that they visit. What a great idea! I discovered that they do this for each sister they visit. Since they have been my visiting teachers there haven't been any birthdays; mine was the first in many months. "Creative." Wasn't that what Sister Lee said? These women practice what they preach. But more importantly, they really love those whom they serve.

The luncheon was simple. Each had contributed something—a salad, rolls, drink, and a light dessert. The gift was simply a handmade card from them with a loving greeting. This short hour together really makes their sisters feel special. I can see how it would do wonders for those shy or inactive sisters or those that they have been trying to reach in a personal way. It's a plan that everyone can enjoy, and a sure way for all to get to know each other better and begin to feel like real sisters. Companions can grow closer together, too.

I am learning a lot and being blessed in the process.

Entry: April 3, 1966

Despite two notes, six phone calls, and one attempt to find Liz home, we didn't get in to see her in March. But her "hard case" act isn't discouraging me. Today a neighbor told me that her daughter is in Liz's daughter's class. Liz's little girl said her mother was starting a garden. This afternoon I bought garden gloves, hand hoe, and a pair of maternity jeans. I arranged for a baby-sitter for Jennie, and tomorrow I visit Liz.

Entry: April 4, 1966

Boy! The look on Liz's face was classic when up her back walk waddled this slightly pregnant pair of jeans with gloved hands and hoe in position! "Hi, Liz. I came to learn how to garden!"

Either out of pity or total bewilderment, she seemed happy to have me there. I have felt it is important to let sisters feel their worth through their own talents and gifts. Being overwhelmed as a new convert by seemingly "perfect" people has made me sensitive to the gap between many sisters, especially the inactive ones. I want Liz to know that she can contribute to my life, too.

For two hours we worked side by side. We got the beans, corn, and squash in. She talked about children, babies, recipes, families, everything but church. But that is okay. As I left for home, hot tired, dirty, and sweaty, Liz grabbed my arm. She didn't say anything for a minute and then just said simply, "Thanks for coming over." I felt a softening for the first time. I am inspired to keep going.

Entry: April 14, 1966

About a week has gone by since gardening. I called my companion and told her that we must keep weekly contact with Liz. Then I called Liz and told her that Jim had brought me two huge green plants from his office. They were remodeling and gave away all the plants. Would she like one? She was thrilled. Jim and I drove over, and he brought it into her living room. It was so big that he had to turn it sideways to get it through the door. She was delighted. She even asked us to share some lemonade. We kept the visit short and sweet. Don't want to "wear her out" before I even begin, like the first visit.

Entry: April 26, 1966

I have been earnestly and sincerely praying for Liz. With only about seven weeks until my baby is born, I don't want to let go of the momentum or inspiration I am beginning to feel in her behalf. After all, if she really is my sister, then as I pray to our Father in Heaven I know that he'll let me know what his "lost" daughter needs. He loves her so much. She's not listening to him right now, so he'll speak to those who will. I wonder how many inactive sisters he is trying to reach through their visiting teachers.

This evening I called her to ask if anything was coming up in the garden yet. She was so responsive. She told me of her success so far and thanked me again for helping. I could feel her warming up to me.

Entry: May 3, 1966

Today I made an extra large pan of that gooey chocolate dessert Jim loves. It was my excuse for an "unofficial" visit to Liz. I called her and said that the recipe made too much (as if I'd never made it before) and asked if she would like half of it. When I delivered it, she stood on the porch and said, "Sarah, you're too much! At first I thought you'd fade away like all my other visiting teachers. But you keep coming back—and nine months pregnant! Sarah, you make me feel good when I'm around you. You make me feel like I'm important to you. But you've got to stop all this giving! It makes me feel guilty." After I started breathing again, I said that there was something she could give me. She could let Ruth and me visit her "officially" each month. She opened those beautiful eyes and said, "If that's all it takes to keep up your spirits, you've got a deal!" And we both laughed.

I know the Lord will help any sincere and determined person.

Entry: May 16, 1966

Ruth and I visited Liz today. We didn't give a lesson; we just visited and looked over the garden. Ruth is moving to another ward, so next month I'll have a new companion. But still, she spied a torn jacket laying on a chair and asked about it. Liz explained that she was giving it away because she couldn't sew. Good old Ruth scooped it up and said she'd mend it and have it back in two days. I know that affected Liz, realizing that Ruth was moving. Ruth is going to be a good visiting teacher to the very end.

Entry: May 23, 1966

I called Liz and told her that I had just been assigned a new companion, Patti Williams, and that we would like to come over for an introduction next week. She said, "I thought this was going to be a once-a-month deal." I answered her quickly, "So this month it will be one and a half." She actually laughed.

Entry: May 29, 1966

I'm not sure which will be more of a challenge. Patti or Liz! Patti isn't very committed to visiting teaching, and it was a struggle to get her to come with me to see Liz today. She showed up in a dirty pair of jeans and kept hinting how this visit was really interrupting her day.

I never thought about the challenge a companion could give you. Earlier this evening I talked it over with Jim, and he said to look upon it as an opportunity to be a good example. He warned me of finding fault. He said if we look for the faults in others, we'll surely find them. He is right. Well, it still won't be easy after such a good companion like Ruth.

Entry: June 12, 1966

Yesterday, June 11, at 2:06 A.M., my beautiful little girl, Joy, came into this world. There are no words to describe my intense feelings of partnership with God in bringing her into the world. As I look at my new daughter and think about my little Jennie at home, I have an overwhelming recollection of former friends. These are my sisters, my friends, from the premortal life.

I am beginning to see this unique and mysterious sisterhood to which all women belong. It is a special sisterhood, an intense and sacred "bonding" that women have among themselves.

I am beginning to see this bonding as part of an endowment. It is a gift, an endowment to women. The world may not understand it, but it is a great gift. Men may not understand it because they don't have it. Some people don't believe that it exists. But I do, and I believe that it is eternal.

Entry: June 14, 1966

I came home from the hospital today and found that Sister Lee and Sister Moore are indeed the world's greatest visiting teachers. Jim has been fed, and there is enough food in the refrigerator to last a week. And that is not to mention the sandwiches wrapped in foil in the freezer, ready for lunches or snacks anytime.

They assured me that they will take turns showing up every day this week to take Jennie for a few hours so I can rest. I know they will. They are not the type to just say, "If there is anything we can do, let us know." I love them for that.

I'll bet there are a lot of sisters in the Church who can honestly say that no one has ever brought their dinner or shared a treat for any reason short of calamity or death. I remember returning to a sister's house, after learning she was ill, with a sherbet mix to soothe her sore throat, and having her say that no one had ever done that for her. This good sister had been the mission Relief Society president and was known for her own goodness and kindness all over the mission. How sad it was that no one had thought to lighten her load or express love to her in this way.

I think back to last year when Jennie was born. It was hectic—the months before she was born and the weeks just after her birth, with a new job for Jim, living in a new town, going to a new ward, and caring for a new baby. I could have used a lift. I look at all the times this year when my two angels have rung the bell with an appetizing salad, a nice dessert, even just a pitcher of punch for dinner.

Just before we moved from our last area to this one, Jim came home and asked me if I had been nice to someone. I looked at him with a smirk and said, "No, never." He said that he had had the transmission worked on that morning, and when he went to pay the owner for the labor, the man said he would not take any pay. He said, "My wife was very ill last winter and your wife, Sarah, came to the door and left some sherbet for her. That was all she could eat for days."

After thinking for awhile, I recalled that very incident, when Maxine had been ill. Her little girl had told us about her being sick. I just mixed up the sherbet and took it back that afternoon and forgot about it.

Later, when we were moving and the truck and car were all loaded up with the last of our belongings, Maxine's husband came over and caught my husband in the yard. He gave him a pretty glass vase with a nice pink bow filled with pink flowers. There was a card in it. She thanked me for being nice to her and wished me well in our new home. Than she wrote: "You are the most sincere person I have ever known."

Well, I know that I am probably not the most sincere person she has ever known. But what matters is that maybe she feels that I am sincere. How easy it would have been that cold wintry day to just say to the little girl, "You tell your mother that if there is anything we can do for her, she should just let us know."

Entry: June 18, 1966

Today I called my companion and tried to set up a date to visit our sisters. She said she thought we'd be taking the month off because of the baby. I told her absolutely not! She gave a dozen more excuses, and I told her I'd call, make the appointments, and get back to her.

I think this expectation of "time off" for "legitimate" excuses is just a belief that mediocrity is acceptable behavior.

I have heard some presidents stand and say, "We certainly do appreciate all you sisters are doing. We had 67 percent visited last month, and while we didn't see everyone we know you are doing your best."

These presidents ought to help their sisters realize that they are failing themselves, failing the sisters they are neglecting, and failing the Savior who has called them to feed his sheep. We should all be reminded again of the parable of the lost sheep, of the shepherd who left the ninety and nine and went to look for the one. The Lord is not willing that one of his sheep go unattended. The Lord will bless us for whatever sacrifice it takes to reach that one sister.

I have heard leaders stand up at the first of December and say, "Sisters, I know that this month is going to be hectic and really hard for you to get out, with the holidays and all this bad weather we are having. I know you all have other things to do, and I understand that, so just do the best you can." But at the Christmas season, when we remember the mission of the Savior who came to this earth to live and die to provide the Atonement, the perfect example of sacrifice and love, how can we say we don't have time to be about our Father's business because we have last-minute shopping to do?

Those same leaders say in June, "I know that canning season is coming on now, and with the children out of school, and trying to organize family outings and other summer activities, it will be very hard for you sisters to get out. But just do the best you can." In other words, if you sisters don't ever have anything else to do, anywhere else to spend your money than for gas, or nothing else scheduled and a day to spare, maybe you would like to visit one of your sisters.

Maybe the church that does not require everything from us cannot guarantee us anything. Sacrifice is how we prove ourselves. If we only serve when we have nothing else to do, what are we proving? And do we prove nearly so much on a nice spring day as we do when we have driven the forty-two miles in the cold winter snows?

It is rarely just simply a matter of going or not going. This program has so many facets that we probably will never comprehend them all in this life. But there will be another time and place to review it all.

Entry: June 27, 1966

We visited Liz today. She was the hardest to reach all month. We learned she's been gone for three weeks. I have a feeling there are marital problems. She couldn't believe that I just had the baby, and there I was visiting teaching already.

Patti showed up in Levis again. I didn't have to say anything; she brought it up. She asked why I always wore a dress. I told her a story about a sister who continued to serve as a visiting teacher supervisor when she was ill and homebound. Her Relief Society president reported that, with much effort, this sister put on one of her prettiest dresses before doing the telephoning each month, feeling that this act gave her service importance and dignity as she filled her assignment for the Lord.

I asked Patti if it really mattered that this sister always wore one of her prettiest dresses. After all, she was only going to be talking on the phone. Who would see her? This simple act helped her feel special about her work in fulfilling her calling.

This sister put her dress on with much difficulty because of her illness. Perhaps it is a lot of trouble for us, too. But we may be sure that any appropriate and inspired sacrifice, no matter how large or small, will be noted and rewarded accordingly. Such opportunities to sacrifice come in disguise most of the time. I think that we must watch for them and sacrifice each month. It's great to know you can be counted on. You like yourself more when you are dependable and not just known for the quality of your excuses.

I also told her that I believe that what we wear when visiting teaching does make a difference. Why don't the General Authorities show up in different suit combinations occasionally if it really doesn't matter? Why do they wear dark suits and white shirts? Why must the missionaries wear the same dress? We are called to be a peculiar people (that is, particular, special, or different). We are set apart from the world—by choice—in what we eat and drink, where we go, and what we will or will not do. What better way to let the world know that we are special than to dress in a special manner. When we are engaged in our visiting teaching capacities, we are literally about our Father's work. Like missionaries who are about their Father's work, perhaps we should dress accordingly. We are special, particular, and we should bother to be at our best when we are going out about our Father's business.

I also shared with her that it is an accepted fact that our clothing affects our behavior, and behavior, in turn, can affect our actions. If we look like a frump (and feel that way), we will probably not produce as much good as when we look and feel more special. A fur coat and glass slippers are not necessary, but we can all look fresh and attractive, ready to talk about the spiritual message we have prepared.

I truly misjudged Patti. This young sister said simply, "I didn't know that. No one ever explained it to me like that before."

Entry: July 3, 1966

Surprise! Tonight Liz brought me a bag of tomatoes from her garden and a pair of pink booties for Joy. I struggled to hold back the tears. I didn't want to embarrass her or anything, but I was so thrilled with this gesture of friendship.

I swallowed hard but could not resist hugging her as she was leaving. Neither of us said a word, but I know Liz was reaching out and giving of herself to me. It is a unique and mysterious sisterhood to which we belong. Women have the ability, mind, and heart to literally pour out love to each other. But because of our own fears and inadequacies we sometimes hold back that special endowment, the one thing that will help conquer those fears and inadequacies. It is God's principle that when you build and raise others, you build and raise yourself. Tonight, I felt love grow.

Entry: July 13, 1966

Patti and I visited Liz today. Patti wore a clean, fresh dress. She radiated. She let her barriers down and was of a positive mind today instead of negative. And I came determined today to stop judging her and, even if she wore dirty Levis again, to love her. Meeting each other "spiritually" and spiritually being prepared made all the difference in our visit with Liz. Even though she made it clear that she didn't want the message, she was warm and open. As we were leaving, I saw several boxes of peaches in the kitchen. She said she was going to bottle them tomorrow.

Entry: July 14, 1966

This is the true gospel in action. Last night I called my visiting teachers to ask if they could take my children today so I could work as a visiting teacher with my inactive sister. They agreed. I never have asked them to babysit before. They've always sensed my needs and just done it. I have never wanted to abuse their kindness and selflessness. Visiting teachers are not to be our on-call baby-sitters. But this was an emergency, and they agreed.

I showed up at Liz's about 9:00 A.M., and she was already deep in peaches. She readily welcomed me and put me right to work. At noon we enjoyed the lunch she made and then we bottled all afternoon. We talked and laughed and shared our lives. It was great fun, but more than that, she is beginning to trust me. She more than hinted at marital problems. I simply listened. Often a listening ear is all someone needs. Once I asked Sister Moore what she thought a good visiting teacher was, and she said, "A good listener." That's true! We all have the tendency to talk about ourselves. Visiting teaching is one place we should listen. Maybe being a good listener is my gift.

Entry: July 21, 1966

I called Liz today and could tell she was crying. I didn't pry. I opened my pantry and did a "Sister Moore." I made a simple dessert and dashed it over. She invited me in and, after making idle chatter, let a tear creep down her cheek. She told me that she and her husband were contemplating divorce. I leaned on Sister Moore's definition of a good visiting teacher and just listened. When I left, about an hour later, Liz seemed relieved. She took my hand and said, "I really needed someone to just listen. Thank you, friend."

I cried all the way home. I am beginning to really love her.

Entry: August 3, 1966

Liz and I have been talking on the phone nearly every day since she opened up to me about her marriage. Thursday I was able to suggest that she see the bishop for counsel. I even was prompted to suggest a priesthood blessing. I told her I'd call her home teachers and that even Jim would come over. She seemed to be afraid. I don't think she's afraid of the brethren; she's just uncomfortable because she's been inactive. She hasn't really had any contact with the Church since her teenage years. She asked me to explain the priesthood and blessings again. She was embarrassed. I assured her that it was okay not to understand. I assured her that the Lord loved her as much as he loved the prophet. She looked puzzled.

Then I said the dumbest thing! It just popped out of my mouth. I told her that I felt we'd been friends before, and that we were here to help each other. I felt the Spirit as I said it, but it still seemed so dumb somehow. It only made Liz more dubious. She said, "How could I ever help you!"

I could see I was losing ground and ended the conversation. But we've talked every day, and she is thinking about seeing the bishop.

Entry: August 8, 1966

Patti and I finished our visiting teaching today—early—because Jim and I are going on vacation for three weeks. It will be wonderful!

Patti gave a great message. Two weeks ago she called and asked how I prepare my messages. I told her the message we take to our sisters in an important part of the visit. We need to ponder it and prepare ideas to make it special for each sister.

I told her about all the visiting teachers I've had. When I looked forward to the lesson, and they never gave it, somehow I felt cheated. She said she hated it when the visiting teacher just read the message. It was great to feel her sweet spirit, her desire to excel. It made me want to try harder because she was looking to me as an example, as I look to my visiting teachers as examples. It is true, we inspire one another.

Today it was obvious she had prepared. The message was on doing new things to broaden your talents and skills. She took the labels off some applesauce cans and glued yarn in the shape of a large yarn U on each of them. Then, at the conclusion of the message, she told the sister that this was a U can, and that if she would use the idea, it would help her remember that whatever you want to do, "You Can!"

The Spirit radiated as she spoke, and I could tell that she had spent much time in preparation. It was the kind of moment when you hold your breath to absorb as much of the sweetness as you can.

We decided that it would be a great idea to make a special handout each month. She just beamed with self-esteem as she realized that this golden idea had been all hers. We also agreed we should take turns giving the message at every other house every month. Because giving the message will benefit us as much as our sisters, we will grow from preparing and giving it. And it is interesting to see how different it is each time we present the message as the Spirit guides us.

We also agreed that we should not hesitate to bear our testimony to things we have had experience with and know to be true. We don't have to go to the front of the room, clear our throats and be official about it. Just say, "Yes, I know that Heavenly Father does answer our prayers, and I know that the more we pray the easier it gets, and the more we can learn to recognize the answers that come."

Well, even with all this great effort on Patti's part, we still didn't give Liz a lesson. Even with all my "extra mile" effort to befriend her and help her through her storms, she bristled when we drew near to the message.

I am so discouraged at this point! What more does it require? There are others who need me more who would be more receptive. This is really discouraging.

I need this vacation!

Entry: September 6, 1966

It was great to get away. I feel like a new woman. But I found out that going on vacation in the body doesn't mean we go on vacation with the Spirit. I couldn't get Liz off my mind. I wrote her a postcard each week.

Yesterday was too hectic, trying to unpack, wash clothes, etc. But today I phoned to check on her. She was excited to tell me that she and her husband had been to a marriage counselor. He wouldn't go see the bishop but agreed to a counselor. They've been four times already, and she said things are looking up. At least they've agreed that they love each other enough to save the marriage. She paid me a great compliment and said she owed this to me. I was touched deeply. But when I hung up I thought, "Sarah, if you're so great, why can't you give her the message each month?"

Boy was I a dreamer, thinking I could reactivate her!

Entry: September 21, 1966

Today at Liz's house during our "official" visit I really turned to the Lord and silently asked his help. Then I mustered all my courage and told Liz that this was the anniversary of our first meeting. It has been one year since I was called to be her visiting teacher. She said she couldn't believe how time flies. Then I said, "Liz, how long do you think it should take to prepare a visiting teaching lesson?" She said that since she'd never done one, she didn't know but guessed it might take a few hours. I looked her eye to eye and said, "Liz, I've been preparing one year to give you a lesson. Do you think that's enough time, or should I give it more effort?"

There was dead silence.

I thought I'd blown it, and I knew Patti was about to faint right on the spot. Then Liz slowly started to talk. She said she knew that she'd been a "hard case." She told us how afraid she was to let go of her feelings because she was afraid of trying to get her life in order. She was afraid to hear spiritual things because she might realize how far off course she was. And then she admitted that if she realized that, she'd be overwhelmed at the prospect of ever getting back on course.

I looked over at Patti, she was fighting tears. So was I. I told Liz that that's what visiting teachers were all about. The Church is for all of us sinners hoping to become Saints. We are here to help one another become more Christlike. We talked a long time.

She then said, "Okay, if I let you give me the lessons, you aren't going to try to reform me overnight, are you?"

We all laughed. Whew! It broke the ice. I told her that it was never our intention to reform her. We love her like she is. Then Patti told her that we have found that the gospel messages make us happier and that sharing them helps make others happier, too.

She accepted that.

Tonight I feel like I have just started climbing Mt. Everest.
