Johanna Flynn, Anita R. Canfield, Visiting Teaching: A Call to Serve ( 1989)

The Blessing

Journal: Elizabeth Lowe

Entry: March 2, 1984

There is so much in my heart tonight that I cannot keep the tears from flowing freely.

My visiting teachers, Anne and Vicki, just left after helping me with the dishes. They told me that it was the most beautiful missionary farewell they had ever been to. I know that John is my son, but that's how I felt, too. Almost every member of our ward came to the open house tonight, and the comments were unbelievable.

"The Spirit was so strong."

"John bore a powerful testimony."

"You and Brother Lowe are great examples to all of us."

"Your son truly is representative of a son of God."

"This was the first sacrament meeting my teenage son listened to in six months."

And those are only a few of the comments. I know they meant it; many eyes were glistening. The spirit was so strong!

Tomorrow we leave to drive John to the MTC in Provo, Utah. I will miss my handsome son, my last baby. But I know that he has been called to Spain by the Lord to do his work. John's enthusiasm for life and the gospel will make him a great missionary. Spain will never be the same again!

It seems like only yesterday that Eric left on his mission, my firstborn and first to leave home. I shall treasure the letters from those wonderful people in England that he baptized. When the first letter came, I realized how mighty one testimony truly is. I realized for the first time how powerful the force of love is.

The testimony and love of Sarah. Oh, Sarah, how I wish you were here to see all this and realize the great influence you have been in this world. But I can only hope that across the veil you have been permitted to see the force for good that you were in this life. Tonight's compliments belonged to my dear and beloved friend, Sarah.

It was Sarah who was not afraid to reach out to a rebellious and bewildered sister who was afraid to search her own soul. It was Sarah who knew how to simply listen to another's anguish and then reassure with love and confidence. It was Sarah who was not afraid to bear her testimony of the living God who can work miracles—and is eager to. It was Sarah who loved me back into the gospel, back into the arms of the Savior. It was Sarah who helped me see that once in his arms, he would love me back into the presence of my Heavenly Parents. I love her for that. I miss my old friend.

I'll never forget the Saturday in September she called and said, "Well, it took me one year before I could give you the visiting teaching lessons, now it's taken me another year to get you to come to church. I'll be by to pick you up at 9:15 on Sunday." She then hung up, and I knew I was coming back. I knew Sarah wouldn't let me go. I knew she thought I was worth saving.

I shall also never forget those struggles of that first year of activity. Small things got me down. I felt so unworthy of all the others sisters. Frank wouldn't have anything to do with the Church, either. And sometimes I felt like hiding rather than going to church alone with the kids. Sarah sensed my needs. I remember how embarrassed I was when she mentioned in one of her visits that she was making cookie trains for Christmas and would be happy to show me how. I didn't want to hurt her feelings, but I wasn't about to be pushed into another corner of failure. I had sat on the dunce stool too many times already from too many of those cute little homemaking projects that they swore "anyone can do because they are so simple." And my files bulged with copies of everyone's bread recipes that would never fail. I sure proved them wrong.

But Sarah persisted. I tried hard but never could get annoyed with her because she was so nice. She would call every other day and say, "What are doing today? Wouldn't you like me to come over and make you a cookie train?" or "Why don't you get the supplies and let me show you how to make the first one! I have two whole hours today reserved just for you." Well, she really did have me over a barrel, because I knew her schedule was very busy. Yet with everything that she was involved in, Sarah was constantly willing to set aside time to help me. Didn't her sweet attitude obligate me?

One day I did finally agree to let her make me a cookie train while I watched. She was a great teacher, full of patience, careful to tell me little hints as she went along, and she was careful not to force me to try it. She may have been a little discouraged when she left because I had been adamant in saying that I, who might as well have feet where my hands should be, would never be able to hold an icing bag and get it to do all the cute little things that she did.

Ah, but after Sarah left, I looked at all those leftover cookies and the pot of royal icing, and I could not resist just trying one lousy little cookie train. I worked feverishly into the night, stopping only to race to the all-night grocery and buy more and more cookies. And eventually, guess what? I made thirteen cookie trains to give away that Christmas!

Not only did that rekindle some confidence in myself and lift my spirits, but I actually became an expert at something for the rest of my life.

I'm so glad Sarah stuck with me. We used to laugh about her early visits—all the times I left the TV on while she tried to talk, the appointments I never kept, taking the phone off the hook the day she was to call, and on and on.

Frank was so hostile to her in those months of my reactivation. I guess he thought he was "losing" me. After all, we had just patched up a very bruised marriage. He was downright rude to her. I remember when I was sick once and she came to the door with dinner. She told me later that she had stood on the front porch and prayed five full minutes before ringing the bell. Then Frank opened the door and roared, "What is this? You don't have to bring us charity. We're not a welfare case!"

She came right back at him: "Oh, Brother Lowe, you know I know that it isn't necessary. I'm just here because I love Liz, and I thought this might be one way I could show it. Even if you just take it in and put it straight into the garbage, I had to bring it. I know how I feel when I'm sick. I'm just showing my love for your family."

And, of course, it was Sarah who was there when we lost our precious little Lisa. It seemed like only moments after the accident that Sarah was there, but I know several hours must have passed. She was there with words of love and comfort. I felt all the strength go out of her and come into me. Both she and Jim never left Frank and me wondering where to turn next. They took the boys while we went to the funeral home. They ran all the errands in preparation for the funeral. She even got Frank's suit pressed and arranged for all the food.

Somehow, in those dark hours we knew that Jim and Sarah were there for us, as near as the phone, and that we could count on them.

A few weeks after the funeral, Jim and Sarah came over with a beautiful painting of Lisa, dressed in white running toward us. Most people would have been afraid to give such a gift, but not these inspired people. They had had a friend paint it from Lisa's school picture.

As they presented it to us, Sarah said, "It's called 'Resurrection Morning,' and we are here to tell you how this scene can really happen." It was the turning point in Frank's life. He listened with a sincere and softened heart. The Spirit was there in full force. We felt it bear witness that what was said was true. That night, for the first time ever, Frank and I knelt in prayer together. With hands clasped, we promised the Lord we would be a "forever family." One year later it was Sarah who knelt as proxy for Lisa as we were sealed for all eternity in the temple of the Lord.

The night Sarah died, Frank held me and told me that he felt sure that our little Lisa had met her on the other side and personally thanked Sarah for all she had done for our family. I wept all that night, not for sorrow, even though I would miss her, but because Sarah had helped make it possible that we would be with our little Lisa again.

Who will ever forget the impact she had on our ward when she was called to be the Relief Society president? When we had our first women's conference in September 1978, one of the speakers made the statement that President Kimball wasn't just our prophet, but was the prophet of all women on this earth. This statement went right to her heart. She couldn't forget the idea that she was the Relief Society president for all the ladies living within her ward boundaries. She discussed this with the bishop, counselors, and the sisters of her ward, and they all agreed to canvas the ward boundaries and ask all non-LDS women living there if they would like to have visiting teachers. They explained exactly what the function of a visiting teacher was and suggested that if it were agreeable, a pair would call on them once a month. All but two women expressed interest in having such a visit. Sarah said she felt those two had the right to refuse the invitation and that the angels would so record it so that she would no longer be held accountable for not tending to their needs.

But she was excited to see that every other sister was agreeable, and each visiting teaching team in her ward now had the opportunity to truly lengthen their own strides as they took on more sisters and expanded their routes to much heavier loads. As with anything in the gospel, the harder they worked, the greater were the blessings they earned.

The nonmembers began to turn to their visiting teaching sisters, just as is supposed to happen when the program is working. There were many examples of their success. One woman called and said that her mother was ready to fly back East after being with her and her new baby for a time. They had appreciated the meal that had been brought in by the visiting teachers, and the mother had enjoyed visiting with the sisters, too. Now the reservation for her flight was made, but it was at an hour when the husband could not take her to the airport. Could their visiting teachers help out? What a marvelous victory for these two sisters, to know that they had been faithful enough that this lady felt free to turn to them when she needed them.

And what a marvelous tribute to Sarah. She lived what she used to teach us:

Not what we give, but what we share, For the gift without the giver is bare. Who gives of himself with alms feeds three: Himself, his hungering neighbor, and me. (James Russell Lowe, "Vision of Sir Launfall.")

During the short two years she was president, no sister who was ill went without care, no new mothers went without meals, no one moved in or out of the ward without help. She didn't chastise us, she loved us into serving. She encouraged us to do everything with love and excellence. She inspired us with ideas to be great visiting teachers, simple Christlike ideas such as tending children, sending notes, paying attention to other's accomplishments, being tactful, bearing testimonies, remembering birthdays and holidays, being positive, always visiting, preparing good lessons, being there in sickness or disaster, and bringing food—always bringing food! And not just food but beautiful food. After all, Sarah believed that every act of service was for the Lord. She wondered if sisters thought that what food looks like didn't matter. She told us to watch at the next potluck dinner and see which bowls empty the fastest.

She would say, "They will always be the ones where the parsley is outlining the potato salad, and there is a big daisy in the middle made out of long slices of a hard-boiled egg. At Christmas, the platter of date-nut bread won't go first unless it is decorated with artificial holly. Instead, it will be the iced cookies or iced gingerbread men. People will take those iced gingerbread men even when they don't like gingerbread, just because of the eye appeal. At summer picnics the first bowl emptied won't be the beans baked in one of those old glass bowls that looks like it crossed the plains in 1847 and has been used over open fires."

Sarah always taught us to never say, "If you need anything, please call," but to ask ourselves, "What would the Savior have me do here?" Sarah taught that "charity never faileth."

Sarah was an ordinary woman who struggled to overcome her weaknesses and inadequacies like each of us. But she truly believed that the Lord had called her to serve her brothers and sisters. She always quoted: "And behold, I tell you these things that ye may learn wisdom; that ye may learn that when ye are in the service of your fellow beings ye are only in the service of your God." (Mosiah 2:17.)

Well, I have rambled on, and it is late into the night, but I want my sons and their children and all my posterity to know that this great woman influenced my life, so that instead of becoming a mother of generations of apostates, I am now becoming a mother of generations of faithful Latter-day Saints. I want my posterity to know that this special day—John's missionary farewell—was possible because of a devoted, dedicated and loving visiting teacher.

I want my posterity to know that Eric's mission and his temple marriage were also possible because of this woman's testimony in my life. There are members in England (and soon Spain) whose children and their children and on and on will come to the Lord Jesus Christ because of Sarah. And the ripple effect goes even beyond the veil. Frank and I are doing our genealogy and seeing work done for our kindred dead. So it is true—one person does make a difference.

Often I have longed for her friendship and counsel. Ours was a perfect blending of friendship and personality. She was strong where I was weak, and maybe I was strong where she wasn't. Now that I am Relief Society president, I feel the burden heavy on my back for all the "sheep" of this, His fold.

Sarah, thank you for teaching me that perhaps no calling requires better judgment, keener insight, more prayerful preparation, deeper sincerity or more love than that of a visiting teacher.

I wish she could have been here today to share these moments with us. If she had been, I know she'd be busy making sure our needs were met. I believe that she is sharing it in another way. Wherever Sarah is, I know she's serving still. She is truly becoming like the Master.

She's been gone five years now, and I miss her so much. But when she died, when the illness that she had never spoken of, had never burdened others with, finally overcame her, she sent a message to me. Jim told me that she said, "Tell Liz I'll put in a request to live on the same block with her in the celestial kingdom."

I look forward to that reunion. She believed I could make it!

I tremble to think what might have happened if she'd given up on me.

I have only one regret—I never told Sarah something that always seemed so right. I feel like I have known her always . . .
