Johanna Flynn, Anita R. Canfield, Visiting Teaching: A Call to Serve ( 1989)

Points to Ponder

True or False 1. Being a visiting teacher is an opportunity for me to grow and sacrifice, and I welcome the challenge.

True or False 2. Visiting teaching should be assigned to sisters who don't have anything else to do.

True or False 3. I would never be ashamed for the Savior to see how I look when I am on my way visiting teaching.

True or False 4. If I have been to a sister's home and she is not there or won't let us in, I feel like I have done my part; I did make an honest effort.

True or False 5. I have prayed for those in my district, apart from those prayers offered with my partner before we go out.

True or False 6. I have fasted for those I visit.

True or False 7. I do not think it is absolutely necessary to always give the official message.

True or False 8. If the sister we visit has already been out visiting teaching herself that month, we usually do not give the message.

True or False 9. I have never volunteered to take the children of one of my sisters.

True or False 10. I have never taken dinner to any of my sisters unless it was assigned by the Relief Society president.

True or False 11. My partner and I do not make a practice of taking something to each sister every single time we do our visiting teaching.

True or False 12. I don't think it matters, so if my partner and I cannot make connections, it is perfectly fine to go alone.

True or False 13. I do not see that attending my other meetings on Sunday has any connection with my being a visiting teacher.

True or False 14. I have never left a note for a sister just to say we had been there to visit and were sorry to have missed her.

True or False 15. I have no other contact with my sisters except when I visit them. My companion and I have never had lunch with them or done anything socially.

True or False 16. I have never borne my testimony to the sisters I visit.

True or False 17. I go into each home every month looking for a chance to serve.

True or False 18. I do not have the money to be the kind of visiting teacher I would like to be. I just can't afford the casseroles, etc.

True or False 19. I have never written any of my sisters or any member of her family.

True or False 20. I honestly don't think visiting teaching is necessary. I think some other program could be more effective and could make use of our time more wisely.

True or False 21. If the sister and I have nothing in common and she is inactive, I don't think I should have to bother her every month. It is a waste of time for us both and is also embarrassing.

True or False 22. Most of the time I think the Relief Society president isn't fair, or just isn't thinking, when she assigns the districts and decides who will be companions.

True or False 23. I don't believe that my little visits every month will really change anybody's life.

True or False 24. I do believe that our visits are spiritual, our example is good, we are sincere, and we are consistent—so it is possible that these sisters will want to improve themselves, too.

True or False 25. I am willing to be judged today on the quality of my visiting teaching.

True or False 26. I am really committed to the visiting teaching program.

True or False 27. I really believe that the visiting teaching program is inspired. 1989
