Hyrum L. Andrus, Anticipations of the Civil War in Mormon Thought ( 1966)

A Voice of Warning

The real issue of mobocracy extended beyond the immediate experience of the Latter-day Saints and centered in the question of national peace versus civil war. When hundreds of Mormons were driven from their lands in Jackson County, Missouri, the Saints wrote, "Whenever that fatal hour shall arrive that the poorest citizen's person, property or rights and privileges, shall be trampled upon by a lawless mob with impunity, that moment a dagger is plunged into the heart of the Constitution, and the union must tremble." [^1] The Mormon Prophet clearly stated the alternatives in 1836 when he declared, "If the wicked mob who destroyed Charleston Convent, and the cool, calculating religious lookers on, who inspired their hearts with deeds of infamy, do not arise, and redress the wrong, and restore the injured four-fold, they in turn, will receive of the measure they meted out till the just indignation of a righteous God is satisfied." [^2] Other Mormon authorities also pointed to the real issues at stake. W. W. Phelps observed the prevailing sentiment and exclaimed that there was little wonder that lynch law and mobocracy were "breaking the tender thread of law, and bursting the strong bands of society, to spread anarchy, confusion, destruction and death." [^3] In reporting a Fourth of July oration in 1836, George A. Smith said, "I portrayed strongly the danger our national government was in of dissolution in consequence of the great increase of mob violence throughout the country, and a total disregard on the part of officers of their solemn oaths, when sworn to support the Constitution and protect the people." [^4] And on the same theme the Prophet wrote to James Arlington Bennett, of Arlington House, New York:

... if men are such fools as to let once the precedent be established, and through their prejudice give assent to such abomination, then let the oppressor's hand lay heavily throughout the world...until they may know that the Almighty takes cognizance of such things....

And where, sir, will be your safety or the safety of your children, if my children can be led to the slaughter with impunity by the hand of murderous rebels?... Ought not, then, this oppression, sir, to be checked in the bud, and to be looked down [upon] with just indignation by an enlightened world, before the flame becomes unextinguishable, and the fire devours the stubble? [^5]

After the Mormons were driven from Jackson County, Missouri, Joseph Smith petitioned Governor Daniel Dunklin for redress. With the petition he sent a copy of a revelation that referred to anticipated consequences, should justice fail to be administered. Like documents were sent to the President of the United States, explained the Prophet, that the nation's leaders might "read their destiny if they do not lend a helping hand." [^6] The revelation admonished the Saints to appeal at the feet of the judge, of the governor, and, if necessary, of the President, concluding: "And if the president heed them not, then will the Lord arise and come forth out of his hiding place, and in his fury vex the nation." [^7]

Here was the policy upon which the Saints thereafter acted. From his dungeon cell in Liberty Jail, in Missouri, the Prophet later instructed them to gather the evidence concerning the abuses and losses they had suffered, that they might "present the whole concatenation of diabolical rascality, and nefarious and murderous impositions that have been practiced upon this people" to the nation and its leaders, as a duty enjoined upon them by God before they could "fully and completely claim that promise which shall call Him forth from His hiding place, and also that the whole nation may be left without excuse." [^8] The biblical example of Haman and Mordecai was applicable to their case. When Haman plotted against Mordecai and the Jews, the tables were turned and Haman was hanged upon his own gallows. "So shall it come to pass with poor Haman in the last days," the Prophet wrote. "Those who have thus vilely treated us, like Haman, shall be hanged upon their own gallows; or, in other words, shall fall into their own gin, and snare, and ditch, and trap, which they have prepared for us." [^9]

With specific reference to Missouri's lot in the coming judgments, Joseph Smith declared, "She shall drink out of the same cup, the same bitter dregs we have drunk, poured out, out, out! and that by the hand of an enemy—a race meaner than themselves." From whence these troubles would come he could not say. They would not come from the Negroes or the Indians, he asserted, "but as sure as God ever spoke by me that shall come to pass." An associate who heard the prophecy accredited its fulfillment to "the Bush-whackers or Guerrillas under Quantrill—a generation of vipers raised up mostly after that prophecy was uttered." [^10]

In a way the Mormons were caught in a dilemma. Their repeated petitions to state and federal authorities failed, due largely to widespread prejudice in Missouri and because the federal government was popularly considered by those who held the States' rights doctrine to be one of limited and specific powers. When the Saints wrote of their plight to the aspirants to the Presidency of the United States, in the campaign of 1844, not one would commit himself to uphold justice on its own merits. But if justice was not upheld, the nation would "drink a drink offering, the bitterest dreg," the Prophet commented. He then added, "The States' rights doctrines are what feed mobs. They are a dead carcass—a stink, and they shall ascend up as a stink offering in the nose of the Almighty." [^11]

To John C. Calhoun, the Mormon leader directed a master treatise on the " 'specific' and not very 'limited powers' " of the federal government. "The powers not delegated to the United States and the States belong to the people," he argued, "and Congress sent to do the people's business have all power." Again,

Congress has power to protect the nation against foreign invasion and internal broil; and whenever that body passes an act to maintain right with any power, or to restore right to any portion of her citizens, it is the supreme law of the land; and should a state refuse submission, that state is guilty of insurrection or rebellion, and the President has as much power to repel it as Washington had to march against the "whiskey boys at Pittsburgh [the Whiskey Rebellion]," or General Jackson had to send an armed force to suppress the rebellion of South Carolina. [^12]

In citing these and other powers reserved by the Constitution to the federal government, [^13] Joseph Smith, as Seitz later observed, "laid down a dictum upon which Abraham Lincoln had to rest his cause sixteen years later." [^14] Finally, the Mormon Prophet confronted Calhoun with the real issue, declaring:

...if the Latter-day Saints are not restored to all their rights and paid for all their losses, according to the known rules of justice and judgment, reciprocation and common honesty among men,... God will come out of His hiding place, and vex this nation with a sore vexation: yea, the consuming wrath of an offended God shall smoke through the nation with as much distress and woe as independence has blazed through with pleasure and delight. Where is the strength of Government? Where is the patriotism of a Washington, a Warren, and Adams? And where is a spark from the watch-fire of '76, by which one candle might be lit that would glimmer upon the confines of Democracy? [^15]

While the 1844 Presidential campaign got underway on a negative note for the Saints, the Mormon position in Illinois was disintegrating rapidly under the mounting influence of mobocracy. But if Missouri could be brought to justice, their enemies in Illinois would be checked in their abuse of the Saints. An awareness of these facts prompted the Prophet himself to become a candidate for the Presidency of the United States. "We will whip the mob by getting up a candidate for President," he explained. [^16] In that way they could center national attention upon their cause.

The Prophet's campaign was a necessary action—a matter of self-preservation. But the Mormons also held that the campaign afforded them the best means available to warn the nation of the danger of civil war. "We are satisfied," Willard Richards wrote to James Arlington Bennett in behalf of the Prophet, "that this is the best or only method of saving our free institutions from a total overthrow." [^17] In his "Views on the Powers and Policy of the Government of the United States," where he presented his views to the people, Joseph Smith wrote, "No honest man can doubt for a moment but the glory of American liberty is on the wane, and that calamity and confusion will sooner or later destroy the peace of the people." [^18] He then set forth his proposals for checking corruption and disorder in society, solving the slave question, and putting the nation on a sound financial basis. "What other voice in all the madness was so sane?" Seitz queried, as he looked over the Prophet's proposals. [^19]

The issue of mobocracy predominated in Joseph Smith's brief campaign. His associates were instructed to advocate "purity of elections, and [to] call upon the people to stand by the law and put down mobocracy." [^20] Said one who advocated the Prophet's cause, "He stated that if the people would elect him President it would be the salvation of the nation, but if otherwise, the Union would soon be severed." [^21] A convention acting in Joseph Smith's political interest passed the following resolutions:

Resolved, that as union is power, the permanency and continuance of our political institutions depend upon the correction of the abuses [existing within the nation].

Resolved, that as all political parties of the present day have degraded themselves by adhering more or less to corrupt principles and practices, by fomenting discord and division among the people, being swallowed in the vortex of party spirit and sectional prejudices, until they have become insensible to the welfare of the people and the general good of the country; and knowing that there are good men among all parties, in whose bosoms burn the fire of pure patriotism, we invite them, by the love of liberty, by the sacred honor of freemen, by the patriotism of the illustrious fathers of our freedom, by the glorious love of country, and by the holy principles of '76, to come over and help us to reform the Government. [^22]

Joseph Smith's campaign for the Presidency came to an abrupt end by the forces of violence he sought to check. Two days before his untimely death he again raised his voice in warning of future strife. Several officers of the troops in Carthage, Illinois, were visiting him when he inquired if there was anything in his appearance to indicate that he was the desperate character he was represented to be. "No, sir," they replied, "your appearance would indicate the very contrary, General Smith; but we cannot see what is in your heart, neither can we tell what are your intentions." To this their prisoner replied:

"Very true, gentlemen, you cannot see what is in my heart, and you are therefore unable to judge me or my intentions; but I can see what is in your hearts, and will tell you what I see. I can see that you thirst for blood, and... inasmuch as you and the people thirst for blood, I prophesy, in the name of the Lord, that you shall witness scenes of blood and sorrow to your entire satisfaction. Your souls shall be perfectly satiated with blood, and many of you who are now present shall have an opportunity to face the cannon's mouth from sources you think not of; and those people that desire this great evil upon me and my brethren, shall be filled with regret and sorrow because of the scenes of desolation and distress that await them. They shall seek for peace, and shall not be able to find it. Gentlemen, you will find what I have told you to be true." [^23]

Footnotes

[All footnotes referring to the Book of Mormon, Doctrine and Covenants and Pearl of Great Price relate to the original editions.]

When the Mormons were driven from Missouri, Joseph Smith went to Washington to seek redress, but to no avail. Upon returning in the spring of 1840, he summed the matter up: "Since Congress has decided against us, the Lord has begun to vex the nation, and he will continue to do so, except they repent; for they now stand guilty of murder, robbery, and plunder, as a nation, because they have refused to protect their citizens and to execute justice according to their own Constitution."-The Historical Record, Salt Lake City, VII (January, 1888), 477.

When a client offered General Alexander W. Doniphan some land in Jackson Country, Missouri, as payment for a debt, Joseph Smith, who was present, later cautioned the General: "Doniphan, I advise you not to take that Jackson county land in payment of the debt. God's wrath hangs over Jackson county. God's people have been ruthlessly driven from it, and you will live to see the day when it will be visited by fire and sword. The Lord of Hosts will sweep it with the besom of destruction. The fields and farms and houses will be destroyed, and only the chimneys will be left to mark the desolation."

While conversing with a friend, in 1865, General Doniphan related the prophecy and commented "that the devastation of Jackson county forcibly reminded him of this remarkable prediction of the Mormon Prophet."-History of the Church, III, 57-63.

"I behold the surest pledges that as, on one side, no local prejudices or attachments, no separate views or party animosities will misdirect the comprehensive and equal eye which ought to watch over this great assemblage of communities and interests, so, on another, that the foundations of our national policy will be laid in pure and immutable principles of private morality, and the pre-eminence of free government be exemplified by all the attributes which can win the affections of its citizens and command the respect of the world."

To mark the disparity that existed between Washington's concept of government and the conditions then prevailing the nation, Joseph Smith commented:

"Verily, here shine the virtue and wisdom of a statesman in such lucid rays, that had every succeeding Congress followed the rich instruction in all their deliberations and enactments, for the benefit and convenience of the whole community and the communities of which it is composed, no sound of a rebellion in South Carolina, no rupture in Rhode Island, no mob in Missouri expelling her citizens by executive authority, corruption in the ballot-boxes, a border warfare between Ohio and Michigan, hard times and distress, outbreak upon outbreak in the principal cities, murder, robbery, and defalcation, scarcity of money, and a thousand other difficulties, would have torn assunder the bonds of the Union, destroyed the confidence of man with man, and left the great body of the people to mourn over misfortunes in poverty brought on by corrupt legislation in an hour of proud vanity for self-aggrandizement."-Ibid.

---
Notas:
[^1] 2. George A. Smith's Journal, 1828. No specific date given. Original journal in Church Historian's Office, Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, Salt Lake City, Utah. See also "Sketch of the Auto-Biography of George Albert Smith," Millennial Star, published by the Church at Liverpool, England, XXVII, 407.
[^2] 3. A Book of Commandments for the Government of the Church of Christ (Independence, Missouri, 1833), p. 9. Joseph Smith's revelations herein contained were accepted as a part of the official Church canon.
[^3] 4. Ibid., p. 87.
[^4] 5. Franklin D. Richards, The Pearl of Great Price: Being a Choice Selection From the Revelations, Translations, and Narrations of Joseph Smith (Liverpool, England, 1851), p. 35. Though the Prophecy on War was not published until 1851, there is historical evidence that many people knew of it before that date. After quoting the Prophecy in full, Orson Pratt wrote in April, 1854, "The above revelation was given twenty-one years ago last Christmas."-The Seer, II (April, 1854), 241.
[^5] 6. History of the Church, V, 324.
[^6] 7. Joseph Smith to James Taylor, reported in The Diary of Oliver B. Huntington, 1847-1900, Part II, 308. Copy in Brigham Young University Library. Huntington evidently reported this statement in his diary some years after it allegedly was made. Others, however, were aware of it. For a slightly different report of the Prophet's statement, see Juvenile Instructor, XXV, Salt Lake City, Utah (March 15, 1890), 162. This work was not primarily adapted to youth. For an account of Joseph Smith's stay at the Taylor home, when this statement was said to have been made, see Young Woman's Journal, Salt Lake City, XVII, 547-548.
[^7] 8. Statement by Wilford Woodruff, an intimate associate of Joseph Smith, J.D., XIV, 3.
[^8] 9. God's Spirit is spoken of as enlightening the mind and filling the heart with joy.-Book of Commandments, p. 22; Book of Mormon (Palmyra, New York, 1830), p. 164. "My Spirit," said a revelation, "leadeth to do good-yea to do justly, to walk humbly, [and] to judge righteously."-Book of Commandments, op. cit. By this divine power man may be guided "in wisdom's path."-Book of Mormon, p. 159. "Peace of conscience" is among its fruits. Those who yield to its "enticings" are led to be "submissive, meek, humble, patient and full of love."-Ibid., pp. 162-164.
[^9] 10. See Doctrine and Covenants (Kirtland, Ohio, 1835), pp. 91, 100; hereafter cited D&C. This volume was the successor of the Book of Commandments, as an official publication of the revelations of Joseph Smith.
[^10] 11. Book of Mormon, p. 159.
[^11] 12. J.D., VII, 10-11.
[^12] 13. Book of Mormon, loc. cit.
[^13] 14. J.D., loc. cit.
[^14] 15. Orson Spencer, Letters Exhibiting the most Prominent Doctrines of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (Salt Lake City, 1891), p. 37.
[^15] 16. Book of Mormon, p. 107.
[^16] 17. That volume purports to be the religious history of two former civilizations that once flourished upon this continent-the Jaredite and Nephite cultures.
[^17] 18. Book of Mormon, p. 572.
[^18] 19. Book of Mormon, pp. 442, 465-470, 514-530, 561-573.
[^19] 20. D&C, p. 91.
[^20] 21. Book of Commandments, pp. 121-122.
[^21] 22. History of the Church, I, 314-315. With reference to the immediate religious scene, Ralph Waldo Emerson likewise wrote, in 1838, that no man could "go with his thoughts about him into one of our churches without feeling that what hold the public worship had on men is gone or going."-"Divinity School Address."
[^22] 61. Reprinted in Millennial Star, IX (January 15, 1847), p. 20.
[^23] 62. The People's Organ, St. Louis, Missouri, V (July 4, 1844).
