Dear friends, if our hearts do not condemn us, we have confi dence before God and F F our Kinds of Prayer H H Dear friends, if our hearts do not condemn us, we have confi dence before God and

receive from him anything we ask, because we keep his commands and do what our Kinds of Prayer receive from him anything we ask, because we keep his commands and do what

pleases him.—1 John 3:21–22

pleases him.—1 John 3:21–22

There are many types of prayer. Below are several main categories of prayer. A P P RAY RAY There are many types of prayer. Below are several main categories of prayer. A

P P RAYER RAYER BRINGS BRINGS PEACE PEACE . . When we are at our wit’s end, “Prayer as a relationship person may pray one or all of these in a single prayer time, and in any order. You a Christian author and pastor, explains that praying continually means “you live When we are at our wit’s end, “Prayer as a relationship person may pray one or all of these in a single prayer time, and in any order. You a Christian author and pastor, explains that praying continually means “you live

Scripture tells us to turn all those anxieties over to God is probably your best can remember these categories with the acronym ACTS. Scripture tells us to turn all those anxieties over to God is probably your best can remember these categories with the acronym ACTS. your life and your experiences of life with a constant, close connection to the Lord

your life and your experiences of life with a constant, close connection to the Lord

indication about the health A A doration doration

indication about the health

who will give us peace of mind.

who will give us peace of mind.

and are drawn into his presence through everything.” (Also see Ps. 1; Josh. 1:8.)

and are drawn into his presence through everything.” (Also see Ps. 1; Josh. 1:8.)

of your love relationship

of your love relationship

Do not be anxious about anything, but in every situation, with God. If your prayer Prayer, fi rst and foremost, ought to be about worship. God alone is worthy of Rejoice always, pray continually [or "pray without ceasing"], give thanks in all Do not be anxious about anything, but in every situation, with God. If your prayer Prayer, fi rst and foremost, ought to be about worship. God alone is worthy of Rejoice always, pray continually [or "pray without ceasing"], give thanks in all

by prayer and petition, with thanksgiving, present your life has been slack, your undiluted praise. That would be true even if God never gave us a thing, and that is circumstances; for this is God’s will for you in Christ Jesus.—1 Thessalonians 5:16–18 by prayer and petition, with thanksgiving, present your life has been slack, your undiluted praise. That would be true even if God never gave us a thing, and that is circumstances; for this is God’s will for you in Christ Jesus.—1 Thessalonians 5:16–18

requests to God. And the peace of God, which transcends love relationship has grown John Piper John Piper why adoration is distinct from thanksgiving. Notice that the Lord’s Prayer begins P P RAY RAY requests to God. And the peace of God, which transcends love relationship has grown why adoration is distinct from thanksgiving. Notice that the Lord’s Prayer begins

all understanding, will guard your hearts and your minds cold.”— cold.”—

all understanding, will guard your hearts and your minds

with “Our Father in heaven, hallowed be your name” (Matt. 6:9). Holding up God’s that it is always “if the Lord wills.” He is still in charge and knows best. with “Our Father in heaven, hallowed be your name” (Matt. 6:9). Holding up God’s that it is always “if the Lord wills.” He is still in charge and knows best.

in Christ Jesus.—Philippians 4:6–7

in Christ Jesus.—Philippians 4:6–7

name for praise is our prime duty in prayer. Examples: 1 Chron. 29:10; 2 Chron.

name for praise is our prime duty in prayer. Examples: 1 Chron. 29:10; 2 Chron.

Now listen, you who say, “Today or tomorrow we will go to this or that city, spend a

Now listen, you who say, “Today or tomorrow we will go to this or that city, spend a

We have Almighty God on our side! Jesus showed believers

year there, carry on business and make money.” Why, you do not even know what

year there, carry on business and make money.” Why, you do not even know what

the importance of praying for protection and deliverance. (Also see 2 Cor. 10:4;

the importance of praying for protection and deliverance. (Also see 2 Cor. 10:4;

will happen tomorrow.... Instead, you ought to say, “If it is the Lord’s will, we will

will happen tomorrow.... Instead, you ought to say, “If it is the Lord’s will, we will

Eph. 6:10–18.) P P RAYER RAYER PROTECTS PROTECTS US US . . We have Almighty God on our side! Jesus showed believers 6:26–27; Luke 2:37. 6:26–27; Luke 2:37. C C onfession onfession Eph. 6:10–18.)

“Forgive us our sins, for we also forgive everyone who sins against us” (Luke 11:4). live and do this or that.”—James 4:13–15 “Forgive us our sins, for we also forgive everyone who sins against us” (Luke 11:4). live and do this or that.”—James 4:13–15

Jesus’ prayer for his disciples: My prayer is not that you take them out of the world Knowing that human sin blocks communication with God, Jesus taught his disciples This is the confi dence we have in approaching God: that if we ask anything according Jesus’ prayer for his disciples: My prayer is not that you take them out of the world Knowing that human sin blocks communication with God, Jesus taught his disciples This is the confi dence we have in approaching God: that if we ask anything according

but that you protect them from the evil one.—John 17:15

but that you protect them from the evil one.—John 17:15

to pray this way to make sure that there are no stumbling blocks between God and to his will, he hears us. And if we know that he hears us—whatever we ask—we to pray this way to make sure that there are no stumbling blocks between God and to his will, he hears us. And if we know that he hears us—whatever we ask—we

know that we have what we asked of him.—1 John 5:14–15

know that we have what we asked of him.—1 John 5:14–15

The Lord’s Prayer: And lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from the evil them. Examples: 2 Chron. 7:14; Dan. 9:4–19; 1 John 1:8–9. The Lord’s Prayer: And lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from the evil them. Examples: 2 Chron. 7:14; Dan. 9:4–19; 1 John 1:8–9.

one.—Matthew 6:13 one.—Matthew 6:13

T Thanksgiving hanksgiving

P P RAY RAY

Jesus warns his disciples: Be always on the watch, and pray that you may be able Thanksgiving is praise for something God has done for us or given to us—or for what God’s Spirit in you to guide your prayers. Where we are inadequate, the Spirit knows Jesus warns his disciples: Be always on the watch, and pray that you may be able Thanksgiving is praise for something God has done for us or given to us—or for what God’s Spirit in you to guide your prayers. Where we are inadequate, the Spirit knows

to escape all that is about to happen, and that you may be able to stand before the we trust him to do. The apostle Paul thanked God for the believers in Philippi: “I exactly the right thing to say. (Also see Rom. 8:15–16; Eph. 5:18.) to escape all that is about to happen, and that you may be able to stand before the we trust him to do. The apostle Paul thanked God for the believers in Philippi: “I exactly the right thing to say. (Also see Rom. 8:15–16; Eph. 5:18.)

Son of Man.—Luke 21:36

Son of Man.—Luke 21:36

thank my God every time I remember you. In all my prayers for all of you, I always And pray in the Spirit on all occasions with all kinds of prayers and requests. With this thank my God every time I remember you. In all my prayers for all of you, I always And pray in the Spirit on all occasions with all kinds of prayers and requests. With this

pray with joy because of your partnership in the gospel from the fi rst day until now” in mind, be alert and always keep on praying for all the Lord’s people.—Ephesians 6:18 pray with joy because of your partnership in the gospel from the fi rst day until now” in mind, be alert and always keep on praying for all the Lord’s people.—Ephesians 6:18

(Phil. 1:3–5). Examples: Ps. 100:4; 107:1; 118:21; Matt. 14:19; Eph. 1:15–16; 1 Thess.

(Phil. 1:3–5). Examples: Ps. 100:4; 107:1; 118:21; Matt. 14:19; Eph. 1:15–16; 1 Thess.

The Prayers of Jesus The Prayers of Jesus

1:2; 5:16–18; 1 Tim. 4:4.

1:2; 5:16–18; 1 Tim. 4:4.

But you, dear friends, by building yourselves up in your most holy faith and praying

But you, dear friends, by building yourselves up in your most holy faith and praying

in the Holy Spirit, keep yourselves in God’s love as you wait for the mercy of our

in the Holy Spirit, keep yourselves in God’s love as you wait for the mercy of our

Jesus took time to pray to God the Father. Jesus “often withdrew to lonely S S upplication upplication (Also called Petition) Jesus took time to pray to God the Father. Jesus “often withdrew to lonely

(Also called Petition)

(Luke 6:12). places and prayed” (Luke 5:16) and he would pray for long stretches of time Our heavenly Father wants his children to bring their requests to him (Phil. 4:6). Lord Jesus Christ to bring you to eternal life.—Jude 20–21 (Luke 6:12). places and prayed” (Luke 5:16) and he would pray for long stretches of time Our heavenly Father wants his children to bring their requests to him (Phil. 4:6). Lord Jesus Christ to bring you to eternal life.—Jude 20–21

Jesus taught, “If you, then, though you are evil, know how to give good gifts to your We do not know what we ought to pray for, but the Spirit himself intercedes for us Jesus taught, “If you, then, though you are evil, know how to give good gifts to your We do not know what we ought to pray for, but the Spirit himself intercedes for us

JESUS J ESUS ::

children, how much more will your Father in heaven give good gifts to those who ask through wordless groans. And he who searches our hearts knows the mind of the children, how much more will your Father in heaven give good gifts to those who ask through wordless groans. And he who searches our hearts knows the mind of the Spirit, because the Spirit intercedes for God’s people in accordance with the will of

Spirit, because the Spirit intercedes for God’s people in accordance with the will of

him!” (Matt. 7:11). Intercession is a type of supplication where we pray for the needs God.—Romans 8:26–27 him!” (Matt. 7:11). Intercession is a type of supplication where we pray for the needs God.—Romans 8:26–27

Prayed for his followers. John 17:9 John 17:9

Prayed for his followers.

and concerns of others. And we should not just pray for our friends, but also “...pray A A SK SK IN and concerns of others. And we should not just pray for our friends, but also “...pray

Prayed for the children. Matthew 19:13 Matthew 19:13

Prayed for the children.

for those who persecute you” (Matt. 5:44). Examples: Gen. 24:12–15; 1 Sam. 7:8. that faith is often easier said than done. The Gospel of Mark tells a story of a father for those who persecute you” (Matt. 5:44). Examples: Gen. 24:12–15; 1 Sam. 7:8. that faith is often easier said than done. The Gospel of Mark tells a story of a father

Praised the Father in prayer. Matthew 11:25 Matthew 11:25

Praised the Father in prayer.

Prayed for himself. Prayed for himself. John 17:1 John 17:1

who wanted to fully believe that Jesus would answer his request to heal his son. The

who wanted to fully believe that Jesus would answer his request to heal his son. The

father cried out to Jesus, “I do believe; help me overcome my unbelief!” Even though

father cried out to Jesus, “I do believe; help me overcome my unbelief!” Even though

Prayed for Simon Peter. Luke 22:32 Luke 22:32

Prayed for Simon Peter.

this father had diffi culty with faith, Jesus healed his son (Mark 9:14–29). Like this

this father had diffi culty with faith, Jesus healed his son (Mark 9:14–29). Like this

Prayed that his Father’s will be done. Matthew 26:39; Luke 22:42

Prayed that his Father’s will be done. Matthew 26:39; Luke 22:42

father, we too can pray for stronger faith.

father, we too can pray for stronger faith.

Thanked the Father in prayer. John 11:41; Luke 24:30 John 11:41; Luke 24:30

Thanked the Father in prayer.

Asked the Father to forgive sinners. Luke 23:34a Luke 23:34a

Asked the Father to forgive sinners.

Jesus replied, “Truly I tell you, if you have faith and do not doubt, not only can you

Jesus replied, “Truly I tell you, if you have faith and do not doubt, not only can you

do what was done to the fi g tree, but also you can say to this mountain, ‘Go, throw

do what was done to the fi g tree, but also you can say to this mountain, ‘Go, throw

Prayed with his last words on the cross. Luke 23:46 Luke 23:46

Prayed with his last words on the cross.

This free eChart is taken from the pamphlet 33What the Bible Says About Prayer ISBN 9781596364561. The full-color pamphlet will deepen 44 © 2014 Rose Publishing You may print 10 copies, but do not post on the your understanding of prayer, help you experience the peace that comes from diving into a deeper communication with God, feel comfortable internet or send via email.Your friends may sign up for these Free Rose

praying to God, and know how to pray and what to pray. Save $5 on your $25 order. Enter coupon code: 5EC12 at www.rose-publishing.com. Bible eCharts & Newsletters at: www.rose-publishing.com/echarts

-2-

Spiritual Disciplines

What does it mean to be a disciple? This pamphlet

looks at the classical spiritual disciplines that help

us follow Jesus: scripture reading, prayer, fasting,

worshiping, and others. It addresses questions such

as: What does it mean to be Jesus’ disciples in the

twenty-first century? Do spiritual disciplines look

different in an electronic age?

Pamphlet ............ 9781596363540 ...........$3.99

Also available as a PDF.

Pamphlet

What the Bible Says About Forgiveness

Key biblical principles about forgiveness. Answers

What the Bible Says About Prayer

questions including: What is forgiveness? Why do we

need forgiveness? Why do we need to forgive others?

Have you ever experienced the discouragement of an unanswered prayer?

Why is forgiving enemies tied to whether God will

Have you found yourself questioning God, wondering “Why didn’t He

forgive us? Use for personal study, discipleship, new

answer my prayer?” and “Why is he silent now when I need him the most?”

believers’ class, small group study, Sunday school

Sometimes prayer seems like a one-sided event, even though we know

class, recovery groups, or “basics of the faith” course.

God is listening.

Pamphlet ............ 9781596364400 ...........$3.99

How do you respond to God’s silence? Do you try to “figure” God out—

the purpose behind it all—asking “Was it because I sinned?” “Is a better

Also available as a PDF.

opportunity coming?” or “Have I lost God’s favor?” This pamphlet gives

more than 50 Bible teachings about prayer and gives helpful tips for having

a better prayer life.

The Book of James

Now you can deepen your understanding of prayer with What the Bible

The Book of James features full-color charts, pictures,

Says About Prayer. This pamphlet will help you experience the peace

scripture references, definitions, and study questions

that comes from diving into a deeper communication with God. What the

that enable you to review James’s letter in only

Bible Says About Prayer is a resource you will refer to often as you seek to

minutes. This pamphlet explains how Christians should

improve your prayer life and God’s will in your life.

react to trials and gives the correct biblical responses

that lead to spiritual maturity.

Pamphlet ....................9781596364561 ................$3.99

Pamphlet ............ 9781596364691 ...........$3.99

Also available as a PDF. Quantity discounts available.

Also available as a PDF.

Sign up now to receive FREE Rose Bible eCharts at www.rose-publishing.com/echarts $5 Off

Orders of $25 or More

Enter Coupon Code

www.rose-publishing.com

5EC12

info@rose-publishing.com

Not valid with any other offer.

or call (310) 353-2100

Rose Publishing, Inc., publishes full-color, easy-to-use Bible reference materials, including charts, maps, time lines and biblical reference pamphlets for pastors, Bible study leaders, new member classes & small groups.
