John A. Widtsoe, Seven Claims of the Book of Mormon ( 1936)

Prefatory Note

The following study is part of a projected larger treatise on the evidences of the truth of "Mormonism." It is aimed directly at the needs of missionaries and others who have need of brief, comprehensive summaries of the accumulated evidences for the truth of the work established by the Prophet Joseph Smith.

During the last century a host of capable students have set forth numerous evidences in support of Mormon claims. These reports are scattered over the whole field of Mormon literature and therefore often inaccessible to students and defenders of the Gospel who are engaged in travel and unable to carry with them a sufficient supply of books.

This book was prepared in London within easy reach of the library of the British Museum, and it was possible therefore to check every quotation against original sources. For ease of reference, quotations are not only referred to original sources, but also to more accessible books which quote from the originals.

The authors are under deep obligations to many friends for help rendered, especially to Elders Stephen L Richards, Melvin J. Ballard and Alonzo A. Hinckley of the Council of Twelve and to Dr. George H. Hansen and Dr. Sidney B. Sperry of Brigham Young University.

"Thou fool, that shall say: A Bible, we have got a Bible and we need no more Bible. Have ye obtained a Bible save it were by the Jews?

"Know ye not that there are more nations than one? Know ye not that I, the Lord your God, have created all men, and that I remember those who are upon the isles of the sea; and that I rule in the heavens above and in the earth beneath; and I bring forth my word unto the children of men, yea, even upon all the nations of the earth?

"Wherefore murmur ye, because that ye shall receive more of my word? Know ye not that the testimony of two nations is a witness unto you that I am God, that I remember one nation like unto another? Wherefore, I speak the same words unto one nation like unto another. And when the two nations shall run together the testimony of the two nations shall run together also.

"And I do this that I may prove unto many that I am the same yesterday, today, and forever; and that I speak forth my words according to mine own pleasure. And because that I have spoken one word ye need not suppose that I cannot speak another; for my work is not yet finished; neither shall it be until the end of man, neither from that time henceforth and forever.

"Wherefore, because that ye have a Bible ye need not suppose that it contains all my words; neither need ye suppose that I have not caused more to be written.

"For I command all men, both in the east and in the west, and in the north, and in the south, and in the islands of the sea, that they shall write the words which I speak unto them; for out of the books which shall be written I will judge the world, every man according to their works, according to that which is written.

"For behold, I shall speak unto the Jews and they shall write it; and I shall also speak unto the Nephites and they shall write it; and I shall also speak unto the other tribes of the house of Israel, which I have led away, and they shall write it; and I shall also speak unto all nations of the earth and they shall write it."—2 Nephi 29:6-12.
