John A. Widtsoe, Seven Claims of the Book of Mormon ( 1936)

INTRODUCTION

The Book of Mormon was published to the world in 1830, a few weeks before the organization of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (April 6, 1830). During the century that has followed the Book has been scrutinized repeatedly by friend and foe. Hundreds of books and pamphlets by the learned and the unlearned have been written about it, but without coming to a consensus of opinion concerning its origin, except that Joseph Smith must have been aided by some one in its composition. Meanwhile, the body of evidence for the truth of the claims of the Book has increased steadily with the increase of human knowledge. The Book of Mormon continues to stand as an increasingly baffling mystery to those who do not accept the account of its origin as given by Joseph Smith. It is today one of the strongest evidences for the truth of Mormonism.

The Book of Mormon is a history of some of the early inhabitants of the American continent. It records three migrations from Asia to America, the earliest of which occurred at the time of the Tower of Babel; the second and third just before and after the fall of Zedekiah, king of Judah, about 600 years before Christ. The history of these peoples on the American continent, as contained in the Book of Mormon, is mainly a condensation of a larger and more comprehensive record, yet it sets forth in considerable detail much of the political history and many of the religious beliefs and practices of the people who descended from the three migrations. The history ends about 400 years after Christ, when through a series of civil wars the majority of the people were destroyed.

Joseph Smith declared that a heavenly visitor, Moroni by name, appeared to him during the night of September 21 and the morning and forenoon of September 22, 1823, and among other things, told him of the existence of a collection of gold plates buried in a hill not far from Joseph Smith's home, on which plates the history of the early inhabitants of America had been engraven by a succession of historians. Joseph Smith further declared that he was led to the spot where the plates were buried in the hill Cumorah, and that after repeated annual visits covering a period of four years, he was finally allowed on September 22, 1827, to take possession of the plates for the purpose of translating a part of them. The translation was accomplished through "the gift and power of God." Joseph Smith did not claim in any way to be learned in languages or to know the language in which the book was written. Note his own words: "These records were engraven on plates which had the appearance of gold, each plate was six inches wide and eight inches long and not quite so thick as common tin. They were filled with engravings in Egyptian characters and bound together in a volume as the leaves of a book, with three rings running through the whole. The volume was something near six inches in thickness, a part of which was sealed. The characters on the unsealed part were small and beautifully engraved. The whole book exhibited many marks of antiquity in its construction and much skill in the art of engraving. With the records was found a curious instrument, which the ancients called 'Urim and Thummim,' which consisted of two transparent stones set in the rim of a bow fastened to a breast plate. Through the medium of the Urim and Thummim I translated the record by the gift and power of God." (Mill. Star, 19:118; Hist. of Church 4:537.)

Clearly, the claims of the Book of Mormon must be confirmed by appropriate and acceptable tests. Hundreds of thousands of persons after a candid examination have become converted to the genuineness of the Book and the truth of the claims of the Prophet Joseph Smith with respect to it, while enemies have been mystified in their attempts to discredit Joseph Smith's story. Today the Book stands more firmly upon its original claims than ever before.

Seven major claims are made or implied by the Book of Mormon in its history and contents. The verification of these major claims gives the numerous relatively minor proofs of authenticity the place of confirmatory evidences. If the proof of any one of these claims is convincing, the probability of the others being true also is greatly augmented. The summary of evidences in this writing is confined to a consideration of these seven major claims:

It should not be surprising to Bible students that other volumes of scripture may be revealed, for the lost books of scripture mentioned in the Bible have been discussed often by Bible scholars. Nor can it really be surprising that revelations such as are contained in the Bible should be given to other peoples than those of Israel. In fact, predictions and quotations in the Bible seem to imply clearly that other books may be expected. Note the following examples:

"And I saw another angel fly in the midst of heaven, having the everlasting gospel to preach unto them that dwell on the earth, and to every nation, and kindred, and tongue, and people." (Revelation 14:6.) This may well have been fulfilled when the Angel Moroni revealed the Book of Mormon, followed by the organization of the Church, with the restoration of the authority and ordinances of the pure Gospel.

"Truth shall spring out of the earth; and righteousness shall look down from heaven." (Psalms 85:11.) This seems to point to an event like the taking of the Book of Mormon out of the Hill Cumorah.

"The word of the Lord came again unto me, saying, Moreover, thou son of man, take thee one stick, and write upon it, for Judah, and for the children of Israel his companions: then take another stick, and write upon it, for Joseph, the stick of Ephraim, and for all the house of Israel his companions: And join them one to another into one stick, and they shall become one in thine hand." (Ezekiel 37:15-17.) The record of the stick of Judah is the Bible and the record of the stick of Ephraim is the Book of Mormon. They are now one in the hands of the restored Church.

"And the vision of all is become unto you as the words of a book that is sealed, which men deliver to one that is learned, saying, Read this, I pray thee: and he saith, I cannot; for it is sealed. And the book is delivered to him that is not learned, saying, Read this, I pray thee: and he saith, I am not learned." (Isaiah 29:11-12.) Some of the characters from the Book of Mormon plates were taken to Professor Charles Anthon, a gentleman celebrated for his linguistic attainments. He told Martin Harris, who presented the characters to him to bring the plates from which the characters were taken and he would translate them. Martin Harris replied that part of the plates were sealed. To this Professor Anthon replied, "I cannot read a sealed book," thus fulfilling prophecy. (Pearl of Great Price, Joseph Smith, 2:63-65.) Joseph Smith was not a learned man when the plates were given to him.

Such harmony with Bible predictions is certainly a contributory evidence of the truth of the Book of Mormon.

The Book is another witness of Jesus Christ. This is made evident throughout the Book, from the title page to the last page. Indeed, its message concerns itself with the plan of human happiness in which Jesus Christ is the central figure. There is need in this age as in earlier ages of additional witnesses for Christ. Those who read the Book in the right spirit will receive increased assurance of the divine nature and mission of Jesus of Nazareth.

The appearance of the Book was also a witness to all the world that the Lord is mindful of his children everywhere. The Lord said that he had "other sheep" (John 10:16) to whom he must go. The people of America, descendants of the chosen people, were among these "other sheep." The manner of the Lord's hand-dealings with humanity is made much plainer by the appearance and contents of the Book of Mormon.

The Book moreover serves as a powerful witness for the truth of Mormonism. Coming to the earth through miraculous means, it requires intelligent and vigorous faith for its acceptance; and as evidences for the correctness of its claims accumulate it becomes an increasingly strong proof of the truth of the whole system set up through the instrumentality of Joseph Smith the Prophet. Faith is increased and made more rational by the possession of the Book of Mormon.
