John A. Widtsoe, Seven Claims of the Book of Mormon ( 1936)

CLAIM ONE: THE BOOK OF MORMON HAD A MIRACULOUS ORIGIN

"While I was thus in the act of calling upon God, I discovered a light appearing in my room, which continued to increase until the room was lighter than at noonday, when immediately a personage appeared at my bedside, standing in the air, for his feet did not touch the floor.

". . . He said there was a book deposited, written upon gold plates, giving an account of the former inhabitants of this continent, and the source from whence they sprang. He also said that the fulness of the everlasting Gospel was contained in it, as delivered by the Savior to the ancient inhabitants;

"Also, that there were two stones in silver bows—and these stones, fastened to a breastplate, constituted what is called the Urim and Thummim—deposited with the plates; and the possession and use of these stones were what constituted "seers" in ancient or former times; and that God had prepared them for the purpose of translating the book.

". . . Convenient to the village of Manchester, Ontario county, New York, stands a hill of considerable size, and the most elevated of any in the neighborhood. On the west side of this hill, not far from the top, under a stone of considerable size, lay the plates, deposited in a stone box. This stone was thick and rounding in the middle on the upper side, and thinner towards the edges, so that the middle part of it was visible above the ground, but the edge all around was covered with earth.

". . . Accordingly, as I had been commanded, I went at the end of each year, and at each time I found the same messenger there, and received instruction and intelligence from him at each of our interviews, respecting what the Lord was going to do, and how and in what manner his kingdom was to be conducted in the last days.

". . . At length the time arrived for obtaining the plates, the Urim and Thummim, and the breastplate. On the twenty-second day of September, one thousand eight hundred and twenty-seven, having gone as usual at the end of another year to the place where they were deposited, the same heavenly messenger delivered them up to me with this charge: that I should be responsible for them; that if I should let them go carelessly, or through any neglect of mine, I should be cut off; but that if I would use all my endeavors to preserve them, until he, the messenger, should call for them, they should be protected.

". . . By this timely aid was I enabled to reach the place of my destination in Pennsylvania; and immediately after my arrival there I commenced copying the characters off the plates. I copied a considerable number of them, and by means of the Urim and Thummim I translated some of them, which I did between the time I arrived at the house of my wife's father, in the month of December, and the February following. (Pearl of Great Price, Joseph Smith 2:30, 34, 35, 51, 54, 59, 62.)

The production of the Book of Mormon is astonishing in view of the meager education Joseph Smith received in his boyhood. The financial resources of the family made it impossible for him to go beyond the schools in the little town of Palmyra, New York. Three of his school books, yet in existence, indicate that he was in school in his thirteenth year, but perhaps not later. It is also well known that from his earliest boyhood he was obliged to work on his father's farm or in the employ of others. He was far from illiterate, but not equipped educationally to produce a work of the literary value of the Book of Mormon. In his early manhood, as soon as opportunity offered, he proceeded to make up for his deficiencies in technical education and at his death was acquainted with the fields of languages, law, history, and government. (Joseph Smith, J. H. Evans p. 35; Roberts, 1:196; Joseph Smith as Scientist, Widtsoe, p. 140.)

The first and perhaps one of the strongest evidences for the authenticity of the Book of Mormon is the fact that students of Mormonism have come, almost without exception, whether friendly or unfriendly, to the conclusion that the Book, its contents and structure, is of such a character that an unlearned youth, as Joseph Smith was at the time of the translation, could not have produced it without the aid of someone better informed and more highly educated than he was.

To sustain this view two theories have been set up by those who will not accept Joseph Smith's own explanation. First, that the book was actually written by someone else, by whom Joseph Smith was used as a tool; and second, that Joseph Smith was afflicted with nervous ailments such as epilepsy, resulting in automatic writing, under the influence of which the book was written. Both theories have been shown to be untenable.

No other writer of the Book or a similar book has been discovered in a search extended over a century. For many years the story was circulated that Sidney Rigdon (born February 19, 1793, died July 14, 1876) obtained the manuscript of a book written by one Reverend Solomon Spaulding, and that after this manuscript had been worked over somewhat, Sidney Rigdon placed it in the hands of Joseph Smith to publish as the Book of Mormon. Historical research has shown that Sidney Rigdon did not hear of Mormonism or the Book of Mormon until after the Book had been published and the Church established. He accepted the Gospel and became a member of the Church on November 14, 1830, eight months after the publication of the book. He declared consistently to the end of his life, although he became separated from the Church in later life, that he knew nothing of the Book of Mormon until after it had been published. The testimony of Rigdon's children, at that time not members of the Church, bears out this statement: In 1865 John W. Rigdon returned from a trip to Utah and asked his father about the origin of the Book of Mormon. Sidney Rigdon replied, "My son, I can swear before high heaven that what I have told you about the origin of that book is true. Your mother and sister, Mrs. Athalia Robinson, were present when that book was handed to me in Mentor, Ohio, and all I ever knew about the origin of that book was what Parley P. Pratt, Oliver Cowdery, Joseph Smith and the witnesses who claimed they saw the plates have told me, and in all of my intimacy with Joseph Smith he never told me but the one story, and that was that he found it engraved upon gold plates in a hill near Palmyra, New York, and that an angel had appeared to him and directed him where to find it; and I have never to you or to anyone else told but the one story, and that I now repeat to you." (Life of Sidney Rigdon, by his son, John W. Rigdon, Ms. pp. 188-195; Quoted in Hist. of Church 1:122-123.) John W. Rigdon also mentions in his sketch of his father's life, an affidavit given to him by his sister, Athalia Robinson, to the same effect as the statement of Sidney Rigdon and his wife, relative to the coming of Pratt and Cowdery to their home in Mentor, and presenting to her father a bound copy of the Book of Mormon. (Ibid, p. 123.)

The actual discovery of the Spaulding manuscript in 1882, by President Fairchild of Oberlin College confirms the Rigdon statement. This manuscript, a novel dealing with the early inhabitants of America, now in possession of Oberlin College, has been printed and circulated widely. The Book of Mormon and the Spaulding Manuscript bear no similarity to each other. President Fairchild speaks as follows: "The theory of the origin of the Book of Mormon in the traditional manuscript of Solomon Spaulding will probably have to be relinquished. That manuscript is doubtless now in the possession of Mr. L. L. Rice of Honolulu, Hawaiian Islands. * * * There seems to be no reason to doubt that this is the long lost story. Mr. Rice himself and others compared it with the Book of Mormon and could detect no resemblance between the two, in general or in detail." (James H. Fairchild, in Roberts 3:375-376.)

Critics have suggested that there was another Spaulding manuscript from which the Book of Mormon was taken. This is most improbable. Spaulding would not be likely to write two novels on the same theme. Besides, Spaulding's literary style is revealed in the manuscript found, and bears no similarity to the style in the Book of Mormon.

Several books were published before the publication of the Book of Mormon, calling attention to the existence of Hebrew customs and doctrine among the American Indians, and suggesting that the American aborigines are descendants of the Lost Tribes of Israel. Enemies of the Church have suggested that Joseph Smith obtained the ideas contained in the Book of Mormon from these books. Since the purpose, material, language, diction, and general contents of the Book of Mormon are so entirely different from those of the early books on the American Indians, this theory of the origin of the Book of Mormon has never been seriously proposed. A brief examination of these books is sufficient to convince a person that this conclusion is correct. Indeed, these early books, setting forth the Hebraisms of the American Indians, merely strengthens one of the claims of the Book of Mormon, and are so used in this writing.

The theory that the Book of Mormon was written under epileptic or similar conditions is equally untenable. Joseph Smith was a man of great physical vigor, singularly free from sickness. The testimony of contemporaries is unanimous on this point. "President Joseph Smith was in person tall and well built, strong and active. He possessed a noble boldness and independence of character; his manner was easy and familiar, his rebuke terrible as the lion." (Autobiography of Parley P. Pratt, p. 47.)

"He (Joseph Smith) was full six feet high, strongly built, and uncommonly muscled. No doubt he was as much indebted for his influence over an ignorant people to the superiority of his physical vigor, as to his great cunning and intellect." (Ford, History of Illinois, quoted in Roberts' Comp. History of Church 2:347.) Josiah Quincy, mayor of Boston, U. S. A., declared that of all men he had met, Joseph Smith was one of two that "seemed best endowed with that kingly faculty which directs as by intrinsic right the feeble and confused souls that are looking for guidance." (Figures of the Past, p. 381.) A United States Army artillery officer wrote in his report, "Joseph, the Chief, is a noble looking fellow, a Mahomet, every inch of him."

Aside from such contemporary evidence, the work accomplished by Joseph Smith refutes the theory that it was the product of a disordered mind or a weak physical body. Mormonism is characterized by all who know it as a most orderly system of doctrine, practice and organization. Indeed, the perfection of organization within the Mormon Church has been said to be the highest known. Order is not born of disorder; reason is not the child of insanity. The theory that the Book of Mormon was the product of epilepsy or the like must be set aside both by the incontestable facts of Joseph Smith's own superb physical health and the splendid orderliness of the system he was the instrument in founding.

There was no secrecy about the fact that Joseph Smith had received the plates and was engaged in the translation of them. He had told his parents from time to time of his various heavenly visitations. He had reported his visit to the Hill Cumorah to see the plates. He did not hesitate to tell his friends and neighbors of the work in which he was engaged. The local news papers wrote of it. Francis W. Kirkham gives many quotations from early newspapers, Rochester Telegraph, 1829; Brookville Enquirer, 1827; Palmyra Reflector, 1829-30; Wayne Sentinel, 1831, etc.; and books such as Howe's "Mormonism Unveiled," published in 1834, containing statements of many people who knew the Smith family from 1816 to 1830. He concludes: "These clearly show that it was common knowledge in Palmyra two or more years before the book appeared that Joseph Smith claimed he had in his possession gold plates which he would translate by divine aid and that their contents were of great importance to the religious world." (Des. News, Jan. 26, 1935.) His intimates knew well when he began the actual translation of the plates. In fact, near the beginning of the translation he sent Martin Harris to Professor Anthon of Columbia University with copies of characters drawn from the plates. Even the most bitter anti-Mormon publications do not hesitate to agree that the community in which Joseph lived was aware of his pretensions and supposed labor of translation.

This openness of procedure, this labor aboveboard, form a very strong evidence of the honesty of the young man. Dishonesty and deceit labor usually in darkness. Seldom does the liar invite public attention while the lie is being concocted.

The Book of Mormon was not written by Joseph Smith's own hand. It was dictated by the Prophet from the plates. Secretaries wrote the words as they fell from the lips of Joseph Smith. Three secretaries at different times took part in the work: his wife, Martin Harris and Oliver Cowdery. These three were all convinced of the genuineness of the translation and that Joseph Smith himself produced the Book, and remained so convinced to the end of their days. Oliver Cowdery, who at one time became disaffected, later returned to the Church. Upon his return, in 1848, in a now famous address he stated that he himself wrote every word in the Book of Mormon, save a few pages, as the dictation came from the Prophet Joseph Smith. Here are his words: "I wrote, with my own pen, the entire Book of Mormon (save a few pages) as it fell from the lips of the Prophet as he translated it by the gift and power of God, by the means of the Urim and Thummim. * * * I beheld with my eyes, and handled with my hands, the gold plates from which it was transcribed. * * * That Book is true." (Roberts' Comprehensive Hist. of Church, 1:139.)

It is difficult to fool one's secretary. The scribes who labored with Joseph could hardly have been deceived about the existence of the plates. Those who were closest to the Prophet at the time of the translation believed in him. This of itself is a corroborative evidence of high value of the truth of the Book of Mormon.

One of the many remarkable things about the production of the Book of Mormon is that it was dictated by the Prophet in the course of about sixty days, from April 7, 1829, to the first week of June, 1829, (Joseph Fielding Smith, Imp. Era, 30:946-948.) It is a book of over five hundred pages, dealing with a multitude of facts and principles. The composition of a novel of that size could scarcely be done, even by the most experienced writer, in two months. Yet the Book of Mormon was actually completed in that time. The time of composition with no corrections or additions after the dictation shows the work to be beyond that of the ordinary powers of man. This is another evidence for the truth of the Book.

The title page of the Book of Mormon carries a brief account of the contents of the Book, translated from the plates. In addition the name of Joseph Smith, Jr., appears on the title page in the first edition as author and proprietor. In later editions Joseph Smith's name occurs as translator. The title in the first edition and the subsequent change has led to much comment by unfriendly critics. In fact, however, it is a strong evidence of the truthfulness and sincerity of the young man.

At no time did Joseph claim that he was anything else than a translator of the Book of Mormon. If he had said that he had invented the Book as a piece of fiction, he would have won universal praise. It was the miraculous element in the obtaining and translating of the plates which gave offense. He allowed his name to appear on the title page of the first edition as "author and proprietor" because the copyright law provided that the name of the author appear upon the title page. To meet the issue, as the only living person who could claim the Book, he allowed his name so to appear. A dishonest man, had he been one, would have been crafty enough to devise some means of circumventing the requirement, to avoid the storm of misunderstanding that would follow such a formal statement of authorship of a book declared to be of divine origin.

Joseph Smith was not the only person who saw the plates from which the Book of Mormon was translated. Two groups of witnesses who testify to seeing and handling the plates are of special importance.

One afternoon in June, 1829, at Fayette, New York, Joseph Smith took three men, David Whitmer, Oliver Cowdery and Martin Harris, into a neighboring wood, where after earnest prayer they beheld a heavenly messenger who held the plates in his hands and declared to them that they were translated by the gift and power of God. The testimony of these witnesses to the reality of this experience appears in every copy of the Book of Mormon. These three men, though two were separated from the Church for many years and one for life, never deviated from this testimony, but bore witness to the truth of it on every suitable occasion. All three died with the testimony of the genuineness of their experience upon their lips.

Such testimonies are not easily impugned nor charged to hallucination, for these men lived respectable lives, were honored in their communities and at no time showed evidence of unsound minds or mental illness. And, it would be remarkable indeed if three men of widely different blood, upbringing and temperament could have been imposed upon at the same time in exactly the same way.

A little later eight men were likewise shown the plates. These men testify not only that they saw the plates but that they actually handled them. The written testimony of these eight men also appears in every copy of the Book of Mormon. The eight witnesses, both those who remained in the Church and those who were excommunicated from it, remained true to their testimony until the end of their days. They appeared to feel as Hyrum Smith, one of the eight witnesses, at one time wrote: "I have been abused and thrust into a dungeon, and confined for months on account of my faith and the testimony of Jesus Christ. However, I thank God that I felt a determination to die rather than deny the things which my eyes had seen, which my hands had handled and which I had borne testimony to wherever my lot had been cast; and I can assure my beloved brethren that I was enabled to bear as strong a testimony, when nothing but death presented itself, as ever I did in my life." (Times and Seasons, 1:25.)

The three and the eight witnesses, with Joseph Smith himself, make twelve persons who bear witness to the reality of the plates from which the Book of Mormon was translated. There were perhaps others also who saw the plates but who do not appear as official witnesses.

If the testimony of reliable, honest men can be accepted as having value in establishing the truth of an occurrence, then certainly the testimony of those twelve men of unsullied reputation and lives of integrity, many of whom lived to a ripe old age, honored and respected in their communities, should have weight in establishing the truth of the Book of Mormon.
