John A. Widtsoe, Seven Claims of the Book of Mormon ( 1936)

CLAIM TWO: THE BOOK OF MORMON WAS WRITTEN ON GOLD PLATES IN REFORMED EGYPTIAN BY A SUCCESSION OF HISTORIANS.

Among the numerous references in the Book of Mormon to the plates upon which the Book was originally written the following extracts are typical:

"And all these things did my father see and hear, and speak, as he dwelt in a tent, in the valley of Lemuel, and also a great many more things, which cannot be written upon these plates. (I Nephi, 9:1.)

"And now I, Mormon, proceed to finish out my record, which I take from the plates of Nephi; and I make it according to the knowledge and the understanding which God has given me. (Words of Mormon, 9.)

"And now, behold, we have written this record according to our knowledge, in the characters which are called among us the reformed Egyptian, being handed down and altered by us, according to our manner of speech.

"And if our plates had been sufficiently large we should have written in Hebrew; but the Hebrew hath been altered by us also; and if we could have written in Hebrew, behold, ye would have had no imperfection in our record.

"But the Lord knoweth the things which we have written, and also that none other people knoweth our language; therefore he hath prepared means for the interpretation thereof. (Mormon 9:32-34.)

References to the use of plates of metal or other substances for the keeping of records are not at all uncommon in recorded history. Important information—treaties, sacred knowledge and history—was preserved by the ancients on parchment, wood, clay and stone, but especially in countries under considerable rainfall or rapid changes of temperature, great thoughts and events were preserved on something more durable—metal plates.

In the British Museum there are twenty-five silver plates, approximately eighteen by two inches, bound together by thongs, a Pali manuscript on which are beautifully engraved in Sinhalese characters, according to the legend, Buddha's first sermon preached at Benares, India. Also on display, next to the silver plates, is a very thin gold plate, approximately two by nine and a half inches on both sides of which is engraved, also beautifully in Javanese characters, a letter probably from one of the native princes.

In the Evkaf Museum in Istanbul, Turkey, there are some silver plates about one inch thick and 4 1/2 x 3 inches, on which is engraved a part of the Koran in fine script. (Museum number 1440.)

About 1254 B. C., after a long war between the Hittites, whose land was just north of Palestine, and the Egyptians, a treaty was concluded by Rameses II of Egypt and Khattu-sil, king of the Hittites. A translation of the Egyptian copy of the treaty begins:

"This is a copy of the contents of the silver table, which the great king of the Hittites, Khattu-sil, had caused to be made and which was presented to the Pharaoh by the hand of his ambassador Tal-tesub and his ambassador Re-mes, to propose friendship with the king Ramessu-Miamun (Rameses II)."

(A. H. Sayce, The Hittites, 1925, p. 41.)

This was not an unusual thing at that time for according to Sayce, the famous scholar, "We may gather that the oldest writing material of the Hittites consisted of plates of metal, on the surface of which the characters were hammered out from behind." (Sayce, The Hittites, p. 170.)

"The kings of Egypt employed inscribed tablets of gold and silver and copper to honor their gods." (Seek, From the Pyramids to Paul, p. 224.) Rameses III says, "I made for thee great tablets of gold in beaten work, engraved with the great name of thy majesty, bearing my praises—I made for thee great tablets of silver in beaten work, carved with the graver's tool, bearing the decrees and the inventions of the houses and temples which I made in Egypt." (Breasted, Ancient Records, paragraph 202.)

From time immemorial legal documents in general, as well as treaties, have been inscribed on metallic tablets, such as of brass. Polybius mentions (III. 26) that the treaties between Rome and Carthage written on plates were in his time still preserved in Rome. (Cambridge Bible, note on I Maccabees 822.)

The oldest Greek records are inscriptions carved in stone or engraved on metal surfaces; and treaties between Greek states were frequently engraved on bronze plates and attached to walls of temples. (Chambers Encyclopedia, 1927, vol. 10, pp. 755, 756.) Such bronze plates are now found in the National Museum in Athens.

But most interesting of all are the references in Hebrew history to records and inscriptions on metal. "And they made the plate of the holy crown of pure gold, and wrote upon it a writing, like to the engravings of a signet, HOLINESS TO THE LORD." (Exodus 39:30.) "The sin of Judah is written with a pen of iron, and with the point of a diamond; it is graven upon the tablet of their heart." (Jeremiah 17:1.)

Referring to these two passages Elder J. M. Sjodahl concludes: "That proves beyond a question that the Israelites were familiar with engraved tablets, for otherwise the words of the prophet would have been unintelligible to them." (Sjodahl, p. 46.)

Isaiah, in recording instructions which the Lord gave to him, says: "Then said the Lord to me, Take a great tablet, and write upon it in easily legible characters, Speeding to the spoil, hastening to the prey. And get me reliable witnesses to attest the writing, Uriah the Priest, and Zechariah, the son of Jeberechiah." (8:1-2; Smith and Goodspeed translation.) On this passage Dr. Adam Clarke in his Commentary states: "I have a metalline mirror found in Herculaneum which is not above three inches square. The prophet is commanded to take a mirror, or brazen polished tablet, not like these little hand mirrors, but a large one; large enough for him to engrave upon it in deep and lasting characters * * * with a workman's graving tool, the prophecy he was to deliver."

The Book of Maccabees (8:22) in the Apocrypha states: "And this is a copy of the writing which they (the Roman Senate) wrote back again on tablets of brass, and sent to Jerusalem, that it might be with them for a memorial of peace and confederacy." Later, in chapter 14, verses 16 to 18, it is recorded that the Spartans wrote to Simon, on tablets of brass, to renew the friendship which they had had with Judas and Jonathan his brethren.

Richard Watson, in his Bible and Theological Dictionary, in the article on writing, says: "The Hebrews went so far as to write their sacred books in gold, as we may learn from Josephus compared with Pliny." According to John Kitto lead plates were also used. (Cyclopedia of Biblical Literature, Art. Lead.)

The contention that writing on plates was also to be found in the New World is supported by evidence mostly made available since the Book of Mormon was published. In the New World various metals have been used as material for writing. Copper alone and also alloyed with other metals has often been used. Recently, copper plates were found in Georgia by Dr. Warren K. Moorhead. (Improvement Era, 30:531.) Adair in his History of the North American Indians tells of five copper tablets and two brass ones among the Tuccabatchey Indians. Old Bracket, an Indian, gave the following description of them: "The shape of the five copper plates: One is a foot and a half long and seven inches wide, the other four are shorter and narrower. The shape of the two brass plates is circular, about a foot and a half in diameter." (Improvement Era 30:531.)

These records, according to tradition, "were given to them by the man we call God." (Roberts 3:64, 65.)

The Book of Mormon plates were of gold. Gold was to be found in abundance in ancient America, especially in the highly developed civilizations, in Mexico and Peru. Indeed, the Inca of Peru bought his ransom from the Spaniards by filling a room 17 by 22 feet to a depth of 9 feet with gold. The worth of this gold was estimated at 3,500,000 pounds sterling. (Prescott, Conquest of Peru, pp. 205, 221.) Montezuma, the native ruler in Mexico, at the time of the arrival of the Spaniards, ate from "fair large dishes made like platters all of gold, very elaborately worked, as big as a large shield."

Marshall H. Saville in his book The Goldsmith's Art in Ancient Mexico tells of the fine quality of the gold workmanship and lists many of the gold articles that have been found, including several references to gold plates. (pp. 44, 175, etc.) As an instance of the fine art and craftsmanship in metal of the Indians, the Chimus of Peru are especially outstanding. They were skilled in hammering, casting welding, plating, embossing, etc. A. Hyatt Verrill says: "They wrought huge vessels of solid gold and of gold alloyed with silver and copper; objects of great beauty of form, magnificently chased, embossed and carved or decorated by open fretwork." (Under Peruvian Skies, p. 27.)

Skill such as this enabled the early Americans to make thin plates of gold suitable for engraving with characters, the quality of which is attested to by Rivero and Tschudi, who say: "The hieroglyphics of the Mexicans were very distinct and graved on stone or metal." (Tschudi, p. 105.)

During the course of excavating for a cistern near Cincinnati, Ohio, in 1847, a gold plate was discovered three or four inches in length, averaging about three-fourths of an inch in width, about one-eighth of an inch in thickness, with the edges scalloped. In the face of it was beautifully set another plate of the same material, and fastened together with two pins, running through both. This latter plate was full of ancient raised characters, beautifully engraved upon its surface; the whole exhibiting fine workmanship. The plate was examined by Dr. Wise, a learned Rabbi of the Jewish synagogue in Cincinnati, an editor of a Hebrew paper there, who pronounced the characters to be mostly ancient Egyptian. (Millennial Star, Vol. 19, p. 103, facsimile of plate on p. 632.)

Padre Gay mentions (Historia de Oaxaca, Vol. 1, cap. 4, p. 62) that the Mexican Indians "sold to some European antiquarians very thin plates of gold, evidently worked with the hammer, which their ancestors had been able to preserve, and on which were engraved ancient hieroglyphs." (Saville, The Goldsmith's Art in Ancient Mexico, 1920, p. 175.)

"Their graves (Indians of Colombia) contained plates of gold and tablets of earth (clay) with various curious characters which probably had among them conventional significance." (Geografia y Compendio Historico del Estado Antioquia en, Columbia, Paris, 1885, p. 517.)

Although most of the articles of gold have found their way into the melting pot, there are still some which have been preserved to the present time, as for example, in the Field Museum, Chicago, and the British Museum, London. Elder Melvin J. Ballard describes some plates he saw thus: "Brother Pratt and myself saw in a museum in Lima, Peru, a stack of gold sheets almost identical with the size of the Book of Mormon sheets, approximately eight inches long and seven inches wide, as thin as paper. The whole stack was nearly an inch thick, not a thing upon either side but just gold sheets, prepared for just such work as the plates of the Book of Mormon." (Deseret News, April 30, 1932.)

The plates upon which the Book of Mormon was engraved were made of gold and have been described as being about six inches wide by eight inches long by six inches thick. A cube of solid gold of that size, if the gold were pure, would weigh two hundred pounds, which would be a heavy weight for a man to carry, even though he were of the athletic type of Joseph Smith. This has been urged as an evidence against the truth of the Book of Mormon, since it is known that on several occasions the Prophet carried the plates in his arms. It is very unlikely, however, that the plates were made of pure gold. They would have been too soft and in danger of destruction by distortion. For the purpose of record keeping, plates made of gold mixed with a certain amount of copper would be better, for such plates would be firmer, more durable and generally more suitable for the work in hand. If the plates were made of eight karat gold, which is gold frequently used in present-day jewelry, and allowing a 10 percent space between the leaves, the total weight of the plates would not be above one hundred and seventeen pounds—a weight easily carried by a man as strong as was Joseph Smith. Elder J. M. Sjodahl basing his conclusions on an experiment with gold coins, comes to the conclusion that the plates weighed less than one hundred pounds. The probable weight of the plates also appears as an evidence of the truth of the Book of Mormon.

At first sight, one unfamiliar with the subject questions the possibility of writing the whole of the five hundred and twenty-two pages of the Book of Mormon upon a series of gold plates with a total thickness of about two inches (one-third of the whole volume of plates). This subject has been thoroughly investigated and Joseph Smith's claims proved to be true.

"The question before us is, Could one-third, (two-thirds being sealed) of a volume of metal leaves six by eight by six (the Prophet Joseph), or eight by seven by four inches (Martin Harris), or eight by seven by six inches (Orson Pratt) contain a sufficient number of plates, each as thick as parchment or tin, to yield the necessary space for the entire text of the Book of Mormon? If so, what about their immense weight? Upon "a sheet of paper, eight by seven inches, a Hebrew translation of fourteen pages of the American text of the Book of Mormon has been written in the modern, square Hebrew letters in common use. * * * It is demonstrated on this sheet that the entire text of the Book of Mormon, as the American readers have it, could have been written in Hebrew on forty and three-sevenths pages—twenty-one plates in all." (Sjodahl, p. 39.)

If Phoenician characters were used—the characters known to Lehi and his contemporaries—and allowing for the known loss of a portion of the first manuscript, about forty-five plates would be needed. "Mr. Lamb allowed fifty plates to the inch, or two hundred plates to the four inches (the smallest number). One-third only was translated; that is, sixty-six plates and a fraction. But we have demonstrated that the entire book including the lost pages could have been written on forty-five plates. If we allow sixty-six, or even fifty, we have ample space for a text engraved in large, legible characters." (Sjodahl, pp. 42, 43.)

The statement is made several times in the Book that it was written in reformed Egyptian. (Mormon 9:32, 33.) We are not certain from the reading whether the characters used were alone "reformed Egyptian." It is possible that the language of the book was a form of corrupted Hebrew, written to save space in the characters of "reformed Egyptian."

This claim at one time was used to cast doubt upon the authenticity of the Book. Recent discovery has given us much new information concerning the manners, customs and language of the people of ancient Palestine. Particularly, the close relationship of Palestine with Egypt on the one hand and with the valley of Mesopotamia on the other has been brought out. Palestine was ever on the highway between these two places of human settlement. The remains of Egyptian occupancy are being uncovered in several places in Palestine at the present time. There is little doubt that the educated Hebrew knew Egyptian and that the script or manner of writing used by the Egyptians had been adopted for use in many other countries.

"1. The patriarchs took with them from Babylonia to Canaan an Aramaic dialect strongly sprinkled with Akkadian elements. This influenced the Canaanite dialect which they then adopted, inasmuch as reminiscences of Babylonian myths and Akkadian expressions, reflecting Babylonian conditions, passed into the Canaanite. This was the time when the Canaanite dialect, through its assimilation by the patriarchs to their Aramaic language, which, under the influence of the cultured tongues of Mesopotamia, had itself reached a higher stage of development, began to rise above the level of primitive expression. This was the very moment when Hebrews and Canaanites went their own ways, and when out of the Canaanite a separate dialect began to develop among the Hebrews.

Possibly, also, Egyptian was one of the languages later spoken in Palestine, just as several languages are spoken there now. The historical fact that Israel spent some hundreds of years in Egypt would really be sufficient to explain the existence of the Egyptian language in the Promised Land. It is even more likely that whatever language was spoken in Palestine could be written in the symbols and signs used in Egypt. The statement that the plates were engraved in reformed Egyptian, in view of the discoveries of today, becomes an evidence of the truth of the Book. "The Hebrews were in Egypt for two hundred and fifteen years. The relationship between the enslaved Israelites and their Egyptian oppressors makes it logically certain that there was established in some way a ready means of communication for business needs; and it is unbelievable that for more than two centuries the Egyptians made their wishes and commands known to their slaves through Hebrew interpreters. How could Moses, who was brought up as the son of Pharaoh's daughter, get along with his foster mother all the days he lived in her home, if he did not have a knowledge of Egyptian? One of Abraham's wives, Hagar, was an Egyptian woman (Genesis 16:1-4) and Solomon too married an Egyptian woman. What is more likely than that these two famous Israelites acquired considerable familiarity with the native speech of their respective wives? Joseph was one hundred and ten years old when he died in Egypt. He was seventeen years old when he was sold to Potiphar * * * and hence was in Egypt ninety-three years. He governed in that land for eighty years. * * * At the age of thirty Joseph married the daughter of an Egyptian priest, and, considering all the circumstances connected with the life of Joseph, the Egyptian was the speech of that newly established household. Within four years after Joseph's marriage, Manasseh and Ephraim were born, sons of a Hebrew father and an Egyptian mother; and can there be a doubt that in the seclusion of that home the boys used the native speech practically to the exclusion of the Hebrew. * * * When the children arrived at the proper age to be placed in charge of instructors, their teachers would be natives for the reason that, save Joseph and his sons, no other Hebrews were then in Egypt." (Brookbank, Concerning the Brass Plates, pp. 19-21.)

Nephi records: "Yea, I make a record in the language of my father, which consists of the learning of the Jews and the language of the Egyptians." (I Nephi 1:2.) It may be inferred from this statement that though the language was Hebrew, yet the characters were "reformed Egyptian." Such expressing of the words of one language in the characters or alphabet of another is called transliteration, a very common practice.

Centuries before Christ, when little writing was done, the North Semitic alphabet was developed. This was first used to write several languages, Phoenician, Moabitish, Hebrew and Aramaic (International Encyclopedia, 1914, article on Alphabet), but later evolved into separate alphabets for each of these languages. The North Semitic alphabet is used today by the Samaritans in their Pentateuch, though the language is Hebrew. (Encyclopedia Britannica, article on Samaritans.) They also use this alphabet to write Aramaic and even Arabic, though in ordinary secular usage they write in Arabic characters. (Isaac Taylor, History of the Alphabet, 1:242.) The Samaritan Pentateuch has also been transliterated into Greek and Arabic characters. (Moses Gaster, The Samaritans, pp. 120-121.)

During the centuries when alphabets were being developed and the use of them was spreading among people of different languages, it was common for a people to adopt a new alphabet for their language, which would necessitate the transliteration of their writings into the new alphabet. (Taylor, History of the Alphabet.) In the empire of Genghis Khan the Mongolian characters were used, yet after the spread of Mohammedanism, the Arabic characters were adopted. (Chamber's Encyclopedia, article on Alphabet; Taylor, History of the Alphabet, 1:268-269.) The Jews at first used the North Semitic alphabet, yet, after their return from the Babylonian captivity, they adopted the Aramaic characters, which later evolved into the modern square Hebrew.

Recently, Sir Flinders Petrie, in excavating in Upper Egypt, found a papyrus which proved to be so ancient a copy of the Gospel according to John that it stands next in age after the Codex Vaticanus. The text is in Coptic, an old language of Egypt derived from the hieroglyphic language but written in Greek characters with some additional letters peculiar to the Coptic. (Hilda Petrie, Side Notes on the Bible, pp. 36-41.)

In more modern times it is a common practice to write one language in the characters of another. For example, the British and Foreign Bible Society has published parts of the Bible in well over six hundred different languages and dialects, but not in that many different kinds of characters, there being about eighty-four forms used. The Maya and Aztec languages of the American Indians and most European, African and Oceanic and several Asiatic languages are given in Roman characters, the same kind of characters that we use. Even Chinese is so transliterated. One language may be given in a number of different kinds of characters, as Sanskrit, the ancient language of the Hindoos, which is given in six different kinds, and ancient Syriac in three. Even the Book of Mormon since it was published has been transliterated at least twice; once in the English language but using the Deseret alphabet, and once in Turkish, using the Armenian alphabet. In 1928 the Turkish National Assembly enacted that in all official documents the Turkish language must be written in the Roman alphabet or characters.

In addition to the evidence given, a striking discovery has been made in the last few years which is a little short of remarkable in conclusively supporting the possible transliteration of the writing on the plates from which the Book of Mormon was translated. In 1905 Sir Flinders Petrie led an expedition into the peninsula of Sinai, the wilderness where Israel wandered for forty years before Jericho was taken. In the middle of this wilderness, at Serabit, Sir Flinders found and examined an ancient temple. Here he found side by side with Egyptian hieroglyphs another form of writing in a kind of Egyptian, apparently written by someone who knew both languages as did the Book of Mormon historians. Subsequent expeditions there have found more of this writing and worked at its deciphering. Finally, in 1923, the conclusions of Professor Hubert Grimme, Professor of Semitic Language at Munster University, were published in "Althebraische Inschriften vom Sinai." According to Professor Grimme the Sinaitic writing was adopted from the Egyptian hieratic writing about 1500 B.C. The language is "pure Hebrew," but written in Egyptian hieratic characters somewhat changed! And in America "the Mayas and Incas * * * used the hieratic writings of the Egyptians slightly altered, or partially glyphs." (Churchward, p. 143.)

"The Egyptian language is related, not only to the Semitic tongue (Hebrew, Arabic, Aramaic, Babylonian, etc.), but also to the East African languages (Galla, Somali, etc.) and the Berber idioms of North Africa. Its connection with the latter groups, together known as the Hamitic family is little studied as yet, but the relationship to the Semitic tongues can be fairly accurately defined. In general structure the similarity is very great; Egyptian shares the principle peculiarity of Semitic in that its word-stems consist of combinations of consonants as a rule three in number, which are theoretically at least unchangeable. Grammatical inflection and minor variations of meaning are contrived mainly by ringing the changes on the internal vowels, although affixed endings also are used for the same purpose; more important differences of meaning are created by reduplication, whole or partial, or, in one or two special cases, by prefixed consonants." (Alan H. Gardiner, Egyptian Grammar, 1927, p. 2.)

"That the Egyptian connection was not merely that of the Semitic Hyksos, then termed Egyptian, is shown by the curious fact that the Egyptian language seems to have been used in the South of Palestine at Gerar. The general of the Semitic prince was named Phichol. This is a well-known Egyptian name Pa-khal, meaning 'the Syrian.' The plain inference is that a Khali or Syrian was looked on as of different race in Gerar and that the Egyptian language was commonly known or spoken there." (Sir Flinders Petrie, Egypt and Israel, p. 21.)

"The relationship between Egyptian and Hebrew is freely recognized by scholars. (Champollion, Precis du Systeme Hieroglyphique des anciens Egyptians, p. 59.) The strong indication of that relationship in the Book of Mormon, where it is taken for granted as a known fact, is an evidence of the authenticity of that volume of more than ordinary importance." (Sjodahl, p. 18.) These evidences and others that might be cited confirm the reasonableness of the statement in the Book of Mormon that the Hebrew on the plates was written in "reformed Egyptian" characters.

The Book of Mormon account leads us to expect that remains of the Egyptian language and characters, indeed, of its civilization, may he found in America. Such have indeed been found. As previously quoted, a close relationship has been found by some scholars between the Egyptian hieratic writing and that of the Mayas and Incas. (Churchward, p. 143.) The oculus, or eye, has been found used similarly on the prow of boats in Egypt and in America, and the similarity in boat-building has been shown by C. Daryll Ford in his "Ancient Mariners." Mummification was practised alike in Egypt and America. Figures greatly resembling Egyptian and striking architectural features have been found in various places, drawing reproductions of which may be found in the works of Dupaix, Waldeck and Catherwood and later confirmed by photographs. The ankh, cross and other characteristic Egyptian signs have been found in many places.

"In the London Magazine (1910) the photograph of the interior of a Yucatan temple was published. If this be placed side by side with the picture of an ancient Egyptian temple, in Wilkinson's Egypt, the two buildings will be seen to be exactly alike. There is the same identical style of column and supports; the same curves and windings of the sacred serpent. (It is accepted on all hands that the Serpent Cult was common to Egypt and Tropical America.)" (Lee, p. 126.)

J. Fitzgerald Lee says: "During the last century a great number of travelers, explorers, archaeologists and ethnologists have put forward various explanations to account for the very striking similarities between these two parts of the earth; between the ancient architecture, culture, customs, folklore and legends which are common to the valley of the Nile and Tropical America. The flood of evidence for such close likenesses and perfect resemblances as have been found to exist, even the very identity of the legends, is irresistible, irrefutable and challenging." (Lee, pp. 25-26.)

"Humboldt says: 'The ruins in this country (Mexico) prove that Montezuma's ancestors must have dwelt on the banks of the Nile!' (Travels.) He then goes on to describe those huge ancient mounds still the puzzle of the archaeologist, which are dotted over Mexico, and the extensive ruins of what he suggests were fortified places, saying: 'All these mounds and buildings have their sides facing the four cardinal points, exactly like the Egyptian pyramids.'" (Lee, p. 28.) Among the Maya, persons of rank were often buried at the foot of pyramids. (Gann and Thompson, p. 173.)

"Very good and well-preserved specimens of these (Toltec picture-writings) were to be seen in the Royal Library, Dresden. They are remarkably like the Sumerian writings found on the oldest Babylonian cylinders, reproduced by De Clercq." (Lee, footnote, p. 158.)

"It has been mentioned in a previous chapter that the architecture in the original land of the Serpent Totem, Mexico, forcibly reminded Humboldt of the Egyptian temples and the Jewish ritual. Humboldt compares the Mexico pyramids with the temple of Belus: the heads of the idols in the ruins of Mitla (Mexico) with the heads of Isis: the 'serpent woman' of the Maya sculptures with the Eve of the Book of Genesis, (Humboldt, Reisen, vol. 6)." (Lee, pp. 215-16.)

"The cave of Ataruipe* * * is the grave of an ancient race. We counted about six hundred well-preserved skeletons in baskets made of plaited palm leaves. The bones were prepared in three different ways: by bleaching, by painting them over with red stuff or by wrapping them up in sweet-smelling wood and spices, like the mummies in Egypt. Near the baskets we found urns of half-baked clay, ornamented with pictures of crocodiles and snakes, like the picture on the walls of the palace of Mitla in Mexico." (Humboldt, Ansichten der Natur, p. 224; Lee, p. 65.)

Orbigny says, in describing the American pyramid: "We found here the ruins of a great pyramid, which has still huge blocks of stone in its walls. It was a square pyramid, each side of its base being sixty-six feet long. It had four doors and eight apartments. The doors were narrower at the top than at the base. The symmetry and regularity of the whole structure, as well as the peculiar hewing of the stone, reminded me very forcibly of Egyptian architecture in its developed stages." (Picturesque Journey through North and South America, 2:95, quoted by Lee, p. 30.)

Muhlenpfordt saw in Tututepec a large sacrificial pyramid, which he describes thus: "I was very much surprised to hear the natives call it Teo Kalli; this name being so like the Greek Theo Kalia, the house of the god. Quite close by the pyramid were two tall stone images exactly like what I have seen in Egypt. * * * In a very old tomb close by, I found the mummy of a snake, which, with the figures led me to believe that the ancient people who inhabited these parts must have originally come from Egypt." (Muhlenpfordt, Reise, 3:76; Lee, p. 31-32.)

In his book of Mexico, the German historian and critic, J. S. Vater, says: "It is surprising to see how exactly the ancient Mexicans must have copied the Egyptian style in their pictures and statues. They have the identical expression and the correct physical proportions found in Egyptian art." (Vater, p. 13.)

These evidences of a knowledge of Egyptian culture among prehistoric Americans confirm the Book of Mormon statements concerning the Asiatic origin of the Book of Mormon people and their knowledge at least of Egyptian writing.

The Book of Mormon is made up of a number of books written by different hands at various times. These books have in the main been condensed by the Prophet Mormon into the present volume, hence the name, the Book of Mormon. Even though such a condensation has taken place, it would be probable that the varying literary styles of the different authors would show through the condensation. It is practically impossible for two men to write in exactly the same way, using the same vocabulary and the same methods of expression. This has been examined for the Book of Mormon with startling results. Different styles are perceptible as the authors of the various books of the Book of Mormon change.

"The writers whose works were engraven on the smaller plates of Nephi employ the most direct style, and state what they have to say in the first person, without explanation or interpolations by editors or commentators or any evidence of abridgment whatsoever, though, of course, they now and then make quotations from the Hebrew scriptures which the Nephite colony brought with them from Jerusalem. (Read I Ne. 1; Jac. 1:1-3; Enos 1:1-3.) Note how marked the difference is when we come to Mormon's abridgment of the Nephite record which begins with the book of Mosiah, so also in the abridgment of the book of Alma. (Read Mosiah 1:1-2; Alma 1:1-2.) The style of Mormon's and Moroni's part of the work is pronouncedly the style of an abridgment. The body of the work is Mormon's abridgment of the chief events from the Nephite annals, with occasional verbatim quotations from those works, and his own running comments upon the same. When he strikes a period where there are but a few important events in the annals, he passes over them lightly. (Read Alma 4:1-5; 1:23, 24; Hela. 3:32, 33; 11:21-24, 35-38.) Moroni's abridgment of the Jaredite record—the Book of Ether, fails to exhibit this particular characteristic of an abridgment, owing doubtless to the brevity of the original record he abridged—there were but twenty-four plates in the record of Ether, and the 'hundredth part,' says Moroni, 'I have not written'; (Ether 15:33) but otherwise that book of Ether bears all the marks of being an abridgment that the work of Mormon does, except perhaps that the running comments of Moroni are more frequent than Mormon's." (Abridged from Roberts, 3:124-134.)

"There are differences (in the Book of Mormon) which, notwithstanding the smoothing and leveling effect of the work of the translator, appear clearly enough to suggest different original authors. Read, for instance, the following from the opening chapter of I Nephi: 'Yea, I make a record in the language of my father, which consists of the learning of the Jews and the language of the Egyptians. And I know that the record which I make is true; and I make it with mine own hand; and I make it according to my knowledge.' Note the tendency to repetition. Take another passage selected at random: 'And it came to pass that the Lord commanded me, wherefore I did make plates of ore, that I might engraven upon them the record of my people. And upon the plates which I made, I did engraven the record of my father, and also our journeyings in the wilderness, and the prophecies of my father,' etc. (I Ne. 19:1.) In the synopsis by Mormon this tendency to repetition is almost entirely absent. This peculiarity of style was, in all probability, even more conspicious in the original than it is in the English translation.

"Further, Mormon employs expressions which are not used by Nephi. One of these is 'bands of death'; another 'sting of death.' (Mos. 15:8, 9, 20, 23; 16:7; Alma 4:14; 5:7, 9, 10; 7:12; 11:41; 22:14; Mos. 16:7, 8; Alma 22:14.) Nephi uses the expression 'hard things' for difficult to understand, or to bear patiently (I Ne. 3:5; 16:1, 2, 3; II Ne. 9:40; 25:1), and this expression is peculiar to that part of the volume.

"Again, 'Great Spirit' as a name for God is peculiar to Mormon's synopsis of the Book of Alma (Alma 18:2-5; 19:25; 22:9-11), while 'monster' and ' awful monster' are peculiar to Nephi as referring to the adversary or death and the grave. (II Ne. 9:10, 19, 26.) Mormon uses that word in a different sense (Alma 19:26), and so does Moroni (Ether 6:10).

"Such differences—and they are numerous—indicate that the book is the work of different authors as claimed." (Sjodahl, Mill. Star 77:482-483.)

Of even greater interest in establishing the truth of the Book of Mormon is the language used. Joseph Smith was an unlearned youth. His vocabulary and language would be those of the humble pioneer communities in which he lived. The lack of technical learning is evident in the occasional grammatical errors used in the first edition. This makes the language used in the Book of Mormon all the more remarkable.

The English of the Book of Mormon would therefore show, first the absence of modernisms, and, secondly, a Hebrew reflection in words and sentence structure. These are both very evident as the following selections from an extensive literature will show.

"1. The contractions 'can't,' 'couldn't,' 'don't,' and others of a like character and of constant use among English speaking people, do not occur in the Book of Mormon. * * * Such forms are foreign to the ancient Jewish sacred speech.

"2. No titles such as 'Mr.,' 'Mrs.,' 'Miss,' 'Prof.,' 'Dr.,' 'D.D.,' 'LL.D.,' 'M.A.,' 'Hon.,' 'Ph.D.,' 'Lady,' 'Gentleman,' 'Sir,' 'Madam,' 'Esquire,' 'Excellency,' 'Highness,' 'Grace,' 'Peer,' 'Lord,' 'Baron,' 'Count,' 'Earl,' 'Reverend' or their plurals, together with many others that might be cited, are found in that book. A few, however, used to designate office do occur as, for example, 'King,' 'Captain' (general).

"3. There are no surnames in the Book of Mormon—a profoundly wise omission, since surnames first came into general use about A.D. 1040.

"4. In no instance is there a letter 'q,' 'x,' or 'w' in an uncorrupted proper name in the translated Nephite records. Nor is one of them in an uncorrupted Hebraic proper name found in the Bible. Not one of these letters occurs in the Hebrew alphabet under any name, and the Nephites as Israelites, or Hebrews, could not therefore make use of them.

"5. The Book of Mormon makes no use of modern names for cloths, such as 'calico,' 'muslin,' 'delaine,' 'linsey,' 'broadcloth' and scores of others.

"6. No modern names for many articles of wearing apparel occur in that book, as for examples, 'skirts,' 'pantaloons,' 'waistcoats,' 'collars,' 'cuffs,' 'gloves,' 'boots,' 'shirts,' and others.

"7. No names for intoxicants familiar to modern times and people are used in it. It makes no mention of whiskey, gin, ale, brandy, punch, porter, beer and so on. The ancient word 'wine' does occur.

"8. The book does not speak of colleges or universities, nor does it refer directly to any such schools of learning.

"9. Libraries, art collections, museums and like institutions are not mentioned, nor is their existence in any way implied.

"10. Several single words and phrase term which are in common use among modern English authors are wholly wanting in the pages of that work. To instance some of them we have, 'namely,' 'as follows,' 'the following,' 'to wit,' 'the foregoing,' 'the above,' 'to sum up,' 'for instance,' 'for example,' 'to recapitulate,' and so on. Even the rare use of such words was foreign to the ancient Hebrew speech.

"11. Christian denominational names in use a century ago throughout the world are not to be found in the translated Nephite records; nor is Mohammedism spoken of; and the same may be said of the many 'isms' of one character or another, which have sprung up among men during the last several centuries. All names also of Christian religious orders, such as Jesuits, Franciscans and various others are excluded from that book.

"12. No principle of science is mentioned under a modern name; no principle is referred to in any way which the very latest development do not sustain as sound, scientific teachings.

"13. No tariff or free trade questions are noticed.

"14. Newspapers and magazines are not spoken of, nor is their existence implied.

"15. When giving relative values which obtained in the Nephite monetary system (see Alma 11) any statement concerning or involving a decimal principle would have been well nigh fatal to the claim that the Book of Mormon records are a translation from ancient historical writings. Decimals, as we understand and use them, were not invented until after the beginning of the Christian era.

"16. The Book of Mormon does not give even an intimation of the relative value of any piece of the Nephite money when compared with some specified coin of America or England.

"17. No week-day names occur in the book in hand. Not one of the names of the days of the week as they are now used is traceable to an original Hebraic source.

"18. Names of months are not given in the Nephite records. The naming of them was unknown to the ancient Israelites.

"19. Special days or seasons of Christian church observance are all passed in silence. Easter, Lent and not a few others receive no mention.

"20. Watches and clocks are not referred to; neither are the hours of the day as measured by such instruments.

"21. No mention is made of cannons, rifles, muskets, shot, shell, ammunition, etc.

"22. No reference is made to modern medical practices. Diseases under modern names are not spoken of; neither are modern drugs mentioned.

"23. Names of modern beverages do not occur, as tea, coffee, chocolate, etc.

"24. No modern geographical names are used.* * * Why did not Joseph Smith, if an imposter, refer to the 'narrow neck of land' as Panama?

"25. No place is located by means of latitude and longitude. This convenient and accurate system first came into use about A. D. 382.

"26. When writing largely as he did of the Lamanites, who for centuries have been known to English-speaking peoples as Indians, and whom he in his younger days knew by no other appellation, how does it transpire if the Book of Mormon be fictitious, that Joseph Smith never once substitutes the name 'Indians' for 'Lamanites'?

"27. The time of day when Christ was crucified is correctly given in the Book of Mormon. Making proper allowance for the difference in time between Palestine and the Nephite lands, the Savior was slain in the morning. And so is the fact recorded by Nephi.

"28. No reference is made to trial by jury.

"29. There is a different point of view from which this matter of what had been left out of the Book of Mormon is to be considered. Reference is made to things and matters which with perfect consistency might be spoken of in one part of the book while the mention of them even indirectly in another part would have been a disastrous error. We find that the book of Ether does not purport to give an outline of the history of the Israelitish people, but of a Babylonian colony. Some of the omissions which had to be observed in the abridgment of the Etheric narrative are:

"(a) References to the law of Moses; to the writing of the ten commandments by the finger of the Lord; to His descent on Mount Sinai; to a single one of his many marvelous works in behalf of the Israelites.

"(b) Abraham and his calling to be the father of the faithful could not be mentioned; nor could stories relating to Isaac, Jacob, Moses, Joshua, David, Solomon and a host of other famous servants of God.

"(c) Nothing could be said respecting the Aaronic nor the Melchizedek Priesthoods; nor the Levites; nor the tabernacle nor its location.

"(d) Jerusalem, Canaan, Palestine, Egypt, the Dead Sea, the Red Sea, the Jordan, Nazareth, etc., with their sacred and blessed memories could not safely be spoken of unless a knowledge of them is accounted for as coming from the hand of the Lord." (T. W. Brookbank, Mill. Star 86:36-39, 52-55, 59-60.)

"The elimination of common English words from the Book of Mormon vocabulary is evidence that no modern writer wrote the book originally.

"The frequent use of 'exceeding' and 'exceedingly' when for the most of them 'very' alone or in phrase combination could be substituted. 'Very' as an adverbial modifier is not used until near the close of Nephi's second book.

"'Quite' is a term in daily use among English speaking peoples, yet it is not used in the Book of Mormon (the first half at least).

"'Just' in combination such as 'just now' or 'just come,' etc., which Nephi does not use at all, and it may not occur in the Book of Mormon anywhere.

"'Guess' is a word that Joseph Smith, a native of Vermont, might be expected to use frequently; but it occurs only once in the book. (Helaman 16:16.)

"'Namely' is a common word, but it is not used as an original word in the Nephite records." (Thomas W. Brookbank, Imp. Era 14:500-505.)

There are also many phrases and expressions which are striking because they must have come from Hebrew idioms in the original text.

"The English of the Book of Mormon often betrays a too literal adherence to an apparent Hebrew original. Let us call it Hebrew-English.

"Jacob 5:2. 'Hearken, O ye house of Israel, and hear the words of me, a Prophet. of the Lord.'

"The second clause is apparently a too-literal translation of a Hebrew noun in the plural with a possessive suffix. Translate 'and hear my words.' The Prophet Joseph Smith had the correct idea but was unaccustomed to translation, coupled with which was lack of formal training in English.

"The Book of Mormon follows generally the Hebrew custom of stringing out numerals. 'And it came to pass that two hundred and thirty and eight years had passed away,' Jarom 13; 'and it came to pass that two hundred and seventy and six years had passed away,' Omni 3; 'and it came to pass that two hundred and forty and four years had passed away,' 4 Nephi 40. Consult Genesis 5 where the same constructions can be noticed.

"The construct state as described in Hebrew grammars seems apparent in Book of Mormon syntax.

"'The construct relation corresponds most nearly to the relations expressed by of in English, in all its many senses: e.g., the palace of the king, the son of the father, a ring of gold. * * * This relation though usually, is not invariably expressed by of: The point is that the * * * words together make up one idea.' (Davidson-McFadyen, Hebrew Grammar, pp. 58, 59.)

"Book of Mormon examples: I Nephi 4:24, 'the plates of brass' rather than 'the brass plates!' Mosiah 21:27, 'plates of ore': Alma 37:2, 'plates of Nephi.' In Mosiah 20:15 we have 'the daughters of my people.'

"The expression 'daughters of my people' occurs in the Old Testament but this is not exactly as the Book of Mormon has it. In Mosiah 12:33 we have 'the mount of Sinai' where we should expect 'Mount Sinai' if the Prophet were following the Authorized version. The Prophet puts the expression in the construct state (and correctly enough) whereas the Authorized version never does. II Nephi 4:32, 33 'the gates of thy righteousness,' 'the robe of thy righteousness.' It is true that many expressions in the construct state in the Book of Mormon are found exactly the same in the Bible or nearly so. This of course in no way vitiates my general argument. The latter is bound to be cumulative throughout for no one exhibition of Hebrew usage in the Book of Mormon proves my case. But when many cases of exact Hebrew grammatical constructions are exhibited it begins to be evident that the Book of Mormon is something other than 'prayer book' or 'half-Semitic.' I Nephi 17:51 we have the too-literal rendition 'how is it that he cannot instruct me, that I should build a ship?' Translate 'How is it that he cannot instruct me to build a ship?' Other examples, I Nephi 1:11; 2:2; 3:24; 8:8, 13; 14:28; 17:36; III Nephi 19:16; Alma 11:2, etc." (Dr. S. B. Sperry, Imp. Era, 38:187-88.)

"The termination in 'ah' is a very common one among Jewish proper names, and almost invariably carries with it the idea of some kind of relationship to Jehov-ah. For example: Abij-ah, means him to whom Jehov-ah is a father. Dr. Adam Clarke in his notes on Matt. 23:7, 8 says: 'There are three words used among the Jews as titles of dignity, which they apply to their doctors—Rabh, Rabbi and Rabban; each of these has its particular meaning: Rabban implies much more than Rabbi, and Rabbi much more than Rabh.' Rabbanah (Alma 18:13) is an example from the Book of Mormon. It is evident from the facts which bear upon this matter that Rabban-ah must have some meaning that is associated with the highest of earthly dignities on one hand, and with the power, wisdom or other attributes of Jehovah on the other. The Book of Mormon, therefore, in giving to the name Rabban-ah the meaning of 'powerful or great king,' is correct to the last degree. From the context of Alma 18:13, where the name occurs, we learn that Lamoni, a Lamanitish king, and his people did not think the appellation beneath the dignity of the Great Spirit, whom they imagined they saw in their presence clothed upon with a body of flesh and bones.

"Some other apparent similarities between Bible and Book of Mormon names are these:

Bible Book of Mormon

Abinad-ab Abinad-i

Abinad-om

Elam He-lam-an

Shilo Shilom

Gosh-en A-gosh

Tubal Tubal-oth

Melech Melek

Mosol-lamon Laman

"The different terminations of the Nephite proper names, excluding those applied to God, Christ and the Holy Ghost—many of which are translatable terms—number over sixty; but more than forty of them belong to names that are found in identical form in both the Bible and the Book of Mormon, and hence this large number is accounted for at once as certainly Jewish. Of the remainder we find all but two of them among Biblical names as follows:

Termination of Nephite Names Bible Names

osh Rosh

or Beth-peor

hu Elihu

um Rheum

Shallum

no Adino

oth Aloth

ath Gath

le Baale

ib Chezib

ag Abishag

ez Bozez

iz Ziz

if Zif

et Eliphalet

ne Mene

la Bethhogla

"The termination of Nephite proper names not found in any Biblical ones that the writer has examined are 'r' without a preceding vowel, as in Coriantumr, and 'ts' as in Hermounts. In the matter of forming new names by addition of suffixes, the Nephites were orthodox Jews.

"We find in an examination of the prefixes that were used by the Nephites in the formation of their proper names that they are all included in the following enumeration: Te, Pa, Z, Ze, H, Zee, Am, O and Ab. Te with Omner gives Teomner; Pa and Cumeni occur together in the name Pacumeni; Z and Enoch form Zenock; Ze and Nephi welds into Zenephi; H and Elaman makes Helaman; Zee and Zoram combines into Zeezoram; A and Kish gives Akish; Am and Moron appears in Ammoron; O and Gath in Ogath and Ab and Lom welds into Ablom—all of them being genuine Nephite names. These prefixes when added to Bible bases give names which are sanctioned by ancient Jewish usage as disclosed from lists of Bible names. Examples: Te-Beth Tebeth; Pa-Shur Pashur; Ze-Bul Zebul; O-Beth Obeth; Z-Enan Zenan; Se or See-Machi Semachi; A-Rumah Arumah; Am-Asa Amasa; Ab-Iron Abiron.

"An examination of all the proper names (and untranslated terms) that occur in the Book of Mormon shows that there is not found a single one of them that has a 'q,' 'x,' or 'w' in it. That is to say, so far as the names in question can be traced to a purely Nephite origin, they do conform in the orthography to the limitations of the Hebrew alphabet, and this remarkable consistency is especially forced upon the attention by the spelling of the Nephite name 'Amnihu' as here given, instead of 'Amnihew' or 'Amnihugh,' according to some of the English methods of representing the long sound of u." (Adapted from Brookbank, Imp. Era, 13:117-121, 336-342, 418-420, 538-543.)

"There is much evidence of translation in the Book of Mormon, as final examples we may examine two of the texts of Isaiah quoted in the record.

"In II Nephi 12:16 (compare Isaiah 2:16) the Prophet prefixes a whole phrase not contained in the Authorized version or Hebrew version. The phrase in question is 'and upon all the ships of the sea.' With this phrase the Septuagint agrees and it is perfectly easy to explain on the basis of the Book of Mormon readings being the original why our present Hebrew text has but two phrases. According to the Book of Mormon the original had three phrases all beginning with the same words, 'and upon all.' By a perfectly natural error some scribe's eye inadvertently hit upon the second 'and upon all,' and the first phrase was omitted. It is interesting to note that the Septuagint version has preserved the first phrase of this verse correctly, has omitted one phrase and has corrupted another. The Hebrew has preserved the last two phrases correctly, but the Book of Mormon has preserved all three."

"II Nephi 13:9 (Compare Isaiah 3:9). In this rather remarkable illustration we shall deal only with the first sentence. The Authorized version reads, 'The shew of their countenance doth witness against them; and they declare their sin as Sodom, they hide it not.' Contrast this with the Book of Mormon which reads, 'The show of their countenance doth witness against them, and doth declare their sin to be even as Sodom, and they cannot hide it.' The Nephite version has a change in meaning. The ancient Syriac version agrees exactly with the rendering of the clause, 'and they cannot hide it' of the Book of Mormon. Furthermore, in our present Hebrew text, it is possible by shifting the last letter of the second verb before the following word, to get precisely the reading of the Nephite scripture for the part of the verse in question. It is possible, too, that a letter of the Hebrew text has dropped out as some scholars may insist. At any rate who can deny the strong evidence of translation at this point in the Nephite text? Few will be likely to deny that the Nephite version has an attractive reading." (Dr. S. B. Sperry, Imp. Era, 38:187.)

Those who are interested in the Hebraisms in the Book of Mormon will find an extensive and convincing literature upon the subject. It is here introduced briefly as suggesting the effect of the language of the plates upon the language of the translator.
