John A. Widtsoe, Seven Claims of the Book of Mormon ( 1936)

CLAIM THREE: THERE EXISTED A POPULOUS AMERICAN CIVILIZATION IN ANTIQUITY

"And it came to pass that the Nephites began the foundation of a city, and they called the name of the city Moroni; and it was by the east sea; and it was on the south by the line of the possessions of the Lamanites.

"And they also began a foundation for a city between the city of Moroni and the city of Aaron, joining the borders of Aaron and Moroni; and they called the name of the city, or the land, Nephihah.

"And they also began in that same year to build many cities on the north, one in a particular manner which they called Lehi, which was in the north by the borders of the seashore."—Alma 50:13-15.

"He saw that there had been slain by the sword already nearly two millions of his people, and he began to sorrow in his heart; yea there had been slain two millions of mighty men, and also their wives and their children.

"He began to repent of the evil which he had done; he began to remember the words which had been spoken by the mouth of all the prophets, and he saw them that they were fulfilled thus far, every whit; and his soul mourned and refused to be comforted."—Ether 15:2-3.

Columbus found Indians on the new continent that he discovered, and the explorers who followed him met Indians in almost every quarter of North and South America. Inquiring minds naturally asked about the progenitors of these American aborigines and in general about the early or prehistoric period in America.

Only casual and scattered studies of American antiquities were made before the birth of the science of archaeology in the nineteenth century. Indeed, at the time the Book of Mormon was produced, few systematic explorations and studies had been made with a view of discovering the history of man upon the American continents and many of them were in foreign languages. The assurance with which the Book of Mormon spoke of ancient populous, mighty civilizations in America was not justified by the reputable knowledge of the day in which the book was published.

True, a number of persons had written books on facts derived chiefly from the current knowledge of the North American Indians, such as Robertson in 1777, James Adair, 1775, Boudinot, 1816, Ethan Smith, 1825, and Mrs. B. A. Simons, 1829. Naturally, the Indian, his knowledge, habits and ancestry, was a challenge to intelligent minds.

During the last one hundred years, however, a long succession of careful studies of American archaeology and anthropology have been made. Many excavations have revealed structures of unexpected magnitude and grandeur. Especially has this field of study been fruitful during the last two or three decades, and it promises even greater results in the future.

"The last fifty years have witnessed a more intensive study of the American aborigines than the entire four hundred years that preceded them, and this deeper study has awakened a renewed interest in the problems of how long the Indians have inhabited North and South America, how and by what routes they reached this hemisphere, and to what race or races they are most nearly akin." (Diamond Jenness, in preface, American Aborigines, 1933.)

The net general result of investigation into the prehistoric period of the American continents is that in ancient times large, populous civilizations, often of considerable culture, have flourished in many parts of North and South America. Evidences of such cultures exist from Patagonia to Alaska. The concurrence in this respect of modern science with the Book of Mormon claim that great peoples lived in America in early days, hundreds or thousands of years before Columbus, is now so well known as to be commonplace. It is only as a review that attention is here called to some of the special evidences for the claim of the Book of Mormon.

"The Indians appear to be one race—the American race—and not many races, but in the culture of that one race several elements are discernible, such as East-Asiatic, Semitic and Egyptian." (Sjodahl, Mill. Star 89:158.)

The ancient peoples of America built cities, temples, monuments, roads, aqueducts, irrigation canals and other structures indicative of a large population and in many instances of a high degree of culture. The following are but examples of thousands of observations that might be quoted.

"At the time of the Spanish conquest the Peru of the Incas extended along the coast from about 2 or 3 degrees northern to about 37 degrees southern latitude. Just how far it reached towards the east is not, clear, but in some places it overlapped the mountains considerably. The entire area under Inca government has been estimated at from 800,000 to 1,000,000 square miles. It took in part of Ecuador, Peru, Bolivia and a large part of Chile. The census taken by order of King Philip II showed a total population of 8,280,000 souls." (Sjodahl, pp. 286-287.)

Baldwin says: "The ruins of ancient Peru are found chiefly on the elevated table-lands of the Andes between Quito and Lake Titicaca. * * * The great district to which they belong extends north and south about two thousand miles. When the marauding Spaniards arrived in the country, this whole region was the seat of a populous and prosperous empire, complete in its civil organization, supported by an efficient system of industry and presenting a very notable development of some of the more important arts of civilized life.

"The Peruvian ruins show us remains of cities, temples, palaces, other edifices of various kinds, fortresses, aqueducts (one of them 450 miles long), great roads (extending through the whole length of the empire) and terraces on the sides of the mountains. For all these constructions the builders used cut stone laid in mortar or cement, and their work was done admirably. * * * The masonry although sometimes ornamented was generally plain in style and massive." (Baldwin, pp. 222-223.)

"On the Lake Titicaca plateau a number of monoliths and extensive ruins still testify to the existence there at one time of a civilization 'the most ancient and the most brilliant in South America' (Nadaillac, p. 401). The great city of Tiahuanaco had buildings which Garcilasso de la Vega refers to as 'mountains of prodigious height made by the hand of man.' The so-called 'fortress' is really a pyramid, one hundred and fifty feet high, similar to those found in Mexico and Yucatan. The 'temple' is a parallelogram four hundred and forty-five feet by three hundred and forty-five feet by three hundred and eighty-eight. The so-called 'hall of justice' was at one time an immense building. A door-way made of a single stone and ornamented with a frieze of human faces in relief gives evidence of wonderful workmanship." (Sjodahl, p. 318.)

Central America and Mexico are filled with evidences of the existence of great civilizations now lost. "In the Valley of Mexico and near-by countries there was found at the time of the Spanish conquest a degree of civilization in some respects superior to that of the Peruvians under the Incas. It covered an area of about forty thousand square miles, from one hundred and twenty-five miles north of the present City of Mexico to a line near southern Honduras, and from the Pacific to the Atlantic." (Sjodahl, p. 337.)

"The ruins of Copan are situated in the west part of the modern state of Honduras, on the left bank of the Copan river, which empties into the Montague. The extent along the river, as ascertained by monuments still found, is more than two miles. There is one monument on the opposite side of the river, at the distance of a mile, on the top of a mountain two thousand feet high. There are no remains of palaces or private buildings and the principal part is that which stands on the bank of the river, and may perhaps with propriety be called the Temple. The temple is an oblong enclosure. The front or river wall extends on a right line north and south 624 feet, and it is from 60 to 90 feet in height. It is made of cut stones from 3 to 6 feet in length and a foot and a half in breadth. * * * The other three sides consist of ranges of steps and pyramidal structures, rising from 30 to 140 feet in height on the slope. The whole line survey is 2866 feet, which, though gigantic and extraordinary for a ruined structure of the aborigines * * * is not so large as the base of the great pyramid Gizeh. Beyond (the recess near the southwest corner) are the ruins of two small pyramidal structures* * * seems to have been a gateway or principal entrance from the water. The south wall runs at right angles to the river, beginning with a range of steps about 30 feet high and each step about 18 inches square. At the southeast is a massive pyramidal structure 120 feet high on the slope. On the right are other remains of terraces and pyramidal buildings; and here also was probably a gateway, by a passage about 20 feet wide, into a quadrangular area 250 feet square, two sides of which are massive pyramids 120 feet high on the slope. At a short distance (to the north) is a detached pyramid, tolerably perfect, about 50 feet square and 30 feet high. The bank was elevated about 30 feet above the river, and had been protected by a wall of stone, most of which had fallen down. Beyond the wall or enclosure were walls, terraces and pyramidal elevations!" (Stephens, Central America, Vol. I, ch. 7.)

Palenque is situated about 260 miles northwest from Copan in the modern state of Chiapas in the valley of the Usumacinta river. Nadaillac remarks: "The monuments of Palenque are justly reckoned amongst the most remarkable in Chiapas. * * * The streets extend for a length of from 18 to 24 miles irregularly following the course of the streams which descend from the mountains. Among the best preserved ruins may be mentioned the palace, the temple of the three tablets, the temple of the bas-reliefs and the temple of the cross and the temple of the sun. There are others, but of less importance. The palace, the most important building of Palenque, rests on a truncated pyramid about 40 feet high, the base of which measures 310 feet by 260. The inside of this pyramid is of earth; the external faces are covered with large slabs; steps lead up to the principal building, which forms a quadrilateral of 228 feet by 180; the walls, which are two or three feet thick, are of rubble, crowned by a frieze framed between two double cornices. Inside as well as outside they are covered with a very fine and durable stucco, painted red or blue, black or white. The principal front faces the east; it includes fourteen entrances about nine feet wide separated by pilasters ornamented with figures. These figures are more than six feet high and are full of movement. * * * The inside of the palace corresponds with the magnificence of the outside. * * * The rooms are decorated with granite bas-reliefs, grotesque figures, some thirteen feet high. * * * The building is finished off with a tower of three stories, measuring thirty feet square at the base. * * * It (a monument of Palenque) rises from a truncated pyramid and forms a quadrilateral with three openings in each face, separated by massive pilasters, some ornamented with hieroglyphics and some ornamented with human figures. The openings, all at right angles, lead into an inside gallery communicating with three little rooms. The central one of these rooms contains an altar, which fairly represents an open chest. From the two upper extremities of this frieze (which ornaments the altar) springs two wings, recalling the mode of ornamentation so often employed in the pediments of Egyptian monuments." (Nadaillac, pp. 318-324.)

At Cholula, in southern Mexico, stands the world's largest known pyramid measuring 177 feet high and 1440 feet square at the base. Next in size and importance come the "Sun," "Moon," and "Quetzalcoatl," located at San Juan Teotihuacan, Mexico. The first named measuring 770 feet square at their base and 214 feet high; and the last named after their heavenly white God, who once visited them.

"The Mayas were intellectual giants indeed. The ruins of their vast public works, of their costly edifices, of their sculptures and paintings and of their finely carved symbolic writings attest the height of civilization." (DeRoo, p. 177.)

"To erect the monuments of Mexico and Peru, the yet more ancient ones of Central America * * * must have required skilled labor, a numerous population and an established priesthood, such as could have developed only during the lapse of centuries. * * * Multitudes of races and nations have arisen upon the American continent and have disappeared, leaving no trace but ruins, mounds, a few wrought stones or fragments of pottery." (Nadaillac, p. 14.)

"In the New World, mysterious mounds and gigantic earthworks arrest our attention. Here we find deserted mines, and there we can trace the sites of ancient camps and fortifications." (E. A. Allen, The Prehistoric World, pp. 23-24; Roberts, 2:422.)

"Closely enveloped in the dense forests of Chiapas, Guatemala, Yucatan and Honduras, the ruins of several ancient cities have been discovered, which are far superior in extent and magnificence to any seen in Aztec territory." (Bancroft, 2:116.)

"In a stone, in one of the walls of that temple, a compass was executed that was seventeen inches from point to point and as perfectly executed as though it had been done but yesterday. The square also and in the center of that court was the great sacrificial slab, a stone of approximately nine feet in length, seven feet wide, grooved so that the blood of the animal would drain to a common point where a great stone basin, blackened by the fire of ages, had received the blood of the sacrifice. Whoever has looked upon that temple has concluded that the builders knew all about Solomon's Temple, for here were the symbols, marks, designs upon it so strikingly like Solomon's Temple. They have also concluded that the builders of these temples (in the city of Tichnanaco on the shores of Lake Titicaca) knew about the law of sacrifice for there too were the evidences of that sacrifice having been perpetuated upon this American continent." (Melvin J. Ballard, Deseret News, April 30, 1932.)

North America likewise is filled with evidences of prehistoric peoples and cultures.

"The marvelous remains of pre-historic Indian culture are by no means confined to South and Central America and Mexico. In the vast area now known as Utah, Colorado, Arizona and New Mexico, there are evidences of an early, aboriginal civilization of no mean degree. The ancient inhabitants of this area are known as Pueblos and Cliff Dwellers from the peculiar characteristics of their habitations. * * * In the valleys of the Mississippi, Ohio, Missouri and their tributaries; in the valleys of the Wyoming, Susquehanna, Yazoo and Tennessee; on the banks of Lake Ontario, in the western districts of New York, in the states of Missouri, Mississippi, Michigan, Wisconsin, Iowa, Nebraska and in some other states, there are artificial mounds of various forms and sizes. Some rise from the summit of a hill; others extend for miles on the plains. Some are only a few inches high; others are ninety feet or more. Some are enclosed within earth walls. But all have so many common characteristics as to warrant the inference that they belong to the same culture stage, the same people." (Sjodahl, pp. 371, 383-384.)

"In many places in America, both North and South, are found peculiar relics of a remote past, generally known as 'shell heaps' or shell mounds; also called 'kitchen middens.' Such heaps or mounds dot the American coasts, and may be seen in some places many miles from tide water. They are found in eastern Canada, the New England states, Pennsylvania, Maryland, sections of Virginia, West Virginia, the Carolinas, Georgia, Florida, in the middle and lower Mississippi Valley, in the South-Andean-Pacific area, on the Fuegian and Chilean coasts, in California, on the Aleutian islands, and elsewhere. Some of them are the works of the waves and the wind and other natural agencies, but others are artificial, as proved by the presence in them of bones, shells, showing marks of fire, charcoal and various kinds of handicraft. * * * Some of the shell mounds are of a very large size. There is one in Georgia which covers ten acres of ground, to a depth of from five to ten feet. One on the Amelia island is said to be a quarter of a mile long with a width of nearly five-hundred feet. * * * 'The vast extent of country—nearly all America—where these heaps are to be found affords abundant evidence of the spread of this nation; and the huge masses of accumulated shells and similar remains prove, like Monte Testaccio of the Romans, that they were in large numbers, sedentary in habits, and that they endured for many centuries."' (DeRoo 1:51.) (Sjodahl, pp. 396, 399, 402.)

These vast structures and cities were at times reconstructed as has been the case with cities on the Eastern hemisphere. This is confirmed by Baldwin. "It can be seen that * * * these were much more ancient than the time when any of the later built or reconstructed cities whose relics still exist were left to decay." (Baldwin, p. 153.)

The existence of great cities, mighty monuments, paved roads, bridges, etc., etc., would predicate a high state of culture among many of the early inhabitants of America, precisely as described by the Book of Mormon.

Nadaillac remarks: "To sum up, everything goes to prove that the ancient races of Central America possessed an advanced culture, exact ideas on certain arts and sciences and remarkable technical knowledge. As pointed out in 1869 by Morgan in the North American Review, the Spanish succeeded in destroying in a few years a civilization undoubtedly superior in many respects to that which they endeavored to substitute for it." (Nadaillac, p. 386.)

Prescott says: "Enough has been said to show that the Aztec and Tezucan races were advanced in civilization very far beyond the wandering tribes of North America. The degree of civilization which they reached, as inferred by their political institutions, may be considered not much short of that enjoyed by our Saxon ancestors under Alfred. (849-901 A.D.) In respect to the nature of it, they may be better compared with the Egyptians; and the examination of their social relations and culture may suggest still stronger points of resemblance to that ancient people." (Prescott, Mexico, 1:40.)

"This, however, I may safely claim: If the preceding pages inform us aright, then were the Nahuas, the Mayas and the subordinate and lesser civilization surrounding these but little lower than the contemporaneous civilization of Europe and Asia, and not nearly so low as we have hitherto been led to suppose." (Bancroft, 2:804-805.)

Baldwin says: "We are told repeatedly that the Spaniards employed 'Mexican masons' and found them 'very expert' in the arts of building and plastering. There is no good reason to doubt that the civilized condition of the country when the Spaniards found it was superior to what it has been at any time since the conquest." (Baldwin, pp. 215-216.)

Prescott, in speaking of an era of prosperity which followed the triple alliance of the states of Mexico, Tezcuco and Tlacopan, says: "The Aztec capital (Mexico) gave evidence of public prosperity. Its frail tenements were supplanted by solid structures of stone and lime. * * * The dimensions of which, covering the same ground, were much larger than those of the modern capital of Mexico." (Mexico, 1:15.)

Among some of the prehistoric Americans there was a good knowledge of astronomy. Priest says: "Nearly all the lines of ancient works found in the whole country, where the form of the ground permits it, are right ones, pointing to the four cardinal points. * * * The opening of the military works are generally towards one or more of the cardinal points. From which it is supposed that they had some knowledge of astronomy." (Priest, p. 265.)

Baldwin says: "Mr. Schoolcraft gives this account of a discovery made in West Virginia in the course of excavations made in 1842 in the easternmost of the three mounds of the Elizabethtown group, several tubes of stone were disclosed * * * if intended for a telescopic tube it is a most interesting relic. An ancient Peruvian relic found a few years ago shows the figure of a man wrought in silver in the act of studying the heavens through such a tube. Similar tubes have been found among relics of the Mound Builders in Ohio and elsewhere. In Mexico Captain Dupaix saw sculptured on a peculiar stone structure the figure of a man making use of one. Astronomical devices were sculptured below the figure. This structure is supposed to have been used for observation of the stars." (Baldwin, pp. 42, 103.)

Nadaillac says: "The various races which occupied Central America had some knowledge of astronomy." (Nadaillac, p. 305.)

Prescott says: "We know little further of the astronomical attainments of the Aztecs. That they were acquainted with the cause of eclipses is evident from the representation, on their maps, of the disk of the moon projecting on that of the sun." (Mexico, 1:102.)

Bancroft says: "Perhaps the strongest proof of the advanced civilization of the Nahuas was their method of computing time, which, for ingenuity and correctness, equaled if it did not surpass the systems adopted by contemporaneous European and Asiatic nations." (Bancroft, 2:502.)

The inscriptions upon stone monuments point to a knowledge of writing, as well as the actual writing upon the few manuscripts that have come down of the prehistoric days of the American continent. Claverigo says: "The Mexicans had more than one method of writing. Not only did they use hieroglyphic signs, both figurative and symbolic, but, like the ancient Egyptians, they had also phonetic signs, representing not a thing, an action or an idea, but a sound. From thence to the alphabet is but a step, or rather, it is the alphabet already, but they made far less use of the valuable discovery of phonetic signs than did the Egyptians. They confined themselves almost entirely to the figurative and symbolic. The result was that the writing had to be greatly aided by the memory." (Claverigo, 2:43, 56.) (Smith, p. 23.)

Recent studies point to a very admirable form of government among many of the nations of Ancient America. "In one respect the Incan Empire was unique. It was an amazing paradox of a Communistic-imperialistic government. Nothing like it has ever been attempted, much less carried out, and yet it was most successful and endured for centuries. It was, in fact, the world's greatest communism, and as far as known, the only wholly successful communistic government. Moreover, its end came not through any failure of its own, not through the dissatisfaction of the people, but through the invasion of the Spaniards. * * * How long the Incan social system had been in force prior to the coming of the Spaniards no one knows. We have no means of determining whether it was in force in pre-Incan days or was a strictly Incan innovation; but that it had been successfully carried on for hundreds of years before the conquest of Peru is certain for only through centuries could so complete a communism have been established and carried into effect. One of its most remarkable features is the fact that the empire was not composed of members of a single race, but was a confederation of hundreds of tribes and of several races of various characteristics and temperaments; and yet one and all submitted to being mere cogs in a gigantic communistic wheel. And, what is more, they appeared contented, prosperous, happy and progressive as such." (Verrill, p. 267.)

"Horatio Hale and Amedee Moure, speaking from long contact with these natives, declare that while 'impartial investigation and comparison will show that some of the aboriginal communities of the American continent are low in the scale of intellect, others are equal in natural capacity, and possibly superior, to the highest of the Indo-European race,' and that 'with reference to his mental powers, the Indian of South America should be classed immediately after the white race, decidedly ahead of the yellow race, and especially beyond the African.'" (J. H. Evans, Message and Characters of the Book of Mormon, p. 379.)

The Book of Mormon implies a high industrial development among the ancient peoples of America, and specifically mentions many industrial materials, such as copper, iron, cement, precious stones, etc. Recent research has demonstrated that the prehistoric peoples of America had domesticated many animals, such as sheep, oxen, horses, bees, perhaps also llamas and other beasts. Some doubt has been cast upon the Book of Mormon account which mentions horses because there is no record of horses having been in America at the time of the early explorers. It is well known, however, that the horse was numerous and wide-spread upon the American continent in recent geological time, and the absence of the mention of the horse in the scant records of the first explorers is not a proof that the horse was not really there. In fact, evidences of the pre-Columbian use in South America of horses for burden bearing seem conclusive.

After referring to various finds in Southwestern United States, Dr. Alfred S. Romer concludes: "There is a very strong evidence that horses, two genera of camels, a mammoth, the sloth Nothrotherium, two extinct genera of 'antelopes,' and the giant 'cat' Felix atrox, existed in the southwest in comparatively modern post-Pleistocene times. This immediately suggests a comparison with the La Brea fauna, of which these forms are typical members." (In Jenness, The American Aborigines, 1933, p. 72.)

"Recent discoveries have now shown that the mastodon lingered on for many centuries as a contemporary of man in the New World, and there is some evidence that in Ecuador one was slain by man not more than 3,000 years ago, as the polychrome pottery associated with it attests." (J. Eric Thompson, Mexico Before Cortez, 1933, p. 290.)

"Cotton growing and the elaborate dresses represented in the statuary and the wall-panels have already been referred to. * * * The dresses must have been made * * * from cotton or the fibre of cactus and aloe, gathered wild. It has been suggested that much of the material of the loom was fibre from the perennial tree-cotton. Messrs. Blom and LeFarge in their 1926 expedition into Central America discovered in the cave near Comalcalco the only fragments of Old Empire textiles so far recovered. They are of a coarse cotton cloth—apparently cultivated cotton. * * * Spindle whorls of pottery have been recovered from the excavations, and presumably the loom was as simple as the spindle and of the same character as that employed in later times. * * * From this simple frame it is probable that the magnificent tapestry-like ceremonial robes of the Old Empire, were produced, if not in blood, at least in much sweat * * * the problem of weaving the pattern on several strips, to dovetail when sewn, must have required considerable ability and concentration." (Mitchell, pp. 97-98.)

Agriculture was practiced and the products of the forests were used. "Terracing of the land shows that agriculture was extensively practiced in former times in regions now unoccupied. Two principal forms of prehistoric stone terraces, built evidently for agricultural purposes, may be recognized in the Central American region, in addition to the narrow terraces of earth described in a previous section. There are (1) narrow, high terraces to hold drainage water and prevent erosion in the narrow valleys or on steep slopes of mountains, and (2) broad, low terraces apparently leveled to keep rain water from running off rather than to apply irrigation.

"Many localities which are now occupied by apparently virgin forests are shown by archaeological remains to be regions of reforestation. Thus in the Senahu-Cahabon district of Alta Vera Paz relics of two or three very different types of primitive civilizations indicate that as many ancient populations have occupied successively the same areas which are now being cleared anew by the coffee planters as though for the first time." (Dr. O. K. Cook in Bulletin No. 145, Bureau of Plant Industry, 1909, p. 16.) (Jensen, p. 110.)

In the building of the cities with their houses, temples and monuments stone was used, and to judge by the excellence of existing remains, the people reached a high degree of skill in stone-cutting and building. Curiously enough, a fine variety of cement was known in those days which was used for covering houses and pyramids and for the making of roads. "In ancient times Chichen Itza and all the great and lesser cities of the Yucatan peninsula were linked by a network of smooth, hard-surfaced highways. The Mayas of today call these old roads Zac-be-ob, or white ways." (Willard, p. 88.)

Beautiful pottery was made by most of the ancient inhabitants of America. Glass appears also to have been made by them.

Copper is known to have been used in prehistoric America, for large numbers of copper objects have been found. It seems certain also that iron was known and used, but since iron rusts easily few iron objects dating back to prehistoric days have been found in America. This fact has been used to cast doubt upon the Book of Mormon story. Authorities very generally agree, however, that iron must have been at the command of the people of ancient America. "There is no evidence that the use of iron was known except the extreme difficulty of clearing forests and carving stone with implements of stone and soft copper." (Bancroft, 4:779.)

"Iron was unknown to them in the time of the Incas, although some maintain that they had it in the previous ages, to which belong the ruins of Lake Titicaca. Iron ore was and still is very abundant in Peru. It is impossible to conceive how the Peruvians were able to cut and work stone in such a masterly way or to construct their great roads and aqueducts without the use of iron tools. * * * Some of the languages of the country and perhaps all, had names for iron. 'It is remarkable,' observes Molina, 'that iron, which has been thought unknown to the ancient Americans has particular names in some of their tongues.'" (Baldwin, p. 248.) Iron seems to have been unknown in America at the time of the Spanish discovery, but the Mound-Builders' graveyards afford proof that they not only knew it but manufactured it into tools and implements." (DeRoo, 1:67.)

"There is a tradition (among the Indians) that Florida had once been inhabited by white people, who had the use of iron tools, which, and the subterranean wall found in North Carolina go very far to show that they (the white people) had a knowledge of iron ore and consequently knew how to work it, or they could not have had iron tools." (Priest, p. 233.)

Priest tells of the finding of axes and hammers made of iron in the saltpeter caves of the Gasconade country in Missouri and that Dr. Beck "considers the circumstance of finding those tools in the nitre caves as furnishing a degree of evidence that the country of Gasconade river was formerly settled by a race of men who were acquainted with the use of iron, and exceeded the Indians in civilization and a knowledge of the arts." (Priest, p. 236.)

"Meteoric iron has attracted the attention of men at different times and in widely separated regions. In the New World, for instance, it was used not only by the Incas of Peru but also by the Mayas of Yucatan and the Aztecs of Mexico. Amerigo Vespucci found the Indians of the La Plata region of South America making arrowheads and small tools of this metal; the Indians of North America considered it so precious a material that they used it to overlay their beads of gold. Ornaments and tools of meteoric iron have been discovered in the mounds in the Mississippi and Ohio valleys. The Eskimos of Greenland used fragments of such metal inserted in bone handles for knives and spearheads, and even recently Peary found the tribes on Melville Bay using tools of this type." (The Origin and Early Spread of Iron-working, Harold Peake, in the Geographical Review, October, 1933.)

Priest describes the finding in New York, Onondaga county "in the same grave with the bottle * * * an iron hatchet edged with steel. * * * In the same town * * * were found the remains of a blacksmith's forge; at this spot have been ploughed up crucibles, such as mineralogists use in refining metals. Within the range of these works have been found pieces of cast iron, broken from some vessel of considerable thickness. * * * Anvils of iron have been found in Pompey (Onondaga county) in the same quarter of the country with the other discoveries; which we should naturally expect to find, or it might be inquired how could axes and the iron works of wagons be manufactured." (Priest, pp. 252, 253, 255.)

"At a depth of five and one-half feet below the surface at the temple site, among broken pottery and imbedded in charcoal, I found a steel or hardened iron implement. The greater portion is almost completely destroyed by corrosion, but the chisel-shaped end is in good condition. It is so hard that it is scarcely touched by a file and will scratch glass, and with such an implement it would be a simple matter to cut and carve the hardest stone." (Verrill, World's Work, January, 1928, quoted by President A. W. Ivins, 99th Annual Conference, p. 11.)

Precious stones were known to the people of ancient America. Ornaments of jade, pearls, emerald, amethyst, cornelian, turquoise and mother-of-pearl have been found in large quantities among the remains of these people.

The Book of Mormon recounts a long succession of wars among the various divisions of the people who lived anciently in America. Indeed, the Book declares that warfare at length became so bloody that whole peoples were exterminated. It is interesting to note that modern American archaeology tells practically the same story.

"There appear to have been very hotly contested religious disputes; constant wars broke out between the sectarians following the God Votan and those who worshipped Quetzalcoatl, and the vanquished on either side perished under horrible tortures, or were compelled to fly their country." (Nadaillac, p. 274.)

"An American archaeologist, Professor Walters, has made a scientific investigation of this (in the Choctaw Indian country, when the Kansas City, Pittsburg and Gulf Railway was built through it) burying ground. He found it to cover thirty acres and estimates that it contained 75,000 skeletons of men slain in battle. They were buried in sand, and according to the statements of Professor Walters, as given recently in the New York Sun there were two distinct strata of earth formations above the sand." (Mill. Star, Vol. 60:85.)

"In Piedras Negras and Menche-Yaxchilan especially monuments are to be found of bound and captive warriors—unpleasantly bound and unpleasantly treated. These are northern outposts, and probably mark the occasional raiding and subjugation of un-Mayan enemies. * * * The Archaic civilizations of the Old World were for long peaceful civilizations. Organized warfare rose with the rise of powerful groups of nobility inside the framework of the state who came to resent the central power of Sun King and Sun King's priests. Or it rose through contact of the Archaic civilizations with outer fringings of peoples whom they neither subdued nor civilized, but raided and despoiled. In time these outer peoples retaliated by arming themselves with the weapons and methods of the civilized Archaics and triumphantly invaded their territory. * * * The weight of evidence seems to conjure up a picture of an Empire in its early phases, an Empire only culturally; politically, it was divided into many small states; later still these states may have been united, forcibly united, under some central power, perhaps a league of Peten cities. Later still, that league fell apart, and political hegemony ceased around the time when the dated inscriptions ceased to be carved." (Mitchell, pp. 130, 131, 133.)

"But even during this Toltec period hunting tribes, both of Nahua and other blood, were pursuing their game in the forests and mountains. Despised by their more civilized, corn-eating brethren, they were known as barbarians, dogs, Chicimecs, 'suckers of blood,' from the custom attributed to them of drinking blood and eating raw flesh." (Bancroft, 2:344.)

Destruction seems also to have followed at times in the wake of earthquakes, the effects of which are readily discernible. This also confirms statements in the Book of Mormon.

Three separate and distinct settlements of America are reported by the Book of Mormon. The first, the Jaredites, dates from the Tower of Babel, the other two, the Nephites and Mulekites, from the time of Zedekiah, King of Judah. There may also have been others not recorded in the Book or not known to the ancient authors.

Students of American archaeology are now agreed that the result of exploration and digging prove the existence of several successive or contemporaneous civilizations in early America. Excavations in the Valley of Mexico in recent years have brought to light evidence of the existence of at least three main civilizations which successively followed each other there in the past.

An archaic people, highlanders and agriculturalists, it seems flourished between the first and third millennia B. C. upon the mountain plateau between Mexico and Colombia, developing a very characteristic civilization of their own.

"Tiahuanacu" (in Bolivia) "has been judged the product of two distinct and successive civilizations, the latter supposedly reconstructing, to some extent, ruins left by an earlier people. * * * There are many indications that two very different civilizations succeeded each other at ancient Tiahuanacu. Many of the worked stones are only half finished, which induces the belief that some great catastrophe, natural or otherwise, compelled the workmen to leave their task uncompleted." (S. E. McMillin, Nat. Geo. Mag., 51:217-18, 1927.)

'"'That America was peopled from Asia, the cradle of the human race, can no longer be doubted but how and when they came is a problem that cannot be solved.' (Dupaix.) The ancient American races preserved the tradition of distinct migration in their hieroglyphics and pictographs." (Bancroft, 5:31.)

It is interesting to note that several careful students have come to the conclusion that the oldest migration may have occurred near the dispersion of tongues or thousands of years ago.

"After this they were dispersed abroad, on account of their languages, and went out by colonies everywhere; and each colony took possession of the land which they lit upon, and unto which God led them; so that the whole continent was filled with them, both the inland and maritime countries. There were some also who passed over the sea in ships and inhabited the islands." (Josephus, Book 1, Chapter 5.)

"In view of the best light and information which I have been able to collect on the subject, my opinion is that the earliest inhabitants of America were the descendants of Ham, the youngest son of Noah and that the first settlement was made shortly after the confusion of tongues at the building of the Tower of Babel. Moses tells us that about that period, 'the Lord scattered the people abroad upon the face of the whole earth' (Genesis 11:8, 9). America, then, according to this portion of sacred history, was at that time reoccupied by man; for the writer could not have meant by 'all the earth' only about one-half of it." (Schoolcraft, Mill. Star. 65:503.)

It is equally interesting that recent scholarship shows that the beginning of the Maya civilization was approximately 600 B.C. The Book of Mormon declares that the Nephites arrived in America about 600 B.C.

The ancient civilizations that arose on the American continent were of about the same standard, except as degeneration set in. "Wherever there was a center of civilization, that is, wherever the surroundings favored the development of culture, tribes of different stocks enjoyed it to nearly an equal degree, as in central Mexico and Peru. By them it was distributed and thus shaded off in all directions." (Brinton, p. 44.)
