John A. Widtsoe, Seven Claims of the Book of Mormon ( 1936)

CLAIM FOUR: THE AMERICAN ABORIGINES ARE IN PART OF HEBREW DESCENT

Many theories of the origin of American Indians have been proposed. The majority of modern students believe that the ancestors of the North American Indians came from Asia, chiefly by the Western route. "Not only from North and South America and Oceania, but also from Java and Indo-China and farther west, there is available an overwhelming mass of exact evidence to convince him of the derivation of the cultural capital of America from southeastern Asia." (G. Elliott Smith, In the Beginning, p. 109.) However, others, but a small minority, contend that the native Americans are indigenous, that is, that they originated in America and have no connection with the people of any other continent. A recent, 1933, book, The American Aborigines, Their Origin and Antiquity, contains the papers of ten notable American anthropologists, presented at the Fifth Pacific Science Congress. Nine of the ten either directly or indirectly hold to the doctrine that the American Indians did not originate in America, and the tenth leaves the reader in doubt as to his meaning. Modern scholarship undoubtedly holds that the American Indians originally came from some other country.

"It is only tardy justice to Columbus to state that the latest consensus of scientific opinion tends to vindicate his practical judgment as to the Asiatic affinities of the American Indians." (N. C. Nelson, The American Aborigines, p. 89.) W. H. Holmes says, "It is not assumed that the pioneers of the Old World, who in following the tendency to wander reached the shores of Bering Sea, arrived in large numbers—that there was anything that could be called a migration, but that stragglers from Asiatic centers of population found their way across the intervening waters to the shores of America; and the process, continuing from century to century, involved not a single people nor a few more or less fully differentiated groups, but representatives of many of the brown skinned people of the Asiatic shoreland and of the islands of the Pacific and Indian Oceans." (Quoted by Hansen and Fitzgerald, A History of American Indian Origin Theories, Utah, Acad. of Sciences, 8:25, 1931.)

Certainly, many, Hrdlicka, Wissler, Kroeber, etc., hold that the native Americans are only culturally, indigenous, that is, that man arrived at a very early date, bringing with him a primitive culture out of which has grown a culture peculiar to America, and in that sense indigenous.

"Few if any scientists now believe that America was the cradle of the human race, or that its inhabitants rose and multiplied in complete independence of man in Europe, Asia, Africa, and Australasia." (Diamond Jenness, in preface, American Aborigines.)

It is commonly believed that the early migrations to America were by sea, though some may have come by land over Bering strait. In recent years especially it has been shown that water traffic in ancient days was much greater than has been commonly believed, making the story in the Book of Mormon more likely. G. Elliott Smith says: "Even before 3500 B. C. the Egyptians had begun to send expeditions to foreign lands. In their search for raw materials for their arts and crafts, they had penetrated to the Sudan, to Sinai, to Syria, and to the Red Sea coast. This was the beginning of the process which led to the course of the succeeding forty centuries to the elements of the original Egyptian culture being distributed over an increasingly wide area, until they finally penetrated to the furthermost regions of the earth.* * * Even before 3000 B.C. Egyptian sailors taking their courage in both hands, had the temerity to launch their ships upon the open sea and make voyages to Syria in search of timber. (G. E. Smith, In the Beginning, pp. 98, 100.)

"Necho next fitted out some ships, in order to discover if Africa was circumnavigable, for which purpose he engaged the services of certain Phoenician mariners; and he has the honor of having been the first to ascertain the peninsular form of the continent about twenty-one centuries before Bartolomeo Diaz and Vasco da Gama (1450-1524)." (Rawlinson, The History of Herodotus, 2:321, New York, 1893; Sjodahl, p. 89.)

"A voyage is said to have been made about 500 B.C. by Hanno, Carthaginian. With sixty vessels carrying thousands of persons, Hanno sailed from Carthage along the Mediterranean coasts and through the Strait of Gibraltar and southward along the coast of Africa. There colonies were established.

"A century later another Greek, Pytheas of Massilia, again sailed through the 'Pillars of Hercules,' as the Strait was called, and turned northward to find England. From this time (340 B.C.) England and Ireland appear upon the world map. Phoenician sailors during these centuries were exploring the Indian Ocean and extending the knowledge of the world toward the East." (Sjodahl, pp. 90-91.)

"Mrs. Harriet Chalmers Adams, one of America's foremost women explorers, in a communication to the National Geographic Society, Washington, has expressed the opinion that the ancient inhabitants of America came by sea, possibly in broken stages, from Asia. This immigration took place, she thinks, very far back. She says: 'This earlier immigration, however, was at a very remote period, for our prehistoric monuments point to an indigenous culture. A branch of an old world race, these "early Americans" evolved to their highest civilization on new world soil. * * * In olden days great war canoes were paddled by many oarsmen from one south sea island to another. It seems likely that in this fashion men set sail from the Malay peninsula, with their wives and children, food, household goods and domestic animals aboard, and, aided by wind and tide, reached the promised land, some palm-fringed isle in the tropic sea.' Mrs. Adams has records of many small boats that apparently were blown across the Pacific, one of them a Japanese fishing boat which landed its unwilling immigrants alive and well on California soil a few years ago." (J. M. Sjodahl, Mill. Star, 77:516-517.)

"See Bancroft, Native Races, 5:51-54, where the paper of the Japanese Consul, Mr. Brooks read before the California Academy of Sciences, in March, 1875, is cited, detailing forty-one instances in which Japanese junks were cast upon our shores since 1782. Mr. Brooks states that he has a record of over one hundred similar instances. Whymper, in his 'Alaska' (N.Y., 1869), p. 250, refers to other Japanese wrecks, and especially to one which after drifting ten months reached the Sandwich Islands." (Short, p. 510.)

"Sufficient attention has not hitherto been given to the well-authenticated cases of extensive journeying by native boats. There is the instance of a boat which remained at sea for five months, its passengers surviving on a diet of sea-animals (including sharks) and rain water. A boat from Mangareva in the Paumotus, travelled 3,700 nautical miles until it reached Sikayana atoll, east of Malaita, in the Solomons. Had this vessel traveled an equal distance east instead of west from Mangareva it would have reached America. A boat from the Carolines is known to have travelled 2,700 kilometers against the wind; and it is not an uncommon incident in Polynesian experience for boats out of their course to travel from one to two thousand sea miles. Other information and bibliographical references the reader will find in Friederici's memoir. But I have quoted enough to emphasize the fact that during the many centuries of such far flung journeyings many thousands of boatloads of immigrants must have arrived on the Pacific coast of America, bringing with them a variety of contributions from the civilizations of the Old World." (G. Elliott Smith, Elephants and Ethnologists, 1924, p. 107.)

Rivero and Tschudi hold it to be conclusive that emigration has occurred "to the western coast of America from the eastern coast of Asia," and "that it explains many facts in America which long perplexed our archaeologists"; but "it by no means aids us in determining the origin of our earliest population." (Tschudi, p. 24.)

Besides, there are countless legends among the North American Indians to the effect that they came from a far country by sea. Pictures likewise indicate this. "The Navajos believe that all the nations, Navajos, Pueblos, Coyoteros and white people lived together at one time; all speaking the same tongue." (Bancroft 5:81; Lesueur, p. 39.)

"Toltecs claim to have come to America at the time of the confusion of tongues, arriving at Hue Pue Tlalapallan after a long hard journey. * * * The Yucatans have a tradition that they came originally from the far east, passing through the sea, which God made dry for them. * * * The Olmec traditions relate that they came by the sea from the East." "The Algonquins preserve a tradition of a foreign origin and sea voyage. They offered an annual thank-offering for a long time in honor of their safe arrival in America." (Bancroft 5:19-22; Lesueur, pp. 39-40, 61.)

Boturini says: "That in the ancient paintings of the Toltecs were represented the migration of their ancestors through Asia and the Northern countries of America until they came and settled in the country of Tullan." (p. 407.) He says further: "That in the year 660 * * * a celebrated astronomer, called Huematzin, assembled by the King's consent all the wise men of the nation, and with them painted a celebrated book called Teomoxtli, or 'Divine Book,' in which they represented in very plain figures the origin of the Indians, their dispersion after the confusion of tongues, their subsequent journeyings in Asia, their first settlements upon the continent of America, the founding of the kingdom of Tula and their progress." (Simon, Ten Tribes of Israel, p. 30.)

"According to Catari, then, as reported by Oliva who transcribes them from the Cervantes paper, the remote forebears of the Indians were driven to America from the Old World after the Deluge, and eventually reached Caracas, which may possibly be identified with Caraques on the Ecuadorian coast." (Means, p. 210.)

"The Mayas did not pretend to be autochthonous, but claimed that their ancestors came from distant regions in two bands. The largest and most ancient immigration was from the East, across, or rather through, the ocean—for the gods had opened twelve paths through it—and this was conducted by the mythical Itzamna. The second band, less in number and later in time, came in from the West, and with them was Kukulcan. The former was called the Great Arrival, the latter, the Less Arrival." (Brinton, Hero., pp. 145-146.)

All this confirms the statements found in the Book of Mormon. The Nephite migration came over the ocean from the West; while the Jaredite and Mulekite migrations might have come from the East.

The first migration mentioned by the Book of Mormon, called the Jaredite, occurred at the time of the Tower of Babel, probably before the formation of the Hebrew language. The two later migrations, the Nephite and Mulekite, occurred at the time of King Zedekiah and were composed of Hebrews who undoubtedly knew Hebrew and as already pointed out they may have known Egyptian and other languages.

It would be expected then to find in the languages of the native Americans remnants of Hebrew, perhaps of Egyptian and perhaps of the older languages spoken by the members of the first migration. Such remnants have actually been found and are a strong argument for the racial kinship of the American Indians and the Hebrews.

Several scientists have asserted that the American Indian languages are of Aryan origin, that is, "had its (their) origin in the highlands of east Iran, the country of the Elamites." Others have declared that there is also distinctly Hebrew elements in the languages of the American Indian. This probably results from the influences of the different languages spoken by the various migrations.

Survivals of Hebrew in the languages of the American Indians are numerous. "Several early Spanish writers claim that the natives of some portions of the land still spoke a corrupt Hebrew; Las Casas so affirms with regard to the inhabitants of the island of Hayti. Lafitu wrote a history wherein he maintained that the Caribbee language was radically Hebrew." (Claverigo, Memories de l'Amerique; Mill. Star, 59:374.)

"In the course of studying the dialects of tropical America I have come across many words, expressions and idioms which go far to support the remarkable discovery of Le Plongeon:

"The first person singular pronoun 'I' is in the ancient Mexican 'ano,' and 'ani,' which is the same as the Hebrew and Arabic. The Hebrew 'anoki' (I) is the I, the Inca of Peru.

"A planet, a sign in the Heavens, was called 'ot,' or 'oth,' in the Maya language, and is still called so in the Huastica dialect; it is 'oth' in Hebrew.

"The night, or period, is called 'lailo,' in Mexican, while the Hebrew and Arabic is 'laila,' 'leila.'

"The idea of whiteness, or brightness, is expressed by the word 'zack' all over Central America, and especially in Yucatan; the Hebrew is 'zach.'

"Anything in the nature of food, or sustenance of life, is called in the Mexican language 'zeeta'; in Hebrew and Arabic 'zaid.'

"A fire, a burning or an oven is called in Peru and the northern parts of South America 'tunni,' 'etunni.' In the Chaldaic and Hebrew it is 'attun'; in ancient Keltic it is 'teinne'; and in ancient Egypt the name for the sun's disc, the source of all heat, was 'aten.'

"The word for earth, the lower world, among all the tribes of the Aymara Indians, was 'urak,' 'urakke,' which is the same as the Chaldaic, 'urak,' 'urakke.'

"The hollow of the hand, or the two hands joined together so as to hold water to drink is 'kab,' or 'kabh,' in the Maya language; in the Hebrew it is 'kaph.'

"Any great man, or leader of men, a chief, is called all over Central America and the West Indies, 'Kazique'; in the Hebrew it is 'khazek,' 'khezek'; and the Arabic for a 'judge,' or 'chief magistrate,' is 'bokarina'; in Hebrew it is 'boker.'

"A collection of flowers in a bouquet, wreath or garland was called 'ziza' or 'zissah' in Hebrew.

"The name in Tropical America is still applied to the Ipomea, or moon-flower, which the Mexican Indians call 'the flower of a lost world.' The little girls about to be sacrificed to the cruel gods of ancient Mexico wore garlands of this flower; and a wreath of it has been found on the head of an Egyptian princess who died about four thousand years ago.

"A tree is called in the Peruvian and Central American dialects 'yaor,' which is the same as the Hebrew 'yaar,' a tree; and in the island of Hayti the name of a forest is 'yaarooma.'

"In Alaska and the Aleutian Islands a brother is called 'aak,' or 'aaki'; in the Hebrew and Arabic, the word for brother is 'aach.'

"To double, to repeat, is expressed in the Yucatan dialect by 'kappal,' while in the Hebrew it is 'kaphal.'

"Poison, or terror causing death, is called in Central American 'puggul,' and this word in Hebrew has the same meaning.

"The tree from which certain tribes of the North American Indians used to get the poison for their arrows was called by them 'pugguly.'

"Firewood is still called in Venezuela 'kaamery'; in Hebrew, 'kamar.'

"The hair of the head is called 'zoz,' in Yucatan; in Hebrew it is 'zizith.'

"A ruler or king in Mexican is 'capach,' while in Hebrew it is 'gabach.'

"A son is called in Guatemala 'pen,' in Hebrew 'ben.' The Esquimaux for a male infant is 'pennik,' the diminutive of 'pen.'

"The Maya and Mexican for 'it passed away,' 'it died,' is 'maqui'; in Hebrew 'makak.'

"To light, to shine, is exactly the same in Maya and Hebrew: 'nagah.'

"The sun is in Mexican 'chearasi'; in Hebrew 'cheres.'

"In the Hebrew the word 'nega' means a plague; we still find it in the Haytian language applied to that unpleasant sandlouse which burrows into the flesh of the feet.

"The overflowing of the Holy Lake in the Maya legend is called 'Tchoma'; the great Flood in the Hebrew legend is called 'Tchom rabba.'

"The word 'zuph,' in Hebrew, means a large river, or the overflowing of a smaller one; in nearly all of the North American Indian dialects the word for a river is 'ziph,' 'zeph,' or 'sipi,' their greatest river they called 'the fish river': 'na messi zippi'; hence the word 'Mississippi.'

"The North American Indian for 'to sing,' or a 'song,' is 'assaphi': the chief musician of the Hebrew King, David, was named Asaph, the singer.

"The old Hebrew verb 'makhak' meant 'to strike,' (Piel) 'to kill by striking.'

"The North American Indian expression for 'the weapon for killing,' is 'ta-mahakan,' from which we get the word tomahawk.

"The wicked god was called by the ancient Egyptians 'zet typhon'; the Maya word for 'wicked' is 'zetu.'

"The Accadian 'nin' meant 'wife' or 'lady': the Mexican word for 'daughter' is 'nin,' 'nina.'

"We have the Mexican and Maya 'miqui,' 'to die,' cognate with the Accadian 'miq,' 'to burn,' and 'miqu,' sacrifice." (Lee, pp. 224-227.)

Many Hebrew names are found among the American Indians, as illustrated by the following:

"Balam. This name was an ancient American favorite and occurs in Ahbuluc-Balam, Nahua god; Cibil-Balam, a Princess; Ci-Balam, Quiche-Cakchiquel day Cotz-Balam, Quiche name; Balam, Maya sorcerer; Ek-Balam, Maya god; Balem, Maya high-priest; Balem-Agab, Quiche second man; Balam-Acam, Quiche second man; Balam-Acab, Quiche second man; Balam-Conache, Quiche prince; Balam-Quitze, Quiche first man; Balam-Colob, Maya nation. The name Balam spelled Balaam, is frequently found in Num. 22-24.

"Baal. This name was applied to the supreme god of the Phoenicians and the Canaanites. He was also known as Bel and Belus, and in early times the true God was known by the name of Baal; but later this use of the name was discontinued, presumably on account of its desecration by association with the name of an idol god. It occurs in the Bible in various forms, according to use, as Baal, Baale, Baali, Baalim, Baalah—the latter going to Balah in Josh. 19:3, and to Bilhah in I Ch. 4:29. Among the ancient American names we find Baali, Zapotec captain; Baalo, Zapotec captain.

"Kish. The name is found in the Bible as belonging to various persons. (cf. I Sam. 10:21; I Ch. 8:30; 23:21; II Ch. 29:12; and Est. 2:5.) The following tribes of Indians use it in their tribal names: Kishawins, Kisheys, Kishtsamahs, Kishumas, Numkishes.

"Babel. This name needs no Biblical reference. It occurs in the name of the Babeles tribe of Indians.

"Other names: Kush (Cush), Kishishi, Chanan or Ghanan (Canaan), Chen, Shalal, Shimia, Hannah, Oloman (Solomon), Enech, Tenoch, Enek, etc., (Enoch, Kanoch, Henech), Dan, Mish, or ish, Sinaah, (Sinai), Heth Ptolmes, Ahas, Amus, Shoko, Bel, Cox, Ru, Rama, Raham, Zip, Zia, Iddoa (Iddo), Malah, Mathow (Mathew), Jue (Jew), Nacon, Elim, Naboh, Iri, Moriuh (Moaiah), Tobet, Terrabas, (Barabbas), Dinneh, Ehi (Lehi), Opostles (Apostles), Elah, Tarah, Zeec, Satun, (Satan), Shekom, Moqui, Maji, Bel, Ben, Mani, Mina, Shakie, Yohewah." (Thomas W. Brookbank Imp. Era 20:328-335; see this reference for discussion of words.)

Ethan Smith's "Views of the Hebrews" gives the following words which are similar:

Hebrew or

English Indian Chaldaic

Jehovah Yohewah Jehovah

Jah Yah Jah

Heavens Hemin Hemim

Man Ishte Ish

Wife Awah Ecoch

Winter Kora Korah

To Pray Phale Phalac

Rushing Wind Rowah Ruach

Man of God Ishto Alle Ishda Alloah

God Ale Ale, Aleim

Shiloh Shilu Shiloh

Father Abba Abba

Woman Ishto Ishto

Nose Nichiri Neheir

Canaan Canaai Canaan

Name Na Na

My Skin Nova Ourni

Praise to the First Cause Halleluwah Hallelujah

"The legend in the Pentateuch informs us that the Hebrews came from the 'Land of Goshen.' * * * Smith Barton quoted by Vater, tells us that the word is common in the dialects of the North American Indians, as goshena, geshona, Koshen; and it always signified a great man, a number of great men (in the plural), a great tribe." (Lee, p. 95.)

"In his (Dr. Rudolph Falb's) chapters on the 'Relationship of the Aryan and Semitic Languages to the Dialects of Ancient Peru,' he, first of all, proves that the Semitic roots are Aryan; then he shows that the common stems of all the variants are to be found in their purest condition in the old Peruvian language." (Lee, p. 96.) Dr. Falb gives a list of fifty words similar in Hebrew and dialects of Peru.

"There are striking similarities between the pre-Incan, the Incan, the Aztec and the Mayan religions and the Hebrew faith, while throughout Peru there are place names as well as words in the Quichua language that are almost identical with the old Hebrew." (Verrill, p. 28.)

One of the most impressive evidences for the Hebrew origin of North American natives is the knowledge which they have of the people and events recorded in the Old Testament. This familiarity with the Hebrew scriptures has been remarked upon by the vast majority of those who concerned themselves with the traditions of the North American Indians so that it is certain that such knowledge did and does exist. "I cannot fail to remark that one of the arguments which persuades me to believe that this nation descends from the Hebrews is to see the knowledge they have of the book of Genesis. * * * It is impossible on reading what Mexican mythology records of the war in heaven and the fall of Zontemoque and other rebellious spirits * * * not to recognize scriptural analogies." (Kingsborough, 6:401.)

Here are some of the subjects of unquestioned Hebrew origin, appearing and reappearing in the legends of the various tribes of the native inhabitants of North and South America.

There was a war in heaven, which led to the peopling of the earth. The creation of the earth with its plants, animals and men was accomplished by the Gods in successive intervals. The first man was made of clay and the first woman was made while he slept. The woman brought sin into the world by plucking a forbidden rose. She had two sons, Cain and Abel. In that day there were giants in the earth. At that time some people went upward into heaven (probably Enoch and his people).

Described briefly by an Indian, the American myth system is as follows:

"There was a world before this one in which we are living at present; that was the world of the first people, who were different from us altogether. Those people were very numerous, so numerous that if a count could be made of all the stars in the sky, all the feathers on birds, all the hairs and fur on animals, all the hairs of our heads, they would not be so numerous as the first people.

"These people lived very long in peace, in concord, in harmony, in happiness. No man knows, no man can tell how long they lived in that way. At last, the minds of all except a very small number were changed; they fell into conflict—one offended another consciously or unconsciously, one injured another with or without intention, one wanted some special thing, another wanted that very thing also. Conflict set in and because of this came a time of activity and struggle, to which there was no end or stop till the great majority of the first people—that is, all except a small number—were turned into the various kinds of living creatures that are on earth now or have ever been on earth except man—that is, all kinds of beasts, birds, reptiles, fish, worms and insects, as well as trees, plants, rocks and some mountains; they were turned into everything that we see on the earth or in the sky.

"That small number of the former people who did not quarrel, those great first people of the old time who remained of one mind and harmonious, left the earth, sailed away westward, passed that line where the sky comes down to the earth and touches it, sailed to places beyond; stayed there or withdrew to upper regions and lived in them happily, lived in agreement, live so today and will live in the same way hereafter." (Jeremiah Curtin, Creation Myths of Primitive America, 1898, Introd., pp. 11-13.)

"But Hurakan was not altogether satisfied with his handiwork. These men were too perfect. They knew overmuch. Therefore the gods took counsel as to how to proceed with man. They must not become as gods (note here the Christian influence)" of which influence Spence later says, p. 33: "The very fact that it was composed in the Kiche tongue is almost sufficient proof of its genuine American character. The scholarship of the nineteenth century was unequal to the adequate translation of the 'Popol Vuh'; the twentieth century has yet shown no signs of being able to accomplish the task. It is, therefore, not difficult to credit that if modern scholarship is unable to properly translate the work, that of the eighteenth century was unable to create it." "Let us now contract their sight so that they may only be able to see a portion of the earth and be content", said the gods. Then Hurakan breathed a cloud over their eyes, which became partially veiled. Then the four men slept, and four women were made, Caha-Paluma (Falling Water), Choimha (Beautiful Water), Tzununiha (House of the Water), and Cakixa (Water of Aras or Parrots), who became the wives of the men in their respective order as mentioned above." (Lewis Spence, Popol Vuh, p. 24, 1908.)

"In the usual North American stories death and evil come into the world as a result of sortilege, but there are many examples in which moral motives enter—as in the Eskimo tale in which man is given choice between eternal life in darkness or mortality blessed by the light of day, and chooses the latter. * * * Of course, in the great number of tales, it is a broken tabu that first brings the disaster of evil into the world." (Hastings Ency. of Religion and Ethics, 1920, art. Sin—American, the origin of sin—11:530.)

"This document (Codex Telleriano-Rememsis) tells how Quetzalcoatl, Tezcatlipoca and their brethren were at first gods and dwelt as stars in the heavens. They passed their time in Paradise, in a Rose Garden, Xochitlycacan ("Where the roses are lifted up"); but on a time they began plucking the roses from the great rose in the center of the garden, and Tonaca-Tecutli, in his anger at their action, hurled them to earth, where they lived as mortals." (D. G. Brinton, Hero, p. 95.)

"It is proper here to explain the position of spirits in the Indian systems. All the first people are conceived as having bodies as well as spirits. When we speak of a spirit appearing to a sorcerer or 'doctor,' it is understood that the spirit has left its body temporarily and will return to it. There are not spirits without bodies save an exceptional few who at the time of the metamorphosis of the first people lost the bodies which had belonged to them in their primal condition and received no new bodies at their fall. This loss of bodies was inflicted as a punishment. These desolate disembodied spirits wander about now in mountains and lonely weird places. Uncanny in character they are seen rarely and then only by sorcerers." (Jeremiah, Curtin, Creation Myths of Primitive America, 1898, p. 37.)

The story of the Flood is widely current among the American Indians. A man (Noah) with certain other people escaped in a boat filled with various animals and birds. A rainbow is the sign that this will not happen again. The leader of this party later invented the art of making wine. In course of time a tower was erected for the purpose of reaching the clouds, but the gods incensed at this presumption, destroyed the tower, confused the language of the day and dispersed the people.

Jacob and his twelve sons are found in the legends of the American Indians. Some of the tribes "used to build an altar of twelve stones in memory of a great ancestor of theirs who had twelve sons." "They have traditions that all Indian tribes descended from one man who had twelve sons. That this man was a notable and renowned prince, having great dominion; and that the Indians, his posterity, will yet recover the same dominion and influence." (Calvin Colton, Origin of the American Indians, London, 1833.) (Mill. Star 6:67.)

"In the early part of the eighteenth century, a Dutch Jew, whose name was Aaron Levy but who wrote under the nom de plume Montesinus (Travels, Rotterdam, 1840) met with a strange people in the northern Andes, of whom he says: 'My guide was Indian—at least, so he seemed to me—and he called his god after the name of the Hebrew god, Adonai. He told me that in very ancient times his forefathers were called Abram, Esaak and Yakoob; that the name of his own tribe was Rooben. Through him I made the acquaintance of a number of the men of his tribe, whom I at once recognized as Jews. They kissed and embraced me as a brother." (Lee, p. 36.)

Moses, the plagues of Egypt and the Exodus to the promised land were well known in ancient America. "A very remarkable representation of the ten plagues which God sent on Egypt occurs in the eleventh and twelfth pages of the Borgian Ms. Moses is there painted, holding up in his left hand his rod, which became a serpent; and, with a furious gesture, calling down the plagues upon the Egyptians. These plagues were frogs, locusts, lice, flies, etc., all of which are represented in the pages referred to; but the last and most dreadful were the thick darkness which overspread Egypt for three days, and the death of the firstborn of the Egyptians. The curious symbol of one serpent swallowing up others, likewise occurs in the nineteenth page of the same Ms. It is not extraordinary that the Mexicans who were acquainted with one portion of the exodus—that relating to the children of Israel journeying from Egypt—should also not have been ignorant of another." (Kingsborough; Scraps p. 277.)

"In the Quiche book of legends, the Popol Vuh, we are told that the earliest tribes of the human race traveled from the place of sunrise and crossed the sea. Having arrived in a strange land they were opposed and attacked by the inhabitants, who were, however, put to flight by swarms of hornets. Here now we have to deal with the same identical legend common only to the Hebrews and Ancient Mexicans." (Lee, p. 132.)

"What was the King and his army doing all this time? Pharaoh was not disposed to let them off easily; they had literally plagued his life; he was punished for his ill treatment of them, exactly as the wicked in the Mexican legend (L. Spence, Myths of Mexico and Peru, p.17) was punished with hail, tempest and fire; frogs and toads, locusts and lice." (Lee, p.114.)

The ark of the covenant appears to have been known. "On the excellent authority of Adair, Long and Noah, American historians and ethnologists, we are informed that the western tribes of the North American Indians kept a holy chest, or ark, which they were wont to carry to the battlefield when hard pressed by their enemies. Long says: 'This ark was placed on a sort of frame carried on men's shoulders, and was not allowed to touch the ground. To uncover it was strictly forbidden. Three men who out of curiosity attempted to examine its contents were struck blind on the spot."' (Lee, p. 109.)

Even such an incident as disagreement between Miriam and her brothers, Moses and Aaron, has been preserved. "A curious feature of identity in the Hebrew and Aztec migration is with reference to Miriam, who, under the name of Chimalman, was shut out several days from the Aztlan camp in consequence of her quarrel with her brothers, the leaders of the Aztecs or Mexicans." (Kingsborough—Numbers 12:15.)

The religious practices of the ancient Americans and their descendants, the present American Indians, are well understood from the remaining monuments and from the practices observed by those who have lived among the Indians. Almost without exception, students of this phase of the life and history of the American Indian have reported the astonishing similarity between the Hebrew religion and the religion of the Indians. "In regard to the manners, customs, habits, etc., of the wild tribes of the Western territory, a true and more correct type than any I have ever seen may be found in the ancient history of the Jews or Israelites after their liberation from Egyptian bondage. The 'Medicine Lodge' of the Indian may be compared to the place of worship or tabernacle of the Jews; and the sacrifices, offerings, purifications, ablutions and anointings may be all found amongst and practiced by those people. The manner of mourning for a deceased relative is very similar to that of the Israelites. There could be very numerous and similar analogies made between the manners and customs of those people and those of the Jews." (Schoolcraft, Vol. 1, pub. 1851; Scraps 2:274-275.)

Naturally, during the centuries of varied history represented by the Book of Mormon, the original religion became greatly corrupted, but nevertheless the Hebrew similarity is remarkably evident. Egyptian influence appears as a frequent intrusion, which is only to be expected from the close relationship between Israel and Egypt at the time of the Nephite and Mulekite migration. Perhaps nothing better can be done than to quote several eminent authorities who have had personal knowledge of the subject.

"The religious belief of the Arucanians (an exceedingly warlike tribe of Southern Chili) is sublime. They acknowledge a Supreme Being, whom they denominate by a word expressive of Supreme Essence. They also call him the Spirit of Heaven, the Great Life, the Thunderer, the Omnipotent, the Eternal, the Infinite. The government of this glorious Creator is the prototype of their polity." (Don Alonzo Ercilla, History of Chili; Reynolds, Mill. Star 59:392.)

"Like the Jews, the Indians offer their first fruits; they keep their new moons, and the feast of expiations at the end of September or in the beginning of October; they divide the year into four seasons, corresponding with the Jewish festivals. According to Charlevoix and Long, the brother of a deceased husband receives his widow into his house as a guest and after a suitable time considers her as a legitimate consort. In some parts of North America circumcision is practiced, and of this Acosta and Lopez de Gomara make mention. But that which most tends to fortify the opinions as to the Hebrew origin of the American tribes is a species of ark, seemingly like that of the Old Testament; this the Indians take with them to war: it is never permitted to touch the ground, but rests upon stones or pieces of wood, it being deemed sacreligious and unlawful to open it or look into it. The American priests scrupulously guard their sanctuary, and the high priest carries on his breast a white shell adorned with precious stones, which recalls the Urim of the Jewish high priest; of whom we are also reminded by a band of white plumes on his forehead." (Tschudi, pp. 9-10.)

"The first and most striking fact amongst the North American Indians that refers us to the Jews is that of their worshipping, in all parts, the Great Spirit, or Jehovah, as the Hebrews were ordered to do by Divine precept, instead of a plurality of gods, as ancient pagans and heathens did, and their idols of their own formation. The North American Indians are nowhere idolators. They appeal at once to the Great Spirit and know of no mediator, either personal or symbolical. The Indian tribes are everywhere divided into bands, with chiefs, symbols, badges, etc.: and many of their modes of worship I have found exceedingly like those of the Mosaic Institution. The Jews had their sanctum sanctorums; and so may it be said that the Indians have their council or medicine-houses, which are always held as sacred places. As the Jews had, they have their high priests and their prophets. Among the Indians, as among the ancient Hebrews, the women are not allowed to worship with the men; and in all cases also they eat separately. The Indians everywhere, like the Jews, believe that they are the favorite people of the Great Spirit; and they are certainly, like those ancient people, persecuted, as every man's hand seems raised against them; and they, like the Jews destined to be dispersed over the world and seemingly scourged by the Almighty and despised of man. In their marriages, the Indians, as did the ancient Jews, uniformly buy their wives by giving presents; and, in many tribes, very closely resemble them in other forms and ceremonies of their marriages. In their preparations for war and in peace-making, they are strikingly similar. In their treatment of the sick, burial of the lead, and mourning they are also similar. In their bathing and ablutions, at all seasons of the year, as a part of their religious observances, having separate places for men and women to perform these immersions, they resemble again, and the custom among the women of absenting themselves during the lunar influences is exactly consonant to the Mosaic law. The custom of separation is a uniform one among the different tribes.

* * * In nearly every family of a tribe will be found a small lodge, large enough to contain one person, which is erected at a little distance from the family lodge, and occupied by the wife or the daughter to whose possession circumstances allot it, where she dwells alone until she is prepared to move back. After this season of separation, purification in running water and anointing, precisely in accordance with the Jewish command, is requisite before she can enter the family lodge. In their feasts, fastings and sacrificing, they are exceedingly like those ancient people. Many of them have a feast closely resembling the annual feast of the Jewish passover; and among others, an occasion much like the Israelitish feast of the tabernacles, which lasted eight days, making sacrifices of the first fruits and best of everything, closely resembling the sin-offering and peace-offering of the Hebrews. * * * Among the list of their customs, we meet a number which had their origin in the Jewish ceremonial code, and which are so very peculiar in their forms that it would seem quite improbable and almost impossible that two different people should ever have hit upon them alike, without some knowledge of each other." (Catlin, North American Indians, London, 1841, 2:232-234.)

"The first reason for concluding the Indian tribes to be of Hebrew descent is in their belief in the symbolical purification of water. The inhabitants of Yucatan gave to water with which they baptized their children, the title of water of regeneration. The Indians of Yucatan invoked Him whom they believed to be the true and living God of whom they made no graven image. The second reason for believing that the religions of the Indians was Judaism is that they used circumcision. Third, that they expected a Messiah. That many words connected with the celebration of their religious rites were obviously of Hebrew extraction. That Las Casas, the Bishop of Chiapas, who had the best means of verifying the fact, was of that opinion. That the Jews themselves, including some of the most eminent Rabbis, such as Menasseh Ben Israel and Montesinos, maintained it both by verbal statement and in writing. The dilemma in which some of the Spanish writers such as Acosta and Torquemada have placed their readers, by leaving them no alternative than to come to the decision, whether the Hebrews colonized America and established their rites amongst the Indians, or whether the devil had counterfeited in the new world the rites and ceremonies which God gave to His chosen people. The eighth is the resemblance which many ceremonies and rites of the Indian bear to those of the Jews. The similitude which existed between the Indians and Hebrew moral laws; the knowledge which the Mexican and Peruvian traditions supplied that the Indians possessed the history contained in the Pentateuch. The Mexican tradition of the Teo-moxtli, or Divine Book of Toltecs. The famous migrations from Aztlan (Asia). The traces of Jewish history, traditions, laws, customs, manners which are found in Mexican paintings. The frequency of sacrifice amongst the Indians and the religious consecration of the blood and fat of the victims. The style of architecture of their temples. The fringes which the Mexicans wore fastened to their garments. A similarity of the manners and customs of the Indian tribes, far removed from the central monarchies of Mexico and Peru, to those of the Jews, which writers, who were not Spaniards, have noticed—such as William Penn." (Kingsborough; Mill. Star 70:836-837.)

"On the tropical eastern seaboard, in the Antilles and northeastern South America, we find Indians wholly distinct from either our United States tribes or the Central American and Western South American tribes. Many of these are strikingly Semitic in appearance and still adhere to Semitic customs." (A. Hyatt Verrill, The American Indian, 1927, p. 4.)

"Aztec children were taught to obey their parents and to honor aged persons. This is in accord with the Mosaic law. Prickling with thorns seems to have been a common educational punishment. The Jews too had a proverb about 'kicking against the pricks' (Acts 9:5)." (Sjodahl, p. 361.)

"As customary among Orientals, brides were selected by the parents. * * * A brother was expected to marry his deceased brother's widow, as in the Mosaic law; but with this difference: Under the Aztec code he was under obligation to do so only if there were children to take care of, not otherwise provided for. Under the Mosaic law the levirate marriage was instituted for the express purpose of perpetuating the name of the deceased. (Deut. 25:5-6.)" (Sjodahl, p. 361.)

"In the eleventh month all women who had become mothers during the year were 'purified.' (cf. Lev. 15:19; for the idea of consecrated water see Num. 19:2-9.) and the children presented before the Lord. Circumcision was practiced by some, but was not generally observed." (Sjodahl, p. 363.)

"A celebrated French traveler, M. de la Borde (Caribbeans, Paris, 1875) says: 'Many of the Caribs told me that their early ancestors were a great and powerful people, whom I cannot help identifying with the Jews. Their laws relating to marriage were the same, and they were forbidden to eat the flesh of animals like the peccary, or South American swine.'"(Lee, pp. 126-127.)

"The geographer and archaeologist Kanne (American Indian Myths, Leipzig, 1813, p. 57) says: 'We find the shoe of authority (Psalm 60:8) and the wife's slipper in the social rites of the old Peruvians exactly as they were among the Jews. The principal part of the marriage ceremony was to pull off the bride's shoe. If from any cause the bridegroom refused to pull it off, he was reviled as a man among the ancient Hebrews would have been reviled if he refused to marry his brother's widow. And this law also obtained in countries more towards the north, even as far as Mexico."' (Lee, pp. 127-128.)

"When descent was reckoned (among the Indians) through the female line, the husband joined through marriage the gens of the wife. Property, with the exception of a few articles of personal necessity, belonged to the wife, and the husband had no claim on it. The price of a man, if killed, was among the Hurons, only three-fourths that of a woman.

"This social arrangement may seem very strange to us, but it was similar to that which prevailed among the Semites in the days of Abraham. Sarah was the 'princess,' as the very name implies. That is, she was the chieftainess. Her successors were Rebekka, Lea, Dinah and Sarah, the daughter of Asher, the son of Zilpah, Leah's handmaid. (Num. 26:46.)

"In Egypt, too, in those days, the woman was the mistress of the house. She held the property and inheritance was through the female line.

"This social feature was preserved among the American Indians, as it is to this day, to some extent, among the Arabs of the desert." (Sjodahl, pp. 279-280.)

An extensive literature, beyond the scope of this writing, deals with the theory that the American Indians are of Hebrew origin. Here are a few miscellaneous evidences. Such examples might be greatly multiplied. "On one occasion, we are told, when Mr. Catlin saw copies of the head and faces of the Egyptian kings from the British Museum, he exclaimed, with a solemn oath: 'Why they must have been Redskins!"' (Lee, p. 98.)

"In the year 1829 a British traveler, Pentland, discovered in the mountain valley of Sorata near the eastern frontier of Peru, a peculiar and evidently very ancient tribe, of which he says: 'Their features, expression and physique are quite different from those of the other natives in these parts; they are certainly not Indians, and they are uncommonly like Jews. Their language they are very careful to keep to themselves, and it is not understood by any of the Indian tribes around them."' (Lee, p. 36.)

William Penn says in a letter dated August 14, 1683, with reference to the Indian tribes whose territory bordered on the southwestern frontier of his settlement: "As to the origin of these Indians I am ready to believe them to be of the Jewish race, I mean of the stock of the Ten Tribes. I find them to be of the like countenance and their children of so lively a resemblance that a man would think himself in Duke Place or Berry Street (Jewish quarters) in London when he seeth them. But this is not all; they agree in rites, they reckon by moons, they offer their first fruits, they hold a kind of feast of tabernacles, they lay their altars upon twelve stones, and they mourn their dead for a year." (Lee, pp. 124-125.)

"M. Latifau published a book called Moeurs des Sauvages Americains; and at the end of the first volume he gives us the very words and music of the sacred songs which the Indians sang at their religious ceremonies. He noted their favorite expressions Me schee hah and schee loh, which they sang in connection with the other word Yoh heh wah, thus: Yon me schee hah, he me schee-loh-heh, wah me schee, hah, and schee-loh-you, schee-loh-heh schee-loh. Now, although M. Latifau knew nothing about it, these two words are not only Hebrew (maschiach and schiloh), but they are to be found only in connection with the most ancient Hebrew legends, and principally in the Book of Genesis." (Lee, p. 63.)

Near Newark, Ohio, about 1860, an abstract of the Ten Commandments was found engraved in 256 characters on a stone tablet in ancient Hebrew. (Bancroft, 5:94-95.) This tablet and another engraved with Hebrew characters are now in a Coshocton, Ohio, museum.

About 1865 a number of Hebrew characters were found buried in mounds near Newark, Ohio, one of which was this expression, buried with one of their ancient dead, "May the Lord have mercy on me a Nephite." (Translated Nephel.) (Roberts 3:56.)

"Joseph Merrick, Esq., a highly respectable character in Pittsfield, Mass., gave the following account: That in 1815, he was leveling some ground.* * * After the work was done, walking over the place, he discovered a black strap. * * * In attempting to cut it he found it as hard as bone. He succeeded in getting it open and found * * * four pieces of parchment. They were of a dark yellow hue, and contained some kind of writing. * * * Three pieces were sent to Cambridge, where they were examined and discovered to have been written with a pen in Hebrew, plain and legible. The writing on the three remaining pieces of parchment was quotations from the Old Testament. See Deut, 6:4-9; 11:13-21; Exodus 13:11-16." (Ethan Smith's "View of the Hebrews," from Mill. Star 21:274; Roberts 3:49-50.)

Humboldt says in speaking of some images which were found near the ancient temple of Mexitli (Mexico): "The forehead is adorned with a string of pearls on the edge of a narrow fillet. The neck is covered with something like a triangular handkerchief, to which are attached twenty-two little tassels. These tassels and the general appearance of the head-dress reminded me forcibly of what I had read about the apples and pomegranates on the robes of the ancient Jewish High Priests." (Lee, pp. 32-33.)

The Incas, "also had a lunar year, consisting of 354 days, to which they added eleven days to make it correspond with the solar year. This year began the 22nd of June, after the harvest, and was inaugurated with a festival called Intip Raymi, when sacrifices were offered and the people banqueted. There is an extraordinary resemblance between this lunar year of the Peruvians and the sacred year of the Hebrews. The latter also had 354 days and a month added every third year. It began shortly after the first grain was ripe and was inaugurated with a festival, the so-called feast of ingathering. (Ex. 23:16; Lev. 23:9; Deut. 26:10.) It would take a great deal of credulity to believe that this resemblance is due to chance only." (Sjodahl, p. 314.)

"The people (Incas) were divided into chuncas, consisting of ten families each. Ten chuncas, a hundred families, formed a pachaca. Ten pachacas formed a huaranca, and ten huarancas, 10,000 families, was a hunu. A hunu, consequently, if we count five persons to a family, consisted of 50,000 individuals. Each of these divisions had its own presiding officers. The duty of the presidents of the pachacas was to see that every family had seed to sow and material of which to make clothes, etc. They were also responsible for the morals of the people under them and had to report acts of law-breaking to the higher officers, whose duty it was to punish the offenders. * * *

"The division of the population into chuncas, pachacas, huarancas and hunus reminds one of the division of the twelve tribes of Israel into tens, fifties, hundreds and thousands, with 'rulers' over each division. (Ex. 18:21; Deut. 1:15; and perhaps Lev. 26:26, where it appears that ten families used to share one oven.)" (Sjodahl, pp. 299, 301.)

There are also among the American Indians a large number of proverbial sayings which seem to have come from Hebrew sources.

"For thou wilt not leave my soul in hell; neither wilt thou suffer thine Holy One to see corruption." (Psalms 16:10.)

"O remember not against us former iniquities; let thy tender mercies speedily prevent us: for we are brought very low. Help us, O God of our salvation, for the glory of thy name: and deliver us, and purge away our sins, for thy name's sake." (Psalm 79:8, 9.)

"Blessed are the peacemakers, for they shall be called the children of God." (Matt. 5:9; 3 Nephi 12:9.)

"Blessed are they which are persecuted for righteousness sake: for theirs is the kingdom of heaven." (Matt. 5:10; cf. 3 Nephi 12:10.)

"But thou, when thou prayest, enter into thy closet, and when thou hast shut thy door; pray to thy Father which is in secret; and thy Father which seeth in secret shall reward thee openly." (Matt. 6:6; cf. Matt. 6:18; 3 Nephi 13:6, 18.)

"But I say unto you, that whosoever looketh on a woman to lust after her hath committed adultery with her already in his heart." (Matt. 5:28; 3 Nephi 12:28.)

"If brethren dwell together, and one of them die and have no child, the wife of the dead shall not marry without unto a stranger; her husband's brother shall go in unto her, and take her to him to wife, and perform the duty of an husband's brother unto her." (Deut. 25:5.)

Thomas W. Brookbank (Imp. Era 14:983-988) shows that the measurements of ruins in Central America, when expressed in cubits (21.888 inches) and its divisions (digits) can be expressed in multiples of five digits. He gives a number of measurements to show that the cubit-digit system must have been used by them. The cubit was the ordinary unit of length among the Hebrews.

"Landa says in his book that some old men of Yucatan related to him the story, handed down for many generations, that the first settlers had come from the east by water. These voyagers were ones 'whom God had freed, opening for them twelve roads to the sea.' If there is any truth in this tradition, these progenitors may have been one of the lost tribes of Israel. An interesting side light on this hypothesis is the distinctly Semitic cast of countenance of some of the ancient sculptures and murals found at Chichen Itza and in other old Maya cities. The dignity of face and serene poise of these carved or painted likenesses is strikingly Hebraic. In an article written for Harper's Magazine by Mr. Edward Huntington reference is made to the Jewish cast of features of the modern Mayas, and I have often noticed the similarity. One prominent writer on Yucatan considers the possibility of Jewish origin for the Mayas as being the most substantial of the several theories I have mentioned." (T. A. Willard, The City of the Sacred Well, pp. 35-36, and note, see also photograph facing p. 36.)
