John A. Widtsoe, Seven Claims of the Book of Mormon ( 1936)

CLAIM FIVE: JESUS THE CHRIST VISITED THE AMERICAN CONTINENT.

The Book of Mormon relates that the Savior after His resurrection but before His ascension visited America, taught the Gospel, organized the Church and ordained men to carry on the Gospel work.

The idea of a Christ to come was naturally widespread among the American Indians, if they were of Hebrew origin and had access to the sacred Hebrew writings up to 600 B. C. A large accumulation of traditions prove that an expected Savior was a part of early American religion.

There are quite as many traditions and legends to the effect that this expected Leader and Savior had actually come. So extensive is this tradition and so closely are details supplied, that the evidence of Christ's visit to America becomes convincing.

It seems quite out of the question to attribute these legends and beliefs to Christian influence after Columbus. They are too widely spread and too inherent in the faiths of all the people. "No dissemination of merely Christian ideas since the conquest is sufficient to account for these myths." (Nadaillac, p. 431.) "Among the Mexicans, the Mayas, and the pre-Incan and Incan people of Peru there was a persistent, universally believed tradition of a bearded white man who visited their lands, taught them their civilizations and religions and then mysteriously disappeared. The tradition tells of this bearded god having reached Mexico and Yucatan in a 'magic ship,' and the tradition of the first Inca—'Manko Kapak'—having appeared from Lake Titicaca and having declared himself the 'Son of the Sun.'" (Verrill, p. 28.)

"The Aztecs have a tradition of a God suffering and crucified named Quetzalcoatl, and of one preceding Him to prepare the way and call them to repentance. Tezcaltlipoca offered Him a cup, calling him 'my Son,' of his unwillingness to taste and weeping bitterly after having drunk its contents; forsaking temporal kingdoms for spiritual, being called away by the Father. At His departure there were four earthquakes. He promised to return again and redeem His people." (Kingsborough, 8:3; Lesueur, pp. 236-237.)

"Although bearing various names and appearing in different countries, the American culture-heroes all present the same general characteristics. They are all described as white, bearded men, generally clad in long robes; appearing suddenly and mysteriously upon the scene of their labors, they at once set about improving the people by instructing them in useful and ornamental arts, giving them laws, exhorting them to practice brotherly love and other Christian virtues, and introducing a milder and better form of religion; having accomplished their mission, they disappear as mysteriously and unexpectedly as they came; and finally, they are apotheosized and held in great reverence by a grateful posterity. In such guise or on such mission did Quetzalcoatl appear in Cholula, Votan in Chiapas, Wixepecocha in Oaxaca, Zamna, and Cukulcan with his nineteen disciples, in Yucatan, Gucumatz in Guatemala, Viracocha in Peru, Sume and Paye-Tome in Brazil, the mysterious apostle mentioned by Rosales in Chile and Bochica in Colombia." (Bancroft, 5:23-24.)

"Las Casas, Bishop of Chiapas, relates in his apology, which is in Ms., in the convent of St. Dominic, that when he passed through the kingdom of Yucatan, he found there a respectable ecclesiastic, of mature age; he charged him to proceed into the interior of their country, giving him a certain plan of instruction, in order to preach to them; at the end of a year, thus he wrote to the bishop—he had met with a principal lord, who informed him that they believed in God, who resided in heaven, even the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit. The Father was named Yeona, the Son Bahab, who was born of a virgin, named Chibirias, and that of the Holy Spirit was called Euach. Bahab, the Son, they said, was put to death by Eupuro, who scourged Him, and put on His head a crown of thorns, and placed Him with His arms stretched upon a beam of wood, and that on the third day He came to life, and ascended into heaven, where He is with the Father; that immediately after the Euach came in His place as a merchant, bringing precious merchandise, filling those who would with gifts and graces, abundant and divine." (Kingsborough, Mill. Star, 60:86-87.)

"Only Quetzalcohuatl among all the gods was pre-eminently called Lord; in such sort, that when any one swore, saying, By our Lord, he meant Quetzalcohuatl and no other; though there were many other highly esteemed gods." (Bancroft, 3:251.)

"He (Quetzalcohuatl) took leave of his followers, promising that he and his descendants would revisit them hereafter." (Prescott, Mexico, 1:50.)

"The Mexican believed that Quetzalcohuatl was both god and man, that he had previously to his incarnation, existed from all eternity." (Kingsborough, 6:507.)

Singularly, the serpent was the symbol of the Christ, hence the feathered serpent is found depicted in the sculptures and few manuscripts of ancient America. "The Hebrew conception of the reign of the Messiah is expressed by the image of a 'flying' or 'winged' serpent. The word used by Isaiah 14:29 is 'saraph' which may be familiar to us in its plural form seraphim which we read 'seraphs' and understand to mean a high order of angels attending the Lord. (Isaiah 6:2, 6.) They are represented as having six wings; such is the swiftness of their service. Wings are angels. (Hebrews 1:7.) They are princes, nobles, in heaven. But, says Gesenius, 'If any one choose to follow the Hebrew uses, Loquendi, in which seraph is serpent, he may indeed here render it (seraphim) by winged serpents; since the serpent both among the ancient Hebrews and the Egyptians was the symbol of wisdom and of the healing art. (See Numbers 21:8; 2 Kings 18:4)" (Smith, p. 60.)

"The serpent motif controlled the character of Mayan art and was of first importance in all subsequent arts in Central America and Mexico. The serpent was seldom represented realistically, and yet we may safely infer that the rattlesnake was the prevailing model. Parts of other creatures were the trogon or quetzal, the teeth of the jaguar, and the ornaments of man. The serpent was idealized and the lines characteristic of it entered into the delineation of many subjects distinct from the serpent itself. Scrolls and other sinuous details were attached to the serpent's body and human ornaments such as earplugs, nose-plugs, and even head-dresses were added to its head. Finally, a human head was placed in the distended jaws. The Mayas may have intended to express the essential human intelligence of the serpent in this fashion. The serpent with a human head in its mouth doubtless belongs in the same category as the partly humanized gods of Egypt, Assyria and India. It illustrates the partial assumption of human form by a beast divinity. The features combined are so peculiar and unnatural that the influence of Mayan art can be traced far and wide through Central America and Mexico by comparative study of the serpent motif." (Spinden, p. 85.)

The tradition that Christ was the Son of God and born of a virgin is found among the American natives. "Quetzalcoatl was born in Chiuenaiuecatl, which is where the hand is (this hand indicates the niche on the calendar that has the date chiconahuiehecatl). He it is that was born of the virgin that is called Chimalman in the heavens. * * * This Quetzalcoatl was he whom they say made the world because they say that this Tonacatechuhtli (the supreme God who resides in the most high heavens) when it pleased him breathed and begot this Quetzalcoatl. To this being they built the round churches that have no corners at all. They say that it is he who made the first man. * * *

"A god that was Citlalatonac sent a message for a virgin that lived in Tula, that was called Chimalman. * * * This virgin conceived a son without knowing a man, the which was called Quetzalcoatl, and they say he is the god of the air." (Codex Mess. Rios No. 3738, Transcription of the Explanatory Text, pp. 25-28; Smith, p. 58.)

Lord Kingsborough, who between 1830 and 1848 published the results of his researches on Ancient America, says: "From Mexican mythology, speaking of no other son of Tonacatecutle (a god and the people) except Quetzalcoatl, who was born of Chimalman, the virgin of Tula, without connection with man, and by his breath alone (by which may be signified his word or his will, announced to Chimalman by word of mouth of the celestial messenger, whom he dispatched to inform her that she would conceive a son), it must be presumed that Quetzalcoatl was his only son. Other arguments might be adduced to show that the Mexicans believed that Quetzalcoatl was both god and man. * * * Quetzalcoatl was born of a virgin of the daughters of men." (6:507.)

H. H. Bancroft said: "He was born of a virgin of miraculous birth.* * * He had a human body like other men, yet he was a God, the son of a God, of mysterious birth." (3:372.)

D. G. Brinton said: "Quetzalcoatl was 'born of a virgin in the land of Tula or Tlapallan, in the distant Orient, and was high priest of that happy realm.'" (p. 214.)

Torquemada, an early Spanish writer, relates: "The Otomies Indians, a wild and warlike race, originally spread over the table-land north of the Mexican valley, 'were also acquainted with the embassy of the angel of Our Lady, under a figure, relating that something very white, like the feather of a bird fell from heaven, and that a virgin stooped down and took it up and put it into her bosom and became pregnant.'" (Kingsborough, quoted by Roberts 2:473.)

Elder Angus W. McKay relates the following tradition of the Navajo Indians: "A baby boy was found near the Pacific Ocean by a most beautiful Virgin, who had never seen man. They claim that Heavens and Earth came together and that this boy was dropped from Heaven, pure and holy." (McKay, Utah Genealogical Magazine, 24:60.)

The tradition of a virgin giving birth to a god is found among many ancient American peoples. Brinton says: "Many of the goddesses were virgin deities, as the Aztec Coatlicue, Xochiquetzal, and Chimalman; and many of the great gods of the race, as Quetzalcoatl, Manibozho, Viracocha, and Ioskeha, were said to have been born of a virgin. Even among the low Indians of Paraguay the early missionaries were startled to find this tradition of the maiden mother of the god, so similar to that which they had come to tell." (Myths of the New World, p. 172.)

To Latter-day Saints, these traditions are not surprising. We recognize in them remnants of the truths once taught to the early American peoples, as recorded in the Book of Mormon. According to the Book of Mormon, the people were not only told of the visit of Christ to come (Helaman 14), but also to the Prophet Nephi was shown in a vision "the Virgin, exceedingly fair and white * * * the mother of the Son of God after the manner of the flesh * * * bearing a child in her arms." (I Nephi 11:18.) The visit of Christ, after His crucifixion, is also described in an account of singular beauty (3 Nephi 11:28).

At the time of the birth of Christ, the Book of Mormon affirms there were two days and nights of light. This is confirmed in American tradition. Bancroft quoting Juarrors: "And this division (of an empire) was made on a day when three suns were seen, which has caused some to think that it took place on the day of the birth of the Redeemer, a day on which it was commonly believed that such a meteor was observed." (Bancroft, 5:566.)

Bancroft, following the native writer Ixtilxochiti: "The next event recorded * * * is the stopping of the sun for a whole day in his courses, as at the command of Joshua as recorded in the Old Testament." (Bancroft, 5:209-210.)

A rite similar to baptism was practiced by the Americans. "The use of water more or less sanctified was used as a purification avowal which frees one from an inherent sin. This runs back to a period far pre-Christian among the Mexican, Mayan and other American nations. They were cleansed from sin by washing." (Bancroft, 3:119.)

Gann and Thompson, careful students of the Mayas, report that the Mayas practiced a form of baptism, and that the Mayan word for baptism meant rebirth, and that the children were baptized when they were about twelve years old. (See Gann & Thompson, pp. 139, 140.)

"Baptism was not known in any of the provinces of New Spain, but in Yucatan, and this name they gave it signified to be born again, having so great a veneration for it that none went without it, believing they in it received a pure disposition to be good, that the Devils could not hurt them, and they were put into the Way of Bliss. No man could be married without it." (Antonio de Herrera, History of America, 4:172, trans, by Stevens.)

"With these vows was often associated the rite of baptism, by sprinkling or by immersion in water. Even among the rude Jahgans of Tierra del Fuego we find that the child, when born, was promptly dipped in water, not for sanitary but for religious reasons. * * * In another sense it (baptism) would seem to have been a purification from inherited sin, in which sense it was practiced by the Nahuas of Mexico and the Quichuas of Peru. With the Mayas of Yucatan it was in common usage and was known by the significant name, 'the second birth.'" (D. G. Brinton, Religions of Primitive Peoples, 1897, p. 195.)

"The natives at the time of maize gathering were accustomed to sacrifice a man to the gods of the harvest. Around the altar were strewn grains of corn. Over these worshipers stood and with flint knives let blood from the most sensitive parts of their bodies, the drops falling on the grains. These were then eaten as holy food, part of the sacrifice. (Oviedo, Historia de las Indias lib. 10, cap. 11.) Something very similar obtained in Peru at the time of the vernal equinox, all strangers were bidden to leave the sacred city of Cuzco, where the Inca resided. A human victim was immolated, and the spotless 'Virgins of the Sun' were deputed to mingle his blood with meal and bake it into small cakes. These were distributed among the people and eaten, and one sent to every holy shrine and temple in the kingdom." (Balboa, Histoire du Perou, pp. 125-127; D. G. Brinton, Religions of Primitive Peoples, p. 190.)

D. G. Brinton tells us: "The astonishment of the Romanist missionaries rose to horror when they discovered among various nations a rite of baptism of appalling similarity to their own, connected with the imposing of a name, done avowedly for the purpose of freeing from inherent sin, believed to produce a regeneration of the spiritual nature; nay, in more than one instance called by an indigenous word signifying 'to be born again.' Such a rite was of immemorial antiquity among the Cherokees (a tribe of Indians in the Eastern United States), Aztecs, Mayas and Peruvians." (Myths of the New World, 1868, pp.125-126.) (Also stated by Herrera, History of America, quoted in Scraps, p. 288; Gann and Thompson, History of the Maya, p. 140.)

Of the remote antiquity of this practice we are also assured by Bancroft (Native Races 3:119) and by DeRoo, who says: "Christian missionaries and other writers of that time (of the Conquest by Spain) assure that baptism—to all intents the sacrament of baptism—was administered in several American districts from time immemorial." (DeRoo, p. 466.)

Sahagun, the most important authority concerning the Aztec religion of Mexico, and who lived contemporaneously with the conquest of Mexico by the Spaniards, gives us this concerning the rite of baptism among the Aztecs: "The one baptizing sprinkled water on the head of the infant saying, 'O my child, take and receive water of the Lord of the world, which is our life, it is to wash and to purify; may these drops remove the sin which was given to thee before the creation of the world, since all of us are under its power.' * * * The rite was concluded with: 'Now is he purified and cleansed afresh, and our mother the water again bringeth him into the world."' (Historia de Nueva Espana, lib. 6 cap. 37.)

In regard to the manner of baptism and the age of those baptized, Brinton tells us: "In Peru the child was immersed in the fluid. * * * In either country sprinkling could take the place of immersion. The Cherokees believe that unless the rite is punctually performed when the child is three days old it will inevitably die." (Myths of the New World, p. 128.)

Kastner, an authority, also speaks of immersion. (Quoted by DeRoo, p. 466.)

That baptism was not just a formal ceremony is shown by the respect and meaning which was attached to it in Yucatan and in Central America. Bishop Landa, a bishop of Yucatan, who wrote about the middle of the sixteenth century on the religious beliefs of the Mayas, says this: "They have such a respect for baptism that those who have sins on their consciences or who feel themselves inclined to commit sin, confess to the priest in order to be in a state to receive baptism. * * * They believe that they receive therefrom a disposition inclined to good conduct, that it, guarantees them from all temptations of the devil, with respect to temporal things, and by means of this rite and a good life they hope to secure salvation." (Quoted in Hastings Encyclopedia of Religion and Ethics, 11:529.)

This aid made possible in leading a good life and in obtaining "salvation" is told also by DeRoo: "It was the duty of all the Mayas to have their children baptized, for they believed that by this ablution they received purer nature, were protected against evil spirits and possible misfortunes. They held, moreover that an unbaptized person, whether man or woman, could not lead a good life nor do anything well." (DeRoo, p. 467.)

From these various quotations that have come to us through historical research, it is evident that baptism was practiced in America by various peoples. It is also evident that they understood baptism to be a "rebirth," cleansing them from sin and making possible a better life and salvation.

The Book of Mormon tells us that the meaning and mode of baptism was taught to the ancestors of the Indians by prophets of God (read 2 Nephi 9:22-24; Moroni 6 and 8) and, indeed, the Savior during His visit to the Nephites gave the following instructions regarding baptism: "Behold, ye shall go down and stand in the water, and in my name shall ye baptize them * * * saying: Having authority given me of Jesus Christ, I baptize you in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. Amen. And then shall ye immerse them in water, and come forth again out of the water." (3 Nephi 11:23-26.)

Officers of the Church were appointed to carry on the work. "Quetzalcoatl had priests who were called quequetzalcohua, that is to say 'priests of the order of Quetzalcoatl."' (Bancroft, 3:259.)

"At the head of the Aztec Priesthood stood the Lord of Divine Matters. He had a seat on the emperor's council which was second only to royal authority. Next in rank to him was the High Priest of Quetzalcoatl * * * who had authority over his own cast only. The priests of Quetzalcoatl were called by name after their tutelar deity. The lesser grades included the ordinary priests. * * * The lowest order was the Little Priests, youths who were graduating in the priestly office." (Spence, p. 116.)

The legendary Christ of America performed miracles and taught Christian doctrines. Rosales History of Chile declares "A wonder man had come to that country * * * who performed many miracles, cured the sick with water, kindled fire at a breath, caused it to rain and their crops and grain to grow, healing at once the sick, giving sight to the blind." (Kingsborough, 6:419; Roberts 3:25.)

"It is said that when barren women prayed and made sacrifices to Quetzalcohuatl, children were given them. He was god of the winds, and the power of causing them to blow was attributed to him as well as the power of calming them. * * * The soil grew the richest harvest without cultivation." (Bancroft, 3:259-260, 274.)

"In contemplating the religious system of the Aztecs one is struck with its apparent incongruity, as if some portion of it had emanated from a comparatively refined people, open to gentle influences, while the rest breathes a spirit of unmitigated ferocity. It naturally suggests the idea of two distinct sources and authorizes the belief that the Aztecs had inherited from their predecessors a milder faith on which was afterwards engrafted their own mythology. The latter soon became dominant and gave its dark coloring to the creeds of the conquered nation—which the Mexicans, like the Romans, seem willing to have incorporated into their own, until the same funereal superstitions settled over the farthest borders of Anahuac." (Prescott, Mexico, 1:47.)

"Quetzalcohuatl would have nothing to do with wars, even covering his ears when the subject was mentioned. His was a veritable golden age, as in the time of Saturn, animals and even men lived in peace." (Bancroft, 3:274; Roberts 3:35.)

Gann and Thompson also say that the Mayas fasted preceding important ceremonies. (pp. 143, 144.)

"We thus arrive, still in primitive conditions, to such personal ideals as Quetzalcoatl among the Aztecs of whom it was said in their legends that he was of majestic presence, chaste in life, averse to war, wise and generous in actions, and delighting in the cultivation of the arts of peace; or, as we see among the Peruvians, in their culture hero Tonapa, of whose teachings a Catholic writer of the sixteenth century says. 'So closely did they resemble the precepts of Jesus, that nothing was lacking in them but His Name and that of His Father."' (D. G. Brinton, Religions of Primitive Peoples, p. 251.)

"The doctrines of the benign and saintly Quetzalcoatl or Cukulcan must be classed among the great faiths of mankind, and their author alone of all the great teachers of morals except Christ himself, inculcating a positive morality, must be granted a precedence of most of the great teachers of Chinese and Hindoo antiquity." (Short, p. 515.)

"In addition to this sign of a belief in Christ, a ceremony suggestive of analogy to the sacrament of the communion was witnessed with astonishment by the invaders (Cortez). Aztec priests were seen to prepare a cake of flour, mixed with blood, which they consecrated and gave to the people, who, as they ate, 'showed signs of humiliation and sorrow, declaring it was flesh of Deity.'" (Prescott, 3:314.)

"Quetzalcohuatl took leave of his companions, and sent them back to their city instructing them to tell their fellow citizens that a day should come in which the white men would land upon their coasts, by way of the sea in which the sun rises; brethren of his and having beards like his; and that they should rule the land." (Bancroft, 3:25.)

The great white God in American tradition is frequently mentioned as having been crucified. Crucifixion was in fact practiced in ancient America. "It is worth noting that we find in its records reference to the old Hebrew custom of putting prisoners of war or criminals to death by crucifixion. Death by crucifixion was a Jewish form of execution long before the Roman Empire came into existence. Sculptures representing crucified victims were found among the ruins of the most ancient temples in Tropical America and Assyria. * * * Moses found it necessary to lay down special laws with regard to the manner in which the dead bodies of the crucified should be treated. (Deut. 21:22, 23.)" (Lee, pp. 164-165.)

"The Mayas collected the remains of their dead in places specially set apart for this purpose. Over this place the skulls of those recently sacrificed were stuck on the tops of poles.

"Let us note this name Tzompanco, 'a place of skulls.' There was invariably a Tzompanco attached to all the most important places of sacrifice: the sight of which was meant to add an extra pang to the horrors of approaching death; for the living victims could not help seeing there the ghastly remains of those who had just been butchered.

"In connection with this, we cannot help being reminded that of the surroundings of the place where the greatest Human Sacrifice of all was offered up, the only one mentioned by each of the four Evangelists is: 'The Place of Skulls."' (Lee, pp. 172, 173.)

"In most American stories where we hear of the first of men emerging from the underworld, it is by climbing a tree. The tree also supports the sky, and is so represented in the native books of the Mayas and Nahuas. The Yurucares of Bolivia relate that their god Tiri, when he would people the earth with men, cleft a tree, and from the opening came forth the various tribes of the world. When the tree was not worshipped as itself, but under a symbolic form, this was usually as the sacred pole or cross. The sacred pole was found widely among the American Indians. It was planted in the center of their villages, or, if the tribe was nomadic it was carried about in an ark or wrapping and set up in a tent by itself in their encampment. It typified the communal life of the tribe and represented the 'mystery tree' which was intimately associated in their legendary origin. In early art the cross as a sacred design is often derived from the conventionalized figure of a tree, and symbolizes the force of life, the four winds, the rain and the water. This is notably the case in Mexico and Central America where we have abundant testimony that this is the origin and meaning of the cross symbol so frequent in their monuments." (Brinton, Religions of Primitive People, pp. 151-152.)

"The present age—or 'sun' of the world, as the Aztecs conceived it—endured by reason of the continual expiation, self-maceration of human hearts offered to gods who had made of themselves the first great sacrifice. The fullest version of this remarkable myth is in the anonymous 'Historia de los Mexicanos por sus Pinturas,' though it is to be found also in the 'Anales de Cuauahitlan,' fragmentarily. The idea underlying the myth is apparently related to the notion of Anazimander that individual life (even of Gods) is in some sense an arrogance and injustice to be atoned for, and a great part of the ceremonial of Mexican religion was devoted to acts of atonement. How completely the idea dominated the Mexican mind is most impressively shown by the prayers recorded by Sahagun, for the whole sixth book of the Historia is virtually an elaborate ritual of penitence—not so much for individual sins as for the presumptuousness of living." (Hastings, Ency. of Religion and Ethics, art. Sin, [American, Origin of] 11:531.)

"In the fourth page of the Borgian Ms. he (Quetzalcoatl) seems to be crucified between two persons who are in the act of reviling him." (Kingsborough, 6:166.)

"Very often * * * the Incans are referred to as sun worshippers. But strictly speaking this is incorrect. The Incans never worshipped the sun itself, but regarded the planet merely as the visual manifestation of the Sun-god Inti; a living deity who, when he so desired, could descend to earth and mingle with human beings. It was believed too that he could suffer and die, as at the time of eclipses, but that he was always reborn; and that his divine wife was Mama Quilla, whose visible manifestation was the moon. But over and above these two, the Incans believed there was a supreme being or creator, a god who was known as Kamak or Kapah or 'The Condor of the Heaven' or 'Condor-god' and who was of pre-Incan origin." (Verrill, p. 147.)

The Book of Mormon declares that at the time of the crucifixion there were earthquakes and catastrophic changes in America. Traditionally, this is verified. "The sun and moon were eclipsed, the earth shook, and the rocks were rent asunder, and many other things and signs happened, though there was no loss of life. This was in the year Ce Calli, which, the chronology being reduced to our system, proves to be the same date when Christ our Lord suffered, 33 A.D." (Bancroft, 5:210.)

Rivero and Tschudi quote Montesinos, a Peruvian historian: "During his reign (32 or 33 A. D.) they experienced earthquakes that lasted several months." (Tschudi, pp. 59-60.)

Brasseur de Bourbourg speaks of physical cataclysms which, according to the native traditions, took place in that part of America (Peru). "This tradition affirms that a part of the continent extending into the Atlantic was destroyed in the manner supposed (submerged), and appears to indicate that the destruction was accomplished by a succession of frightful convulsions. * * * 'The land was shaken by frightful earthquakes, and the waves of the sea combined with volcanic fires to overwhelm and engulf it.' * * * Most of the inhabitants were destroyed." (Baldwin, p. 176.)

Nadaillac refers to traditions collected by Brasseur de Bourbourg: "There were in these regions, at that remote date, convulsions of nature, deluges, terrible inundations, followed by the upheaval of mountains, accompanied by volcanic eruptions. These traditions, traces of which are also met with in Mexico, Central America, Peru and Bolivia, point to the conclusion that man existed in these various countries at the time of the upheaval of the Cordilleras, and that the memory of that upheaval has been preserved." (Nadaillac, pp. 16, 17.)

That the spirit of man would live after death was a well-established and well-nigh universal belief. Gann and Thompson found that the Mayas believe in an existence after this life. (p. 129.)

"The Peruvians believed in the existence of man after death, and the resurrection of the body. They had a conception of a 'heaven' for the good, and another place for the wicked, which they located in the center of the earth, as the Hebrews did their Sheol. They also believed in the existence of an evil spirit, Cupay, and they believed that life after this was very much like the present, wherefore they buried with their loved ones their utensils and treasures, and, like the Egyptians, they preserved the bodies of their kings and princes." (Sjodahl, pp. 317-318.)

Here is an Indian funeral sermon: "You are about to go to that land where our forefathers have gone. You have finished your journey here before us. We shall follow you and rejoin the happy groups which you will meet." (Schoolcraft, 2:68.)

Among the Indians "the idea of immortality is strongly dwelt upon. It is not spoken of as a supposition or a mere belief, not fixed. It is regarded as an actuality, as something known and approved by the judgment of the nation. During the whole period of my residence and travels in Indian country, I never knew and never heard of an Indian who did not believe in it, and in the reappearance of the body in a future state." (Schoolcraft, 2:68.)

"The American peoples are at one in their belief in a Paradise, a place of joy, if not of reward." (Lewis Spence, Popol Vuh, p. 48.)

"The hero-gods in the myth (Popol Vuh) voluntarily succumb to the power of the Lords of Death, and after being burned their bones are ground in a mill and thrown into the waters. The belief was almost universal in America that the soul resided in the bones. The bones were the basis of the man. Flesh would readily perish, but would return to clothe this more lasting foundation. So in many tribes the bones of the dead were carefully preserved." (Lewis Spence, Popol Vuh, p. 49.)

"The Alaskan and Peruvian mummies, like those of ancient Egypt, were artificially prepared and swathed in numerous cerecloths. In all, the same faith in the literal resurrection of the flesh was the prevailing motive. More generally, the belief was held that the soul remained attached in some way to the bones." (D.G. Brinton, Religions of Primitive Peoples, p. 211.)

"The Cascikas of Peru * * * believed to rise again in another world, and therefore

they would not then be to seek for such furniture and service (vessels of gold and silver and pages or servants). So then when the Spaniards came to break up those sepulchres for the gold and plate that was in them, the Indians besought them that they would not scatter the bones, because (said they) their bones being together, they shall more easily, and with less pain, rise again." (Zarate, p. 43.)
