John A. Widtsoe, Seven Claims of the Book of Mormon ( 1936)

CLAIM SEVEN: THE BOOK OFFERS A CERTAIN TEST OF ITS AUTHENTICITY

"The Book of Mormon offers a test of its genuineness, which has been used by thousands with never a failure. Those who have used it have become convinced of the truth and divine authenticity of the Book of Mormon.

"'And when ye shall receive these things, I would exhort you that ye would ask God, the Eternal Father, in the name of Christ, if these things are not true; and if ye shall ask with a sincere heart, with real intent, having faith in Christ, he will manifest the truth unto you, by the power of the Holy Ghost.' (Moroni 10:4.)

"Such a challenge makes the Book of Mormon unique. Men dare not present such a test for their human labors. A host of witnesses, living and dead, testify to the efficacy of this divine test. But, the test, to give full assurance, must be applied by one who loves truth above all else." (John A. Widtsoe, The Book of Mormon, p. 4.)

There are upwards of 750,000 living members of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Other hundreds of thousands of members have died in full fellowship with the Church. The majority of this vast multitude have applied this test to the genuineness of the Book of Mormon, and have come out of the search with the assurance that the Book is true.

So far, none has reported that after having complied with Moroni's requirements, he has failed to obtain a testimony of the truth of the Book.

Such a test, and such results may not be lightly laid aside.

The divine test of the truth of the Book of Mormon implies that man possesses powers other than those of the physical senses that may confirm the evidence of eyes or ears. That is, there resides in every human being spiritual powers which once put into operation may yield certain evidence concerning the things about us. Every earnest seeker after truth, whether in or out of scientific laboratories or university libraries, can bear witness to the help that comes from out of the unseen world.

When the Book of Mormon was first published, the present mass of evidence in behalf of the truth of the Book was not available, yet thousands of intelligent, honest persons became convinced of its truth. The people read the Book, weighed its statements in the balance of reason and applied Moroni's test. The assurance came to them, an assurance strengthened by every advance in sound knowledge. "The way to truth? Yes, it may be found easily, but only by paying the eternal price of truth. The way is through the higher logic, the convincing teaching of the spirit of truth by the operations of the mind and the eager outreaching of the spirit to God. Whoever would find truth must: (1) Desire truth, (2) Pray for it, (3) Study, and (4) Practice it. Those who do so will find truth, for it cannot be denied them. They will receive the glorious and priceless possession called a testimony or complete assurance of truth, which becomes the great gift of God to its possessor.

"Is truth worth the effort necessary to secure it?"

"Truth is the only enduring possession of man, the only power that lifts man into permanent joy. It is the final justification of life. Human days are valueless if truth is not worth every sacrifice of life. Those who have lived most have lived by truth. So speaks the voice of human experience." (J. A. Widtsoe, In Search of Truth, pp. 119-120.)
