John A. Widtsoe, Seven Claims of the Book of Mormon ( 1936)

CONCLUSION

Let us in conclusion review briefly the status of the seven claims which have been discussed.

Claim 1: The Book Had a Divine Origin.

It is generally agreed that the contents of the Book prove its composition to be above the natural powers of an untutored lad, as was Joseph Smith. It may be said to be a settled fact that Joseph Smith produced the Book of Mormon without help from any other man. No other author has been found. The translation was carried on above board, with the knowledge of the community. Twelve witnesses testify to having seen the plates from which the Book was said to have been translated. Four of these men testify that at the time they saw the plates they also had the manifestation of a heavenly personage. The time of composition of the Book, something over two months, makes it unique in the history of book making, beyond the ordinary powers of man. The honest mind is driven to the conclusion that Joseph Smith was but an instrument of unseen spiritual forces in the production of the Book.

Claim 2: The Book Was Written On Gold Plates In Reformed Egyptian by a Succession of Historians.

It is a settled fact also that the ancients frequently preserved their writing upon metallic plates. Neither the weight of the plates nor their capacity clashes with the statements made by Joseph Smith regarding them. The original language of the Book of Mormon is not known. It is called by the historians, "reformed Egyptian." Any language may be written with the use of any one of several alphabets. The Egyptians frequently wrote their language in scripts different from the ordinary Egyptian hieroglyphics. It is further made certain by recent investigation that the ancient inhabitants of America showed the possession of Egyptian traditions both in their religious practices and in their buildings. There is considerable difference in the words and manner of language used in the various books written by different Book of Mormon historians, pointing to the truth of Joseph Smith's story. The English used in the Book of Mormon is quite foreign to the every day language used by the people of Joseph Smith's day and neighborhood, but shows unmistakable relationships to the Hebrew idiom. All these facts taken together support marvelously well the second claim of the Book of Mormon.

Claim 3: There Existed a Populous American Civilization in Antiquity.

This claim has been so well authenticated by recent investigations that it seems almost a waste of time to defend it. Yet, when one recalls that in 1830 when the Book was first published the knowledge of prehistoric America was very limited, this claim becomes important in proving the Book of Mormon to be of divine origin.

Claim 4: The American Aborigines Are in Part of Hebrew Descent.

This question has not yet been settled by competent scholars; but without question there are Hebrew elements in many of the native American languages and customs. The American aborigines have traditions of the leading Hebrew characters and events before the time of Christ,—and in their religious beliefs and practices they follow with astonishing similarity the corresponding beliefs and practices of the Hebrews. In view of existing knowledge no matter how one may feel about the Book of Mormon, he cannot lightly set aside this claim. Indeed every new discovery has tended to confirm this claim.

Claim 5: Jesus the Christ Visited the American Continent.

It is undeniably true that the Christ story was spread among the natives of the two Americas before the coming of Columbus. This might have come through a knowledge of the Hebrew religion which looked forward to a coming Messiah. The American tradition, however, declares that He did come, and the tradition is so extensive and so thoroughly engrained in the historical life of the people that one must either accept the coming of Christ to America as a fact or the coming of some other great man was mistaken for the Christ. The latter supposition disappears, however, in view of the body of Christian ordinances and beliefs as taught by the Savior which survive among the American aborigines. It is difficult, though one may disagree with the Book of Mormon, to ignore these facts which were predicted as well as fully realized in the Book of Mormon story.

Claim 6: The Contents of the Book of Mormon Are Inspired.

This claim means that the contents of the Book of Mormon are beyond the power of an ordinary man to produce—and that they bear the mark of a divine source. Only the reading of the book with an unprejudiced mind can fully bring about the realization of the truth of this claim. Nevertheless, take into consideration the following facts: That a Book produced by an unlearned young man on the Western frontier of New York deals with the leading theological controversies of that day and offers such solutions for them that the progressive thinkers within other churches of the last century have in the main come to the same conclusions; that the Book has one definite message, the one that runs through the Old and New Testaments, and that it presents an astonishing doctrinal harmony considering the short time of composition and the lack of scholastic training on the part of the translator. The summary of Book of Mormon doctrine presents the Gospel of Jesus Christ in plainness and simplicity, rounded out beyond the limits placed upon it by the churches of the day. There are many striking statements of beauty and deep import which could scarcely fall from the lips of an untrained youth without inspiration from above. In addition, prophecies are uttered in the Book, many of which have been fulfilled. The claim of inspiration for the contents of the Book of Mormon, like the other claims, presents such an array of evidence that it commands the respect and hearing of all who are willing to recognize truth wherever it may be found.

Claim 7: The Book of Mormon Offers a Certain Test of its Authenticity.

This claim can be substantiated only by referring to the hundreds of thousands of people who have tried it and found it workable. There is a question in view of the consistencies and evidences of truth which converge upon the Book of Mormon, if any one has the right in this day of truth-seeking and truth-loving to lay aside the Book of Mormon without applying fully and without reservation the test proposed by the ancient American prophet Moroni. If there had been flaws in the Book of Mormon they would long since have been discovered. No system of truth in the last one hundred years has been so subject to abuse and unwarranted persecution as has Mormonism. Professional men as well as laymen have undertaken to find weaknesses in its structure, particularly in the Book of Mormon. The attempts that have been made are puerile. The objections raised are usually of the kind to which men are driven when they find themselves without the logical support that they expected to discover. A candid examination of the literature of the Book of Mormon will show that the Book has withstood successfully the assaults of its enemies, that it is more of a mystery to them today than ever before, and that consequently, the probability of the truth of the Book is more firmly established than ever before.
