Noel B. Reynolds, Book of Mormon Authorship Revisited: The Evidence for Ancient Origins ( 1997)

Chapter 1

Introduction

Noel B. Reynolds

Noel B. Reynolds is professor of political science at Brigham Young University and president of the Foundation for Ancient Research and Mormon Studies.

For most Latter-day Saints, the question of Book of Mormon authorship is noncontroversial. Within the devout LDS community, few doubts are raised about the truthfulness of accounts given by Joseph Smith, the Book of Mormon witnesses, and various family members and scribes associated with the process by which the Book of Mormon came forth. Gold plates containing a thousand-year record of the ancient Nephites were delivered to Joseph by Moroni, the last custodian of that record and now an angel of God. Joseph translated the record by supernatural means and the aid of several scribes. For Latter-day Saints, the Book of Mormon is revealed scripture, written by prophets and brought forth in our day by miraculous means to provide the world with a touchstone by which they might measure the truth of the restored gospel and its importance in their lives.

Earlier in this century, skepticism about this account was widespread within the LDS community, particularly among the more educated. It should also be noted that understanding of the book itself was not then far advanced: almost no serious studies of the book and its contents had been published, and the book was not heavily used in worship service discourse or in gospel instruction. The Latter-day Saints were not prepared for the skepticism of scripture that had swept through liberal Protestantism and that dominated the Christian schools of theology where LDS religious educators were studying for advanced degrees.

Scholarly interest in the Book of Mormon developed in the early part of the century among amateur and professional archaeologists. By midcentury, Sidney B. Sperry, Hugh W. Nibley, John L. Sorenson, and a few others had launched serious scholarly inquiries into the book itself. All of these began with the faithful assumption of the book's divine origins. In the mid-1970s the rate of publication on Book of Mormon topics began to soar. The Church worked the Book of Mormon into the regular cycle of the new correlated curriculum for adults, and Church leaders began using the Book of Mormon more frequently and systematically in speeches and instructional situations. As Latter-day Saints have more regularly and systematically engaged themselves in the Book of Mormon in both personal and scholarly study, its authenticity as an ancient scriptural record has become more firmly and generally established. Vocal doubters are a small and shrinking minority that finds itself much closer to anti-Mormons in its interests and views than to the general LDS community.

The growth of scholarly studies on the Book of Mormon continues to produce an accumulation of significant insights into the authorship of the book. In 1982 I edited a volume of these studies for BYU's Religious Studies Center. The Center gave the imprint to FARMS for the 1996 reprint edition. The present volume addresses some issues treated in the 1982 volume and several others that have surfaced in the last fifteen years to provide a broad look at the authorship question as it stands at the end of the century. Updating and extending this discussion seems appropriate given the large amount of new evidence of the ancient origin of the Book of Mormon that has accumulated from scholarly studies and the renewed efforts of the book's detractors to refute the LDS account.

While most of the scholarly work Latter-day Saints have done on the Book of Mormon is directed primarily at improving our understanding of its contents, it inevitably has implications for the authorship question. Because of the endless chorus of criticism from dissident Mormonsand anti-Mormons, it may be useful to sum things up periodically and to provide the LDS community with an organized presentation of the state of knowledge on this subject. This book is intended to provide that kind of resource for those interested in following these issues and for those who may desire to help someone who is troubled by the anti-Mormon arguments against the divine origin of the Book of Mormon.

The contributors to this volume are not trying to "prove" the authenticity of the Book of Mormon. We understand from personal experience that knowledge of the truthfulness of the Book of Mormon is a spiritual and personal matter. Our primary objective is to understand the book itself and to share whatever understanding we might gain. But we also recognize that it may be important for young people or others who wonder about these things to know that the most serious scholarly students of the Book of Mormon are led to conclusions exactly opposite those of the book's critics. Faithful scholars have turned up evidence that refutes most of the criticisms, and they have found mountains of evidence for the book's ancient origins-evidence that is rarely confronted squarely by critics. Many of us expressed our personal views on these questions in the 1996 FARMS/Deseret Book publication, Expressions of Faith: Testimonies of Latter-day Saint Scholars, and in the current volume we share the results of a number of scholarly inquiries conducted by us and others. We are all dependent on the works of others in order to build our knowledge.

This volume is divided into four sections. Part 1 deals with various accounts of how the Book of Mormon was actually produced in 1829 and 1830, emphasizing the translation process and the witnesses who saw the plates. In part 2 we look at the structure of the authorship debate and its arguments and review the history of alternative theories and criticisms of the Book of Mormon. Part 3 presents textual studies that demonstrate the plausibility of the Book of Mormon as an ancient book, and part 4 updates the attempts to understand the ancient geographical and cultural setting of the Book of Mormon in both the Old and New Worlds.

In chapter 2, Richard L. Bushman recounts the events leading up to the March 1830 publication of the Book of Mormon with an illuminating commentary on the contrasting tendencies of LDS and secular scholars to emphasize or de-emphasize different parts of the historical record. This fresh look at a much analyzed history transports us back in time and presents these events from the perspective of the participants. Joseph's 1832 account is quoted in full, helping us to appreciate more than ever his ongoing effort to understand his own divine mission. The involvement of other key players is also illuminated with contemporary personal perspectives. The sixty-three-day time of translation that produced the final book, together with the matter-of-fact moving on to other things at its completion, help us understand both why this divinely revealed scripture was so crucial as an evidence of God's role in this restoration and why the church organized by Joseph Smith did not intensively study its contents for another hundred and twenty years. Though Bushman refers only briefly to anti-Mormon and secular interpretations of the events surrounding the coming forth of the Book of Mormon, his approach makes clear how difficult it is to match any alternative account to the historical evidence. As students of the Book of Mormon learn about the successive complexities and ancient elements in the book, they are forcibly reminded that the manuscript was translated by Joseph with his scribes, grinding out seven to nine pages a day never reviewing even the previous sentence or page, and using no notes. This process is well documented, but it is difficult to imagine even the most educated genius writing such a complex book in this manner. Those who have written complex histories or other kinds of books know that this task is impossible, though others might be tempted to believe that such writing is relatively easy. The most plausible explanation, unless one disallows all reference to the divine, is the one given by Joseph and the other witnesses. Joseph did not write the book; rather, he read it as it was given to him through interpretive instruments such as the seer stone, much like we today would read material off a computer screen. The writing was the combined effort of dozens of ancient authors who lived over a thousand-year period.

Richard L. Anderson's ongoing studies on the Book of Mormon witnesses are well-known and have posed some of the most serious obstacles to secular and anti-Mormon interpretations of the Book of Mormon and its origin. Eleven men were formally shown the plates. They hefted and handled the ancient writings and satisfied themselves of their real existence in every way. Others had less formal exposure to the plates, but they, too, left their testimonies. As Anderson has demonstrated, [^1]these witnesses all consistently maintained that their original account was true throughout their lives. Their commitment to those original accounts was tested severely when several of them fell into circumstances that would have rewarded them richly to expose Joseph Smith had they any sense of having been duped by some fraud, but none did that, for they all knew there was no fraud to expose. Because these accounts are so strong, critics and skeptics often ignore them altogether. In chapter 3, Anderson sets forth the personal writings of Joseph Smith and six of the eleven witnesses that explain their experiences with the gold plates.

Royal Skousen's exhaustive analysis of the manuscripts that were produced in the translation process shows that new light can be shed on these events when they are viewed from new scholarly perspectives. Skousen has carefully analyzed all the manuscript variations, corrections, and physical features, and he finds the eyewitness accounts of the translation process to be wholly credible. Joseph dictated without reference to any notes, papers, or even the plates themselves; he relied wholly upon the Urim and Thummim and the seer stone. Joseph spelled out the strange new Book of Mormon names and other unfamiliar words, and scribes read back to him their transcription to allow him to check for accuracy. New sessions began without any review of the last transcribed material. Skousen's analysis of the translation process leads him to conclude that the witnesses' view that some level of control was exerted over Joseph's selection of words is supported by the manuscript evidence. The people closest to the translation process had no doubts that it was divinely directed; in fact, they could not imagine that Joseph was capable of writing such a book on his own. The evidence in the manuscript supports them consistently.

Louis C. Midgley leads out in the analysis of the authorship debate in part 2 with a concise history of the alternative theories advanced by those who reject Joseph Smith's account of Book of Mormon origins. The Book of Mormon presents a different problem for Joseph's detractors than does his first vision. Visions have no secondary witnesses, nor do they leave historical evidence, but the 1830 Book of Mormon contained 590 pages of text, which is the most important kind of evidence historians can find. The existence of the book must be explained-even explained away-if Joseph's prophetic powers are to be discounted. Thus the critics have given a variety of alternative explanations, ably surveyed by Midgley. The first critics agreed that Joseph was not the kind of man who could have written such a book, so they looked for someone who could. Sidney Rigdon and Solomon Spaulding were early candidates, but neither can be plausibly defended as the book's author. Later critics proposed epilepsy and other psychological abnormalities to explain Joseph's seemingly miraculous achievement, but they failed to acknowledge that there is no evidence for such abnormalities in Joseph's life and that historically no such abnormalities have ever contributed to the writing of such a complex book. Others assumed that Joseph was a conscious fraud, but even this fails to reconcile this highly complex work with the ignorance and inexperience of the supposed author. In 1945, Fawn M. Brodie attempted a gentler explanation, arguing that although Joseph's religious career began fraudulently, he gradually came to believe his own lies, but this solved no problems, and Hugh Nibley and others have since exposed the weaknesses in her logic and evidence. More recently, Mormon historians who have trouble accepting Joseph's account have argued for some kind of middle ground that would accept the religious value of the Book of Mormon but attribute its origins to nineteenth-century frontier culture. Midgley chronicles, evaluates, and criticizes all these approaches, documenting their meanderings, contradictions, and other shortcomings. He notes the cycles in these explanations and their failure to make any real progress, especially when compared with the booming scholarship based on the assumption that Joseph's account is true. Readers who have heard of these various alternative theories but have been unable to sort out their mutual connections will find this chapter especially valuable.

Daniel C. Peterson is a seasoned defender of the Book of Mormon against its critics. He currently helps oversee the FARMS criticisms project of collecting, documenting, and responding to all published criticisms according to the present state of Book of Mormon scholarship. In chapter 6, Peterson summarizes that situation and sets forth the current argument on some of the best-known and most typical criticisms. He surveys critics' allegations about textual changes, anachronisms, historical and archaeological implausibilities, inconsistencies with Mormon doctrinal beliefs and attempts to identify alternative authors. Peterson shows convincingly that the best scholarship available does not support these criticisms, and that, in fact, it converts most of them into powerful evidence for the authenticity of the Book of Mormon as an ancient text with Middle Eastern origins.

Hugh Nibley developed and perfected the argument of the complexity of the Book of Mormon as both an answer to many criticisms of the Book of Mormon and as a basis for evidence that the book is an authentic ancient text. Throughout his writings on this subject, Nibley identifies subtle and complex interrelationships between linguistic, historical, cultural, and textual features of the Book of Mormon that can only be appreciated in light of scholarship that has been published since 1830. This argument points to Joseph Smith's lack of education and the book's being dictated line by line without notes and without reviewing what was said minutes, hours, days, or even months earlier. Yet despite these circumstances, a large number of complex relationships are developed in the book and are maintained consistently from beginning to end. Many of these relationships have taken scholars longer to sort out than it took Joseph Smith to translate the entire book. The Book of Mormon has at least three independent dating systems that are maintained accurately throughout. It has a complex system of religious teachings that are enriched as new sermons are added throughout the text but are never confused or contradicted. The book's authors refer to a huge and complex set of sources, including official records, sermons, letters, monument inscriptions, and church records, which always maintain a consistent relationship in the final text. Subtle and complex political traditions evolve early in the text and surface in a variety of forms in later sections, always plausibly and consistently. The book describes various ebbs and flows of ethnic interaction without once losing track of even the most minor groups. Hundreds of individual characters are successfully introduced and coherently tracked. The geographical data in the text is diverse and complex, yet when carefully analyzed makes perfect sense and matches an identifiable portion of Mesoamerica quite well. This list of examples could go on at great length.

In chapter 7, Melvin J. Thorne explicates Nibley's argument from complexity, reviewing a number of important examples, including some that are presented in this volume. Thorne goes on to point out the mounting improbability of the alternative theories as the number of elements establishing Book of Mormon complexities increases. He draws on the simple rule that the probability of two events occurring by chance at the same time is equal to the product of their separate probabilities of occurring at all. In other words, two events that are likely to occur half the time independently are likely to occur jointly only one quarter of the time (.5 x .5 = .25). From a probabilistic point of view, the large number of ancient elements that exist in the Book of Mormon, which would be natural in an ancient book but not in a nineteenth-century production, yields a joint probability that is astronomical against its being a nineteenth-century composition that just by chance is historically and culturally accurate.

The textual studies in part 3 begin with a review of chiasmus in the Book of Mormon, one of the most intrinsically interesting and convincing of the book's ancient featuresJohn W. Welch first discovered these chiastic features of the text as a missionary in the 1960s, and in a series of publications he has developed the study of this structural device in the Book of Mormon and other ancient literature of Middle Eastern origin. In chapter 8, Welch examines the last thirty years of study of this phenomenon, including criticisms and uncritical excesses. In summarizing the evidentiary value of chiasmus today, he finds it stands stronger than ever as clear evidence of a tradition of writers that understood and valued this particular literary structure for its aesthetics and its power to communicate at multiple levels simultaneously. No better explanation exists for the prevalence of high-quality chiasms in the Book of Mormon than its ancient biblical roots.

The 1982 authorship volume included a wordprinting study of Wayne Larsen and Alvin Rencher that used statistical analyses of relative frequencies of noncontextual terms to determine that neither Joseph Smith nor his close colleagues were authors of the Book of Mormon and that over two dozen separable portions of the book were authored by different people In the 1980s John L. Hilton and five of his associates in the Bay Area (three non-LDS) tested these results using a completely independent analysis. Borrowing the tests of the Scottish forensics specialist A. Q. Morton and beginning with a large controlled author study to establish statistical significance, Hilton's group eventually confirmed the view that different authors can be distinguished within the Book of Mormon, and that none is Joseph Smith or any of the other nineteenth-century candidates that have been proposed. In some methodological respects, the new study was critical of the first, but the original findings were confirmed, planting another enormous obstacle in the road of anyone wishing to assert that the Book of Mormon was authored in the nineteenth century. Hilton's statistical techniques were critically reviewed and accepted by the University of Chicago Press prior to its publication of a recent book that, using these same statistical techniques, identified previously unrecognized writings of the seventeenth-century English philosopher Thomas Hobbes. [^2]Hilton's 1990 paper reporting his Book of Mormon findings is reprinted in chapter 9 with minor modification.

Most thoughtful readers of the Book of Mormon have probably wondered at the large numbers of people that the text describes as having descended from the two or three dozen original settlers in the Lehite colony. Anti-Mormon critics of the book have seized on this intuitively obvious "flaw" as evidence for the book's fraudulence. In chapter 10, James E. Smith, one of the chief architects of the Cambridge model for estimating historical populations, which is used widely by professional demographers, points out that population studies fail badly when they rely on intuition or common sense. Trustworthy historical records support a much less intuitive model of population growth and decline. Applying the Cambridge model to the Book of Mormon accounts, Smith finds the numbers reported in the text to be on the high end of what would be predicted scientifically but still plausible. Relaxing any of his perhaps unduly conservative assumptions would move Book of Mormon numbers closer to the middle of the expected range. Most important, if the Nephites or Lamanites absorbed any other unmentioned populations, the numbers cease to be at all problematic.

Several years ago, Donald W. Parry produced The Book of Mormon Text Reformatted according to Parallelistic Patterns, showing Book of Mormon readers how extensively parallelisms are used in that text. Parry has identified examples in the Book of Mormon of most biblical forms of parallelism. In chapter 11, he presents and examines three specific parallelistic patterns in their Book of Mormon exemplifications-climactic forms, synonymous parallelisms, and alternating parallel lines. He provides helpful explanations of these poetic and rhetorical structures that are richly illustrated with clear examples from the text of the Book of Mormon. Not only does the identification of these structures enrich our reading of the Book of Mormon, it also constitutes another impressive challenge to Book of Mormon critics: in addition to explaining how Joseph Smith could have written the book, they now must explain how he could have ignorantly introduced such beautiful examples of Hebrew poetic structures.

In chapter 12, John A. Tvedtnes advances an original analysis of a beautiful Book of Mormon complexity that has eluded earlier readers. Using Paul's conversion story as related variously in several texts, Tvedtnes focuses on Alma's account of his somewhat similar conversion experience and its retellings in different Book of Mormon contexts. Through careful analysis of each of these passages, Tvedtnes shows the rich emotional content of Alma's memory as well as the doctrinal implications Alma draws from the experience and how they occurred to him and developed in each retelling. Tvedtnes builds on this analysis to show that Mormon actually quotes each of these passages from the original record rather than reporting them third person. Finally, Tvedtnes details how each retelling is unique and supplements the others with additional information. Taken as a whole, the retellings are consistent, different in detail, and highly reinforcing. Given the translation process, this is again a seemingly impossible achievement if Joseph, or anyone besides Alma himself, was making up these widely scattered passages.

In chapter 13, John W. Welch compares the Book of Mormon with another ancient text, in this case the Narrative of Zosimus, which circulated in early Christian circles and appears to have Hebrew origins but was certainly unknown to Joseph Smith and his contemporaries. Zosimus records a dream remarkably similar to Lehi's tree of life vision and a revelation about a group much like Lehi's colony that was led out of Jerusalem to an ideal land. Welch presents the Zosimus text, translated from both Greek and Syriac versions, together with verses from the Book of Mormon that contain parallel information. While Welch readily acknowledges the impossibility of determining the connections between these two amazingly similar accounts, the unquestionable antiquity of the Zosimus text would seem to confirm the antiquity of the Book of Mormon and to indicate that the two texts may share some common origins.

The final section of this volume addresses the geographical and archaeological speculations that have fascinated Book of Mormon believers from the earliest years. If the book is a true ancient record, the Nephites lived somewhere in real time in a real historical and cultural context. The history of Book of Mormon studies has always featured vigorous efforts to identify the geographical and cultural context of Nephite times (600 b.c.- a.d. 421). Two distinct geographical contexts are featured in the Book of Mormon: the journey from Jerusalem across the Arabian peninsula and the promised land itself where Lehi's descendants dwelled for a thousand years. The Jaredite record tells little about their journey and provides no directions, but their history occurred in an area that overlapped Nephite territory. The last two chapters of this volume articulate what is known about this subject at the present time, which is much more than is commonly realized.

In chapter 14, Noel B. Reynolds draws extensively on Warren P. and Michaela Knoth Aston's research on Lehi's exodus from Jerusalem. [^3]Relying on their earlier work and his own subsequent research and field work with them, Reynolds summarizes what can be said about this journey through the Arabian peninsula and the building of the ship at Bountiful. The text provides remarkably helpful directions and descriptions that have helped make it possible to identify plausible sites for Nahom, where Ishmael was buried, and Bountiful, where the ship was built. As Eugene England pointed out in the 1982 authorship volume, at the time the Book of Mormon was written, no Americans or Europeans believed that fertile coastal locations of the kind the Book of Mormon describes existed in Arabia, yet at least one site has now been identified west of Salalah in Oman that appears to meet every one of the specific features described in the text. In 1830, including such a description in a fraudulent account presenting itself as truthful would have been foolhardy. The ancient authorship and accuracy of the Book of Mormon are strongly reinforced by these findings.

Most of the geographical speculation on the Book of Mormon has focused on the effort to identify Book of Mormon lands in the New World, which would also pinpoint a cultural group at that point in history. Mesoamerica has been the focus of almost all of that research in recent years. Where else does a narrow neck of land exist between two seas and a literate civilization build cities for hundreds of years b.c.? John L. Sorenson has done more than any other person to identify the geographical issues in the Book of Mormon and to explore the possible areas where these peoples could have lived. In chapter 15, Sorenson updates his detailed comparison of the Book of Mormon itself and the lineage histories written by Mesoamerican peoples in the post-Nephite period. The extensive parallels between these different writings indicate strongly that the Book of Mormon fits nicely into the cultural context of ancient Mesoamerican books. Because Joseph Smith knew nothing about ancient Mesoamerican books, it is hard to see how he could have come up with such a match. Like his associates in the early Church, Joseph assumed that the Book of Mormon peoples had probably covered the entire Western Hemisphere and that all Indians were Lamanite descendants. Only in the last few decades has it become clear that the Book of Mormon narrative describes Nephite and Lamanite homelands that were confined to a few hundred miles in diameter during the entire thousand-year history. These and numerous other textual details escaped both translators and readers of the Book of Mormon for a hundred years. The book describes a cultural context not unlike that in ancient Mesoamerica but which is quite different from what Joseph and his contemporaries understood or expected. This clearly undercuts any theory that would attribute authorship of the Book of Mormon to Joseph or his associates.

The concluding chapter is a reprint of William J. Hamblin's summary of the important work scholars have done on warfare in the Book of Mormon. Hamblin shows that in dozens of dimensions, the assumptions and complex details of Book of Mormon warfare are consistent with ancient as opposed to modern warfare, specifically ancient Mesoamerican warfare.

The studies in this volume are offered to students of the scriptures in the hope that they will help them think about the authorship issues raised by critics of the Book of Mormon. While we can never scientifically prove that the Book of Mormon was written by Nephite prophets, we can show through scientific and other scholarly studies where the criticisms of the book fail. Science and logic can prove negative, but not positive, claims. Students who desire a fully satisfying resolution of these questions will do best to accept Moroni's invitation to find their own spiritual witness of the book's truth through personal study and prayer.

We gratefully acknowledge the permission of BYU Studies to reprint John Hilton's wordprint study and a revised version of John W. Welch's Zosimus paper. We also acknowledge the Review of Books on the Book of Mormon for permission to use a revised version of James Smith's earlier treatment of the population issue in its pages. FARMS and Deseret Book have allowed us to reprint William Hamblin's conclusions from Warfare in the Book of Mormon.

Theresa S. Brown and Thomas J. Lowery have been helpful in preparing these materials for publication. Davis Bitton generously provided thoughtful criticisms and suggested revisions for the entire text, and a special thanks is owed to Jessica Taylor, Mary Mahan, and Melvin J. Thorne of the FARMS editorial staff for their gentle but expert guidance in producing the final version of this manuscript. Above all, I acknowledge the constant encouragement and support of my wife Sydney. If this work meets her approval, I am happy enough.

Notes

PART ONE:

The Nineteenth-Century Origin of the Book of Mormon

The publication of the Book of Mormon in 1830 posed a problem for anyone unwilling to believe Joseph Smith's account of its divine origin. If they could not accept Joseph's statement that he was given an inspired translation of a genuinely ancient record, they needed another explanation in terms of contemporary events. All these alternative approaches must address the clearly documented facts describing the process by which Joseph translated and published the Book of Mormon. Several people were first-person witnesses of the translation as it developed over many months with some interruptions, and eleven respected men signed affidavits stating that they had seen and examined the golden plates from which the book was translated. Most anti-Mormon attacks on the Book of Mormon avoid these basic facts that constitute the first level of evidence that must be considered in the authorship debate.

The three contributors to this section treat the principal documentary evidences surrounding the coming forth of the Book of Mormon. Richard L. Bushman examines surviving accounts of participants in these events, investigating their statements for credibility and coherence. Richard L. Anderson compiles and gives context to the personal statements of the seven Book of Mormon witnesses, including Joseph Smith, who left written accounts of their experience with the gold plates. Royal Skousen reports a painstaking analysis of the original manuscript, the transcription of the Book of Mormon text produced in the translation process. The consistent and convincing picture that emerges from these accounts and manuscripts makes stories of fraud and delusion seem impossible. The plain and simple words of all participants, though some witnesses later became bitter enemies of the church or of Joseph Smith, support Joseph's story in fact and in spirit. Only wishful thinking and determination could produce the idea that Joseph created the book and the experiences reported by these people on his own. This leaves his assertion of the ancient authorship of the Book of Mormon as the only remaining credible theory.

Chapter 2

The Recovery of the Book of Mormon

Richard Lyman Bushman

Richard Lyman Bushman is Gouverneur Morris Professor of History at Columbia University.

Unlike some events in LDS Church history-such as the First Vision and the restoration of the Melchizedek Priesthood-the chronology and main outlines of the recovery story are not much in question. We are not likely to be blind-sided by a clever researcher who shows a lack of evidence for a major occurrence. The sources on events before 1827 are limited; we are largely dependent on the accounts of Joseph Smith himself and his mother, Lucy Smith. [^4]But after the plates were removed from the stone box in the hill and neighbors learned about them, plenty of people, hostile and sympathetic, gave their versions of events.

Chronologically, the first published account appeared in a newspaper, the Wayne Sentinel, a Palmyra weekly, on 26 June 1829, and others followed on 31 August 1829 and 5 September 1829 in two Rochester papers, the Advertiser and Telegraph and the Gem. The main points of the story, as Francis W. Kirkham demonstrated many years ago, can even be found in the hostile affidavits that Philastus Hurlbut collected for E. D. Howe and published in Mormonism Unvailed in 1834. [^5]The editor of the Wayne Sentinel, Pomeroy Tucker, recorded everything he could remember in a volume on Mormonism published in 1867. [^6]Of course, Joseph Smith himself is the primary source, complemented by Lucy Smith, and their narrations are elaborated in firsthand accounts by Oliver Cowdery, Joseph Knight, Emma Smith, Martin Harris, and David Whitmer. If there remain uncertainties about details and contradictions on some points, the basic chronology of happenings is well-grounded in friendly and unfriendly sources.

How these sources are used to retell the story of recovery varies greatly according to the inclinations of the teller. Mormon historians, for example, emphasize the rapidity of the translation. John Welch and Tim Rathbone estimate that there were sixty-three translating days available from Oliver Cowdery's start as secretary on 7 April 1829 to the end of June when the title page was published in the Wayne Sentinel. That comes to eight pages of printed text a day [^7]-a marvelous production rate for any writer and a stupendous one for an uneducated twenty-three-year-old who, according to his wife, could scarcely write a coherent letter. [^8]During the translation period, Joseph was hard-pressed to put food on the table. To avoid interruptions from hostile neighbors, he moved his entire household from Harmony, Pennsylvania, to Fayette, New York. Yet, through it all, he dictated the Book of Mormon text without hesitation day after day.

Unbelieving writers pass over this achievement, usually by simply acknowledging Joseph Smith's genius; one author has attributed the book to a freakish capacity for automatic writing. [^9]Secular historians pay less attention to the circumstances of translation, such as the production rate, and instead look for the sources of the book's content. They play down the miraculous and play up the conventional material from Joseph's own culture that they think shows up in the Book of Mormon. Ethan Smith's View of the Hebrews (Poultney, Vermont, 1823), for example, is credited with supplying the main idea of Israelites migrating to the Western Hemisphere. Masonry and anti-Masonry, the Bible, local theological controversies, and Joseph Smith's own family dynamics are all said to have played a part. [^10]Secular accounts thus attempt a cultural biography of Joseph Smith, scouring the intellectual landscape for possible sources of Book of Mormon ideas and speculating on how those sources might have made their way into Joseph Smith's mind. Day-to-day happenings are neglected to make room for this wide-ranging search.

Mormon writers are more inclined to put the reports from people close to Joseph Smith into the story. Because the recovery of the Book of Mormon is a sacred story, every detail is relished. Mormons are interested in the futile efforts of Lucy Harris, Martin's tempestuous wife, to see the plates, or in Emma's father's refusal to allow an object in his house that he was forbidden to look at. We love Emma Smith's comment that she never saw the plates but "moved them from place to place on the table as it was necessary on doing my housework." [^11]The way the divine work played on the lives of the various actors-perplexing, frustrating, thrilling, and enraging them-captures the Mormon imagination. These everyday details are beside the point for secular historians who want to run down the elusive sources of Book of Mormon ideas and not to make the protection of the plates, the gathering of converts, and the laborious work of translation seem too real. Most of the detailed sources were written by believers, and to follow them too closely infuses a narrative with their faith. Secular historians are, therefore, more inclined than Mormons to suppress source material from Joseph's closest associates.

Joseph Smith did not give all the details about recovering the Book of Mormon in his first attempt at autobiography in 1832. He had not yet found his full voice as a writer and historian. At that point he seemed more concerned with promoting the idea of a divine work breaking forth. The exact appearance of Moroni, the contents of his instructions, and the circumstances of the vision were played down; he told the whole story in one breathless sentence!

When I was seventeen years of age I called again upon the Lord and he shewed unto me a heavenly vision for behold an angel of the Lord came and stood before me and it was by night and he called me by name and he said the Lord had forgiven me my sins and he revealed unto me that in the Town of Manchester Ontario County N.Y. there was plates of gold upon which there was engravings which was engraven by Maroni & his fathers the servants of the living God in ancient days and deposited by the commandments of God and kept by the power thereof and that I should go and get them and he revealed unto me many things concerning the inhabitants of the earth which since have been revealed in commandments & revelations and it was on the 22d day of Sept. AD 1822 and thus he appeared unto me three times in one night and once on the next day and then I immediately went to the place and found where the plates was deposited as the angel of the Lord had commanded me and straightway made three attempts to get them and then being excedingly frightened I supposed it had been a dreem of Vision but when I considred I knew that it was not therefore I cried unto the Lord in the agony of my soul why can I not obtain them behold the angel appeared unto me again and said unto me you have not kept the commandments of the Lord which I gave unto you therefore you cannot now obtain them for the time is not yet fulfilled therefore thou wast left unto temptation that thou mightest be made acquainted with the power of the advisary therefore repent and call on the Lord thou shalt be forgiven and in his own due time thou shalt obtain them for now I had been tempted of the advisary and saught the Plates to obtain riches and kept not the commandment that I should have an eye single to the glory of God.9

This abbreviated narration goes a long way to win over a reader to Joseph's sincere struggle to discover his mission. The passage has an endearing candor to it. Joseph admits his teenage transgressions and his hope for forgiveness. He comes across as a learner trying to understand what he is to do. He is baffled when he cannot get the plates and wonders for an instant if he had just dreamed the vision. He is terrified that he has done something wrong. The angel at times frightens him. When he is rebuked, Joseph recognizes that he had been thinking of gold and riches, not of the glory of God. He is relieved to record the assurance that by repentance he could be forgiven and get the plates eventually. Like every other text, this one could be read for signs of extraneous cultural influences, such as a magical belief in visions in threes, and probably turned to other interpretive purposes. But however cleverly managed, the passage captivates a reader, making it hard to doubt Joseph's sincerity. Inserting too much of language like this into a secular account would diffuse the search for Book of Mormon sources and turn attention to Joseph's desire to comply with the will of heaven. Mormons, on the other hand, love every word of it. In this sense, believing historians are more inclined to be true to the basic sources than unbelieving ones.

In the 1832 account, Joseph leapt in a single phrase from age seventeen to age twenty-one, when he recovered the plates. The only interim event that figured in the story was his marriage to Emma Hale, daughter of Isaac Hale, on 18 January 1827. Actually, the Smith family suffered considerable adversity during the four years from 1823 to 1827. They lost their eldest son and major breadwinner, Alvin, in 1824. In a futile attempt to raise money, Joseph Smith Sr. involved Joseph Jr. in an abortive search for Spanish treasure that was to employ Joseph's powers as a seer. (Joseph had found a seer stone while digging a well for Willard Chase in 1822 and became adept at finding lost objects.) The Smiths failed to make the last payment on their farm and lost it, with all improvements, in 1825. Joseph was brought to trial in 1826 in South Bainbridge on charges of disorderly conduct, presumably because he used his seer stone in a treasure search. All of this, however, was tangential to the narrative of the Book of Mormon recovery, and Joseph left it out. [^12]

Marriage to Emma Hale, however, was relevant to the story; she became a copartner in the enterprise from that point on. Emma went with Joseph to the hill in the dark early hours of the morning of 22 September 1827 to get the plates. She was the one to rush to him with a report that thieves were hunting for the hiding place of the plates in a fallen tree where Joseph had left them that night. She arranged for a place to translate on her father's property in Harmony and was Joseph's first secretary. When Martin Harris lost 116 pages of manuscript, Joseph thought first of Emma: "Must I return to my wife with such a tale as this? I dare not do it, lest I should kill her at once." [^13]After all her troubles with the doctrine of plural marriage and long after her break with Brigham Young, Emma held on to her belief in the Book of Mormon. With a wife's realistic assessment of her husband's abilities she told her son that "it would have been improbable that a learned man could do this, and for one as unlearned as he was it was simply impossible." [^14]

Among the enlarging circle of friends and enemies who were drawn into the story after the recovery of the plates was Joseph Knight of Colesville, New York, a farmer, miller, and carding machine operator who employed Joseph in 1826 during the months when Joseph was courting Emma. Probably by design, Knight made a point of visiting the Smiths on September 22 and wrote about what he observed. Although a believer from the start, Knight's "Recollection" has bothered some Mormon readers because of its rough-cut style and its unembarrassed reports of familiar relations with neighborhood money diggers. Knight recorded a warning Joseph sent to Samuel Lawrence, a conjurer, to stay away from the Hill Cumorah on September 22 or Joseph would "thrash the stumps with him." Knight talked to Joseph soon after the return from the hill on the morning of September 22 and reported the impression that Joseph "seamed to think more of the glasses or the urim and thummem then he Did of the Plates, for, says he, ÃI can see any thing; they are Marvelus.'" Knight also tells of pressure from the money-diggers to see the plates, resulting in Joseph's and Emma's retreat from Manchester in December 1827 to a quieter haven on Emma's father's place in Harmony. [^15]

Knight's "Recollection" is now more widely accepted in standard Mormon narrations of the recovery story. We are coming to appreciate the homely details and the skirmishes with the money diggers. Knight's account seems all the more authentic because it is so candid. His close observation helps us understand how an increasing number of people were caught up in the drama of the gold plates. Joseph did not carry on his work alone.

Martin Harris entered the story when Joseph and Emma left Manchester for Harmony. Fascinated by the accounts of the gold plates circulating in Palmyra, Harris was both believing and doubtful. In spurts he was immensely helpful, and then again he was filled with misgivings. He told his story to the editors of Tiffany's Monthly, a spiritualist publication that speculated that Joseph Smith was indeed inspired supernaturally but by low-grade spirits who foisted inferior doctrines on him. Mormon scholars have mistrusted the Tiffany report on Harris because of the magazine's bias, but some parts are too good to resist and have made their way into Mormon narrations. [^16]

Harris is famed for a number of interventions. He played a major role in the recovery story because he was a prosperous farmer who had money. He lent Joseph Smith fifty dollars to pay for the trip to Harmony in December 1827, and then during the winter, he came down himself. Joseph had been translating with the help of Emma and her brother Reuben Hale and had copied some of the characters on a sheet of paper. Harris took the transcription to various learned men-most notably to Samuel Mitchill, then at Rutgers Medical School, and Charles Anthon of Columbia University. Joseph said that Harris himself received the inspiration to make the trip. It may be that in a doubting mood, he wanted confirmation that Joseph had the plates. I have speculated that Joseph wanted reassurance that he was doing the translation properly, considering the daunting difficulty of the task laid upon him. In the outcome, Harris was satisfied, even though Anthon himself later wrote that he tried to disillusion his visitor. Anthon could not translate the characters; he claimed to have said that they were a scrambled mÂlange of various languages. But Harris, who interpreted the encounter differently, came away reassured that they were authentic.

The incident made an impact on Joseph. He received no confirmation of his accuracy as a translator, but soon after he realized that Harris, Anthon, and he had fulfilled prophecy. As he retold the story in his 1832 account (and again in 1839), Harris's experiences with Anthon conformed with the verses in Isa. 29 about the learned man being unable to read a sealed book and an unlearned person succeeding despite his ignorance. While we think it obvious that Joseph stood in the middle of the prophetic stream concerning the last days, we must remember that he was only twenty-two, truly unlearned, with no worldly standing, living in an obscure rural backwater, and with only a few visionary glimpses of what lay ahead. It was anything but obvious that he was to be a major figure in divine history, despite the extraordinary visions he had received. To find himself tied into the grand tradition of biblical prophecy must have thrilled Joseph and given him a larger understanding of his role.

Harris went back to his Palmyra farm after reporting on the Anthon visit but returned in April with his wife, Lucy. Lucy was a nuisance, at least in Lucy Smith's telling. Lucy Harris would not rest until she saw the plates. She rummaged through everything, forcing Joseph to extreme measures to conceal their whereabouts. After she left in the late spring of 1828, Joseph and Martin got down to translating, the first protracted period of work on the plates since Joseph had received them the previous September. After 116 pages were written, Harris asked if he could show them to his wife. The gold plates were dividing his household, and he must have hoped that sight of the manuscript would reassure Lucy of their reality. Joseph inquired of the Lord and was told no. Martin importuned. On the third request, permission was granted under close restriction as to the persons who were to see the pages.

After Harris left, Joseph turned his attention to Emma, who, on 15 June, bore a son who died the same day. For two weeks Joseph tended her until she urged him to return to Manchester to check on the manuscript. To his dismay, the worst had happened. Martin had shown the manuscript to more than the agreed-on number, and finally, one day when he went to retrieve it, the pages were gone. Lucy Smith blamed the loss on Lucy Harris, suspecting her of stealing the manuscript with the intention of altering it. A retranslation, even if exactly the same, would make Joseph look like a fraud who was making up the text rather than translating it.

Lucy reported that when Joseph got the news, "the most bitter lamentations filled the house." [^17]Joseph's own regrets were then underscored by a revelation that chastised him for giving way to Harris and threatened him with losing the gift of translation (see D&C 3). Joseph had to give up the interpreters and the plates. At the same time, he was promised forgiveness if he repented, and on 22 September 1828 the plates and interpreters were returned (see D&C 3).

Joseph still had to deal with the consequences of losing the manuscript. For the next year and a half, he lived in fear that an altered text would appear to discredit his translation. He was warned of the danger in a revelation, and in the preface to the published Book of Mormon, he cautioned readers about the possibility of a doctored manuscript turning up. He worried that "Satan would stir up the hearts of this generation, that they might not receive this work." [^18]

The incident marked the end of Martin Harris's term as secretary for the translation. For the next six months, little was accomplished until Oliver Cowdery arrived in Harmony on 5 April 1829. Cowdery was a twenty-two-year-old Vermonter who had kept store, blacksmithed, and taught school. He came from a family with a taste for the supernatural and apparently had tried water witching himself. In 1834 he attempted a history of Joseph's visions and the rise of the Church in a series of eight letters to the Mormon newspaper, the Messenger and Advocate, in Independence, Missouri. Although close to Joseph Smith and a participant in many critical events, Cowdery is less than satisfactory as an historian. His wordy style and his proclivity to run off into meditations about the meaning of events keep getting in the way of the story. But he does tell us clearly that he arrived in Harmony on Sunday evening, April 5, helped Joseph with business matters on Monday, and began to write Book of Mormon dictation on Tuesday. [^19]

They labored together for three months, from April through June 1829. During that time they had to scramble for food; at one point they were saved from going out to work by Joseph Knight, who arrived from Colesville with nine or ten bushels of grain, five or six bushels of potatoes, a pound of tea, and a barrel of mackerel. In mid-May a passage in the Book of Mormon manuscript got them wondering about baptism. When they prayed, John the Baptist appeared and restored the Aaronic Priesthood.

Besides translating, Joseph received revelations for his brother Hyrum and the helpful Joseph Knight, and was instructed by the Lord to translate the small plates of Nephi rather than go back again to Lehi's longer record. But through all of the ambient events, the main project ground on, the words coming relentlessly from Joseph's mouth and going onto paper under Cowdery's pen

In early June the two of them left Harmony for Fayette, New York, and the Peter Whitmer household. Joseph saw signs of an impending mobbing, and Cowdery had asked his friend David Whitmer, son of Peter, if the family could make room while the translation was finished up. Many of the Whitmers-but David particularly-were interested in the gold plates. David took time away from the spring farm work to go down to Harmony to pick up the pair. Like Cowdery, Whitmer gave his own account of events in these years, but only long after he had soured on the Church and had lived in religious isolation for many years. Whitmer was most happy with Joseph during his time at the family farm and just after the Church was organized. In Whitmer's view these were the times of recurrent miracles involving him and his family, a time when Joseph was in touch with God through his seer stone, and when priesthood and organization played a lesser role. [^20]

Joseph and Oliver got back to work the day after they arrived in Fayette. They translated in a room at the top of the house in the heat of early summer. David Whitmer said, "It was a laborious work for the weather was very warm, and the days were long and they worked from morning till night." [^21]Occasionally Emma and one or two of the Whitmers spelled Oliver, but Joseph labored on day after day. Sometime before 11 June, they applied for a copyright. By then they had finished the plates of Mormon and translated Mormon's title page. The small plates of Nephi and Ether kept them busy probably until near the end of June.

Around 20 June, possibly prompted by passages in Ether 5:2-4 and 2 Ne. 27:12 about others who would see the plates, the three men closest to Joseph-Oliver Cowdery, David Whitmer, and Martin Harris-asked if the privilege might be theirs. The testimonies of the three, along with a similar statement by eight others who saw and touched the golden plates, appeared in the first edition of the Book of Mormon. It was the only attempt at providing proof for the plates and the divine inspiration behind the translation. In answer to Martin Harris's earlier request for a witness, the revelation had said that "they would not believe you, my servant Joseph, if it were possible that you should show them all these things which I have committed unto you" (D&C 5:7). In June, however, the three were told they would see the plates, the breastplate, Laban's sword, and the Urim and Thummim (see D&C 17:1). Then after they had "seen them with [their] eyes, [they should] testify of them, by the power of God" (D&C 17:3). The witnesses' statements were an effective demonstration of authenticity for a skeptical age, including modern doubters who have found no plausible cause for the elaborate vision. Fawn Brodie could only hypothesize Joseph's "positive talent at hypnosis"; in a more recent study, John Brooke makes no attempt at explanation. [^22]Secular historians have never come to grips with the fact that none of the eleven who saw the plates (in addition to Joseph Smith) ever recanted.

With the completion of the book by the end of June, Joseph was at last relieved of his arduous labor. He turned now to the search for a publisher. The printer in Palmyra, Egbert Grandin, refused the job, apparently feeling religious compunctions in keeping with many in the village. In July Joseph and Martin went to Rochester in search of a printer and were turned down by Thurlow Weed, owner of a Rochester newspaper, before winning the cooperation of another Rochester printer, Elihu Marshall. Before signing with him, however, they went back to Grandin and persuaded him to take the contract since the book was to appear anyway. Grandin required a $3000 security in case the books did not sell, and Martin Harris mortgaged his farm to raise the money. Cowdery meanwhile began recopying the manuscript for the printer's use, and typesetting commenced in August.

Joseph left Harris, Cowdery, and Hyrum Smith to see the manuscript through the press while he returned to his little farm in Harmony. He had to return to Palmyra in January 1830 when the publisher of a new Palmyra weekly, the Reflector, began printing pirated excerpts from the Book of Mormon. The publisher was Abner Cole, a former justice of the peace, who, under the pseudonym Obediah Dogberry, began the paper the previous September. He set the type in Grandin's office on Sundays and apparently in that way got Book of Mormon passages in advance of publication, hoping to take advantage of the local notoriety to sell papers. Hyrum's warnings to Cole had no effect, and the family decided Joseph Sr. should go to Harmony for Joseph. Joseph caught Cole on Sunday afternoon hard at work and reminded him of the consequences of stealing copyrighted material. Cole heated up and challenged Joseph to a fight-a dangerous proposition against an adept wrestler like Joseph Smith. Joseph waved him off and eventually Cole agreed to stop after his 22 January issue, closing the case.

As the book neared completion and news of its actual contents began to leak out, opposition mounted. Lucy Smith said that people from the county called a meeting to mobilize resistance. They passed a resolve not to purchase the book and went directly to Grandin, the printer. Hoping he would stop work, they told him the printing expenses would never be paid. Martin and Joseph calmed Grandin down and the work went on. The incident may have occurred around 16 January when Joseph Smith Sr. signed an agreement that Harris would have an equal chance to sell copies of the book along with Joseph Sr. and his friends. [^23]The pressure from the villagers may have worried Harris as much as it did Grandin. When the book came off the press in late March, Harris was still panicky. Bringing Joseph up from Harmony in that month, Joseph Knight came across Harris on the road with a pile of books in his arms. He told the two of them, "The Books will not sell for no Body wants them." Refusing to be reassured, Harris told Joseph, "I want a Commandment," meaning another revelation. Joseph told him to obey the commandments he had, but Harris insisted. [^24]The next day Joseph received the revelation in D&C 19 in which Harris was sorely rebuked and admonished to "not covet thine own property, but impart it freely to the printing of the Book of Mormon, which contains the truth and the word of God" (D&C 19:26).

Grandin announced in the 26 March edition of the Wayne Sentinel that the Book of Mormon was now for sale, wholesale and retail, at the Palmyra bookstore. After all the effort that went into the translation over the past two and a half years, it should have been a high moment for Joseph Smith and the small circle of believers. But none is recorded. Neither Lucy nor Joseph nor anyone close to them expressed exhilaration at the accomplishment. The book was launched, and the Prophet went on to other matters. Within two weeks the Church was organized.

Nothing in the newspaper reviews gave the translator any cause for celebration. The Book of Mormon was noticed to be sure. Within a year James Gordon Bennett could write in the New York Morning Courier and Enquirer: "You have heard of Mormonism-who has not?" But the press response was universally scornful. Within a week after the 26 March publication date, the Rochester Daily Advertiser described the book under the headline "BLASPHEMY": "The Book of Mormon has been placed in our hands. A viler imposition was never practiced. It is an evidence of fraud, blasphemy, and credulity shocking both to Christians and moralists." [^25]Those words were picked up in Boston and Vermont within weeks. Thus was the Book of Mormon greeted when it came into the world.

Joseph seems to have given the reviews no notice, never mentioning the bad press. He had not translated the book to win acclaim in the newspapers, and he saw no need to answer the attacks. The revelation to Martin Harris, when the Book of Mormon was published, said he was to carry it to Jew and Gentile "with all humility, trusting in me, reviling not against revilers" (D&C 19:30). Rather than reply to the revilers, Joseph contented himself with writing an account of events as he had experienced them, to which were added reports from many friends and family members. Together they constitute the bulk of the historical record, the original source material for the story of the Book of Mormon's recovery. Narrations that balk before the miraculous events and try to tell another story must suppress these sources and disregard the consistent and detailed accounts from the people who knew Joseph Smith best.

Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] A complete collection of documents about the Book of Mormon witnesses is now being compiled. The books were initiated by my respected coeditor Scott H. Faulring and with the research support of FARMS. The first volumes concern Oliver Cowdery and are in the final stages of editing.
[^2] Joseph F. Smith, "My Missions," Deseret News, 21 December 1901; also cited in James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1970), 4:22. The phrase his voice illustrates how clarity of expression can fade as conversations are retold long after they occurred. While Smith's account seems to indicate that the angel spoke, David Whitmer said in an early report of the event, "I heard the voice of the Lord as distinctly as I ever heard anything in my life, declaring that the records of the plates of the Book of Mormon were translated by the gift and power of God" (Orson Pratt and Joseph F. Smith, letter to President John Taylor, 17 September 1878, Deseret News, 16 November 1878; also in Lyndon W. Cook, ed., David Whitmer Interviews: A Restoration Witness [Orem, Utah: Grandin Book, 1991], 40). Quotations from historical sources in this article are verbatim but include conservative modernization in punctuation and spelling.
[^3] Joseph Smith, "Church History," Times and Seasons 3 (1 March 1842): 707; republished in Joseph Smith, History of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, ed. B.H. Roberts (Salt Lake City: Deseret News, 1946): 4:537. Orson Pratt boarded at the Prophet's home in the early 1830s and in 1840 he first published the description of the plates along with an account of Joseph Smith's early visions. The Prophet obviously felt he was quoted accurately about the plates, because he used Pratt's sketch as his own, with some corrections. For Pratt's original account, see Dean C. Jessee, The Papers of Joseph Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1989), 1:399-400.
[^4] This is the earliest surviving draft (1839) of the Prophet's manuscript history ("Church History," 236-7); it is minimally edited in Joseph Smith, History of the Church, 1:54-5.
[^5] "Valedictory," dated February 1837, Messenger and Advocate 3 (August 1837): 548.
[^6] For an outline biography of Oliver Cowdery, see Lyndon W. Cook, The Revelations of the Prophet Joseph Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1985), 14.
[^7] "Oliver Cowdery's Last Letter," Deseret News, 22 March 1884. Richards prefaces the "letter" by describing the circumstances in which he obtained it.
[^8] Some say Martin Harris was not excommunicated, but a 1 January 1838 letter written by John Smith, then the First Presidency member presiding over the Kirtland High Council, stated that Martin had been excommunicated the week before. See Anderson, Investigating the Book of Mormon Witnesses, 119 n. 13.
[^9] George A. Smith, letter to Josiah Fleming, 30 March 1838, Kirtland, Ohio, in LDS Church Archives.
[^10] For an outline biography of Martin Harris, see Cook, Revelations, 9.
[^11] Data on Hannah is from RLDS records in Susan Easton Black, Early Members of the Reorganized Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints (Provo, Utah: BYU Religious Studies Center, 1993), 2:670.
[^12] The True Latter Day Saints' Herald 22 (1875): 630.
[^13] For an outline biography of David Whitmer, see Cook, Revelations, 24-5.
[^14] "Murphy on Mormonism," The Hamiltonian, 21 January 1881. David Whitmer turned seventy-six on 7 January 1881.
[^15] David Whitmer, An Address to All Believers in Christ (Richmond, Mo.: David Whitmer, 1887), 8-9. This is David's final reprinting of his proclamation; the text matches the 1881 original. David explains the publication of his earlier leaflet on pages 8-9 of the Address.
[^16] For other letters from David Whitmer, see Cook, David Whitmer Interviews, 234-47.
[^17] For a brief biography of Forscutt, see F. Henry Edwards, The History of the Reorganized Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints (Independence, Mo.: Herald House, 1970) 6:78-9.
[^18] Printed courtesy of the RLDS Library-Archives, Independence, Missouri. For a reproduction of the handwritten manuscript from the RLDS Archives, see Inez Smith Davis, The Story of the Church, 10th ed. (Independence, Mo.: Herald House, 1981), 75.
[^19] Address to All Believers in Christ, 8. The booklet closes with David's name and the dateline, "RICHMOND, MO., April 1st, 1887."
[^20] For an outline biography of Hyrum Smith, see Cook, Revelations, 19-20.
[^21] Hyrum Smith, "To the Saints Scattered Abroad," Times and Seasons 1 (December 1839): 20.
[^22] Ibid., 23.
[^23] For an outline biography of Hiram Page, see Cook, Revelations, 40.
[^24] McLellin's 1847 reorganization is surveyed by Larry C. Porter, "The Odyssey of William Earl McLellin: Man of Diversity, 1806-83," in The Journals of William E. McLellin, 1831-1836, ed. Jan Shipps and John W. Welch (Provo, Utah: BYU Studies, 1994), 341-46.
[^25] Hiram Page, letter to William E. McLellin, 30 May 1847, Ensign of Liberty 1 (January 1848): 63.
