specialists kept the records

esoteric, needed

interpreting

origin story, key to social order

rulers' genealogy

validator of right to rule

ceremonial display, reading

migration history to predestined

homeland

nonterritorial accounts

ruler's title from name of early ruler

sacred artifacts with record

incorporate sacred myths

foretell the future

Religious functionaries and records:

mainly kept and used by priests

multi-level, coordinated record-using priesthood

prophets and records

seers and their devices

"false prophets"

Calendrical format for history:

prophecy for set periods

events at specified dates

sense of inevitability

Similarities between the Book of Mormon and Mesoamerican Records

As mentioned earlier, my paper "The Book of Mormon as a Mesoamerican Codex" constitutes a treatment of the contents of the scripture-symbolic, ritual, social, artistic, and historical motifs and other cultural patterns-"which could be found without surprise in a translated Meso-american document of codex form." [^213]Those materials supplement the parallels treated in the twelve categories listed above. Moreover, I have presented in another paper many cultural parallels between Mesoamerica and the Near East that further flesh out a picture of apparent ancient relations between the two areas. [^214]

Not surprisingly, the Book of Mormon is also dissimilar in some ways, just as no Mesoamerican codex is like others of the class in all features, although their "family resemblance" is generally obvious. Similarly, the Jewish Torah is like other ancient Near Eastern records in many ways while unique in certain features.

Conclusion

More than sixty general and specific ways have been presented that show that the Book of Mormon aligns with much of what is known about Mesoamerican records, documents, or books. Significant, supplementary cultural parallels have also been pointed out. It is legitimate to ask the question, Could this degree of similarity be found between the Book of Mormon or Mesoamerican records on one hand and those of some other area of the world on the other? While I have not made a systematic comparison with, say, Southeast Asian books, cursory consideration indicates fewer and vaguer similarities. It appears to me that the parallels considered above cannot be considered fortuitous but are very significant and indicative of a genetic or historical connection between Mormon 2 's document and Mesoamerican records. Furthermore, it is totally implausible that such an array of similarities could have been produced by poorly educated Joseph Smith JrSignificant information on most of the points discussed above had not been discovered or was inaccessible to him or any other American in 1829, so the Mesoamerican-like features of and in the Book of Mormon could not be due to any early-nineteenth-century author. Nor is it plausible that such a set of Mesoamerican features could have been produced as fiction by a Smith or any American creative writer of his era.

In light of the facts presented here, the only sensible explanation for the Mesoamerican cultural form and content shown in and by the Book of Mormon is that it was a translation from a Mesoamerican document, that is, in general terms, a codex or native book.

An Epilogue for Mesoamericanists

To assert that the Book of Mormon derived from a Mesoamerican document is to challenge scholarly orthodoxy about both Mesoamerica and the Book of Mormon. Experts on Mesoamerica suppose there will not be major new discoveries of documents for their use but only increments in knowledge from piecemeal archaeological interpretation, gradual epigraphic decipherment, and patient investigation of Spanish archival documents. They are little prepared to deal with the considerable cultural information offered in the Book of Mormon because it yields data that they believe to be contrary to what they "know." So many have so often rejected the Book of Mormon as an authentic historical record that they are not likely to welcome what this paper has to say about the antiquity of its source. Besides, it is a "religious" book, which makes secular scholars nervous a priori. (Of course, virtually every document from or about Mesoamerican cultures dating before 1900 that is of substantial value is "religious" in some sense, "native" or Catholic.)

In contrast, some respected researchers on the history of religion including Christianity have come around to seeing the Book of Mormon as a source with which they need to deal seriously. The noted specialist on Old World Pseudepigrapha, James H. Charlesworth, was drawn to look at the Book of Mormon because "there are many . . . important parallels between the Pseudepigrapha and the Book of Mormon that deserve careful examination." [^215]KristerStendahl, then dean of Harvard Divinity School, added, "I have applied standard methods of historical criticism, redaction criticism, and genre criticism [to the Book of Mormon]. From such perspectives it seems very clear that the Book of Mormon belongs to and shows many of the typical signs of the Targums and the pseudepigraphic recasting of biblical material. . . . It is obvious to me that the Book of Mormon stands within both of these traditions if considered as a phenomenon of religious texts." [^216]How long must we wait for the chauvinism of "neutral scholarship" to abate in Mesoamerican studies so that someone in that field has the courage to manifest similar concern with the Book of Mormon?

Parallel situations in Mesoamerican scholarship may provide valuable perspective. The lessons they convey can give logical and methodological guidance in dealing with the appropriate exploitation of this "new" source.

The Popol Vuh is a quintessentially religious volume. Probably no "facts" in it are unaccompanied or uncolored by QuichÂ beliefs about the supernatural. Its text is arcane. Its theology and mythology are weird to most moderns. Yet dozens of different translations have been made of it by scholars in an attempt to clarify its content and make it accessible. Its text is combed assiduously and cited repeatedly by any scholar who seriously wishes to contribute to understanding Mesoamerican civilization. How it is to be related to culture historical research has never been very clear. Robert Carmack attempted to relate its "Toltecs" to the highland Guatemalan archaeological setting, but his results were indeterminate. [^217]He found evidence from linguistic examination of the text that "small numbers of the Toltec ancestors must have [entered the area and] come in contact with large, autochthonous, well-established populations." But thereafter the culture and genes of the intruders, as well as their language, "were apparently absorbed by the . . . much more numerous indigenous populations." [^218]Because this "Book of Counsel" of the ancient QuichÂ was the product of an elite minority, an enclave within a larger people, only a handful of specifically "Toltec" features it mentions have been found in the area's archaeology or language-so far. "Many . . . features which would be expected as a result of [the presence of the immigrant party] . . . are lacking," [^219]so that what might be called "the archaeology of the Popol Vuh" is of limited scope or value. (Mormon readers may be forgiven a special moment of dÂjÂ vu at this point.) The cultural and historical situation behind the Popol Vuh is obviously not simple, yet the source remains indispensable for scholars. And researchers have been able to deal with the volume without feeling threatened about being converted to QuichÂ religion.

Another perspective comes from the situation presented not by an accepted text but by one whose authenticity has been called into question, like the Nephite book. Michael D. Coe, in his book Breaking the Maya Code, tells of a dispute that arose in 1971 over a purported Mesoamerican book, a newly discovered codex. He was a principal protagonist in the fight, arguing for the authenticity of the document. [^220]The circumstances of the codex's discovery were mysterious; it was claimed to stem from unauthorized "archaeology" in southern Mexico (most archaeologists would call it looting). [^221]Eventually labeled the Grolier Codex, the document came to public attention under conditions that led conventional Mesoamericanists to label it a fake, without giving it much, if any, scrutiny. Coe took up the cudgels for it. His favorite villain and longtime friend, famed Mayanist Sir J. E. S. Thompson, played the role of key antagonist.

In Breaking the Maya Code, Coe describes how Thompson earlier had "hammered away" at Yuri Knorosov, the Soviet linguist to whom much of the credit eventually has gone for launching the successful decipherment of the Maya hieroglyphics. Knorosov had had the audacity to offer a theory about the glyphs in opposition to Thompson's reigning viewpoint; Thompson considered the Knorosov position completely mistaken and responded with "a contemptuous review," as Coe terms it, labeling the Russian's work "a Marxist hoax." Thompson's stance toward the new codex might be paraphrased as something like, "The Maya canon of books is already full. A codex? A codex? We already have three codices!" [^222]He reviewed Coe's publication of the Grolier document, writing in his typical slashing style. Coe says of that review that Thompson["ignor[ed] the main argument while concentrating on some detail where he thought the chances of a quick kill were best." [^223]With justified satisfaction Coe tells the story of the codex's subsequent vindication. The Grolier Codex is now generally acknowledged to be authentic, based on the characteristics of the document itself rather than on its unorthodox discovery. Coe comments on "the irony of the whole business" of the Grolier Codex. [^224]Had it had a less-prejudiced origin, he says, had it been found "while rummaging around in archives during the mid-nineteenth century, it would [have been] accepted by even the most rock-ribbed scholar as the genuine article." [^225]

It seems only fair to point out the irony in Coe's treatment of the Book of Mormon. In an article in 1973, Coe discussed some of the history of Latter-day Saint concerns with "Book of Mormon archaeology" in a fairly well-informed, nonhostile manner; he had done a respectable amount of homework on that history in preparing his piece. [^226]He thought nothing written under that heading was worthwhile, and he peremptorily ruled Mormon 2 's scripture out of scientific court. No serious Mesoamericanist could take seriously such a bit of nineteenth-century folly, he courteously but firmly insisted. Yet nowhere in his discussion did he show that he had more than superficially studied the text of the Book of Mormon as a possible ancient document. The irony is heavy, because Coe did with the Book of Mormon exactly what Thompson did with the Grolier Codex. Both men responded by reflex on the basis of opinions each had long since fixed in intellectual concrete of his own mix. In his 1973 article, Coe dismissed Joseph Smith's "outrageous claims," what Coe deemed "all the . . . nonsense generated by a nineteenth-century American subculture [i.e., Mormonism] intellectually grounded in white supremacy and proexpansionist tendencies." [^227]This is just as arrogant, mistaken, and irrelevant in judging the text as was Thompson's use of the "Marxist" brush to smear Knorosov's scholarship. By using epithets, each tried for a cheap dismissal of the case, thus avoiding the drudgery of doing that serious, unprejudiced, scholarly investigation that ought to precede a judgment about the authenticity of any potentially ancient text. Thompson found enough "nonsense" to disqualify the Grolier Codex without giving it the examination it deserved; Coe dismissed the Book of Mormon without studying it more than casually-six of one and half a dozen of the other.

More recently, a newly discovered stela from La Mojarra, Veracruz, has been labeled a fake by a Mexican archaeologist. John S. Justeson, who is confident it is not fraudulent, asks, "Who could have faked it? At the time that the monument was discovered, no one had all the linguistic and cultural knowledge needed to produce such a text." [^228]That issue-Who could have faked it?-is considered key to establishing the monument's authenticity. We ask precisely the same question about the Book of Mormon.

Is there hope that, in light of the comparisons made in the present work, professionals who have prejudged the Book of Mormon might look at it anew? Might they adopt the persona of the serious scholar long enough to examine the Nephite record as possibly stemming from a fourth-century Mesoamerican source? Or will they continue to assume that the Book of Mormon can only be a nineteenth-century fraud that, in some inexplicable manner, issued from the hands of a barely literate frontier youth? Mesoamericanists, non-Mormon or Mormon, would uphold the ideals of scholarship better if they would follow Charlesworth's and Stendahl's example and get on with the job. Although puzzled by what they discovered inside the Book of Mormon, they might conclude that secular scholars have already lost too much for too long by excluding Mormon 2 's pseudepigraphical codex from the field of Mesoamerican studies. It would be the responsible course for them to undertake careful scholarship on it regardless of any discomfort they may feel personally about how the New York farm boy brought the volume to light or about the church he founded.

Notes

Incidentally, Dr. Samuel L. Mitchell, no doubt the same person who was seen by Martin Harris, is one of the "antiquarians" whose opinions are summarized regarding the origin of the Indians; in Mitchell's view they included Malay, Tartar, and Scandinavian transoceanic voyagers. Also, see a piece in the Portsmouth Journal (New Hampshire) for 1 November 1834, that reported, obviously on the basis of some urban newspaper, the vague information that expeditions into Mexican back country in 1786, 1805, and 1807 had produced drawings and detailed descriptions of ancient monuments; however, these had remained in the portfolios of the Mexican Museum until 1828, when "M. Abbebaradere, a French savant," became possessor of them. He planned to publish them in Paris. The discoveries included "ancient idols of granite, . . . pyramids, subterranean sepulchres, . . . colossal bas-reliefs sculptured in granite or modeled in stucco, zodiacs, hieroglyphics differing from those of Egypt," and so on. But no such publication was ever issued, nor was there any equivalent volume until Stephens's. Clavigero's volume on Mexico appeared in an English edition in 1817 in Philadelphia, but it was mainly a description of the Aztecs that gave little ancient historical information. Humboldt's English edition of Vues des cordillÂres came out in London in 1814, but neither could it have informed Smith about more than snatches of fact on Mesoamerican civilization. The 1833 volume by Priest, who had vastly better library resources and scholarly skills than Smith, does not cite either Clavigero or Humboldt.

It is interesting also that Stephens had studied at Columbia College (later, Columbia University) under Professor Charles Anthon, "America's most famous classicist." Stephens graduated from Columbia in 1822 at age seventeen, being the same age as Joseph Smith Jr. Anthon was only eight years older.

From the "Great Tower" (in Mesopotamia, ca. 3140 b.c.) to Moroni 2 's termination of his record (Moro. 10:1) encompasses 3600 tuns or 9 baktuns, which equal 72 Israelite fifty-year jubilee periods. From the Jaredite arrival to their destruction was 2600 tuns (=52 jubilees). From Lehi1 's departure from Jerusalem to the nativity of Jesus, 600 tuns (=12 jubilees). From the birth of Jesus to the destruction at Cumorah, 400 tuns or 1 baktun (=8 jubilees).

This Chief Two [the given name of the first ruler] engendered Keh Nay

And five other sons,

Who were provided by this king as governors.

Hence until the Spaniards came

The kings had this name of Keh Nay

Because it is like [the royal title] ÃCaesars' among the natives." (Ibid.)

This use of title is interesting-as a cultural pattern, if not as a historical fact-in light of Jacob 1:9-11, where we read, "Now Nephi began to be old, and he saw that he must soon die; wherefore, he anointed a man to be a king and a ruler over his people now, according to the reigns of the kings. The people having loved Nephi exceedingly, he having been a great protector for them . . . Wherefore, the people were desirous to retain in remembrance his name. And whoso should reign in his stead were called by the people, second Nephi, third Nephi, and so forth, according to the reigns of the kings; and thus they were called by the people, let them be of whatever name they would." Interestingly, Nephi 1 was one of six sons, like Keh Nay. Meanwhile, the Lamanite kings may have used "Laman" as a title, in parallel to the use of "Nephi" by the Nephites (see Ancient American Setting, 242; and Daniel H. Ludlow, ed., Encyclopedia of Mormonism [New York: Macmillan, 1992], 1:191, s.v. "Book of Mormon peoples").

The QuichÂ had already received from their founding fathers a sacred emblem, the Pizom-Gagal, or "bundle . . . of power," which had been left to them as a "symbol of [the ancestors'] being" (ibid., 205-6). This object consisted of a sacred stone "which they used in their incantations." The T'tulo de los Se-ores de TotonicapÂn, anotherlineage history, speaks of "the precious gift which our father Nacxit gave us; it will be useful to us, because we have not yet found the place in which we are going to settle" (p. 205); in other words, it served as an instrument to receive divine guidance as to where they should travel and settle. Carmack, following Nicholson, says that "this sacred symbol of power corresponds precisely" with the sacred bundle revered by descendants of the Toltecs in central Mexico. There it consisted of green stones (jade or turquoise) set into pieces of wood with holes bored in them and wrapped in cloth mantles; it symbolized "the hearts of [their] gods" (see Carmack, "Toltec Influence," 73).

I find the similarities to the Liahona and the "interpreters" of the Nephites striking. The Liahona was a guide for Lehi1 's party when they had "not yet found the place in which they were to settle." The interpreters were sacred stones set in a device to facilitate their handling. Both instruments were divine gifts that reminded the holders of godly power to reveal; they were reminders of the ancestral founders; and they were among the insignia of office passed on between Nephite rulers. It seems possible that replicas, at least conceptual replicas, of the original objects held by the Nephite leaders may have been passed on by Lamanite or apostate Nephite rulers, which served as models for the paraphernalia of later groups.

Monte Alban, Oaxaca, ?700 b.c.

(One scholar has suggested, however, that the system in use in M.A. I and II, up to ca. a.d. 300, was very different from that used in subsequent M.A. IIIA, which could be due to "a change of population and even of language." See Hanns J. Prem, "Calendrics and Writing," in R. F. Heizer and John A. Graham, Observations on the Emergence of Civilization in Mesoamerica, University of California Archaeological Research Facility Contributions no. 11 [1971], 121-2.)

Kaminaljuyu Stela 10, ?150 b.c.

(See Graham, "Commentary on: Calendrics and

Writing by Prem," Observations on the Emergence of Civilization, 135. Graham thinks this must be "a very sophisticated system," even though nobody can read the unique inscription yet.)

Southern Veracruz, ?100 b.c.

Maya, ?100 b.c.

Teotihuacan, a.d. ?100

Âui-e (Coe's "Huajuapan"), central Mexico, a.d. ?400

Taj'n, north-central Veracruz, a.d. ?500

Borgia Group codices, central Mexico, a.d. ?500

Xochicalco, central Mexico, a.d. ?600

Cotzumalhuapa, coastal Guatemala, a.d. ?600

Mixtec, south-central Mexico, a.d. ?600

Aztec, a.d. ?1350

To these glyph systems may be added Olmec (?1000 b.c.) and possibly others (see below).

The most sweeping and best-documented proposition is that of Otto Sadovszky. He has found that the California Penutian languages, such as Wintun and Costanoan, are so clearly similar to the Ob-Ugrian group of western Siberia that they must be classified in the same family. The data require that a direct migration took place to central California on the order of 500 b.c. (see Sorenson and Raish, Pre-Columbian Contact. vol. 2: entries S-008 to S-017). Brian Stubbs ("Looking Over vs. Overlooking Native American Languages: Let's Void the Void," Journal of Book of Mormon Studies 5/1 [1996]: 1-49) demonstrates that Uto-Aztecan languages yield more than a thousand similarities to Hebrew, in phonological, morphological, and semantic patterns consistent with modern linguistic methods. See also Ludlow, Encyclopedia of Mormonism, 1:179-81, s.v. "Book of Mormon Language." David H. Kelley ("Linguistics and Problems in Trans-Pacific Contacts," Proceedings, 35th International Congress of Americanists [MÂxico, 1962], 1:17-8, based on his 1957 Harvard dissertation) demonstrates the presence of some fifty cognate ritual and sacred terms from Uto-Aztecan in early Polynesian. Pierre Agrinier ("Linguistic Evidence for the Presence of Israelites in Mexico," Newsletter and Proceedings of the S.E.H.A. 112 [1969]: 4-5) reports on evidence for a relationship between Zapotec and Hebrew, which Robert F. Smith extended substantially in an unpublished manuscript, "Sawi-Zaa Word Comparisons," dated September 1977. Mary LeCron Foster, of the University of California at Berkeley, maintains and documents that there were specific relationships between the Egyptian language and the Mixe-Zoquean family of languages of southern Mexico, as well as ties between Uto-Aztecan and Indo-European languages, following Morris Swadesh, who saw relations specifically between Aztec and Latin. See Foster, "Old World Language in the Americas: 1," a paper given at the annual meeting of the Association of American Geographers, San Diego, California (20 April 1992); and Foster's overlapping paper, "Old World Language in the Americas: 2," read at the annual meeting of the Language Origins Society, Cambridge University, England (September 1992). Lengthy abstracts are given in Sorenson and Raish, Pre-Columbian Contact, second ed., entries F-146B and F-146C.

For the record, I note that an odd calendrical pattern that deserves analysis is manifested in one Nephite count of years. Gareth Lowe pointed out to me years ago that 4 Ne. 1:6 has "the thirty and eighth year pass away, and also the thirty and ninth," but then jumps to the "forty and first." The pattern is repeated in the jump from "forty and nine years" to "the fifty and first . . . and even until fifty and nine years had passed away." Verse 14 continues the scheme, from the "seventy and first . . . and in fine, till the seventy and ninth year had passed away." Why are the decadal years omitted?

---
Notas:
[^213] 213. Sorenson, "The Book of Mormon as a Mesoamerican Codex," 4.
[^214] 214. Sorenson, "The Significance of an Apparent Relationship between the Ancient Near East and Mesoamerica," 219-41.
[^215] 215. James H. Charlesworth, "Messianism in the Pseudepi-grapha and the Book of Mormon," in Reflections on Mormonism: Judaeo-Christian Parallels, ed. Truman G. Madsen (Provo: BYU Religious Studies Center, 1978), 129.
[^216] 216. Krister Stendahl, "The Sermon on the Mount and Third Nephi," in Reflections on Mormonism, 152.
[^217] 217. See Carmack, "Toltec Influence."
[^218] 218. Ibid., 71.
[^219] 219. Ibid., 64.
[^220] 220. Coe, Breaking the Maya Code, 227-9.
[^221] 221. I find an interesting parallel in Stephen Williams' unique notion that the gold plates that Joseph Smith had were obtained by "discovery and excavation," and that the LDS faith "has deep roots in what must be called the Ãarchaeological discoveries' in 1827 by Joseph Smith" (Williams, Fantastic Archaeology: The Wild Side of North American Prehistory [Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1991], 161, 25). Also see Diane E. Wirth's review of his book and my review in Review of Books on the Book of Mormon 4 (1992): 251-3 and 254-7, respectively.
[^222] 222. Compare Williams, Fantastic Archaeology, 152-3.
[^223] 223. Ibid. Coe, Breaking the Maya Code, 229. Chapter 6 tells in gory detail how effective Thompson had been against previous foes following this critical strategy. I discussed that point and the Coe/Thompson conflict in my review of "Does the Shoe Fit?" by Deanne G. Matheny, 302-3.
[^224] 224. Coe, Breaking the Maya Code, 229.
[^225] 225. Ibid.
[^226] 226. Michael D. Coe, "Mormons and Archeology: An Outside View," Dialogue 8/2 (1973): 40-5.
[^227] 227. Ibid., 47.
[^228] 228. A. M. H. Schuster, "Case of the Suspect Stela," Archaeology (September-October, 1994): 53.
