# Course Study Journal

Keep a course study journal in which you regularly record what you have learned, how you have applied it, and how it has increased your faith in Jesus Christ. This will allow you to reflect upon and recognize the many blessings you have received from God. The journal can also be a source of inspiration and strength. Near the end of the course you will report to your teacher that you regularly kept a course study journal and how your experience strengthened your faith in Jesus Christ.

Elder Richard G. Scott (1928–2015) of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles taught:

  

  “Write down in a secure place the important things you learn from the Spirit. You will find that as you write down precious impressions, often more will come. Also, the knowledge you gain will be available throughout your life” (Richard G. Scott, “To Acquire Knowledge and the Strength to Use It Wisely,” Ensign, June 2002, 32).

President Henry B. Eyring of the First Presidency also spoke of the importance of recording spiritual impressions:

  

  “I came home late from a Church assignment. …

  “… Just as I got to the door, I heard in my mind … ‘I’m not giving you these experiences for yourself. Write them down.’

  “… And as I did, I understood the message I had heard in my mind. I was supposed to record for my children to read, someday in the future, how I had seen the hand of God blessing our family. …

  “I wrote down a few lines every day for years. … Before I would write, I would ponder this question: ‘Have I seen the hand of God reaching out to touch us or our children or our family today?’ As I kept at it, something began to happen. …

  “More than gratitude began to grow in my heart. Testimony grew. I became ever more certain that our Heavenly Father hears and answers prayers. I felt more gratitude for the softening and refining that come because of the Atonement of the Savior Jesus Christ. And I grew more confident that the Holy Ghost can bring all things to our remembrance—even things we did not notice or pay attention to when they happened” (Henry B. Eyring, “O Remember, Remember,” Ensign or Liahona, Nov. 2007, 66–67).

For more information, see also 1 Nephi 1:1–3; 6:3–6; Alma 37:8–9; 3 Nephi 23:6–13; Moses 6:5, 45-46.
