For the information of the members of the Church, the First Presidency has issued the following statistical report concerning the growth and status of the Church as of 1981 December 31. (Membership figures include estimates based on 1981 reports available prior to conference.)

Number of branches in stakes

Number of branches in missions

(These statistics reflect an increase of 103 stakes and 622 wards and branches during 1981.)

Number of countries with organized wards or branches

Total membership at the close of 1981

It is estimated that current Church membership exceeds 5 million.

Children of record baptized

Birthrate per thousand

Number of persons married per thousand

Death rate per thousand

Full-time missionaries

Names cleared in 1981 for temple endowments

Number of endowments performed during 1981:

Temples in operation

With those announced this week, the number of temples planned and under construction

Temples closed during the year

(There were 139,000 more endowments performed in 1981 than in 1980, even though the Manti Temple was not in operation for part of the year.)

Total enrollment during 1980–81 school year:

Seminaries and Institutes, including special programs

Church schools, colleges, and continuing education

Persons assisted by LDS Social Services

Persons placed in gainful employment

Man-days of labor donated to welfare services

Commodities distributed from storehouses in pounds

Elder S. Dilworth Young, emeritus member of the First Quorum of the Seventy and former Senior President of the First Council of the Seventy; Elder Del Alvin Talley, senior Regional Representative; Freda Joan Jensen Lee, widow of President Harold B. Lee; Belle Smith Spafford, general president of the Relief Society from 1945 to 1974 and former president to the National Council of Women; Lucile Reading, managing editor of the Friend magazine and former counselor in the General Presidency of the Primary; Dr. Henry Eyring, world-renowned scientist and author; Dr. Harvey Fletcher, internationally known expert and inventor in the field of communications; A. Hamer Reiser, former counselor in the General Presidency of the Sunday School; Louise J. Lake, teacher of the handicapped and recipient of the President’s Trophy for Handicapped American of the Year; and George S. Eccles, prominent banker and civic leader.
