# The Book of Abraham Facsimiles

### The Book of Abraham Facsimiles
Robert L. Millet, Kent P. Jackson, Studies in Scripture, Vol. 2: The Pearl of Great Price ( 1985)
 
 

19

THE BOOK OF ABRAHAM FACSIMILES

JAMES R. HARRIS

Introduction

The Book of Abraham Facsimiles have been a curious conversation piece—a stumbling block to some investigators, a springboard to weird interpretations, and most of all they have been ignored by nearly seven generations of Latter-day Saints. Even the brief uproar created by Reverend Spaulding's "investigation" of the Facsimiles in 1912 1 did not create a lasting motivation for research into the meaning and use of the Facsimiles. Latter-day Saints (myself included) have generally been content to focus on the text of Abraham and depend upon the power of its message to validate the text. With the acquisition of part of the Joseph Smith Egyptian Collection from the New York Metropolitan Museum on 27 November 1967 2 a very positive spirit of curiosity has been manifest and has resulted in several books and articles on the Abraham Facsimiles. Foremost among such publications were numerous articles and two books by Hugh Nibley. 3 A number of significant articles appeared in Dialogue during 1968-69. Although the latter articles were not always supportive of long-established notions of Latter-day Saints, they were the result of serious and honest consideration of the Joseph Smith Egyptian Collection, which included the vignette (from which Facsimile No. 1 was made).

With due respect for all that has been done, there remains a need for a clarification and selective identification of what responsible research has revealed regarding the Facsimiles of the Book of Abraham. What follows is a review of past and current research that has provided insight and understanding of the uses and messages of the Facsimiles.

Once there was a man who had a great love for music, notwithstanding his inability to read or play a single note. He determined that he must find a way to participate in a great musical production. He noticed that some musicians squirmed and wiggled on the piano bench to achieve a comfortable playing position. In a flash he realized that he had found a means of fulfilling his obsession. He would compile a chart indicating the exact distance of a piano bench from a piano for optimum comfort and reach, according to the height and arm length of each individual. Measurements scientifically produced would be logged in centimeters to assure respectability. With a great sigh of relief and sense of achievement our music lover now retired to the auditorium knowing he had made a contribution. Some genuine value may have resulted from his efforts on some rare and remote occasion, but the scientific seating chart was at best a peripheral consideration, rarely, if ever, crucial to the production of good music.

Too much research on the Book of Abraham has been devoted to adjusting seats and fiddling with the lights. The most critical part of the performance is the interpretation of the musical score. A quality performance requires that the performer know the score. Too many are adjusting seats and never learning the score.

It does not affect our faith or testimony to know that a detail, date, or event was out of sequence or incorrectly recorded by a historian of the Book of Abraham. Correct information is imperative, but when misinformation on such details does surface it does not threaten our perception of the origin of the Book of Abraham. But it can affect our faith and testimony to know how God inspired his prophet in the utilization of Roman-period Sensen Vignettes (Facsimiles No. 1 and 3) to illustrate a text identified with Abraham in the second millennium B.C.

No longer an obscure minority but a worldwide Church, the Latter-day Saints cannot ignore reasonable questions raised by honest and sometimes sympathetic inquirers. In an earlier period there was less sympathy and a more belligerent climate that did not promote objective discussion. The critics of early in this century, whose views are quoted below, were quick to respond to inqueries concerning Joseph Smith's work, and the tone of their conclusions was both sharp and absolute. The unanimous conclusion of these critics was that Joseph Smith was an obvious fraud. The following are representative:

1. Professor C. A. B. Mercer, Western Theological Seminary:

That the author knew neither the Egyptian language nor the meaning of the most commonplace Egyptian figures; neither did any of those, whether human or Divine, who may have helped him in his interpretation, have any such knowledge. By comparing his notes on facsimiles Nos. 1, 2, and 3 with any elementary book on Egyptian language and religion, and especially by comparing the notes of No. 2 with the explanation of the above named plate on page 49ff. of the work of Petrie already named (the explanation is by A.E. Weigall, Chapter V), this becomes unquestionably evident. A criticism in his explanations could be made, but the explanatory notes to his facsimiles cannot be taken seriously by any scholar, as they seem to be undoubtedly the work of pure imagination. 4

2. E. A. W. Budge:

The interpretation is bosh. 5

3. W. M. Flinders Petrie, University College, London University

To any one with knowledge of the large class of funeral documents to which these belong, the attempts to guess a meaning for them, in the professed explanations, are too absurd to be noticed. It may be safely said that there is not one single word that is true in these explanations.

If any one wishes to verify the matter, they have only to ask any of the curators of Egyptian museums. Prof. Breasted of Chicago, Dr. Lythgoe of New York, or any one else who knows the subject. None but the ignorant could possibly be imposed on by such ludicrous blunders. 6

4. James H. Breasted, University of Chicago. 23 May 1912:

It will be seen, then, that if Joseph Smith could read ancient Egyptian writing, his ability to do so had no connection with the decipherment of hieroglyphics by European scholars. Joseph Smith's interpretation of them as part of a unique revelation through Abraham, therefore, very clearly demonstrates that he was totally unacquainted with the significance of these documents and absolutely ignorant of the simplest facts of Egyptian writing and civilization. 7

5. Arthur C. Mace, Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York:

I return herewith, under separate cover, the "Pearl of Great Price." The "Book of Abraham," it is hardly necessary to say, is a pure fabrication. Cuts 1 and 3 are inaccurate, 2 is a copy of one of the magical discs which in the late Egyptian period were placed under the heads of mummies. There were about forty of these latter known in museums and they are all very similar in character. Joseph Smith's interpretation of these cuts is a farrago of nonsense from beginning to end. Egyptian characters can now be read almost as easily as Greek, and five minutes' study in an Egyptian gallery of any museum should be enough to convince any educated man of the clumsiness of the imposture. 8

Among the more recent responses to questions regarding the origin and meaning of the Facsimiles, there is a noticeable softening of language. 9 More polite and respectful references are being made to the Prophet and the Church. Perhaps the most gracious critic among non-Latter-day Saint writers has been Dr. Klaus Baer of the University of Chicago's Oriental Institute. 10 Dr. Baer even suggested to a Mormon investigator that Joseph Smith may have been "actually receiving a Divinely inspired scripture while he was working—and working hard—on what he believed to be a philological interpretation of the papyri." 11 Professor Baer made it very clear that he did not believe or accept the idea, but that if he were a believing Latter-day Saint it is a possibility he would seriously consider. Responding to the questions of whether the Book of Abraham is a correct translation of the Sensen text and if he and other Egyptologists accepted the explanations accompanying Facsimile No. 1 of the Book of Abraham, Dr. Baer answered with an emphatic and resounding "No" (to both questions). 12

We observe that while the language has softened, the substance of professional reply has remained the same. The community of professional Egyptologists will not recognize the interpretations of Joseph Smith as competent scholarship.

If we can successfully put to rest any notion that Joseph Smith was an Egyptologist, we are then free to view his accomplishments as results of his prophetic calling. He, of course, never claimed to be an Egyptologist but did consistently claim the latter.

A Brief Historical Orientation

The following is a brief account of how a hypocephalus (a round disk inscription, Fac. 2) and a Sensen text with two vignettes (Facs. 1 and 3), found in Western Thebes, became identified with the Book of Abraham. Sometime between the years 1818 and 1830, Antonio Lebolo, a native of northwestern Italy's Piedmont region, received permission from Bernardino Drovetti (also a Piedmontese) to excavate in Gurneh (located in western Thebes). In his effort to find valuable antiquities, eleven mummies were discovered and taken out of Egypt by Lebolo. He died "peacefully" in his own bed, in Castellemonte, Italy on 19 February 1830. 13

Michael Chandler, a presumed nephew of Lebolo by marriage, became heir to the mummy collection, and in the course of events (1835) encountered Joseph Smith, the Prophet. When the Prophet Joseph Smith was convinced that the papyrus found with the mummies contained sacred writings, he purchased the collection for the Church at the cost of $2400. Pressures of persecution and administrative responsibilities inhibited the progress of the translation, but by 1842 five chapters of the Book of Abraham and three illustrations (Facsimiles 1-3) were published in the Times and Seasons at Nauvoo, Illinois. Facsimiles Nos. 1 and 3 were created from the two vignettes (small illustrations) of a Sensen text. Facsimile No. 2 was created from a disk-shaped amulet that was placed under the head of the deceased, hence known as a hypocephalus (literally meaning "under the head"). In their original context these illustrations have no connection with the Book of Abraham. Possibly due to the similarity of Abraham and Osiris as Messianic types, i.e., representations of a suffering dying Messiah renewed by divine intervention, these vignettes were seen as appropriate illustrations for the Book of Abraham. It is probable that they served as a catalyst to channel the Prophet's mind to receive further revelation on Abraham. Revelation received under these conditions led the Prophet to the conclusion that the vignettes and related papyrus texts were in fact the text of Abraham, a conclusion he never publically questioned during his lifetime.

Included as part of the Joseph Smith Egyptian Collection rediscovered in 1967 were several fragments of the Book of the Dead texts and fragments of three different documents. 14 It is reasonably certain from a careful reading of the Chicago Museum's catalogue that the original vignette from which Facsimile No. 3 was composed burned in the Chicago Fire in 1871. The whereabouts of possible additional fragments and/or scrolls remains unknown.

Joseph Smith made no attempt to describe the content of the scrolls or fragments of papyrus, other than to say of the two scrolls that one contained the Book of Abraham and the other contained the Book of Joseph. Oliver Cowdery described another fragment as containing astronomical figures. 15 Other than these brief statements, no additional sources of reliable information can be found.

The Origin of the Facsimiles

Facsimiles Nos. 1 and 3 will be treated in sequence here because of their common origin. Egyptian funerary practices changed throughout three thousand years of history in response to an increasing concern with the afterlife by an ever increasing populus. In the fifth dynasty of the Old Kingdom (2345 B.C.), lavish Pyramid Texts—inscriptions on the walls of burial chambers within pyramids—assured the happy afterlife of the deceased. These were later supplemented and replaced by coffin texts—afterworld texts written directly on coffins—during the First Intermediate period (2200-2050 B.C.). Later these coffin texts were supplemented and to some extent replaced by papyrus rolls containing Book of the Dead texts, buried inside the coffin with the mummy of the deceased.

The purpose of these texts was to protect, preserve, and enliven the body of the deceased, enabling the body to continue its relationship with the ba (spirit) and ka (the intelligence, essential nature, or life-force of the deceased). If the ba and ka could not find expression through the mummy, statuary, or portrait, all in the likeness of the deceased, then the ba and ka would cease to exist. If the name of the deceased was not written and spoken by a descendant or priest in a temple, the ka and ba could not survive. For example, Ramses II was proclaimed to have been a good son because he spoke the name of his father Seti I in the temple. Actually, he did his best to obscure his father's name by eradicating it from temple, texts, and monuments. 16 In short it was life, not death, that was the obsession of the ancient Egyptians. In the later (Ptolemaic and Roman) periods even greater efforts were made to assure more people of life after death. Sensen texts accompanied by a variety of amulets were the least expensive and most widely used objects of the cult. Facsimiles Nos. 1 and 3 were, respectively, the opening and closing vignettes (illustrations) of a Sensen (breathing) text. To refer to these texts as Breathing Permits or Breathing Texts does not reflect the quality of life they were to secure for the deceased; this life included association with the gods and an anticipation for a future resurrection. More appropriate for a future would be a loftier title such as "Breath of Eternal Life." The evidence that Facsimiles Nos. 1 and 3 are variations of Sensen vignettes (and of the Book of the Dead vignettes) is as follows.

Among the papyri donated to the Church in 1967 from the Metropolitan Museum of Art were two fragments of special interest (Papyri Joseph Smith X and XI; cited hereafter as PJS X and XI). These two fragments, together with the original vignette from which Facsimile No. 1 was made, are all part of a single scroll. This scroll also contains a late Egyptian religious text identified as "The Book of Sensen." The end of this small papyrus appears to have included the original vignette from which Facsimile No. 3 was copied. Unfortunately we do not have the original vignette, but other Sensen papyri contain vignettes similar to the scene shown in Facsimile No. 3, leading us to believe the illustration would have been part of the Sensen scroll. The text of the papyrus indicated that its owner was Hor (Greek "Horus"), the son of Remni-qai and Qaikhebyt. It has been dated with reasonable assurance to A.D. 60 or a little later. 17

A final codification of the religious and magical literature of the Egyptians was transmitted from the earliest predynastic times by Sensen texts. The book of Sensen was the distilled essence of the religious teachings of the Egyptians. The sources of these teachings were the earlier religious writings of the Egyptians, which included the Pyramid Texts, the Coffin Texts, and the Book of the Dead.

In Roman times the Book of Sensen was not the title of a specific book but was rather a general term for religious texts. 18 The word Sensen itself (Egyptian snsn), which is often translated "breathing," was a technical religious term which referred not merely to breathing but designated that state of glorified existence to which the righteous deceased could look forward in the hereafter. The Dutch Egyptologist B.H. Stricker took all of the extant late Books of Sensen and organized them into three main classes. 19 The Joseph Smith Sensen text belongs to the second class of texts, those distinguished from the other classes of texts by their uniformity in content. The title of these texts was "The Book of Sensen made by Isis for her brother Osiris." Because members of this class of documents formed a "standard text" (according to Stricker) we can rely upon other texts of this class to provide reliable material for restoration of damaged texts when and if such restoration is desired. We need not be in doubt about the intent of the original document.

In summary, the "Book of Sensen" is the title given to a class of late Egyptian (Roman period) religious texts that served two purposes. First, it was an initiation guide for the living, used to prepare themselves for entrance into the realm of the gods after death; second, it was buried with those who had died, for use on that final journey into the hereafter.

Facsimile No. 3 does not have the advantage of a text to accompany, complement, and determine the sense in which this Egyptian scene is to be understood. Both Facsimiles No. 1 and 2 are located in the Book of Abraham in such a way as to appropriately illustrate the text of Abraham. For example, Facsimile No. 1 illustrates the first chapter of Abraham. Facsimile No. 3 (in all editions before 1981) appears at the very end of the Book of Abraham, suggesting that it was intended to illustrate an additional but unpublished text of Abraham. Just such an addition to the Book of Abraham was promised by Joseph Smith. John Taylor became the editor of the Times and Seasons after the publications by the Prophet Joseph of all we now have in the Book of Abraham. President Taylor encouraged the Saints at that time to renew their subscriptions so that they would not miss the "further extracts." Facsimile No. 3 was published in May of 1842, unaccompanied by a text other than the brief "Explanation" included with the Facsimile. These "further extracts" may well have included the text which Facsimile No. 3 illustrates. Growing public hostility perhaps made it inadvisable to expose mankind to more scripture with the prospect that it would, if rejected, damn more lives than it would bless. Consequently the "further extracts" never saw the light of day.

Facsimile No. 3 was created as a modification of the last vignette located on the same papyrus text that contained the source of Facsimile No. 1. The Church does not possess the original vignette for Facsimile No. 3, but similar scenes are found on other Sensen texts, such as the papyrus Ker-Asher (B.M. 9995), a 1st-century-B.C. text.

The description in the Chicago Museum catalogue of 1863 strongly indicates that the papyrus which burned in the Chicago fire of 1871 was the original Sensen vignette from which Facsimile No. 3 was composed. The catalogue description quotes a statement from Professor Seyffarth that the papyrus is "an invocation to the Deity Osiris, in which occurs the name of the person (Horus), and a picture of the attendant spirits introducing the dead to the Judge, Osiris." A copy of the 1859 St. Louis Museum Catalogue (page forty-five) records an identical description.

The name of the deceased owner of the papyrus (Horus) is found on the Sensen text (PJS X and PJS XI) and on the Facsimile. On PJS XI, column II, lines 3, 5, and 9, it appears three times; on PJS X, column III, lines 7 and 13 it appears twice; and on column IV, line 12 it appears once. The name of the owner is Osiris Hor (Horus), and it is the same name that appears in the line of hieroglyphs at the bottom of Facsimile No. 3 and above the left-hand of figure 5. In other words the name Osiris Hor appears a total of six times in the Sensen text and twice in the Facsimile illustration. The context in which the name appears on the vignette provides an appropriate setting for one intent upon entering the presence of the gods (as the conventional interpretation of the illustration would suggest). The columns read "Osiris Hor declared to be justified." What are we to conclude? Did Joseph Smith make a futile attempt to restore and interpret Facsimile No. 3 as it originally was recorded on the Sensen papyrus? Or was Joseph Smith inspired to see beyond the Egyptian catalyst (the Sensen vignettes) to the age of the great Patriarch Abraham and his moment of triumph over false doctrine and magic in the house of the King of Egypt?

Important to remember is that the Egyptians successfully illustrated a wide variety of themes from the same basic scene by simply adjusting basic props and players. This is precisely what Joseph Smith did, and the overall assessment of his modifications, restorations, and interpretations is witness that he was divinely guided.

Joseph Smith was not inspired to translate and restore the "Breathing Permit of Osiris Hor" with its vignettes, but he was inspired to restore an ancient and authentic record of Abraham and to modify, remodel, and reinterpret the original vignettes to complement the inspired text. In so doing the Egyptian quality and character of signs and their interpretation were not strained.

Facsimile No. 1

One of the observations of the Egyptologists that worked with the Facsimiles was that damaged portions were not restored properly. 20 The conclusion that is quite correctly drawn by these observers is that an accurate interpretation of the original vignette or text would not be possible without an accurate restoration. But was it desirable or necessary for Joseph Smith to restore the original vignettes or the hypocephalus? The message of the Sensen text, if perfectly restored, interpreted, and translated, would be of little use or interest to Latter-day Saints. It appears that the value of the first vignette of the Sensen text was its near-perfect appropriateness as an illustration for the Book of Abraham. Consequently, restorations were made to compliment the text of Abraham, not the Sensen text. A look at the nature of the restorations and their interpretations will greatly increase the reader's respect for the inspiration of Joseph Smith. Perhaps an even more crucial consideration is an explanation as to how Joseph Smith, the unlearned, arrived at such appropriate restorations and interpretations.

For example, Facsimile No. 1, figure 2 is appropriately compatible with the text of Abr. 1:15. This figure is an ideogram and a determinative of supplication as in the act of offering prayer. In the verse cited above, Abraham (identified as figure 2) said: "Behold, I lifted up my voice to the Lord my God." The sign illustrating Abraham's supplication to God is not only compatible with the message of the text, but it is an authentic hieroglyphic sign appropriately used by a man who is accused of not knowing anything about Egyptian signs. 21

The Joseph Smith Facsimile No. 1 of the Book of Abraham is one of many variations of scenes in which the lion couch and Osiris are central figures. It is important to realize that lion couch scenes are found in numerous variations and are used to illustrate many mythological events. In the two volumes of E. A. Wallas Budge's Osiris, over thirty variations are featured, including Osiris begetting Horus, Osiris being renewed, Osiris being prepared for burial, Osiris ruling from the Netherworld, Osiris being resurrected, and Osiris triumphant, i.e., overcoming his enemies. 22

Osiris is always the central figure representing the deceased who wishes to become like Osiris; he literally becomes an Osiris (a god). Osiris may change his posture, but he remains the central figure. The props and personalities surrounding the Osiris figure are the ones most likely to change or not appear. Such changes in their presence or posture will modify the meaning of the vignette. This is precisely what happened to Facsimiles Nos. 1 and 3; they are modifications of a conventional vignette scene tailored to accompany the Book of Abraham text.

Osiris is a Messianic figure; he is both the god of the dead and the god of the resurrection. He is the good shepherd that lays down his life for the sheep. 23 It is not surprising then that Abraham, who is also a type of the Messiah, should be portrayed in one of these messianic episodes with some similarities to the Osirion renewal. 24

The above example is typical of the restored and interpreted portions of all three Facsimiles. Facsimile No. 1, figure 1 is not a ba-bird (as it might have been in the original vignette) but a hawk, the sign of a powerful divine or celestial being. In Egyptian mythology it is Horus (the Hawk) who delivers his father Osiris from death (just as the hawk delivered Abraham from death). 25 Figure 3 is not Anubus as it may have been in the original vignette but represents a priest offering sacrifice on an altar.

All of the figures in this Facsimile were considered in detail by Dr. Hugh Nibley in the Era article of December 1968. Additional information acquired since his publication and a fresher and deeper understanding of the use made of this Facsimile will make it profitable for us to examine the remaining eight figures of Facsimile No. 1.

Figure 4: "The altar for sacrifice." Almost without exception critics have been unwilling to acknowledge that this item could be anything but an embalming table. Certainly it can represent an embalming table, but as a symbol it is not restricted to that interpretation. Large alabaster tables with the lion design, found at Memphis, were rarely used for embalming. The research of Mustafa El Amir in 1948 concerning the Apis Bull at Memphis revealed that these tables were used daily to wash the living Apis and also to perform sacrifice. Amir described an offering table with lions carved on its sides and located near an inscription of dedication to the "Living Bull Apis." 26

Figures 5 to 8 can be considered together. They are four canopic jars correctly identified by Joseph Smith as representing gods. Nibley identified the names of these gods (collectively called the Sons of Horus) as gods identified with the four lands adjacent to Egypt: on the east, Elkenah (Canaan); on the west, Libnah (Libya); on the north, Mahmackrah (Anatolia); and on the south, Korash (Cush). The east, west, north, and south orientation of these lands is consistent with the tradition that these sons of Horus were guardians of the pillars "which formed the four cardinal points." 27 The four gods held the pillars of heaven and earth in position as gods of the four cardinal points "who embrace the four Pure Lands" and are devoted to the service of Osiris. 28 The sons of Horus were also guardians of the liver, intestines, stomach, and kidneys and therefore are represented on lids and bodies of jars used to store these visceral parts. Frequently, however, such jar-sharped figures are portrayed on solid material with no cavity or removable lids. Obviously such non-jar representations were not used to store viscera, but to portray the gods. 29 In earlier times such jars all had the form of a human head, but by the end of the eighteenth dynasty (1370-1305 B.C.) they were crowned with the head of a man, an ape, a jackal, and a hawk (left to right). 30 In Facsimile No. 2, figure 6, Joseph Smith identified another symbolic representation of the four sons of Horus as "this earth in its four quarters." Joseph's interpretation is similar to the interpretation of Bonnet and Budge which describes the four Sons of Horus as "guardians of the pillars which formed the cardinal points and gods who embrace the four Pure Lands." 31

Facsimile No. 1, figure 9, is Sebek the crocodile, appropriately identified by Joseph Smith as "the idolatrous god of Pharaoh." According to Thebean tradition, the Pharaoh's claim upon the throne was based upon his relationship with the crocodile god, Sebek. He (Sebek) dwelt on the "Mountain of Sunrise where he assisted Horus to be reborn daily." 32 In so doing he overthrows every enemy of Osiris. His most impressive service was the role he played with the child Horus, who was to become the new king (Pharaoh). Sebek the crocodile god helped Horus take his seat upon the throne of his father Osiris. 33 Obviously, then, this is good reason to call Sebek "the god of Pharaoh."

Facsimile No. 1, figure 10: "Abraham in Egypt." Figure 10 is a lotus on an offering table, with perfume or ointment containers. The lotus was the symbol of Upper Egypt, including the area where the papyri of the Joseph Smith Egyptian Collection were found. 34 As a symbol of light and life emerging from the primieval pond, it is appropriately located at the head of the altar of renewal. 35 The symbol was also sacred with regard to Nefertum, the Lord of Perfumes.

Figure 11: "Designed to represent the pillars of heaven." Here there is no contest, as no one has ever challenged this interpretation. The pillars are appropriately placed under the heavens, even though the heavens portrayed are beneath the earth.

Figure 12: To the Egyptians the heavens were represented as seas which had no consistent orientation to the earth. The home of Sebek is both the solar sea above and the sea beneath. These seas were the mythological avenues to the Netherworld that must be traveled by everyone who would enter the presence of the gods. 36

We therefore conclude that there is nothing in the interpretation of the Facsimile or in the text of the first chapter of Abraham that is not appropriately represented by the Egyptian symbols in this Facsimile. During the months of March and May of 1842 Joseph Smith published all the material that now constitutes the Book of Abraham in the Times and Seasons at Nauvoo, Illinois. Symbols that were damaged and replaced by Joseph Smith or by his associates (working under his direction) are the best evidence that he was inspired to restore the correct forms and given an appropriate interpretation for the illustrations of the text. It will be more apparent as we continue our study of the remaining two Facsimiles that when Joseph Smith was not operating under the Spirit of inspiration he was incapable of making the most elementary kinds of judgments concerning the meaning or form of hieroglyphic signs. That very inability makes his accuracy when inspired all the more profound. It is difficult to believe that this outcome could result from anyone except a prophet of God.

Facsimile No. 3

As the last vignette on the same Sensen scroll that produced Facsimile No. 1, Facsimile No. 3 is seen by Egyptologists as a portrayal of the deceased (figure 4) entering the presence of Osiris and Hathor (figures 1 and 2). An invitation to enter their presence was the desired conclusion of every judgment scene. Similar vignettes are found on Papyrus Ker Asher (B.M. 9995) and Papyrus HuNefer.

A major point of concern from some critics of Joseph Smith is his interpretation of figures 1, 2, and 4 of Facsimile No. 3. A representative comment is Baer's statement: "It is obvious that figures 2 and 4 are women and not Pharaoh or his heir-apparent Prince." 37 There was also general agreement among some (named below) that figure 1 is Osiris and not Abraham.

Although these points of criticism are generally considered to be correct, they do not represent the only possible interpretation of this scene. Egyptian ritual drama frequently employed the principle of acquisition by impersonation. Spencer explained that "identification with [i.e., impersonation of] Osiris did not remain [an exclusively] royal privilege"; "private individuals . . . exploited" the practice of acquiring the characteristics and attributes of the gods by impersonating them. 38

Adorning a candidate for immortality with the clothing and paraphernalia of a god or goddess was a means of endowing him with powers, characteristics, and attributes associated with the deities thus impersonated. To achieve such an objective the king was dressed as the goddess Hathor during a Heb Sed festival, 39 which involved drama and ceremony intended to renew the king's claim to the throne after a 30-year reign. 40 During a coronation ceremony an impersonator of the goddess Maat appears dressed as Horus. The prince of Egypt would become a Horus. when he ascended to the throne, and as king one of his major functions would be to maintain Maat (i.e., truth and order). To become an implementor and complete possessor of Maat the prince was clothed and totally identified with the diety he impersonated. 41 Facsimile No. 3 was then a ritual dramatization that utilized the principal of acquisition, or endowment of power, by impersonation.

There is no Book of Abraham text to accompany or relate to Facsimile No. 3, but as already indicated there is a brief "Explanation" that must be considered.

Figure 1: "Abraham sitting upon Pharaoh's throne, by the politeness of the king, with a crown upon his head, representing the Priesthood, as emblematical of the grand Presidency in Heaven; with the scepter of justice and judgement in his hand." There are several historically documentable examples of foreign and non-royal personalities that impersonated the king by sitting upon his throne when dressed in his royal garb. In Egyptian myth and history such a man was called rp't, meaning a substitute for the king. In the Bible, Joseph in Gen. 41 was a rp't. Another example is Amenophis, son of Hapu, who played rp't during the Heb Sed Festival. 42 The rp't was in fact the substitute king. It would appear then that Abraham played the roll of rp't. The Prophet's explanation identified a "crown on his head" and mentioned priesthood presidency. Abraham was both a king and a priest with the powers of presidency (see D&C 110:12; a dispensation was committed unto Abraham). The Pharaoh was also a king and a priest. He was the Official High Priest of Heliopolis and of every other temple in Egypt. 43 His crown is the two plumed atef, a symbol of power, priesthood, light, and holiness. 44 In the Prophet's explanation, scepters of justice and judgment are mentioned. The scepters carried by Osiris are the flail and the shepherd's crook. He is the good shepherd who cares for the flock. 45 He must also prod them and at times drive them with his flail. The flail (i.e., whip) is shaped like a compass above his arm and is also the shape of a pyramid (a symbol of regenerative power). Crook and flail are symbols of mercy and justice and are instruments of rescue and punishment, respectively. 46

Figure 2: "King Pharaoh, whose name is given in the characters above his head." The use made of this figure in the Facsimile is another example of acquisition by impersonation. The characters are unclear but a reconstruction of the original vignette based on documents of similar dating would probably reveal the name of Isis.

Figure No. 3: "Signifies Abraham in Egypt as given also in figure 10 of Facsimile No. 1." See discussion of Fac. No. 1, figure 10.

Figure 5: "Shulem, one of the kings principle waiters." In the original vignette he is the deceased, Osiris Hor.

Figure 6: "Olimlah, a slave belonging to the prince." In the Ker-Asher vignette he is Anubus.

The textual passages in the columns above the heads of the characters (figures 1, 2, 4, 5, and 6) are generally referred to by Joseph Smith as signifying the names of these personalities. This observation is worthy of some notice, because it is unusual that the Prophet would have understood the correct use made of these columns. There was no need to restore the signs in the columns above the heads of the figures in Facsimile No. 3. Joseph Smith did not intend to restore or reproduce the original vignette but to provide an appropriate illustration for a continuation of the text of the Book of Abraham. Unless the Prophet was inspired with the appropriate signs for the columns in question he would be helpless to restore them on his own. While the original meaning of the vignette would be of no use to Joseph Smith or the Saints, concentration on the characters in the Facsimile provided a springboard to revelation for the Prophet.

Facsimile No. 2

Facsimile No. 2 appears in the Book of Abraham as a modified restoration of a damaged hypocephalus originally composed at Thebes sometime during the 30th Dynasty (380-343 B.C.). 47 Today, surviving hypocephali are few in number. The rarity of these documents indicates that they were never a part of mainstream Egyptian practices. Edith Varga emphasized this point by observing that all known owners of these documents belonged to priestly families and that they were frequently women songstresses of the temple or sistrum players. 48 In the literature on Egyptian funerary practices, hypocephali are rarely treated, and when they are, they are often classified with the amulets, which were also attached to the mummies, containing inscriptions of religious and magical texts intended to provide those entering the Netherworld with necessary information and power. 49 Although drawing little attention from Egyptologists, the magnitude of the explanations of this Facsimile by Joseph testify of its value for us.

The term for these documents originated with the great Champolleon, the foremost of the Rossetta Stone interpreters, who named them from the practice of placing the document under the head of the deceased (as is required in chapter 162 B.D.). The components of the word hypocephalus consist of the prefix hypo, meaning "under," and the suffix cephalus, meaning "head." At times the papyrus was "plastered" to the back of the head of the deceased with moist clay or simply placed under the head. 50 The amulet was by magic, faith, or both, intended to produce vital heat to protect, preserve, and, in a peculiar manner, to enliven the mummy. The contents of these hypocephali often include rather high-sounding religious commitments and aspirations. Covenant making, moral obligations, and theological and mythological overtones can be seen in the amulets, texts, and vignettes.

The earliest samples of these objects are from the Saite Period (ca. 600 B.C.), with text and illustrations written on papyrus. 51 After 300 B.C. linen stiffened with plaster was used to form these amulets. The disk shape of the hypocephalus, which represented the eye of the Sun God, continued in use through Roman times. In Ptolemaic and Roman periods bronze bowl-shaped hypocephali were also used. 52

The Joseph Smith hypocephalus maintains the style and content of various hypocephali identified by Raven with the 30th Dynasty (380-343 B.C.). 53 Varga suggests that this same style continued until the reign of Ptolemaus Philadelpeus II (285-246 B.C.). Hypocephali after Philadelpeus II tended to have less and less text and more and more illustrations. 54 The latest date for the Joseph Smith hypocephalus would be the late Macedonian period, or the beginning of the Ptolemaic period (ca. 332-325 B.C.). By the time the Prophet acquired it, it was rather damaged. Facsimile No. 2 contains extensive restorations made by him.

A passage from the 162nd chapter of the Saite Recension of the Book of the Dead is a clear expression of the expectations of a hypocephalus owner. The amulet was expected to insure its owner's success while "on earth" as well as to perpetuate his continued existence "in the Netherworld":

I adore thy name. I am the cow. Listen to my voice, on the day when thou puttest a flame under the head of Ra. Behold he is in the Tuat, and he is mighty in Heliopolis. Grant that he may be like one who is on earth. He is thy son, who loves thee. Do not ignore his name. Come to Osiris N. Grant that a flame may arise under his head, for he is the soul of the great body which rests in Heliopolis; the shining one, the form of the firstborn is his name. Barakatat'aua is his name.

This is a very great protection, which the cow granted to her son Ra, after he had gone to rest. His abode is surrounded by warriors of blazing fire.

If thou puttest this goddess on the neck of the King who is on earth, he is like fire in pursuing his enemies, his horses cannot stop.

If thou puttest it on the neck of a man after his death, he is mighty in the Netherworld. Nobody will drive him away from the gates of the Tuat undeviatingly. 55

The Joseph Smith hypocephalus was not among the papyri fragments given to the Church in 1967 by the New York Metropolitan Museum. The oldest known rendition of the Joseph Smith Hypocephalus is the copy found in a document titled "Valuable Discovery of hidden records that have been obtained from the ancient burying place of the Egyptians, Joseph Smith, Jr." On page 13 of that document the damaged hypocephalus is sketched. This sketch is invaluable because it clearly identifies the signs that were restored. Signs that now occupy the blank spaces in the "Valuable Discovery" sketch are signs restored or replaced by Joseph Smith.

The sketch (in "Valuable Discovery") is to be regarded as a poor copy of the original hypocephalus. When compared with the 1842 Times and Seasons woodcut of Facsimile No. 2, the sketch displays several signs which are incorrectly inserted and poorly copied. For example, the first sign of line 16 is incorrectly copied as the first sign of line 17 (using Joseph Smith's figure numbers for identification). Also the signs on lines 17, 11, and 8 are poor copies. Line 11 is an exception in that the first sign, a reed, is more clearly represented in the sketch than it appears in the 1842 publication.

As mentioned, the hypocephalus was damaged before the Prophet purchased it. The damage accounting for the absent parts of the Hypocephalus can be attributed to white Egyptian ants which frequently eat the linen and cartonague of hypocephali. Acqusition of the original hypocephalus is always a welcome possibility, but at the time of this writing, nothing of this nature has been reported officially by the Church.

The explanations given by the Prophet for the figures in the Facsimile are not translations of an Egyptian text but are possible interpretations of ideographic signs. An ideogram is a sign or figure that represents an idea or concept. They are usually quite flexible and can be interpreted in a variety of ways, depending on the context in which they are placed. As a determinative for a word in an Egyptian text the idea conveyed by an ideogram would be specific and inflexible, such as the Egyptian word msdr, meaning "ear." When that same sign appears at the top of a stele or among other ideograms, its meanings can be altered by its relationship to accompanying ideograms. It may mean "listen" or "hear this," to draw to the inscription the attention of mortal men. It could be a supplication to deity with an appeal so that the gods will listen. Or such a sign at the beginning of a text may be a title specifying that it is an offering to Ptah, the "Listening One." 56

The explanation of Facsimile No. 2 resulted from the Prophet's work with the ideograms and was not a translation of the accompanying text. The Prophet did interpret appropriately nine of the eleven or so ideographic groups of signs on the Facsimile. A comparison of the original meaning of the hypocephalus illustrations with the Facsimile "explanation" demonstrates that every explanation made by Joseph Smith is both a possible and a reasonable interpretation, well within the broad scope of possible meanings for each ideogram, while conveying a meaning uniquely suited to the book of Abraham and its revealed message.

Figure 1: "Kolob, signifying the first creation, nearest the celestial, or the residence of God. First in government, the last pertaining to the measurement of time." Figure 1 portrays a two-headed deity with head positioned on two back-to-back bodies with knees extended. With rare exception this deity is always portrayed with four heads. De Horrack concurred with Champolleon's notion that this four-headed deity represents Geb (earth), Shu (air), Ra (fire), and Osiris (water), the primary or first elements of creation. 57 The god represented with the ram's horned heads (two) is Khnum-Ra, the great creator often portrayed at a potter's wheel fashioning human beings. As Khnum-Ra he combines the characteristics of Khnum the Creator with those of the sungod Ra. Khnum-Ra is he who "shines upon the earth and is creator of all things." 58

The two baboons (figures 22 and 23) are identified by Joseph Smith with "the stars, . . . receiving light from the revolutions of Kolob." These apes are in fact identified by Egyptian scribes with the morning stars that greet the rising sun. Hypocephalus B.M. 8445a includes an inscription above the heads of the apes that reads, "The god is adored four times." 59 That is, the source of light and life is adored by the morning stars.

A short inscription was added to figure 1, a combination of signs that is not found on any fragments of the J. S. Papyri Collection, nor on any other hypocephalus that is available for examination. The possibility that they were simply copied into the Facsimile from another text is extremely remote. Above the head of Khnum-Ra (Kolob), at the top of the column of signs and moving downward, is the sign for the primeval ocean, "Nu." The three horizontal lines (fig. A) are the heiratic form for n n, transliterated as Nun or Nu. The next sign (fig. B) is the determinative for q.r.t., representing half the sky; the sky is located in mythology just below the water mass (i.e., Nu). The final sign (fig. C) is water emerging from the side of the half sky sign, signifying water emerging from the gate of life. Budge described Nu as "a deep and boundless watery mass out of which had come into being the heavens, and the earth, and everything that is in them. The germs of all and every kind of life were in this watery mass, and they were supposed to have been there from the beginning. . . . Nu was frequently identified with sky, Pet, and with heaven [the mate of Nu] called Nut. . . . The ocean and the Nile were also identified with Nu." 60 Traditions of Upper Egypt explain how "the Nile flood came forth from the Island of Elephantine whereon stood the first city that ever existed: out of it rose the sun when he went forth to bestow life upon man." 61

What a marvelous harmony of the Joseph Smith interpretation with the Egyptian meanings of figure 1. How could the Prophet, who does not seem to know or care if a sign is right-side-up or up-side-down, come up with accurate and appropriate restorations of signs with their correct interpretations? A reasonable response to this question would certainly include inspiration. Joseph Smith was not a Ph.D.; he was a prophet.

The signs to the left of figure 1 that suggest the "First Creation" are written in what can be called an abbreviated form. Such a form is not unusual for a hypocephalus. The signs by the adoring apes are an example of this type of abbreviated composition. The word "praise," or more specifically "adore," would not be written with the single five-pointed star but would be written with three signs, the first two phonetic and the third a determinative, meaning "adore" (in the morning). 62 Also "the god" could be written in long form, i.e., n.t.r. or neter plus the determinative sign (a flag or banner) meaning "god." 63 In the above examples the determinatives without their phonetic compliments were sufficient to convey the idea of "adoring the god." In the column restored by Joseph Smith the same abbreviated representation of ideas by ideograms is apparent. The determinative for Nun followed by the determinative for q.r.t., meaning "the hollow, cavern, cave, the source of the Nile" 64 and the ideographic representation of water flowing from the half heaven sign, suggesting the celestial or Heavenly Nile rose flowing from its primeval source on the Island of Elephantine, combine to represent the Egyptian equivalent of Kolob. The Heavenly Nile rose from its primeval source on the Island of Elephantine. It rose in the First Cataract from the Qerti "whereon stood the first city that ever existed," and from which "all good things poured forth." 65 Clearly we see a combination of signs compatible with Joseph Smith's interpretations and with the references to Kolob in the text of Abraham.

Figure 2: "Stands next to Kolob, called by the Egyptians Oliblish, which is the next grand governing creation near to the celestial or the place where God resides; holding the key of power also, pertaining to other planets." There are no restorations of signs in this figure, and it appears to have been copied essentially as it was on the Joseph Smith hypocephalus. The deity in this figure is found on many hypocephali of the same period. In Egyptian mythology he is identified as Amen-Ra. De Horrack described him as a "double-faced deity, with two feathers on his head, and holding in his left hand a standard surmounted by a jackal. It is Amon, the supreme god of Thebes, identified with Ra, the Sun, under the name of Amen-Ra." Rhodes agreed with de Horrack and added William F. Petrie to the list of experts who identify this figure as Amen-Ra; Rhodes added that Petrie saw, "the two heads as representing the rising and setting sun." 66

Amen is the ancient god of Thebes, worshipped from predynastic times. He is the Hidden One, i.e., "the personification of the hidden and unknown creative power . . . associated with . . . primeval . . . gods in the creation of the world and all that is in it." 67 The name Amen, i.m.n. means "what is hidden," or that which is not seen and not known. "When Amen was coupled with Ra, forming the composite god Amen-Ra, during the Eighteenth Dynasty, he became the mysterious creative power that was the source of all life in heaven, earth and the underworld." 68 Eventually the priests of Amen claimed that there was no other god like Amen, who was the "one one" and had "no second." This concept resembles that of the Hebrews, who said, "Yahweh our God is one Lord" (Deu. 6:4). 69 Perhaps an even stronger conceptual parallel in LDS theology can be seen in the Father's act of giving his all (titles and powers) to his Beloved Son, who becomes the "Father and the Son" (John 14:20).

Amen-Ra is a combination of "the unseen mysterious principle of Amen and the visible and brilliant power of Ra." 70 This is conceptually congruous with the idea that the Son of God is the manifestation of divine power while the Eternal Father (Elohim) is to fallen man more remote (hidden).

Jackal sceptres and masks are symbols of power often associated with Anubus, the guide to the dead; Wepwawet, a guide to travelers in this world, also guided the Pharaoh into battle. The sceptre is a key to power. If the secret name of a god were known, the god could then be controlled or his powers could be acquired (as Isis acquired the powers of Amen.) 71 Possession of a god's name or his symbol on a sceptre constitutes a key to power over his domain. The sceptre therefore symbolizes what some would call the keys of authority, or power of presidency. Joseph Smith called this sceptre "the key of power." The pyramid text of Unas states:

Thou sittest upon the throne of Osiris thy sceptre is in thy hand and thou givest commands to those whose places are hidden. 72

O Wenis, you have indeed not departed (this life) as one dead, but as one living you have departed. Sit upon the throne of Osiris, your sceptre in your hand so you may govern the living. With your lotus-bud sceptre in your hand, govern those whose places are hidden (i.e., the dead). 73

Plutarch reported that the jackal god was common to both celestial and infernal regions. Anubus, the jackal god, subdued and subservient, becomes a protector, a guide and blessing to mankind as men gain power over darkness and death.

The offering table in the lower right-hand corner can well be a symbol of sacrifice. The signs on the left in a vertical column read, "The name of the great god." His name is not given because it is sacred and consequently secret. Once Isis obtained the name of Ra she could have "dominion over the whole universe." 74

A great deal of uniformity is displayed in other hypocephali featuring the figure of Amen-Ra. Major variations are in the amount of text associated with the figure and whether or not he is portrayed with an 'nh in his right hand. It should be obvious that Joseph Smith's explanations of this figure in no way strain the Egyptian interpretations of the signs.

Figure 3: The Bark of the Great God. Joseph Smith's Interpretation: "Is made to represent God, sitting upon his throne, clothed with power and authority; with a crown of Eternal Light upon his head; representing also the grand Key-words of the Holy Priesthood." This figure is graphically described by de Horrock as "the bark of Osiris defunct." 75 Variations of this type of hypocephalus include a horizontal or a vertical scarab beetle with the name-signs, forms, or combinations representing the goddesses Isis and Nephthys (see illustration). These goddesses pray for the resurrection of Osiris, and on many of the hypocephali they are portrayed addressing supplications to the ba (spirit) or image of Osiris. Birch described the figure on the right of the "upper hemisphere in B.M. 36188 (see illustration) as the "god Ra in the (souls) boat vignette of chapters 100, 101, 102, and 136" 76 of the Book of the Dead. Above the boat is a vertical scarabeaus called the god Khepra (the creator).

The above example is most like the Joseph Smith Hypocephalus in this feature. Rhodes described the Joseph Smith hypocephalus rendition as a "Hawk-headed Ra with the sun disk on his head, seated on the solar bark. . . . In his hand he holds the was sceptre, symbol of dominion." 77 He is called Amen-Ra in his day bark. As illustrated above, B.M. Hypocephalus 86188 portrays this god with a sceptre capped with the scarabeaus (sacred beetle). An ancient text from the pyramid of Unas reads: "This Unas flieth like a birth and alighteth like a beetle; he flieth like a bird and alighteth like a beetle upon the throne which is empty in the boat, of Ra." 78 As in Joseph Smith's interpretation, the god sits upon his throne with a sun disk "symbol of Eternal light" above his head.

As for the Horus (hawk) figure seated behind the rectangular box (chest of Osiris) another text reads: "O ye gods who are in front of the boat of Ra, whom Nehit 79 has brought forth. O ye gods who are in the front of the boat of Ra; he sits before him, he opens his chest, he breaks his decrees, he seals his decrees, he sends forth his messengers, who never rest." 80

A final text from chapter 136 of the Book of the Dead: "I am the Great one among the gods, coming in the two Barks of the lord of Sau, the Figure of the great saluter, who hath made the Flame [sun]. Let the fathers and their apes make way for me, that I may enter the mount of Glory and pass through where the great ones are." 81

The god described in these texts is the great creator and mover of the sun. He is the dispenser of power and strength, seated upon his throne, a causer of life. All creation responds to his decrees and commands. Such a one is not far removed in concept from the description given by Joseph Smith, who saw these symbols portraying "God sitting upon his throne, clothed with power and authority with a crown of eternal light [the sun disk] upon his head." In the Joseph Smith Hypocephalus God is sitting on a throne, and the solar disk above his head is a perfect symbol for the crown of eternal light.

A most important sign in this illustration is the wd3t (wedjat) Eye, symbolic of resurrection, life, wholeness, and the nourishment of the gods. The storm god, Set, is the clouds that hide the sun, and the serpent Apep eats the moon in fifteen or so bites. The moon is restored bit by bit until the eye of the Sun God is whole (like the restored bits of the body of Osiris). Thus the restored eye is symbolic of life and resurrection. 82 Pieces of the eye represent aspects of an almost complete personality. All parts of the eye equal 63/64, thus leaving 1/64 unidentified. To understand the full symbolism of the eye was to have the key to eternal life. 83 Since this symbol is consistently identified by Joseph Smith as the "Grand Key Words of the Priesthood," one wonders if the 1/64 could be what the Egyptians regard as the secret/sacred name of God. Those possessing the secret of the eye reached a new and higher level of consciousness. 84 Possession of the Eye would determine the successor of Osiris in the battle between Horus and Set; therefore, its possessor had a right to rule and reign in heaven. Truly this sign, the wd3t, could appropriately represent the "grand Key words" and grandest aspirations of the priesthood.

Figure 3 is a restoration to the Facsimile and is unlike any other hypocephalus of this style. It has been suggested that figure 3 was simply copied onto the Facsimile from the Papyrus Joseph Smith IV, lower right-hand corner vignette. This would be a very real possibility, and if it illustrated concepts that Joseph Smith and the Lord wished to have illustrated, why not use it in that way? The illustration, however, has one very peculiar feature unlike the vignette of Papyrus Joseph Smith IV and unlike any other hypocephalus in regards to this quarter and hemisphere of the disk. The Facsimile contains an unusual inscription which begins just back of the head of the deity in the boat. An inscription such as this constitutes a remarkable restoration, because it is so appropriate as an explanation of the illustration. The line of Egyptian signs is transliterated as follows: wi3, meaning "sacred bark." 85 How could someone who was unable to recognize if a sign was right-side-up or up-side-down place this appropriate inscription in such an appropriate place? The obvious conclusion is that Joseph Smith had help; and this is what he claimed all along, the help of God. When he was not inspired, he made mistakes, but when he was inspired, he made profound restorations and interpretations.

Figure 4: The Expanse of Heaven and the Ship of a Thousand. Joseph Smith's explanation: "Raukeeyang, signifying expanse, or the firmament of the heavens; also a numerical figure, . . . signifying one thousand." The left section of the upper hemisphere is consistently uniform in theme in all hypocephali of this group or class. Figure 4 is described by de Horrock as a "mummified hawk expanding his wings over a boat [and] symbolizes, more especially, the resurrection of the soul." 86 In the upper compartment most of the hypocephali depict the eight souls (i.e., spirits) represented by rams. Some have an inscription similar to B.M. 8445a, interpreted by Birch, "Thou hast been as the eight souls, thou has lived." 87 Birch also identified the occupant of the lower compartment as the "mummied seker hawk of Sochares." 88 But when discussing the Bart Hypocephalus, Birch described this section as containing a "boat with a phoenix, rekh," with expanded wings and five lines of heiroglyphic (reading): "The rams and souls inviolate." Some uncertainty exists why Birch called this form of Seker a phoenix or Benu bird, as the Benu had a large golden hawk body with a heron's head.

Rhodes described the mummified hawk as a symbol of the sky, or as a representation of the expanse of heaven with wings stretched out as one of the ancient gods of Memphis. 89 The following description by Clark sustain Rhodes:

He appears as a falcon and soars up into the sky, beyond the flight of the original bird-soul, beyond the star (the 'gods of Nut') and all the divinities of olden time whose souls inhabit the constellations. He seems to fly out into the vast regions beyond the limits of the divinely created universe and alights upon the ramparts of the eastern horizon, the boundary of the world. In so doing he brings back light and the assurance of a new day, thus subduing Seth, who personifies the terrors of darkness and death. The atmosphere is almost messianic. 90

On the New Year a solar bark containing the mummified falcon was placed on a sledge and pulled around the sanctuary to symbolize the revolutions of the sun and other heavenly bodies. The above took place at sunrise under the direction of the high priest of Memphis. The Seker boat is called the ship of a thousand and symbolizes the winding up of the clock of the universe to insure that the cycles of sunrise and sunset, births and deaths, will continue year after year, for thousands and thousands of years and cycles. A text translation by Sander-Hansen speaks of the gods who will receive Osiris into his "Ship of a thousand." 91

A few lines from chapter 71 of the Book of the Dead repeat this theme of winding the clock of the universe in a passage titled, "Chapter whereby one cometh forth by day" as follows:

O Divine Hawk, who comest forth in Heaven, Lord of Mehurit [the Sungod].

I am the hawk in the Tabernacle and I pierce through [that which is upon] the vail.

O thou who circlest round, within the egg, Lord of Mehurit [Sun god, Lord of Heaven]

I advance to you, advance ye to me: live in me and let me live in you. Convey to me the symbol of life which is in your hands, and the sceptre which ye grasp. 92

If this chapter is known there is well-being on earth with Ra and a fair abode with Osiris and the person is glorified in the Netherworld. There are granted to him the sacred cakes and the coming forth into the presence [of the Great God] in the course of each day, undeviatingly, for times infinite. 93

Joseph Smith's explanations of these figures appropriately emphasized the expanse of heaven (symbolized by the Hawk with expanded wings) and the symbol of the Seker Boat, or ship of a Thousand, as a sign that symbolized one thousand.

Figure Five: The Cow (Hathor). Joseph Smith's Explanation: "Said by the Egyptians to be the Sun." Figure 5 consists of a cow and a goddess figure, standing behind the cow, holding the lotus in her hand. In this representation, as a cow, she is the goddess of the Tuat, wearing the long pendant collar and the Menait (emblem of joy and pleasure) on her back. She is the House of Horus. She is the house of the stars and of the sun and the moon. The sun is reborn of her each day (i.e., recharged and renewed in the body of Hathor), and she is the source that sustains the life and existence of all things, including the stars. The sun is a representation of the right eye of Ra, who is the sun god, and in the representation found on the Facsimile the head of the goddess is filled with a large right eye. As an anthropomorphic goddess (behind the cow) Hathor is specifically the sun. She can be the sun in its most benevolent manifestations or the sun as a scorching vengeful tool of the sun god, Ra, exacting judgments upon mankind. In her destructive aspect she absorbs the characteristics of Sekmet the vengeful goddess, who is often portrayed with a lion head and blood dripping from the mouth. 94 At Dendura it is Hathor that scorches the earth at the command of the sun god and causes the gods to send in the flood (of beer) to save mankind. The goddess figure in back of the cow is emphatically "said by the Egyptians to be the Sun."

The Prophet was, once again, right on target with his explanations.

Figure Six: The Four Sons of Horus. Joseph Smith's explanation: "Represents this earth in its four quarters." A detailed explanation of the four sons of Horus has already been given above in connection with Facsimile No. 1, figures 5, 6, 7, and 8. They are the guardians of the four pillars of Heaven "which formed the four cardinal points" and as such they "embrace the four Pure Lands." 95 There is an incredible consistency respecting the appropriateness of Joseph Smith's explanation with these figures.

Figure Seven: "Receive of His Fullness." Joseph Smith's explanation: "God sitting upon his throne, revealing through the heavens the grand Key-words of the Priesthood; as, also, the sign of the Holy. Ghost . . . in the form of a dove." A justifiable Egyptian interpretation of the above scene would approximate the explanation given by Joseph Smith. For example, in this figure, the composite god Horus-Min is seated upon his throne. The bird body projecting from the back of this seated figure is the Horus-hawk, representing deliverance from all enemies, protection, and redemption. The ithyphallic seated figure represents the attributes of Min, the god of fertility. The deceased Egyptian took the name of the god, i.e., became an Osirian, and was (as in this hypocephalus) identified with every god whose attributes and characteristics he desired to acquire in order to secure a happy existence in the Netherworld. One might say he became a "partaker of the divine nature" (See 2 Pet. 1:4). His identification with Min would insure eternally his powers of procreation (a feature the Egyptians reserved for the gods).

The Prophet next referred to the Priesthood and "grand Key-words." The figure on the throne is a priestly person with his arm to the square and a pyramidal or compass-shaped object (whip or flail) above his hand. This is a common posture for Min (usually standing) in the act of receiving and giving a priesthood commitment. Since this seated figure represents both the god and the deceased he is giving and receiving a commitment and in return receives divine powers and attributes.

The power received by the deceased are summed up in the symbol representing the Grand-Key words of the Priesthood. That symbol is the wd3t eye; in most Egyptian vignettes it is presented to the deceased (or god) by a snake called Nekebha. In the Abraham Facsimile the eye, which to the Egyptian represented "all good gifts" and the "food of the gods," 96 is presented by a dove, which Joseph Smith identified as the Holy Ghost. Certainly all good gifts come through the Holy Ghost. The Gifts of the Spirit are the tools of the priesthood to unlock the gates to eternal life. To the Egyptian the eye was a symbol of wholeness and perfection, and a knowledge of its mystic parts was a key to eternal Life. 97

Figure 8: A Temple Name. Joseph Smith's explanation: "Writings that cannot be revealed unto the world; but [are] to be had in the Holy Temple of God." Reading the signs in line 8 from right to left Rhodes gave the following translation: "Grant that the soul of the Osiris Shishonk may live." 98 All of the dead took upon them the name of the god Osiris so that they might overcome death as he (Osiris) did. The second name (Shishonk) was the personal name of the deceased.

An appropriate statement by Albert Champdor concerning the importance of names and renewal of life is as follows: "The Egyptians received a second name, which was their 'name for Eternity,' a name without which they could not enter into the Netherworld nor would any god accept them into the congregation of the righteous. The possession of a papyrus containing this name would be an assurance that they would never forget this name." 99 Whether Champdor's "second name" was in fact a name received in the temple or, as seems more likely, the given name of the deceased, it was a key to the company of the gods. If a person's name lived, i.e., was written and spoken in the temple, that person's ba and ka would live even if his or her mummy and statuary were destroyed. 100 It is appropriate therefore that Joseph Smith identified figure 8 with "writing" to be "had in the Holy Temple." The tomb was also a Temple of the ka. 101

Properly, then, texts such as Facsimile No. 2, figures 8-11 may be considered appropriately characteristic of tomb and temple. The vocalization of promises made in a Temple were never expected to be creatively altered; on the contrary, substantially exact phrases were repeated, and the endowments of life, dominion, and power were passed to a qualifying candidate. Joseph Smith did not translate these lines or any other lines of textual material. But his interpretation that this section contains a salvation text with temple overtones is not at all inappropriate.

Summary and Conclusion

This study has not been pursued to find out if Joseph Smith was a prophet. The author already knew that he was and is a prophet of the Living God. Our desire has been simply to try to understand how the Lord used Joseph Smith to accomplish his purposes.

The Joseph Smith Hypocephalus, or Facsimile No. 2, is a literary form peculiar to a late period of Egyptian history (600 B.C. to Roman times). Specific characteristics of Facsimile No. 2 indicate an approximate date of 325 B.C. for its origin. This illustration could not have originated in its present form in the time of Abraham. In all probability it was adopted as an illustration for the text in this dispensation. A substantial part of the illustrations in the Facsimiles (including the Sensen and Hypocephalus) are copied from Book of the Dead vignettes (1567-30 B.C.), with several originating during the Eighteenth Dynasty (ca. 1567 B.C.)

A portion of the text around the right edge of the Facsimile was added upside-down to lines 12, 13, 14, and 15. Half of each line required restoration. The sequence of lines 8, 9, 10, and 11 should be reversed so that the top line is read first; that is, line 8 should be line 11. Also the numbers were placed on these lines in reverse order. These particular features have added fuel to anti-Mormon fires, and only careful examination will eliminate the problems.

A paragraph from Ashment's conclusions is, in my opinion, completely on target and is quoted below as addressing the problem posed by these additions to Facsimile No. 2. Ashment said, "For one thing, the prophet never made any attempts to hide the incomplete papyri even after apparent conjectural restorations of them were published in the Times and Seasons and had made national headlines. If he were trying to perpetrate a hoax, he certainly would have tried to destroy the damning evidence." 102

In the remaining hemispheres and divisions of the Joseph Smith Hypocephalus, the interpretations of the Prophet (when given) are certainly within the scope of possible Egyptian explanations while at the same time are useful in representing gospel concepts. The inspiration of the Prophet is especially evident in the restoration of these illustration and texts.

What then are we to conclude? The marvelously appropriate restoration and interpretations by the Prophet indicate his great genius when moved upon by the Spirit of inspiration. The author recognizes that some errors were made in the restoration of texts but never when a restoration was interpreted by the Prophet.

A possible reconstruction of the coming forth of the facsimilies is as follows:

1. In June of 1830 Joseph Smith began to revise the book of Genesis by the principle of revelation. In remarks on his progress he made no distinction between the methods that produced the text of Abraham or the text of the Book of Moses; he referred to both as "translations." This term reflects his method. 103 Joseph Smith's "translation" then was essentially inspiration.

During the months of the coming forth of the "New Translation" of the Bible (1830-33) Joseph Smith received revelation pertaining to the early chapters of Genesis, including chapters 11-25, dealing with Abraham, whose life and times were certainly on the Prophets mind.

2. In 1833, Joseph Smith received several large blocks of revelation on Melchizedek and Abraham (JST, Gen. 14:25-40; 15:9-12; 17:3-7, 11-12). These revelations may have been a springboard that led the Prophet to additional material on Abraham. The content of Patriarchal Blessing Book No. 1 (pp. 8-9) contained evidences of that possibility in similar wording of parts of the text of Abr. 1:2. 104

PATRIARCHAL BLESSING BOOK NO. 1

(pp. 8-9)

13 December 1833

We diligently sought for the right of the fathers and the authority of the holy priesthood, and the power to administer in the same for we desired to be followers of righteousness and the possessors of greater knowledge. 105

ABRAHAM 1:2

I sought for the blessings of the fathers, and the right whereunto I should be ordained to administer the same; having been myself a follower of righteousness, desiring also to be one who possessed great knowledge. 106

It is this author's contention that the text of the Book of Abraham was already impressed upon the mind and heart of Joseph Smith before he received the papyri collection.

My conclusions at the time I observed these similarities in the text (1969) seem just as valid today; I wrote "A papyrus text in the hands of the Prophet was not essential to production of the translation. . . . The near identical wording of these passages would indicate that some of the text of the Book of Abraham was revealed and recorded before the 'Abraham' papyri came into the possession of Joseph Smith." 107

3. When the vignettes were viewed by the Prophet in 1835, they may have struck a familiar chord. Seeking inspiration concerning Abraham and his life, the Lord gave him a confirmation and possibly an extended vision of the life and times of Abraham. The damaged vignettes were not seen or unfolded to him to the end that he might restore their original meaning (an exercise that would not enhance anyone's salvation), but since he had seen a possible connection in the vignettes with the experience of Abraham he could be inspired with additional light and truth. He may have leaped to the conclusion that these illustrations were a part of the original Book of Abraham and never in his lifetime had any reason to think otherwise.

4. Restorations and revisions of the vignettes and the hypocephalus indicate that when Joseph Smith interpreted and revised in reconstructing the Facsimiles, his statements and signs show an advanced knowledge of things Egyptian, especially considering the period of his publications (1842). When he did not interpret (probably because he was not so inspired) he frequently made errors.

5. The nature of the results achieved by Joseph Smith justifies the conclusion that he was a Prophet. The errors he made remind all that he was also a man. Joseph Smith can be explained as a prophet of God whose successes are God-given and whose failures are a reminder of his humanity. Let no one suppose that we are suggesting that God promotes error or spreads misconceptions. He does not. He works with men as they are and where they are.

There has never been a perfect or errorless book of scripture. Mankind does not require and perhaps could not comprehend an errorless text. Errors and inconsistencies in the Bible have often increased human sympathy for its prophets and priests, and these same scriptures continue to inspire hope, faith, and genuine nobility. Perhaps a most important function of scripture is to open the heart of a believer, or even one who desires to believe, to the witness and assurances that the Spirit of God gives unto men. The text of the Book of Abraham has been and will continue to be a source of inspiration to mankind.

An ancient prophet and major contributor to the written word of God gave a profound caution to the children of men. Moroni's words were as follows:

And blessed be he that shall bring this thing to light; for it shall be brought out of darkness unto light, according to the word of God; yea it shall be brought out of the earth, and it shall shine forth out of darkness, and come unto the knowledge of the people; and it shall be done by the power of God.

And if there be faults they be the faults of a man. But behold, we know no fault; nevertheless God knoweth all things; therefore, he that condemneth, let him be aware lest he shall be in danger of hell fire (Morm. 8:16-17).

Condemn me not because of mine imperfection, neither my father, because of his imperfection, neither them who have written before him; but rather give thanks unto God that he hath made manifest unto you our imperfections, that ye may learn to be more wise than we have been (Morm. 9:31).

NOTES

 1. F. S. Spaulding, Joseph Smith as a Translator (Salt Lake City: Arrow Press, 1912), pp. 3-5.

 2. "Joseph Smith Egyptian Collection, Nov. 2-7, 1967," Church News, 2 December 1967, pp. 7-10. See also H. Donl Peterson, "Some Joseph Smith Papyri Rediscovered (1967)," found herein.

 3. Hugh Nibley, The Message of the Joseph Smith Papyri: An Egyptian Endowment (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1975); Abraham In Egypt (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1981).

 4. Spaulding, p. 29.

 5. Improvement Era, 1912, p. 342.

 6. Spaulding, p. 24.

 7. Ibid., pp. 25-27.

 8. Ibid., p. 27.

 9. Robert Wauchope, Lost Tribes and Sunken Continents (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1962), pp. 50-68.

 10. Klaus Baer, "The Breathing Permit of Hor: A Translation of the Apparent Source of the Book of Abraham," Dialogue 3 (Autumn, 1968): 109-34.

 11. Correspondence to Mr. Evans of Norwich, England, 11 August 1983.

 12. Ibid.

 13. See H. Donl Peterson, "The History and Significance of the Book of Abraham," found herein.

 14. John A. Wilson, "The Joseph Smith Papyri," Dialogue, 2 (Summer, 1969): 67-105.

 15. Jay M. Todd, The Saga of the Book of Abraham (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1969), p. 118; see also HC 2:248-50.

 16. A. J. Spencer, Death in Ancient Egypt (Middlesex, England: Penguin Books, 1982), pp. 58-59, 70-73.

 17. Nibley, Message of the Joseph Smith Papyri, p. 6.

 18. B. H. Stricker, "Wijshield van Anchsnesjong," Ex Oriente Lux 15 (1958): 11-33.

 19. Ibid.

 20. Edward H. Ashment, "The Book of Abraham Facsimiles: A Reappraisal," Sunstone 4 (December, 1979).

 21. E. A. Wallas Budge, An Egyptian Hieroglyphic Dictionary, Volume I (New York: Dover Publications, 1978), p. XCVII, List 1, No. 5; Alan Gardinar, Egyptian Grammar (London: Oxford University Press, 1957), p. 445, A30.

 22. Budge, Osiris Volume II (New Hyde Park, New York: University Books, 1961), pp. 16-35.

 23. Wilson, "The Joseph Smith Papyri," pp. 67-105.

 24. Nibley, Abraham in Egypt, p. 47.

 25. R. T. Rundle Clark, Myth and Symbol in Ancient Egypt (London: Thames and Hudson Ltd., 1978), pp. 130, 160-61.

 26. Mustafa El Amir, "The HKO of Apis at Memphis," Journal of Egyptian Archeology 34 (1948): 51-56.

 27. Bonnet, Reallexikon der aegyptischen Religionsgeschichte (Berlin: W. de Gruyter, 1952), p. 315.

 28. Budge, Osiris Vol. II, p. 79, Unas 1:572, Pepi VI, 1.967.

 29. Introductory Guide to the Egyptian Collections (British Museum Publication, 1964), p. 147.

 30. Ibid.

 31. Ibid.

 32. Book of the Dead, chapter 108.

 33. Budge, The Gods of the Egyptians Volume II (New York: Dover Publications, 1969), p. 356.

 34. Anthony S. Mercatante, Who's Who in Egyptian Mythology (New York: Clarkson N. Potter, 1978), p. 87.

 35. Clark, p. 239.

 36. Ibid., p. 71.

 37. Baer, pp. 126-127.

 38. Spencer, p. 141.

 39. R. Faulkner, Ancient Egyptian Pyramid Texts (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1969), no. 335; S. Schott, Mythe und Mythenbildung im alten Aegypten (Leipzig: J. C. Hinrichs, 1945), p. 14; A. Moret, Du Charactere Religieux de la Royante Pharaonique (Paris: E. Loroux, 1902), p. 89.

 40. Mercatante, pp. 139-40.

 41. S. Morenz, Religions en Egypte Hellenistique et Romaine, Colloque de Strebourg, 16-18 May 1967 (Paris: University Press, 1969), p. 143.

 42. H. W. Helck, "Rp-t auf dem Throne des Geb," Orientalia 19 (1950): 434.

 43. Plutarch, De Iside et Osiride, ed. J. G. Giffiths (University of Wales Press, 1970), p. 6; Plate, Polit 29f 2900-E; Moret, p. 230.

 44. Morenz, p. 81.

 45. John A. Wilson, The Culture of Ancient Egypt (Chicago: University of Chicago Books, 1951), pp. 132-33, 144, 308, 314.

 46. P. E. Newberry, "The Shepherd's Crook and the so-called 'Flail' or 'Scourge' of Osirs," Journal of Egyptian Archeology 15 (1929): 84, 87; R. A. Camenos, Late Egyptian Miscellaneous (London: Oxford University Press, 1954), p. 42; C. E. Sander-Hansen, Die religiosen Texte auf dem Sarg der Anchnesneferibre (Copenhagen: Levin & Muksgaard, 1937), p. 105f.

 47. Maarten J. Raven, "The 30th Dynasty Nespamedu Family" (Oudheidkundige Mededelingen Uit Het Rijkseum Van Oudheden Te Leiden LXI, 1980), p. 27; Edith Varga, "Les Traraux Preliminaries De La Monographie Sur Les Hypocephales," Acta Orientalia, p. 246.

 48. Varga, p. 246.

 49. Spencer, p. 155.

 50. Varga, pp. 240-41.

 51. Saite Recension, Book of the Dead, chapter 162.

 52. Varga, pp. 240-41.

 53. Raven, p. 27ff.

 54. Varga, pp. 240-41.

 55. Saite Recension, Book of the Dead, chapter 162.

 56. William Flinders Petrie, "Memphis I," British Schools of Archeology in Egypt (1908): 7, 19, illustrations 1-30.

 57. Peter J. de Horrack, Proceedings of the Society of Biblical Archeology (London: British Museum, 1884), 6:128.

 58. Budge, The Gods of the Egyptians, Vol. II, p. 45.

 59. Ibid., p. 51.

 60. Ibid., pp. 283-84.

 61. Ibid., p. 52.

 62. Budge, An Egyptian Hieroglyphic Dictionary, p. 8219; Gardinar, p. 487.

 63. Budge, Ibid., p. 401.

 64. Ibid., p. 774b.

 65. Budge, The Gods of the Egyptians, Vol. II, p. 53.

 66. William Flinders Petrie, Abydos I (London: Gilbert & Rivington, 1960), p. 50.

 67. Budge, The Gods of the Egyptians, Vol. II, p. 2.

 68. Mercatante, p. 12.

 69. Ibid., p. 6.

 70. de Horrack, p. 128.

 71. Budge, The Gods of the Egyptians Volume I (New York: Dover Publications, 1969), pp. 372-87.

 72. Budge, Osiris Vol. II, p. 104, Unas & 134, lin. 203.

 73. Translated for this publication by Michael Dennis Rhodes.

 74. Budge, The Gods of the Egyptians, Vol. II, p. 36Off.

 75. de Horrack, p. 128.

 76. Samuel Birch, Proceedings of the Society of Biblical Archaelogy (London: British Museum, 1884), p. 106.

 77. Michael Dennis Rhodes, "A Translation and Commentary of the Joseph Smith Hypocephalus," Brigham Young University Studies, Spring 1977, p. 270.

 78. Mercatante, p. 137.

 79. Also called Nehata, one of the twelve gods in the ninth section, or hour, of Tuat, the underworld, who when greeted by the sun god Ra, begins to utter words of power, causing life and strength to arise in Osiris (or in the deceased), Mercatante, p. 104.

 80. Budge, Osiris, Vol. II, p. 126.

 81. Book of the Dead, chapter 136.

 82. Clark, pp. 179, 180, 219.

 83. Gardinar, p. 179.

 84. Clark, p. 179.

 85. A few years ago Edward Ashment wrote an article for a periodical in which he insisted that the line of signs next to the deity's head in figure 3 had come from a rubric near the aforementioned vignette of Papyrus Joseph Smith IV. A comparison of the two phrases proves the Ashmet's assumption is inappropriate. PJS IV rubric: dd md. w bft in, "to recite a formula in front of," Fac. No. 2, fig. 3: wi3, "sacred bark." The Rubric phrase is entirely inappropriate in the quarter of the disk in which it was supposedly placed. The phrase that is clearly represented in that quarter by Joseph Smith is entirely appropriate.

 86. de Horrack, p. 128.

 87. Birch, p. 106.

 88. Ibid., 1883, pp. 38-40.

 89. Rhodes, p. 270.

 90. Clark, p. 213.

 91. Sander-Hansen, pp. 36-37.

 92. P. Le Page Renouf, Proceedings of the Society of the Biblical Archeology (British Museum, 1896, Vol. 19), p. 54; see John 14:20 for a similar union of man and God.

 93. Ibid., p. 134.

 94. Mercatante, p. 54; Clark, p. 185.

 95. Budge, Osiris Vol. II.

 96. Budge, The Gods of the Egyptians, Vol. II, p. 164.

 97. Clark, pp. 218-30.

 98. Rhodes, p. 270.

 99. Albert Champdor, Das Agyptisch Totenbuch (Zurich: 1979), p. 89.

 100. Spencer, p. 71.

 101. Ibid., p. 55.

 102. Ashment, p. 42.

 103. HC 1:170, 215, 322.

 104. The Improvement Era. September 1968, p. 20.

 105. J. R. Harris, "Book Review of J. M. Todd's The Saga of the Book of Abraham," BYU Studies, 1 (Autumn 1969): 126-27.

 106. Ibid.

 107. Ibid.

 
 
© 1985 Deseret Book Company 

Printed from Gospelink.com
