# The Theological Significance of the First Vision (JS–H)

### The Theological Significance of the First Vision (JS–H)
Robert L. Millet, Kent P. Jackson, Studies in Scripture, Vol. 2: The Pearl of Great Price ( 1985)
 
 

22

THE THEOLOGICAL SIGNIFICANCE OF THE FIRST VISION

(JS–H 1-26)

LARRY E. DAHL

Theology is "the study of God and his relation to the world, . . . an inquiry that seeks an adequate interpretation of matters of ultimate concern." 1 Joseph Smith's First Vision in the spring of 1820 is rich, even bulging with significance regarding "God and his relation to the world—matters of ultimate concern." Consider the following items:

To Know the Character of God—The First Gospel Principle

Joseph Smith did not tell us what his concept of God was as a 14-year-old boy going in to the grove to pray. Nor did he explain in his history exactly what he understood about God's nature as he came out of the grove. However, it seems obvious by his own account that he knew from the vision that the God of heaven was not as the Christian creeds described him. He "saw" for himself that the Father and the Son were "TWO," not one, and that they were "PERSONAGES," not some shapeless ethereal essence. 2

Undoubtedly, a more complete understanding of God's nature came as the Prophet received "line upon line, precept upon precept" (D&C 98:12) through the years. By 1844, Joseph Smith not only knew "what kind of being God is," and "how he came to be so," but he clearly understood how important that knowledge is to one's salvation. He also knew (in 1820 and in 1844) of a critical corollary—the reality of communicating with God. In his well-known King Follett Discourse he said: "It is the first principle of the Gospel to know for a certainty the Character of God, and to know that we may converse with him as one man converses with another, and that he was once a man like us." 3 The Prophet also gave some reasons why this knowledge is the first principle of the gospel—reasons of faith, self-perception, and communication:

1. "Let us here observe, that three things are necessary in order that any rational and intelligent being may exercise faith in God unto life and salvation.

"First, the idea that he actually exists.

"Secondly, a correct idea of his character, perfections, and attributes.

"Thirdly, an actual knowledge that the course of life which he is pursuing is according to his will. 4 For without an acquaintance with these three important facts, the faith of every rational being must be imperfect and unproductive." 5

2. "If men do not comprehend the character of God, they do not comprehend themselves." 6 When we learn what kind of being God is, how he came to his exalted station, and that we are his offspring with the potential to become perfect like him, we begin to understand ourselves. Such understanding brings a healthy, but humble, reverent self-image, optimism, and motivation to achieve eternal goals.

3. "Having a knowledge of God, we begin to know how to approach him, and how to ask so as to receive an answer. When we understand the character of God, and know how to come to him, he begins to unfold the heavens to us, and to tell us all about it. When we are ready to come to him, he is ready to come to us." 7 The published version of the King Follett Discourse reads "come to us." The handwritten notes of William Clayton, who was one of four scribes recording the sermon, and the only one to record this particular idea, renders it "receive us." The difference between his "coming to" us and his "receiving" us is an interesting seed thought.

Thus, the First Vision gave Joseph Smith firsthand experience with the first principle of the gospel. He knew "for a certainty the Character of God," and "that we may converse with him as one man converses with another." He had experienced the powers of heaven. Subsequently, the combined powers of earth and hell could not wrench him from his God-given course over the next twenty-four years of his earthly life. What power there is in that first principle of the Gospel!

New Wine In New Bottles

Why a fourteen-year-old boy? Why not a minister of religion with special theological training and years of experience in religious matters? Simply stated, a restoration of pure, untainted gospel doctrine required the work of one who had not become set in his ways or deceived by counterfeit religion. Joseph Smith was a new vessel into which the new wine of the restored gospel could be poured. Perhaps the Savior himself explained it best in response to some Pharisees who questioned why he would not receive them with their baptism and their false notions of what it meant to "keep the whole law."

Then said the Pharisees unto him, Why will ye not receive us with our baptism, seeing we keep the whole law?

But Jesus said unto them, Ye keep not the law. If ye had kept the law, ye would have received me, for I am he who gave the law.

I receive you not with your baptism, because it profiteth you nothing.

For when that which is new is come, the old is ready to be put away.

For no man putteth a piece of new cloth on an old garment; for that which is put in to fill it up, taketh from the garment, and the rent is made worse.

Neither do men put new wine into old bottles; else the bottles break, and the wine runneth out, and the bottles perish; but they put new wine into new bottles, and both are preserved (JST Matt. 9:18-23; cf. KJV, Matt. 9:16-17). 8

Luke's account of this same exchange adds another insight. "No man also having drunk old wine straightway desireth new: for he saith, The old is better" (Luke 5:39). A careful reading of these verses tells us of the Lord's concern for both the wine and the bottles. Apparently "old bottles," in addition to preferring old wine to new, are not able to handle new wine. They would "break" and "perish" themselves, and in the process the precious new wine would be lost to others. Thus God chose a new bottle, "a youth, clean and open-minded" with "no preconceived false notions and beliefs . . . not steeped in the traditions and legends and superstitions and fables of the centuries. He had nothing to unlearn. . . . For this young boy [was] clean, free from all antagonistic and distorted ideas and with a sincere desire to find the truth." 9

But would just any "new bottle" do? Or would the kind of "new wine" about to be dispensed from the heavens require a special kind of bottle? Both scripture and prophetic utterances assure us that Joseph Smith was no ordinary man. He was "among the noble and great ones who were chosen in the beginning to be rulers in the Church of God" and "reserved to come forth in the fulness of times to take part in laying the foundations of the great latter-day work" (see D&C 138:53-55; cf. Abr. 3:22-23). Joseph of old who was sold into Egypt "saw our day" and testified of Joseph Smith and his mission. Father Lehi in 600 B.C. added his own witness (see 2 Ne. 3:1-25), and so have many others before his time and since. Joseph Smith himself said: "Every man who has a calling to minister to the inhabitants of the world was ordained to that very purpose in the Grand Council of heaven before this world was. I suppose I was ordained to this very office in that Grand Council." 10

Restoring the gospel of Jesus Christ in its purity and fulness to a world divided but variously committed to an abundant array of false religious creeds required a very special receptacle. Joseph Smith was that receptacle. He was one of God's noblemen, tried and proven and foreordained in pre-earth councils. From a mortal perspective, however, he was "new"—young in mortal years, and comparatively new to mortal religious concerns. His call through the First Vision clearly demonstrates the "new wine in new bottles" principle.

Opening the Dispensation of Dispensations

Paul taught "that in the dispensation of the fulness of times [God would] gather together in one all things in Christ, both which are in heaven, and which are on earth; even in him" (Eph. 1:10).

First to Adam, then to others in succeeding generations, God revealed himself and the plan of salvation, only to have the bulk of mankind reject, ignore, or mingle the truth with error and apostatize. Every dispensation of the gospel from Adam to A. D. 1820 resulted in such apostasy, except Enoch's and possibly Melchizedek's. But not this time! The First Vision opened the dispensation of the fulness of times, a dispensation wherein the truth, the gospel, the priesthood, and the true Church of Jesus Christ will remain intact until the Second Coming of the Savior. The Lord told Nebuchadnezzar through Daniel that in the latter days the God of heaven would set up a kingdom "which shall never be destroyed: and the kingdom shall not be left to other people, but it shall break in pieces and consume all [other] kingdoms, and it shall stand for ever" (Dan. 2:44). In Nebuchadnezzar's dream that kingdom was represented by a "stone [which] was cut out of the mountain without hands" (Dan. 2:45). 11 That that stone or kingdom is the restored gospel of Jesus Christ was made clear by the Lord himself in a revelation to Joseph Smith in October 1831: "The keys of the kingdom of God are committed unto man on the earth, and from thence shall the gospel roll forth unto the ends of the earth, as the stone which is cut out of the mountain without hands shall roll forth, until it has filled the whole earth" (D&C 65:2).

The preceding declaration does not mean that the Church will not have some dark days. There has been and will yet be apostasy from the Church. And even among many who remain in the Church there may be "apostasy" from celestial standards, a casualness about gospel living, seemingly justified by the devil-inspired fallacy that "all is well in Zion; yea, Zion prospereth, all is well" (2 Ne. 28:21). True prophets and true gospel principles and ordinances have always had detractors. There will yet be faint-hearted Saints, even traitors and hypocrites "who have professed to know my name and have not known me, and have blasphemed against me in the midst of my house" (D&C 112:26); yet the Church will remain on course. There may be yapping dogs harrassing the sometimes weary travelers, but the great caravan moves on. 12 There will be storms and at times high waves of criticism, but God is at the helm, and the good ship Zion will stay afloat. 13 Although "we have some tight places to go before the Lord is through with this Church and the world in this dispensation," 14 humble followers of Christ within the Church will become "stronger and stronger in their humility, and firmer and firmer in the faith of Christ, unto the filling their souls with joy and consolation, yea, even to the purifying and the sanctification of their hearts, which sanctification cometh because of their yielding their hearts unto God" (Hel. 3:35). Thus, "Zion [will] increase in beauty, and in holiness; her borders [will] be enlarged; her stakes [will] be strengthened; yea, verily I say unto you, Zion [will] arise and put on her beautiful garments" (D&C 82:14), "ready for the Bridegroom" (D&C 65:3) at his coming.

This dispensation of the fulness of times is critical to fulfilling the Plan of Salvation for all God's children. Perhaps the example of vicarious work for the dead illustrates this best. How many have lived and died and will yet live and die on this earth without the gospel of Jesus Christ? How many "would have received it with all their hearts" (D&C 137:8) if they had had an opportunity? It seems manifestly unfair to consign such people to lower realms in the hereafter when the reason they did not qualify for "heaven" is that they did not have a chance. Is this one reason why so many Christian religions have "strayed from mine ordinances" (D&C 1:15), ordinances such as baptism, seeing no way to require ordinances of all and still attribute to God fairness and justice? Man's wisdom is at a loss to find a way to harmonize the requirement for ordinances and God's justice. But God's wisdom is not so limited. The answer lies in the great principle of vicarious work for the dead, which is one of the noblest and most important responsibilities placed upon those who live in the last dispensation.

The earth will be smitten with a curse unless there is a welding link of some kind or other between the fathers and the children, upon some subject or other—and behold what is that subject? It is the baptism for the dead. For we without them cannot be made perfect; neither can they without us be made perfect. Neither can they nor we be made perfect without those who have died in the gospel also; for it is necessary in the ushering in of the dispensation of the fulness of times, which dispensation is now beginning to usher in, that a whole and complete and perfect union, and welding together of dispensations, and keys, and powers, and glories should take place, and be revealed from the days of Adam even to the present time. And not only this, but those things which never have been revealed from the foundation of the world, but have been kept hid from the wise and prudent, shall be revealed unto babes and sucklings in this, the dispensation of the fulness of times (D&C 128:18).

What an opportunity; what a responsibility! The salvation of millions upon millions of God's children who have died is made possible by the knowledge, keys, and resources uniquely made available to Saints in this dispensation. Perhaps it is in this light that D&C 135:3 can be better understood: "Joseph Smith, the Prophet and Seer of the Lord, has done more, save Jesus only, for the salvation of men in this world, than any other man that ever lived in it." Without diminishing in the least the importance of the work done by earlier prophets and others of the Lord's servants, clearly in terms of the numbers of souls to whom the saving principles and ordinances of the gospel have been made available, a monumental work has been effected through the instrumentality of "Joseph Smith, the Prophet and Seer of the Lord" (D&C 135:3). And that instrumentality was initiated in the Sacred Grove.

The Reality of the Devil

After I had retired to the place where I had previously designed to go, having looked around me, and finding myself alone, I kneeled down and began to offer up the desires of my heart to God. I had scarcely done so, when immediately I was seized upon by some power which entirely overcame me, and had such an astonishing influence over me as to bind my tongue so that I could not speak. Thick darkness gathered around me, and it seemed to me for a time as if I were doomed to sudden destruction.

But, exerting all my powers to call upon God to deliver me out of the power of this enemy which had seized upon me, and at the very moment when I was ready to sink into despair and abandon myself to destruction—not to an imaginary ruin, but to the power of some actual being from the unseen world, who had such marvelous power as I had never before felt in any being—just at this moment of great alarm, I saw a pillar of light exactly over my head, above the brightness of the sun, which descended gradually until it fell upon me.

It no sooner appeared than I found myself delivered from the enemy which held me bound (JS-H 15-17).

The young Prophet found himself sinking into despair, "not to an imaginary ruin, but to the power of some actual being from the unseen world" (v. 16). That "actual being" was undoubtedly Satan himself, desperately trying to stop Joseph's appeal for truth and light. He knew the significance of what was about to happen. Previous to his defiance of God, he was Lucifer, "an angel of God who was in authority in the presence of God" (see D&C 76:25-27). Did he know Joseph Smith there? Did he know of his foreordained mission as the first prophet of the last dispensation? Surely he was acutely aware of the scriptural prophecies concerning Joseph Smith and his work. It is not surprising that he would interfere at this juncture.

The scriptures clearly teach of Satan's origin, his motives and methods, his destiny, and even his usefulness in the plan of salvation. 15 To deny his existence and/or to discount his influence in the world is foolhardy. Yet it is fashionable in some worldly wise circles to view the devil simply as a mythical character used to represent what we perceive as "evil" or negative influences in our lives. Such a view is exactly what Satan wants people to believe and is a fulfillment of Nephi's prophecy that in the latter-days the devil would succeed in influencing some to disbelieve in his existence: "And behold, others he flattereth away, and telleth them there is no hell; and he saith unto them: I am no devil, for there is none—and thus he whispereth in their ears, until he grasps them with his awful chains" (2 Ne. 28:22).

The irony of all this is that the people who disavow him, thus perceiving themselves as among the more sophisticated of mankind, have come to that position under the influence of the very personage and power they disclaim. How the devil must look up and laugh, and his angels rejoice at such worldly sophistication and spiritual naivete (see Moses 7:26)! "O that cunning plan of the evil one! O the vainness, and the frailties, and the foolishness of men! When they are learned they think they are wise, and they hearken not unto the counsel of God, for they set it aside, supposing they know of themselves, wherefore, their wisdom is foolishness and it profiteth them not. And they shall perish. But to be learned is good if they hearken unto the counsels of God" (2 Ne. 9:28-29).

Joseph Smith learned of the reality and power of Satan by his own experience in the First Vision. As he gained more experience with scripture and revelation, he learned and taught more specifically about him: 16

The great principle of happiness consists in having a body. The devil has no body, and herein is his punishment. He is pleased when he can obtain the tabernacle of man.

All beings who have bodies have power over those who have not. The devil has no power over us only as we permit him. The moment we revolt at anything which comes from God, the devil takes power. 17

In relation to the kingdom of God, the devil always sets up his kingdom at the very same time in opposition to God. 18

The devil may appear as an angel of light. . . . The devil is an orator; he is powerful; . . . The devil can speak in tongues; the adversary will come with his work; he can tempt all classes; can speak in English or Dutch. 19

For if it be a place of refuge, the devil will use his greatest efforts to trap the Saints. 20

The devil has great power to deceive; he will so transform things as to make one gape at those who are doing the will of God. 21

The devil could not compel mankind to do evil; all was voluntary. Those who resisted the Spirit of God would be liable to be led into temptation. . . . God would not exert any compulsory means, and the devil could not. 22

As no man knows the things of God, but by the Spirit of God, so no man knows the spirit of the devil, and his power and influence, but by possessing intelligence which is more than human, and having unfolded through the medium of the Priesthood the mysterious operations of his devices; without knowing the angelic form, the sanctified look and gesture, and the zeal that is frequently manifested by him for the glory of God, together with the prophetic spirit, the gracious influence, the godly appearance, and the holy garb, which are so characteristic of his proceedings and his mysterious windings.

A man must have the discerning of spirits before he can drag into daylight the hellish influence and unfold it unto the world in all its soul-destroying, diabolical, and horrid colors; for nothing is a greater injury to the children of men than to be under the influence of a false spirit when they think they have the Spirit of God. 23

In addition to learning of Satan's reality and power, the Prophet Joseph Smith was taught by revelation how to avoid being deceived by the devil's influence:

1. Treasuring up the scriptures.

Whoso treasureth up my word, shall not be deceived (JS-M 37).

Whoso would hearken unto the word of God, and would hold fast unto it, they would never perish; neither could the temptations and the fiery darts of the adversary overpower them unto blindness, to lead them away to destruction (1 Ne. 15:24).

Whosoever will may lay hold upon the word of God, which is quick and powerful, which shall divide asunder all the cunning and the snares and the wiles of the devil, and lead the man of Christ in a strait and narrow course across that everlasting gulf of misery which is prepared to engulf the wicked (Hel. 3:29).

2. Following the living prophet.

Wherefore, meaning the church, thou shalt give heed unto all his words and commandments which he shall give unto you as he receiveth them, walking in all holiness before me; For his word ye shall receive, as if from mine own mouth, in all patience and faith. For by doing these things the gates of hell shall not prevail against you; yea, and the Lord God will disperse the powers of darkness from before you, and cause the heavens to shake for your good, and his name's glory (D&C 21:4-6; see also D&C 28:1-7; D&C 43:1-9).

3. Having the gifts of the Spirit through prayer and obedience.

But ye are commanded in all things to ask of God, who giveth liberally; and that which the Spirit testifies unto you even so I would that ye should do in all holiness of heart, walking uprightly before me, considering the end of your salvation, doing all things with prayer and thanksgiving, that ye may not be seduced by evil spirits, or doctrines of devils, or the commandments of men; for some are of men and others of devils. Wherefore, beware lest ye are deceived; and that ye may not be deceived seek ye earnestly the best gifts (D&C 46:7-8).

Joseph Smith indicated that "the greatest, the best, the most useful gifts would be known nothing about by an observer." 24 Would these "best" gifts then be quiet ones such as faith, testimony, peace, and discernment?

4. Avoiding the influence of false teachers.

D&C 52:14-19 gives "a pattern in all things, that ye may not be deceived," warning that "Satan is abroad in the land, and he goeth forth deceiving the nations. Wherefore he that prayeth, . . . he that speaketh, whose spirit is contrite, whose language is meek and edifieth, the same is of God if he obey mine ordinances . . . and shall bring forth fruits of praise and wisdom, according to the revelations and truths which I have given you" (emphasis added). The "if" indicates that a person could pray and speak in a contrite and edifying manner and still be not "of God." Critical factors are that he "obey mine ordinances" and "bring forth fruits . . . according to the revelations."

Alma, speaking out of his own experience of being caught up with false teachers, and even having been one himself, exhorted his followers to "trust no one to be your teacher nor your minister, except he be a man of God, walking in his ways and keeping his commandments" (Mosiah 23:14).

The reality of Satan, illustrated by the First Vision, has great theological significance—it is unquestionably a matter of "ultimate concern." And being alerted, not only to his reality and power, but to his motives, methods, and ultimate destiny, can help us avoid his influence.

Creeds and Professors of Corrupted Religions

In response to Joseph Smith's question regarding which church he should join, he reported the following:

I was answered that I must join none of them, for they were all wrong; and the Personage who addressed me said that all their creeds were an abomination in his sight; that those professors were all corrupt; that: "they draw near to me with their lips, but their hearts are far from me, they teach for doctrines the commandments of men, having a form of godliness, but they deny the power thereof" (JS-H 19).

This strong denunciation of false creeds and corrupt professors of religion came from the Savior. It is reminiscent of his stinging exposure of false religious ideas and religious hypocrites during his own ministry on the earth (see John 8:21-24, 39-59; Matt. 23:1-39).

Just what is meant by "all their creeds were an abomination in his sight" and "those professors were all corrupt"? Perhaps later comments in the verse itself help to explain. Truly it is an abomination—odious, loathsome, detestable—when the commandments of men replace the commandments of God as the basis for creeds of faith, and when the power of God is denied in favor of only a "form of godliness." There is no salvation in that kind of religion, even if someone sincerely believes in such an empty shell. Insult is added to injury when hypocrisy is added to humanized, spiritually impotent creeds—when people do not really believe, but are only "professors" of religion, 25 who "draw near to [the Lord] with their lips, but their hearts are far from [him]."

The Savior's denunciation of man-made creeds and corrupt professors then is not a wholesale rejection of all religious notions then in existence, nor a condemnation of sincere believers, whether minister or layman. Indeed, a few years later the Lord told Sidney Rigdon, a Campbellite minister, "I have looked upon thee and thy works. I have heard thy prayers, and prepared thee for a greater work. . . . Thou wast sent forth, even as John, to prepare the way before me . . . and thou knewest it not" (D&C 35:3-4). The Lord went on to explain to Sidney Rigdon the importance of accepting the "fulness of my gospel, which I have sent forth unto this generation" (D&C 35:12). An important truth is revealed in these passages—the truth that there is a fulness of the gospel, but that God works with people who do not yet have that fulness, to prepare them and others to receive it. He is mindful of them; he hears their prayers; he sends them forth, although they may not recognize the process and purpose of it all. President Joseph F. Smith taught:

Christ taught the gospel to Adam, and made known his truths to Abraham and the prophets. He was the inspirer of the ancient philosophers, Pagan or Israelite, as well as of the great characters of modern times. . . .

Calvin, Luther, Melanchthon, and all the reformers, were inspired in thoughts, words, and actions, to accomplish what they did for the amelioration, liberty and advancement of the human race. They paved the way for the more perfect gospel of truth to come. Their inspiration, as with that of the ancients, came from the Father, his Son Jesus Christ, and the Holy Ghost, the one true and living God. This may also truthfully be said concerning the Revolutionary fathers of this nation, and all who have in the ages past contributed to the progress of civil and religious freedom. There is no light nor truth which did not come to them first from him. 26

How much more noble is the plan of God than the provincial squabblings of mankind. As Joseph Smith taught:

The great designs of God in relation to the salvation of the human family, are very little understood by the professedly wise and intelligent generation in which we live. Various and conflicting are the opinions of men concerning the plan of salvation, the requisitions of the Almighty, the necessary preparations for heaven, the state and condition of departed spirits, and the happiness or misery that is consequent upon the practice of righteousness and iniquity according to their several notions of virtue and vice.

The Mussulman condemns the heathen, the Jew, and the Christian, and the whole world of mankind that reject his Koran, as infidels, and consigns the whole of them to perdition. The Jew believes that the whole world that rejects his faith and are not circumcised, are Gentile dogs, and will be damned. The heathen is equally as tenacious about his principles, and the Christian consigns all to perdition who cannot bow to his creed, and submit to his ipse dixit.

But while one portion of the human race is judging and condemning the other without mercy, the Great Parent of the universe looks upon the whole of the human family with a fatherly care and paternal regard; He views them as His offspring, and without any of those contracted feelings that influence the children of men, causes "His sun to rise on the evil and on the good, and sendeth rain on the just and on the unjust." He holds the reins of judgment in His hands; He is a wise Lawgiver, and will judge all men, not according to the narrow, contracted notions of men, but, "according to the deeds done in the body whether they be good or evil," or whether these deeds were done in England, America, Spain, Turkey, or India. He will judge them, "not according to what they have not, but according what they have," those who have lived without law, will be judged without law, and those who have a law, will be judged by that law. We need not doubt the wisdom and intelligence of the Great Jehovah; He will award judgment or mercy to all nations according to their several deserts, their means of obtaining intelligence, the laws by which they are governed, the facilities afforded them of obtaining correct information, and His inscrutable designs in relation to the human family; and when the designs of God shall be made manifest, and the curtain of futurity be withdrawn, we shall all of us eventually have to confess that the Judge of all the earth has done right. 27

His "inscrutable designs in relation to the human family" include the following truths:

"Every man that cometh into the world" (John 1:9) is given the light of Christ (see also D&C 88:46; Moro. 7:16). The light of Christ will enlighten all who will hearken to its promptings, ultimately leading them "unto God, even the Father," and the Father will teach them of the fulness of the gospel, the "covenant" restored through Joseph Smith (D&C 84:45-53).

The amount of light one receives depends upon at least three factors:

1. Our capacity to receive and benefit from light and truth. Though not spiritually predestined, we come into this mortal probation predisposed to different levels of affinity for spiritual things. Each person's predisposition is a result of his own choices in the pre-mortal life. Some do not have "ears to hear" even though a message is given. 28

2. Agency. We can hearken to the light sent to us or we can choose to ignore it. The consequences of that choice are clear:

And therefore, he that will harden his heart, the same receiveth the lesser portion of the word; and he that will not harden his heart, to him is given the greater portion of the word, until it is given unto him to know the mysteries of God until he know them in full.

And they that will harden their hearts, to them is given the lesser portion of the word until they know nothing concerning his mysteries; and then they are taken captive by the devil, and led by his will down to destruction. Now this is what is meant by the chains of hell (Alma 12:10-11).

Obviously, then, choosing to accept or reject truth helps to determine our future capacity to receive light and truth.

3. The amount of light with which we are blessed. "For behold, the Lord doth grant unto all nations [and individuals?], of their own nation and tongue, to teach his word, yea, in wisdom, all that he seeth fit that they should have; therefore we see that the Lord doth counsel in wisdom, according to that which is just and true" (Alma 29:8).

Perhaps items 1 and 2 above are important factors in the determination of how much light is sent to someone. Concerning the workings of the light of Christ with mankind, President Joseph F. Smith has said:

It is the power of God, the influence that he exerts throughout all his works by which he can effect his purposes and execute his will, in consonance with the laws of free agency which he has conferred upon man. By means of this Spirit every man is enlightened, the wicked as well as the good, the intelligent and the ignorant, the high and the low, each in accordance with his capacity to receive the light; and this Spirit or influence which emanates from God may be said to constitute man's consciousness, and will never cease to strive with man, until man is brought to the possession of the higher intelligence which can only come through faith, repentance, baptism for the remission of sins, and the gift or the presentation of the Holy Ghost by one having authority. . . . There is not a man born into the world, but has a portion of the Spirit of God, and it is that Spirit of God which gives to his spirit understanding. Without this, he would be but an animal like the rest of the brute creation, without ability, except to eat and to drink like the brute beast. But inasmuch as the Spirit of God giveth all men understanding, he is enlightened above the brute beast. He is made in the image of God himself, so that he can reason, reflect, pray, exercise faith; he can use his energies for the accomplishment of the desires of his heart, and inasmuch as he puts forth his efforts in the proper direction, then he is entitled to an increased portion of the Spirit of the Almighty to inspire him to increased intelligence, to increased prosperity and happiness in the world; but in proportion as he prostitutes his energies for evil, the inspiration of the Almighty is withdrawn from him, until he becomes so dark and so benighted, that so far as his knowledge of God is concerned, he is quite as ignorant as a dumb brute. . . . It is my opinion that the Lord bears record to the testimonies of his servants unto those who hear those testimonies, and it is left with them whether or not they will harden their hearts against the truth and not listen to it, and abide the consequences. I believe the Spirit of the Almighty God is upon most of the elders who go out into the world to proclaim the gospel. I believe their words are accompanied by the testimony of the Spirit of God. But all men are not open to receive the witness and the testimony of the Spirit. And the responsibility will rest with them. Yet it may be possible the Lord withholds his Spirit from some, for a wise purpose in him, that their eyes are not opened to see and their minds not quickened to comprehend the word of truth. As a rule, however, it is my opinion that all men who are seeking after the truth and are willing to receive it, will also receive the witness of the Spirit which accompanies the words and testimonies of the servants of the Lord; while those whose hearts are hardened against the truth and will not receive it when it is borne record of to them, will remain ignorant and without a comprehension of the gospel. I believe there are tens of thousands of people who have heard the truth and have been pricked in their hearts, but they are seeking every refuge they possibly can to hide themselves from their convictions of the truth." 29

Every person ever born will have opportunity, either in this world or in the post-earth Spirit World, to understand the gospel in its plainness and truth, and will receive eternal rewards commensurate with whatever law he is able and willing to abide (see D&C 138:1-60; 88:21-24). Vicarious work for the dead (spoken of earlier in the article) will provide for the necessary ordinances for those who choose celestial law but who lacked mortal opportunity to receive the ordinances themselves (D&C 128:18).

Hence, it seems clear that in the First Vision the Savior's instruction that Joseph "join none of them, for they are all wrong" is not to say that everything about them is wrong. Rather, that there is something wrong in all of them. As a more complete picture of God's plan of salvation unfolded over the next two decades after the First Vision, it was made known that the churches referred to lacked priesthood authority, the spiritual powers associated with the gift of the Holy Ghost, and the fulness of gospel truths. In Joseph Smith's 1842 account of the first Vision, written at the request of John Wentworth, editor of the Chicago Democrat, the Prophet Joseph indicated that in the First Vision he received "a promise that the fulness of the gospel should at some future time be made known unto [him]." 30

That fulness has been made known and is now available to all who are disposed to learn of it. Although there are blessings associated with accepting any measure of truth and light, and although God will, through the Light of Christ, give any of his children gospel truths line upon line as they are able and willing to receive them, the fulness of salvation is reserved for those who accept the fulness of the gospel, repent, receive baptism and the gift of the Holy Ghost and all other saving ordinances properly administered by rightful priesthood authority, and endure to the end of the road to eternal life. All are invited.

Jesus Christ, The Giver of Revelation to Man

Another point of theological significance illustrated by the First Vision is that it is the Son rather than the Father who relates directly to and gives revelation to man. The scriptures are clear that Jesus is the "great I Am" (D&C 29:1); Jehovah (D&C 110:1-4); the God of ancient Israel who gave and fulfilled the law (3 Ne. 15:5); our advocate with the Father (D&C 45:3-5); the one to whom the Father "hath committed all judgment" (John 5:22; D&C 19:1-4; 3 Ne. 27:13-15); the God of modern Israel whose name we bear, having become his "children" through covenant and spiritual rebirth (Mosiah 5:7-10; D&C 115:4; 3 Ne. 27:3-10); the only "name under heaven given among men, whereby we must be saved" (Acts 4:12). It is only through the Son that man can come to the Father (see John 14:6), and apparently the Father only comes to man through the Son.

Elder James E. Talmage has written: "A general consideration of the scriptural evidence leads to the conclusion that God the Eternal Father has manifested Himself to earthly prophets or revelators on very few occasions, and then principally to attest the divine authority of His Son, Jesus Christ." 31 Elder Joseph Fielding Smith taught that "all revelation since the fall has come through Jesus Christ. . . . The Father has never dealt with man directly and personally since the fall, and he has never appeared except to introduce and bear record of the Son. Thus the Inspired Version records that ‘no man hath seen God at any time, except he hath borne record of the Son’ (JST John 1:19)." 32

There are many places in the scriptures where it appears to be the Father speaking inasmuch as references are made to "mine Only Begotten Son." 33 In light of the above explanations, it should be understood that it is the Savior giving the revelations, and that at times, by Divine Investiture of Authority, he speaks for the Father, in the name of the Father, and as if he were the Father. 34

On several special occasions the Father has audibly introduced and borne witness of the Son—at the Savior's baptism (Matt. 3:17), on the mount of transfiguration (Matt. 17:5), at the Savior's appearance to the Nephites (3 Ne. 11:7), and perhaps it was the Father's voice bearing witness of his Son to Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon when they saw the vision of the glories known as D&C 76 (see v. 23). Consistent with this pattern, in the First Vision the Father said simply, "This is My Beloved Son, Hear Him!" (JS-H 1:17). Uniquely, however, on the sacred occasion of the First Vision Joseph not only heard, but saw the Father. Again consistent with former instances, after the Father's simple introduction it was Jesus who instructed Joseph and brought about the "restitution of all things which God hath spoken by the mouth of all his holy prophets since the world began" (Acts 3:21).

Conclusion

Topics and lessons associated with the First Vision which have theological significance include: knowing the character of God, placing new wine in new bottles, opening the dispensation of dispensations, the reality of the devil, creeds and professors of corrupted religion, and Christ as our advocate with the Father. However, the factor of primary theological significance associated with the First Vision is that it happened! Joseph Smith testified:

I had actually seen a light, and in the midst of that light I saw two Personages, and they did in reality speak to me; and though I was hated and persecuted for saying that I had seen a vision, yet it was true; and while they were persecuting me, reviling me, and speaking all manner of evil against me falsely for so saying, I was led to say in my heart: Why persecute me for telling the truth? I have actually seen a vision; and who am I that I can withstand God, or why does the world think to make me deny what I have actually seen? For I had seen a vision; I knew it, and I knew that God knew it, and I could not deny it, neither dared I do it; at least I knew that by so doing I would offend God, and come under condemnation (JS-H 25).

How important is it whether the First Vision happened? How important is it that one believes that it really happened? Is it not enough to acknowledge that Joseph Smith was a remarkable, charismatic leader with some demonstrably effective ideas: that applying the principles he espoused has in fact brought about a vibrant church, the members of which are on the whole decent, successful, happy people? If one can "belong" to the Church and serve others through it, enjoy the fruits of gospel principles, establish a soul-satisfying sense of comradery, love, and friendship, what does it matter whether he believes that Joseph Smith's testimony is true concerning the First Vision? The same kinds of questions may be asked concerning the Savior. Was he really the Son of God? Did he really perform miracles—make the blind see and the lame walk and the dead rise? Did he really suffer for the sins of the world? Did he really rise from the dead a resurrected being? Did he really appear to his apostles and others with his body of flesh and bones after his resurrection? What difference does it make whether one believes all these things, as long as he accepts Christ as a great teacher whose ideas, when applied, bring a measure of purpose, peace, and happiness to life? The truth is, it does matter. It matters immensely. It matters because spiritual power in this life and the fulness of salvation in the next come only through Jesus Christ—through belief in him and obedience to the principles and ordinances that comprise his gospel (see John 15:1-16; D&C 132:1-14; D&C 1:11-17; 3 Ne. 27:13-27; Matt. 7:19-21). A critical part of that gospel is that he calls prophets, reveals himself and the truths of heaven to them, confers priesthood upon them, and commissions them to bear witness of him, to teach gospel principles, and to administer the ordinances of salvation to all who are willing to receive them. Joseph Smith was such a prophet. To reject him is to reject the fulness of the gospel offered by the Savior. President J. Reuben Clark, Jr., has eloquently stated the importance of accepting both Jesus Christ and Joseph Smith and the reality of the events of which they bore solemn witness:

In all this there are for the Church and for each and all of its members, two prime things which may not be overlooked, forgotten, shaded, or discarded:

First: That Jesus Christ is the Son of God, the Only Begotten of the Father in the flesh, the Creator of the world, the Lamb of God, the Sacrifice for the sins of the world, the Atoner for Adam's transgression; that He was crucified; that His spirit left His body; that He died; that He was laid away in the tomb; that on the third day His spirit was reunited with His body, which again became a living being; that He was raised from the tomb a resurrected being, a perfect Being, the First Fruits of the Resurrection; that He later ascended to the Father; and that because of His death and by and through His resurrection every man born into the world since the beginning will be likewise literally resurrected. This doctrine is as old as the world. Job declared: "And though after my skin worms destroy this body, yet in my flesh shall I see God: whom I shall see for myself, and mine eyes shall behold, and not another" (Job 19:26-27).

The resurrected body is a body of flesh and bones and spirit, and Job was uttering a great and everlasting truth. These positive facts and all other facts necessarily implied therein, must all be honestly believed, in full faith, by every member of the Church.

The second of the two things to which we must all give full faith is: That the Father and the Son actually and in truth and very deed appeared to the Prophet Joseph in a vision in the woods; that other heavenly visions followed to Joseph and to others; that the Gospel and the holy Priesthood after the Order of the Son of God were in truth and fact restored to the earth from which they were lost by the apostasy of the Primitive Church; that the Lord again set up His Church, through the agency of Joseph Smith; that the Book of Mormon is just what it professes to be; that to the Prophet came numerous revelations for the guidance, upbuilding, organization, and encouragement of the Church and its members; that the Prophet's successors, likewise called of God, have received revelations as the needs of the Church have required, and that they will continue to receive revelations as the Church and its members, living the truth they already have, shall stand in need of more; that this is in truth the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints; and that its foundation beliefs are the laws and principles laid down in the Articles of Faith. These facts also, and each of them, together with all things necessarily implied therein or flowing therefrom, must stand, unchanged, unmodified, without dilution, excuse, apology, or avoidance; they may not be explained away or submerged. Without these two great beliefs the Church would cease to be the Church.

Any individual who does not accept the fulness of these doctrines as to Jesus of Nazareth or as to the restoration of the Gospel and Holy Priesthood, is not a Latter-day Saint; the hundreds of thousands of faithful, God-fearing men and women who compose the great body of the Church membership do believe these things fully and completely; and they support the Church and its institutions because of this belief.

I have set out these matters because they are the latitude and longitude of the actual location and position of the Church, both in this world and in eternity. Knowing our true position, we can change our bearings if they need changing; we can lay down anew our true course. 35

Every person must decide eventually about Joseph Smith's testimony of the First Vision. That decision has deep theological significance.

NOTES

 1. Webster's Third New International Dictionary (Springfield, Mass.: G&C Merriam Co., 1969).

 2. TPJS, p. 370.

 3. Ibid., pp. 345-46.

 4. In Lecture 6 of the "Lectures on Faith," par. 7, it is explained that this knowledge comes only to those willing to sacrifice all earthly things. See N. B. Lundwall, comp., A Compilation Containing the Lectures on Faith, etc. (Salt Lake City: N. B. Lundwall, n.d.), p. 58.

 5. "Lectures on Faith," Lecture 3, pars. 2-5 (Lundwall, p. 33), format modified for the sake of clarity, p. 33.

 6. TPJS, p. 343.

 7. Ibid., p. 350.

 8. Note that JST Matt. 9:18-21 is a restored text, not found in the KJV.

 9. The Teachings of Spencer W. Kimball (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1982), pp. 428-29.

 10. TPJS, p. 365.

 11. "Without hands" reminds us that the kingdom was set up by God—it was not created by the unaided hands of mortals.

 12. See Bruce R. McConkie, Conference Report, October 1984; Ensign, November 1984, p. 85.

 13. See Brigham Young, JD 5:352.

 14. Harold B. Lee, Conference Report, October 1970, p. 152.

 15. See the following references: Origin—Abr. 3:22-28; Moses 4:1-4; D&C 29:36-38; D&C 76:25-28; Motives—2 Ne. 2:18, 27; D&C 10:22-23, 27, 33; Moses 4:6; Alma 34:35; Methods—Moses 4:4; 3 Ne. 11:29; 2 Ne. 26:22; 28:20-29; Alma 30:52-53, 60; Destiny—D&C 76:44-48; Usefulness—D&C 29:39.

 16. In addition to the statements of Joseph Smith included here, see the Bible Dictionary (under "devil") and the Topical Guide in the LDS publication of the Bible under the headings, Devil, Satan, Adversary, Lucifer.

 17. TPJS, p. 181.

 18. Ibid., p. 365.

 19. Ibid., p. 162.

 20. Ibid., p. 161.

 21. Ibid., p. 227.

 22. Ibid., p. 187.

 23. Ibid., p. 205.

 24. Ibid., p. 246.

 25. One of the accepted meanings of "profess" is: "To declare in words only: Pretend," Merriam-Webster Dictionary.

 26. Joseph F. Smith, Gospel Doctrine (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1970), p. 31.

 27. TPJS, pp. 217-18.

 28. That there were different levels of spiritual nobility in the pre-mortal life, see Abr. 3:22-26; that we had our agency there, see also D&C 29:36; Alma 13:1-9; that some can be exposed to a message but not able to "hear" it, see Matt. 13:9-17.

 29. Gospel Doctrine, pp. 61-63, 360-61.

 30. See Milton Backman, Jr., Eyewitness Accounts of the Restoration (Orem, Utah: Grandin Book Co., 1983), pp. 2, 27.

 31. Jesus the Christ (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1945), p. 39.

 32. Doctrines of Salvation, 3 vols., comp. Bruce R. McConkie (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1954-56), 1:27.

 33. As an example see D&C 29:1, 41-42, where the revelation begins with "Listen to the voice of Jesus Christ," but in vv. 41 and 42 it appears to be the Father speaking of "mine only begotten Son."

 34. See "The Father and The Son: A Doctrinal Exposition by The First Presidency and the Twelve," 30 June 1916. The full text of the exposition is printed in James E. Talmage, The Articles of Faith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1975), pp. 465-73.

 35. President J. Reuben Clark, Jr., "The Charted Course of the Church in Education," Aspen Grove, 8 August 1938, cited in David H. Yarn, Jr., ed., J. Reuben Clark—Selected Papers (Provo, Ut.: Brigham Young University Press, 1984), pp. 243-56.

 
 
© 1985 Deseret Book Company 

Printed from Gospelink.com
