# The Appearance of Moroni to Joseph Smith

### The Appearance of Moroni to Joseph Smith
Robert L. Millet, Kent P. Jackson, Studies in Scripture, Vol. 2: The Pearl of Great Price ( 1985)
 
 

23

THE APPEARANCE OF MORONI TO JOSEPH SMITH

KENT P. JACKSON

With Moroni's appearance to seventeen-year-old Joseph Smith in the fall of 1823, the Lord began the process of formally educating his Prophet in preparation for the ministry of restoration that was beginning. It had been over three years since the appearance of the Father and the Son to Joseph Smith. That interim period following the First Vision must have been a difficult time for the young Prophet. Modern readers can imagine the intense burden of responsibility that rested on the young man's shoulders. He was, it should be remembered, only a boy in his teens; yet he had seen God. Perhaps coupled with the burden of that experience was a feeling of uncertainty that came from not knowing what lay in store for him, what his mission would be, why God had chosen him, and what would happen next. One can only imagine the feelings of loneliness he must have harbored, not having anyone in the world who had experienced what he had or who could understand what he was going through. He reported that following his interview with Deity, "my soul was filled with love and for many days I could rejoice with great Joy and the Lord was with me." 1 With a soul filled with love he desired to share his experience with others. How it must have hurt him deeply when that which was so sacred and close to his heart was treated with contempt by other people (see JS-H 21-22). He "could find none that would believe the hevnly vision," 2 yet because of it he experienced persecution that would have been overwhelming for a man twice his age (see JS-H 21-28). In 1838 he recalled that "the most bitter persecution and reviling" was directed against him (JS-H 23).

In his later recitations of his early experiences, the Prophet was candid to recall that among the schooling that he received during this period was that of overcoming his weaknesses. He remembered in 1832, "I fell into transgression and sinned in many things which brought a wound upon my soul." 3 Six years later he clarified: "I was left to all kinds of temptations; and, mingling with all kinds of society, I frequently fell into many foolish errors, and displayed the weakness of youth, and the foibles of human nature; which, I am sorry to say, led me into divers temptations, offensive in the sight of God." The Prophet's own words provide the correct perspective on this matter: "In making this confession, no one need suppose me guilty of any great or malignant sins. A disposition to commit such was never in my nature. But I was guilty of levity, and sometimes associated with jovial company, etc., not consistent with that character which ought to be maintained by one who was called of God as I had been" (JS-H 28). Joseph Smith had to undergo the natural process of maturing before he became ready for the commencement of his mission. During the course of years in which the boy became a man, his Father in Heaven prepared him for his role in the glorious event that would unfold through his efforts—the restoration of the gospel of Jesus Christ. The Prophet Joseph Smith did indeed become a great and powerful prophet, the one chosen of all of the billions of God's children to stand at the head of the most glorious of all gospel dispensations. Surely, over the course of his life he did more, "save Jesus only, for the salvation of men in this world, than any other man that ever lived limit." (D&C 135:3).

Because of "the weakness of youth, and the foibles of human nature" that Joseph Smith experienced as a boy, he "often felt condemend for [his] weakness and imperfections" (JS-H 29). As he reported, such feelings "brought a wound upon [his] soul." 4 On the evening of 21 September 1823, in an effort to obtain forgiveness from the Lord he prayed. He described his experience: "I betook myself to prayer and supplication to Almighty God for forgiveness of all my sins and follies, and also for a manifestation to me, that I might know of my state and standing before him; for I had full confidence in obtaining a divine manifestation, as I previously had one" (JS-H 29). While praying, a light appeared in his room in which a heavenly messenger appeared, clad in white robes and standing in the air above the floor. For the young Prophet the heavens had opened again.

Moroni, the Herald of the Restoration

That Moroni was chosen to be the prophet to announce the restoration of the fulness of the gospel is appropriate. 5 He was, it should be remembered, the final prophet of the Lehite dispensation, and he was the final author, compiler, and caretaker of the Book of Mormon. His coming bridged the gap between gospel dispensations—bringing light and knowledge from his time to that of Joseph Smith. The restoration of the Book of Mormon was an extremely significant part of the restoration of the gospel, and thus it had to be done under the care of a man of the stature of Moroni. From the process of bringing forth the sacred record, and from the gospel light that it contains, the young Prophet learned of God and of his own calling and position before his Lord. This happened under the direction and teaching of the Angel Moroni. It is, therefore, no wonder that Latter-day Saints view him as a mighty angel flying "in the midst of heaven, having the everlasting gospel to preach unto them that dwell on the earth, and to every nation, and kindred, and tongue, and people, saying with a loud voice, Fear God, and give glory to him; for the hour of his judgment is come" (Rev. 14:6-7). His statue on our temples today announces to the world that the gospel has been restored in its fulness and that its blessings are now available to mankind.

Joseph Smith's Accounts of Moroni's Visit

During the Prophet's lifetime he wrote or dictated four separate known accounts of the appearance of Moroni to him, three of which are reproduced here. In these, the original spelling and punctuation are retained. It should be noted that the first two accounts (1832 and 1835) are unedited rough drafts that were not prepared for publication. The first of these is preserved in the draft of a history that the Prophet wrote and dictated between 20 July and 27 November 1832. 6 The account of Moroni's visit was dictated to Frederick G. Williams, and it follows his recitation of the First Vision. 7

When I was seventeen years of age I called again upon the Lord and he shewed unto me a heavenly vision for behold an angel of the Lord came and stood before me and it was by night and he called me by name and he said the Lord had forgiven me my sins and he revealed unto me that in the Town of Manchester Ontario County N.Y. there was plates of gold upon which there was engravings which was engraven by Maroni & his fathers the servants of the living God in ancient days and deposited by the commandments of God and kept by the power thereof and that I should go and get them and he revealed unto me many things concerning the inhabitants of of the earth which since have been revealed in commandments & revelations and it was on the 22d day of Sept. AD 1822 and thus he appeared unto me three times in one night and once on the next day.

In this account Joseph Smith gave few details. He mentioned specifically Moroni's telling him of the ancient American record and the young Prophet's future responsibilities regarding it. He also made the following interesting observation: "He revealed unto me many thing concerning the inhabitants of the earth which since have been revealed in commandments & revelations." Thus Moroni revealed things to the Prophet at that time which were substantiated and confirmed in later revelations. Subsequent events in the process of the restoration of the gospel bear this out, and the Prophet's later accounts of the same visitation give additional detail. By the time this account was dictated (in the summer or fall of 1832), over eighty of the revelations now contained in the Doctrine and Covenants had been given. Moroni's appearance, coming as it did at the beginning of the Restoration, served as a prologue to the mighty process of revelation that ushered in the fulness of the gospel, revealed anew in the Dispensation of the Fulness of Times. 8

The Prophet's 9 November 1835 account is contained in a journal entry that was dictated to Warren Parrish, Joseph Smith's scribe at the time. 9 It is the record of the visit of one Robert Matthews, who visited the Prophet under the pseudonym of "Joshua the Jewish minister." 10 After recounting the First Vision to "Joshua," 11 the Prophet told of his experiences on the night of 21 September 1823:

When I was about 17 years old I saw another vision of angels in the night season after I had retired to bed I had not been a sleep, but was meditating upon my past life and experience, I was very concious that I had not kept the commandments, and I repented hartily for all my sins and transgression, and humbled myself before Him whose eyes are over all things, all at once the room was iluminated above the brightness of the sun an angel appeared before me, his hands and feet were naked pure and white, and he stood between the floors of the room, clothed with purity inexpressible, he said unto me I am a messenger sent from God, be faithful and keep his commandments in all things, he told me of a sacred record which was written on plates of gold, I saw in the vision the place where they were deposited, he said the Indians were the literal descendants of Abraham he explained many of the prophesies to me, one I will mention which is in Malachi 4 chapt. behold the day of the Lord cometh &c. also that the Urim and Thumim, was hid up with the record, and that God would give me power to translate it, with the assistance of this instrument he then gradually vanished out of my sight, or the vision closed, while meditating on what I had seen, the angel appeared to me again and related the same things and much more, also the third time bearing the same tidings, and departed; during the time I was in this vision I did not realize any thing around me except what was shown me in this communication: after the vision had all passed, I found that it was nearly day-light, the family soon arose, I got up also:—on that day while in the field at work with my Father he asked me if I was sick I replyed, I had but little strength, he told me to go to the house, I started and went part way and was finally deprived of my strength and fell, but how long I remained I do not know; the Angel came to me again and commanded me to go and tell my Father, what I had seen and heard, I did so, he wept and told me that it was a vision from God.

In addition to informing the young Prophet of his future responsibilities regarding the coming forth of the ancient American record—which is emphasized in all of the early accounts of Moroni's visit—Moroni "explained many of the prophecies" to Joseph Smith. The Prophet only mentioned one of those, Malachi 4, with an abbreviated paraphrase, presumably of verse 1: "behold the day of the Lord cometh &c."

The longest and most well-known of Joseph Smith's accounts of his first interviews with the heavenly messenger was dictated in 1838. The oldest copy of that account is in the handwriting of James Mulholland and dates from 1839. The record of Moroni's visit follows that of the First Vision. This was the account that was used in the preparation of the Prophet's official history, which eventually became the History of the Church. 12 It was first published in the Times and Seasons in 1842. 13 It is the account that has become canonized as the Joseph Smith—History in the Pearl of Great Price. This account is the most detailed of any of Joseph Smith's records of the event. In it the Prophet quoted several passages of scripture (and specified a few others) that Moroni had quoted to him. He also gave more detailed information about Moroni's message regarding the coming forth of the Book of Mormon. Since the Prophet prepared this account for official publication for the members of the Church, we can look to it with confidence as being his best and most deliberate record of the event. Moreover, this account is part of our scripture, having been accepted as such by the membership of the Church.

The final of the Prophet's known firsthand accounts of the First Vision and Moroni's visits is that contained in the Wentworth Letter, which was published in the Times and Seasons on 1 March 1842. 14 This document was also written by the Prophet to be published—but to a non-Latter-day Saint readership.

On the evening of the 21st of September, A.D. 1823, while I was praying unto God, and endeavoring to exercise faith in the precious promises of scripture on a sudden a light like that of day, only of a far purer and more glorious appearance, and brightness burst into the room, indeed the first sight was as though the house was filled with consuming fire; the appearance produced a shock that affected the whole body; in a moment a personage stood before me surrounded with a glory yet greater than that with which I was already surrounded. This messenger proclaimed himself to be an angel of God sent to bring the joyful tidings, that the covenant which God made with ancient Israel was at hand to be fulfilled, that the preparatory work for the second coming of the Messiah was speedily to commence; that the time was at hand for the gospel, in all its fulness to be preached in power, unto all nations that a people might be prepared for the millennial reign.

I was informed that I was chosen to be an instrument in the hands of God to bring about some of his purposes in this glorious dispensation.

I was also informed concerning the aboriginal inhabitants of this country, and shown who they were, and from whence they came; a brief sketch of their origin, progress, civilization, laws, governments, of their righteousness and iniquity, and the blessings of God being finally withdrawn from them as a people was made known unto me: I was also told where there was deposited some plates on which were engraven an abridgement of the records of the ancient prophets that had existed on this continent. The angel appeared to me three times the same night and unfolded the same things.

In addition to telling Joseph Smith of his calling regarding the Book of Mormon, Moroni introduced the young Prophet to the nature of his life's work: "That the covenant which God made with ancient Israel was at hand to be fulfilled, that the preparatory work for the second coming of the Messiah was speedily to commence; that the time was at hand for the gospel, in all its fulness to be preached in power, unto all nations that a people might be prepared for the millennial reign." Moreover, "I was informed that I was chosen to be an instrument in the hands of God to bring about some of his purposes in this glorious dispensation." 15

Other Sources for Moroni's Visit

In addition to the accounts that came directly from Joseph Smith, other secondary sources exist from people of the Prophet's generation who knew him well, learned of the events directly from him, and published their accounts during the Prophet's lifetime. Foremost among these are accounts written by Oliver Cowdery and Orson Pratt. Oliver Cowdery's renditions of the appearance of Moroni are contained in three articles, in the form of letters to W. W. Phelps, published in 1835 in the Messenger and Advocate. 16 The letters contain lengthy discourses on the restoration of the gospel and the messages conveyed to the Prophet by Moroni. It appears that Oliver Cowdery used the opportunity to present to the Church rather extensive expositions on several significant gospel subjects, focusing on the things that were communicated by Moroni to Joseph Smith. The scriptural content of Moroni's message, as reconstructed by Elder Cowdery, will be discussed briefly below.

Orson Pratt's early reconstruction of Moroni's visit is contained in a thirty-one-page pamphlet which he published in Edinburgh, Scotland in 1840. 17 Much of it is quoted directly from Oliver Cowdery's February 1835 Messenger and Advocate account, while other parts of it clearly paraphrase Elder Cowdery's report. Some of the material, however, appears to be Elder Pratt's recollections of things taught him by the Prophet himself. He summarized as follows:

This glorious being declared himself to be an Angel of God, sent forth, by commandment, to communicate to him that his sins were forgiven, and that his prayers were heard; and also, to bring the joyful tidings, that the covenant which God made with ancient Israel, concerning their posterity, was at hand to be fulfilled; that the great preparatory work for the second coming of the Messiah, was speedily to commence; that the time was at hand for the gospel, in its fulness, to be preached in power unto all nations; that a people might be prepared with faith and righteousness, for the Millennial reign of universal peace and joy.

He was informed, that he was called and chosen to be an instrument in the hands of God, to bring about some of his marvellous purposes in this glorious dispensation. 18

Elder Pratt remarked further that the Prophet received "many instructions concerning things past and to come." 19

The first part of this passage (ending at "his prayers were heard") is very obviously a paraphrase of material from Oliver Cowdery's account. 20 The remainder of the passage is remarkable not for what it quotes but for what is quoted from it. It is apparently a source that the Prophet Joseph Smith had available to him and used when he composed the Wentworth letter in 1842, as can be seen by comparing it with the account of Moroni's visit in that document, above. The Articles of Faith, also part of the Wentworth Letter, similarly show some significant influence from Elder Pratt's pamphlet.

Moroni's Message

Each of Joseph Smith's four known written accounts of his experiences on the night of 21-22 September 1823 bears testimony to the truthfulness of the event. Though they were written under differing circumstances with different audiences in mind, still they give a consistent and clear picture of the events that transpired that night. With the contributions made by others who learned of the occurrence from the Prophet and recorded it themselves, we see a powerful witness of God's work beginning to unfold in the latter days. 21 A brief summary of the comparative contents is instructive. 22

All of the Prophet's accounts but that of 1842 mention that he prayed that night to obtain forgiveness from the Lord. In response to that prayer, the young Prophet witnessed an incredible brightness with the appearance of the heavenly messenger. Three of the Prophet's accounts make mention of the brightness. In the Wentworth Letter he wrote that the brightness gave the appearance that "the house was filled with consuming fire," and "the appearance produced a shock that affected the whole body." The 1832 rendition states simply that the vision was "heavenly." 23 All of the accounts emphasize the coming forth of the sacred record, mentioning something concerning its content and its location in a nearby area. And all of the accounts mention the subsequent visits of Moroni that night.

In addition to mentioning to Joseph Smith that he was forgiven and that he had been chosen to bring forth the sacred record of the ancient Americans, Moroni taught the young Prophet many other things regarding his calling. In 1832 the Prophet reported simply that he learned "many things concerning the inhabitants of the earth." In 1835 he said that Moroni "explained many of the prophesies," citing only one of them specifically. In 1842 he summarized that in preparation for the Second Coming and the Millennium, the covenants with the house of Israel were about to be fulfilled, and the gospel would soon be preached to the nations.

The Scriptures of the Restoration

In the 1838 account, which is found in the Pearl of Great Price, Joseph Smith gave the greatest detail regarding Moroni's teaching. The Prophet recorded that Moroni taught him by quoting and explaining scripture. He mentioned several passages from the Bible that Moroni quoted to him as he trained him for his calling to bring in the last gospel dispensation. A brief discussion of these passages will be instructive.

Malachi 3

Joseph Smith stated simply that Moroni "quoted part of the third chapter of Malachi" (JS-H 36); he did not mention which of the eighteen verses were quoted. Malachi 3 is a very important chapter, as is evidenced by the fact that the resurrected Lord quoted it in its entirety to the Nephites (see 3 Ne. 24). It is rich in powerful passages that have a direct bearing on the Dispensation of the Fulness of Times that was being introduced, in part, by Moroni's visit. Though there is no way to know with certainty which verses were quoted, it is worthy of note that verses 1-4 deal with topics emphasized in the other passages that Moroni quoted to teach the young Prophet, and they are certainly in character with the overall thrust of his message. Malachi 3:1-2 prophesies of the Lord's messenger 24 who would be sent to prepare the way before his glorious coming. 25 It tells of the coming of the Lord "suddenly" to his temple and asks "Who may abide the day of his coming? and who shall stand when he appeareth?" The scriptures do not identify specifically the messenger to whom Malachi referred. Among the heavenly messengers who participated in major ways in the Restoration, the following could be listed: John the Baptist and Peter, James, and John, who brought the priesthood to the new dispensation; Elijah, whose coming is the subject of Malachi's discussion in his next chapter; and Moroni, the first heavenly messenger sent to put the Restoration into motion. Perhaps what Malachi envisioned was not an individual, but the collective ministry of all the messengers who restored doctrine and keys in the last days.

The most likely individual candidate, in my opinion, is Joseph Smith, who is the closest analogue to John the Baptist, the ancient messenger who was sent to prepare the way for the Lord's first coming. As John was sent in that day, Joseph Smith was sent into the world in modern times to establish the work in preparation for the Lord's coming in power and glory. If Moroni quoted that passage, how appropriate it would have been for him to make an allusion to the great latter-day messenger, Joseph Smith. 26 That the reference may go even beyond Joseph Smith to point to the entire work in which he was engaged is suggested in the following passage from the Doctrine and Covenants: "And even so I have sent mine everlasting covenant into the world, to be a light to the world, and to be a standard for my people, and for the Gentiles to seek to it, and to be a messenger before my face to prepare the way before me" (D&C 45:9). Thus the gospel—restored anew in the latter days in preparation for the Lord's return—is a messenger sent before him.

Malachi 3:3 prophesies that the Lord, at his coming, will "purify the sons of Levi," in order that they "may offer unto the Lord an offering of righteousness." If this was among the passages quoted to Joseph Smith by the angel Moroni, then it fits well within the scope of his subject matter. Other passages that the Nephite prophet quoted also deal with the topic of the Second Coming and the purification that will attend it (see Mal. 3:1-2; 4:1; Acts 3:23; Joel 2:28-32). Concerning the purification of the Levites and their future sacrifice, the Prophet Joseph Smith was recorded as saying in 1840:

These sacrifices as well as every ordinance belonging to the priesthood will when the temple of the Lord shall be built and the Sons [of] Levi be purified be fully restored and attended to then [in] all their powers ramifications and blessings—this ever was and will exist when the powers of the Melchisid[ek] Priesthood are sufficiently manifest. Else how can the restitution of all things spoken of by all the Holy Prophets be brought to pass It is not to be understood that, the law of moses will be established again with all its rights [i.e., rites] and variety of ceremonies, this had never been spoken off by the prophets but those things which existed prior [to] Moses's day viz Sacrifice will be continued. 27

Malachi 4:1

The Prophet's statement, "He quoted also the fourth or last chapter of the same prophecy" (JS-H 36), seems to imply that Moroni quoted the fourth chapter of Malachi in its entirety. This is not unlikely, since it contains but six verses. The importance of this chapter is emphasized by the fact that it was also quoted by the resurrected Savior to the descendants of Lehi (see 3 Ne. 25). The Prophet mentioned that Moroni quoted verse 1 differently than it reads in the King James translation. In the earliest manuscript of the Prophet's 1838 history (copied by James Muholland in 1839)—which was the text from which the Joseph Smith—History ultimately was derived—the verse is quoted differently than it stands today in the Pearl of Great Price. The Pearl of Great Price version of this passage is taken from the History of the Church, which derived from Mulholland's manuscript but which also contains editing by later compilers, in some cases after the Prophet's death. The three significant versions of Malachi's prophecy are given as follows:

KJV 1839 Manuscript HC; JS-H

For, behold, the day cometh, For behold the day cometh For behold, the

that shall burn as an oven; that shall burn as an oven, day cometh that

and all the proud, yea, and and all the proud yea and shall burn as an

all that do wickedly, shall all that do wickedly shall oven, and all the

be stubble: and the burn as stubble, for proud, yea, and

day that cometh the day that cometh all that do

shall burn them up, saith shall burn them saith the wickedly shall

the Lord of hosts, that it Lord of hosts, that it burn as stubble;

shall leave them neither shall leave then neither for they

root nor branch. root nor branch. that come

 shall burn them,

 saith the Lord

 of Hosts, that it

 shall leave them

 neither root nor

 branch.

The significant difference in the texts is the reading "They that come shall burn them," in the Pearl of Great Price. In the King James Translation (and in the Hebrew text from which it is translated), as well as in the earliest manuscript of Joseph Smith's dictated record, the next reads: "The day that cometh shall burn them." This is also the reading contained in 3 Ne. 25, in which Jesus quoted the chapter to the early Americans. The 1842 Times and Seasons publication of the same account quotes the verse still differently. 28 The passage in question reads: "They that cometh shall burn them." 29 The origin of the current Pearl of Great Price reading is not known, nor can it be demonstrated at this time whether it was changed to read thus by Joseph Smith himself or by one of the later compilers of history. In any event, the revised text has some interesting scriptural implications.

The setting for the fulfillment of Malachi's prophecy is the destruction of the wicked that will be part of the earth's cleansing process in preparation for the Lord's return in glory. When Jesus returns, the earth must be purified so that only the worthy will be privileged to live in his presence. 30 This process of purification will culminate in the Second Coming (see D&C 87:6-8). The cleansing has begun already, and it will continue as the Lord's coming approaches. As Malachi foretold, "the day that cometh" shall burn up the proud and wicked. The change in the wording in the pearl of Great Price perhaps harmonizes with D&C 63:54, which teaches of the role of the Lord's angels to cleanse the world: "In that day will I send mine angels to pluck out the wicked and cast them into unquenchable fire." In D&C 38:12 we read: "The angels are waiting the great command to reap down the earth, to gather the tares that they may be burned." The Lord revealed in 1832: "The angels are crying unto the Lord day and night, who are ready and waiting to be sent forth to reap down the fields; but the Lord saith unto them, pluck not up the tares while the blade is yet tender (for verily your faith is weak), lest you destroy the wheat also" (D&C 86:5-6).

Malachi 4:2-4

The Prophet did not make reference to Mal. 4:2-4, although, as mentioned, it appears that Moroni quoted the entire chapter to him. Some brief comments will suffice here. Verses 2 and 3 continue the theme of the cleansing that will attend the Second Coming. Recall that the fiery destruction of the wicked in that day was mentioned in verse 1. Now, in verse 2, the Lord foretold the blessed condition of those who "fear [his] name." For them, "the Sun of righteousness [will] arise with healing in his wings." The translators of the King James Bible recognized the term "Sun of righteousness" as a allusion to the Lord; they noted this understanding by the use of the capital letter in the word "sun." Since Biblical Hebrew has no capital letters, the translation is interpretive. Their interpretation is borne out in the Book of Mormon, where the phrase is personified completely and is written, "Son of Righteousness" (3 Ne. 25:2). Verse 3 speaks of the righteous treading on the wicked in that day of the Lord's justice.' 31

Malachi 4:5-6

Moroni quoted this passage quite differently to Joseph Smith than it is recorded in the Bible:

KJV JS-H

Behold, I will send you Elijah the Behold, I will reveal unto you the

prophet before the coming of the Priesthood, by the hand of Elijah the

great and dreadful day of the Lord: prophet, before the coming of the

 great and dreadful day of the Lord.

And he shall turn the heart of the And he shall plant in the hearts of

fathers to the children, and the the children the promises made to the

heart of the children to their fathers, and the hearts of the child-

fathers, lest I come and smite the ren shall turn to their fathers. If

earth with a curse. it were not so, the whole earth would

 be utterly wasted at his coming.

Moroni's quotation of Mal. 4:5-6 is now D&C 2, having been added in that position with the publication of the 1876 Doctrine and Covenants. 32 This was three years before the canonization of what is now known as the Joseph Smith—History in the Pearl of Great Price, from which D&C 2 is an excerpt. An excellent recent study has discussed in detail Moroni's expanded rendition of Malachi's prophecy, 33 so it will not be needed here. Suffice it to say that Mal. 4:5-6 is one of the most important scriptures of the Restoration, as it foretells the creation of the links of priesthood power that bind and seal both ordinances and generations on earth and in heaven. The prophecy of Elijah's coming was fulfilled on 3 April 1836, as the ancient prophet who held the keys of sealing power appeared to the founding prophet of the last dispensation to restore those keys to the earth. 34 As has been pointed out, Elijah's mission is indeed "comprehensive in nature—from uniting their hearts in embracing the gospel and building eternal family units to turning their hearts toward each other through the veil in performing work aimed at saving one another." 35

Isiah 11

Joseph Smith's continuing narrative of Moroni's message reads simply: "He quoted the eleventh chapter of Isaiah, saying that it was about to be fulfilled" (JS-H 40). Isaiah 11 is sixteen verses long, yet from the Prophet's statement it appears that Moroni quoted the entire chapter. Though it is a long passage, still every part of it contains a message that is of tremendous value to the work of the latter days. Isaiah 11 can be outlined as follows:

A. The Stem and Rod of Jesse (vv. 1-5)

B. Millennial Conditions (vv. 6-9)

C. The Root of Jesse, and the Ensign for the nations (vv. 11-16)

This chapter of Isaiah can be studied best in the context of the book of Isaiah itself and in conjunction with D&C 113, which is an explanation of parts of it. 36 It holds a profound position in the context of Moroni's visit to the Prophet Joseph Smith at the beginning of the Restoration. In D&C 113, three questions are asked concerning Isaiah 11, to each of which an inspired answer is given. From these questions we learn the identities of two individuals mentioned in Isaiah's prophecy. The "Stem of Jesse," mentioned in Isa. 11:1, is Christ (D&C 113:2). As I have explained elsewhere, it seems clear that the "rod out of the stem of Jesse" (Isa. 11:1) and the "root of Jesse" (Isa. 11:10) both refer to the Prophet Joseph Smith. 37

The attributes mentioned in vv. 2-5 of Isaiah's prophecy are those of Jesus Christ, and they refer particularly to Christ in his millennial reign, as the following verses indicate. Grammatically, however, the "rod out of the stem of Jesse" is the subject of the sentences contained in those verses. Since Joseph Smith is identified as "a servant in the hands of Christ" (D&C 113:4), just as the "rod" or twig grows out of the stem and derives its strength from it, so also do Joseph Smith's prophetic attributes, callings, and authorities stem from those of his Master.

One of the most powerful of millennial prophecies in the standard works is found in Isa. 11:6-9. Here we read of the wolf dwelling with the lamb and the kid with the leopard. It will be the time in which "the earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord, as the waters cover the sea" (Isa. 11:9). That day, and the day of Restoration that will precede it, will be the days of gathering. And the gathering is the topic of the rest of the verses in Isa. 11:

And in that day there shall be a root of Jesse, which shall stand for an ensign of the people; to it shall the Gentiles seek: and his rest shall be glorious.

And it shall come to pass in that day, that the Lord shall set his hand again the second time to recover the remnant of his people. . . .

And he shall set up an ensign for the nations, and shall assemble the outcasts of Israel, and gather together the dispersed of Judah from the four corners of the earth (Isa. 11:10-12).

As the Doctrine and Covenants explains, the "root of Jesse" mentioned in verse 10 is the Prophet Joseph Smith, "unto whom rightly belongs the priesthood, 38 and the keys of the kingdom, for an ensign, and for the gathering of my people in the last days" (D&C 113:6). It is significant to note that in verse 10 of Isaiah's prophecy the "root of Jesse" will "stand for an ensign of the people." The restored gospel of Jesus Christ is, in the fullest sense, the "ensign for the nations," yet the latter-day messenger of that gospel, the Prophet Joseph Smith, cannot be separated from the message itself. Gathering to the gospel ensign will be Israel (the scattered tribes of the north, including Ephraim; Isa. 11:12), Judah (Isa. 11:12), and the Gentiles (Isa. 11:10). The gathering has begun already and will continue in future years—culminating in the Millennium. It will be during the Millennium that the conditions that Isaiah foretold next will exist: "The envy also of Ephraim shall depart, and the adversaries of Judah shall be cut off: Ephraim shall not envy Judah, and Judah shall not vex Ephraim" (Isa. 11:13). In the Millennium the Kingdoms of Judah and Ephraim will be united again; this time they will be one kingdom, and the Lord himself shall be their king (see Ezek. 37:21-22; Jer. 23:3-6).

Isaiah's prophecy ends with the message that the Lord will bring the children of Israel to their promised land again, gathering them home from their lands of dispersion just as he had gathered their fathers anciently from bondage in Egypt. He described it in striking metaphor: "And there shall be an "highway" for the remnant of his people, which shall be left, from Assyria; like as it was to Israel in the day that he came up out of the land of Egypt" (Isa. 11:16). Other prophecies of the return of Israel should be understood in light of this passage, particularly D&C 133:26-27, in which the "highway" metaphor is also used (cf. Isa. 19:21-25, especially v. 23). It is clear from the passage that Isaiah uses the term "highway" to refer to the divinely provided means of return. As he provided a "highway" for the return of Israel in Moses' day, so also will be provide a "highway" for the return of Israel in the last days. "Assyria" in the prophecy in Isa. 11:16 simply represents the lands of Israel's dispersion in the last days. It thus seems clear that the smiting of the rocks, the ice flowing down at the presence of the returning Israelites, and the "highway [which] shall be cast up in the midst of the great deep" (D&C 133:26-27) are all means of expressing in metaphorical fashion the divinely provided and directed return of Israel from the lands of its long dispersion.

Truly Isa. 11 is a magnificent prophecy, emphasizing some of the great events of the Dispensation of the Fulness of Times and the millennial era which will follow it. Moroni's quoting of this chapter to Joseph Smith taught the young Prophet of his role in the latter days and the greater works that would be built on the foundation that he laid.

Acts 3:22-23

According to Joseph Smith, Acts 3:22-23 were quoted to him by Moroni "precisely as they stand in our New Testament" (JS-H 40). In this passage from the book of Acts, the Apostle Peter paraphrased the words of Moses, in which the ancient prophet foretold the calling of a great prophet after his own time. The passage from Deuteronomy and Peter's paraphrase from Acts are presented below for comparison:

Deut. 18:18-19 Acts 3:22-23

I will raise them up a Prophet from For Moses truly said unto the fathers,

among their brethren, like unto thee, A prophet shall the Lord your God

and will put my words in his mouth; raise up unto you of your brethren,

and he shall speak unto them all like unto me; him shall ye hear in all

that I shall command him. things whatsoever he shall say unto

 you.

And it shall come to pass, that And it shall come to pass, that every

whosoever will not hearken unto my soul, which will not hear that

words which he shall speak in my prophet, shall be destroyed from

name, I will require it of him. among the people.

Moroni taught Joseph Smith that the prophet mentioned by Moses is Christ, which is substantiated elsewhere in the scriptures (1 Ne. 22:20-21; 3 Ne. 20:23). It appears, however, that Moroni's purpose in quoting the passage had more to do with the second half of it, which tells of the destruction of those who would refuse to obey the Lord. Moroni told Joseph Smith that the day had not yet arrived when "they who would not hear his voice should be cut off from among the people." But it "soon would come" (JS-H 40). Moroni was foretelling the destruction of the wicked that would attend the coming of the Lord, a common theme in his message to the young prophet of the last days, as we have seen already (see also Mal. 3:1-3; 4:1-3; and Joel 2:28-32, also quoted by Moroni). Since only the worthy will be allowed to live on earth during the period of the Lord's millennial presence, those who refuse to repent will be destroyed.

Joel 2:28-32

The final passage specified by Joseph Smith is also a reference to great latter-day events that would commence with the restoration of the gospel. Joel prophesied:

And it shall come to pass afterward, that I will pour out my spirit upon all flesh; and your sons and your daughters shall prophesy, your old men shall dream dreams, your young men shall see visions:

And also upon the servants and upon the handmaids in those days will I pour out my spirit (Joel 2:28-29).

It is well known that this passage was used by Peter to apply to the outpouring of the Spirit on the day of Pentecost (Acts 2:16-18). The phenomenon that Peter witnessed was the same as that which was to be in the last days, but it is clear from Moroni's statement that the actual fulfillment of Joel's words would be in the latter-day setting. He told Joseph Smith concerning Joel's prophecy: "This was not yet fulfilled, but was soon to be" (JS-H 41). If, on 21 September 1823, Joel's words had not yet been fulfilled but would be soon, then when can we look for their fulfillment? The Millennium will be the greatest day of the fulfillment of such things, since it will be the day in which "the earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord, as the waters cover the sea" (Isa. 11:9). In that day, so great will be the power of the Spirit among men that no one will need to warn his brother, "saying, Know the Lord: for they shall all know me, from the least of them unto the greatest of them, saith the Lord" (Jer. 31:34). Yet prior to that day would come the day of Restoration, in which all of the spiritual gifts known among men of earlier times would be restored again to earth. The day of Restoration—the day in which we now live—is the prelude to the Millennium, and many of the gifts that will be had in such abundance in that blessed setting are indeed had among the faithful today. It is not unlikely that the time of the pouring forth of the Lord's Spirit, which Moroni said "was soon to be," has now arrived. It began perhaps on that very night—as the heavens were opened, the Lord began to communicate with a latter-day prophet, and the doctrines of the gospel began to be made known again among men. Since that time priesthood authority—the power of God—has been restored, and the gifts of the Spirit have been manifest in the Lord's Church as he has poured out his Spirit upon his sons and his daughters. Surely Joel's prophecy was appropriate to the beginning of the Restoration and the calling of a new prophet, Joseph Smith.

What are the spiritual blessings of which Joel prophesied? Most often when Latter-day Saints think of such things they envision miraculous outpourings of the Spirit such as visions, healings, and speaking in tongues. Though these are tremendous manifestations, the blessings of which Joel spoke are not restricted to these. Perhaps the greatest fulfillment of these words is in the quiet witness that faithful Saints receive in answer to their humble prayers concerning the truthfulness of the gospel and the divine mission of the Church. The most powerful manifestation of the Spirit today is the personal revelation that we call a testimony, which is granted freely by the Lord to the sons, daughters, old men, young men, servants, and handmaids of the Church. God's Spirit is at work among the Latter-day Saints as they quietly "prophesy"—enjoy personal revelation in their lives—"dream dreams," "see visions," and otherwise enjoy the blessings of the Gift of the Holy Ghost. Truly the Lord is pouring out his Spirit on those who serve him—even today.

The other verses from the book of Joel that Moroni quoted (Joel 2:30-32) deal with the signs and wonders that will be shown at the end of the world, including "blood, and fire, and pillars of smoke." 39 The prophecy ends with the glad message that "whosever shall call on the name of the Lord shall be delivered," and that safety will be found in Zion. Then Joseph Smith reported: "And he [Moroni] further stated that the fulness of the Gentiles was soon to come in" (JS-H 41). It is unlikely that the young Prophet knew much about "the fulness of the Gentiles" at that time, but as the doctrines were restored in subsequent years, this too was made known (especially in the Book of Mormon and D&C 45). 40

The final item of doctrinal instruction recorded by the Prophet came during Moroni's second appearance to Joseph Smith. The account reads: "He informed me of great judgments which were coming upon the earth, with great desolations by famine, sword, and pestilence; and that these grievous judgments would come on the earth in this generation" (JS-H 45).

Other Passages of Scripture

After reviewing Moroni's recitations of scripture, Joseph Smith remarked regarding the angel's teaching: "He quoted many other passages of scripture, and offered many explanations which cannot be mentioned here" (JS-H 41). The Prophet never specified what those "other passages of scripture" were. As was mentioned earlier, in 1835 Oliver Cowdery wrote three articles in the Kirtland Messenger and Advocate regarding the appearance of Moroni to Joseph Smith. 41 In two of those articles (February and April) he included scriptures that presumably were quoted or paraphrased by Moroni to the Prophet. All of the articles were written in the form of epistles addressed to W. W. Phelps, and they are characterized by Elder Cowdery's rich literary style. Obviously, Oliver Cowdery was not present with the Prophet on the occasion, so the account is secondary. Yet it is not too much to assume that Joseph Smith had rehearsed the event to his colleague in the ministry on numerous occasions. 42 In the February and July articles, Elder Cowdery's reconstructions of Moroni's words are presented clearly in quotation marks. It is thus quite clear when the speaker is intended to be Oliver Cowdery and when it is Moroni. The April article, however, presents special problems. And that is the article that is of greatest interest to this study, because it contains over two dozen Bible passages quoted in the context of Moroni's visit. In the April 1835 article it is not clear when Oliver Cowdery is the originator of the words or when he is quoting (or reconstructing) Moroni. And unlike in the other articles, there are no quotation marks to assist the reader. Perhaps Elder Cowdery did not use them in order to alert the reader that the message was reconstructed from his own understanding of the matter and not necessarily a historical transcript of the event. At the beginning of his discussion of Moroni's words to the Prophet, Elder Cowdery wrote: "I have thought best to give a farther detail of the heavenly message, and if I do not give it in the precise words, shall strictly confine myself to the facts in substance." 43 At the end of the account he wrote: "I have now given you a rehearsal of what was communicated to our brother. . . . I may have missed in arrangement in some instances, but the principle is preserved." 44 How well he succeeded only God, Moroni, and Joseph Smith know for sure. As Milton Backman has pointed out, "It is not clear whether Oliver is quoting Moroni or merely explaining, with scriptural references, themes emphasized by Moroni." 45 Perhaps the biblical passages cited in Elder Cowdery's account should therefore be viewed with these mild cautions in mind, recalling that it is a second-hand treatment of an event at which only Moroni and Joseph Smith were participants.

Following are the scriptures included by Oliver Cowdery in his reconstructions of Moroni's discourses to Joseph Smith. Although three of Oliver Cowdery's articles deal with Moroni's appearance on the night of 21-22 September 1823, only the two cited below contain Bible passages quoted by the angel. The passages are listed here in the order of the occurrence in the accounts.

Messenger and Advocate 1.5 (February 1835): 77-80.

1 Con 127-29

Isa. 29:14

Isa. 29:13

Isa. 29:11

Messenger and Advocate 1.7 (April 1835): 108-12

Psalm 100:1-2

Psalm 107:1-7

Psalm 144:11-12

Joel 2:28

Psalm 144:13

Psalm 146:10

Isa. 1:7

Isa. 1:23-24

Deut. 32:23-24

Isa. 1:25-26

Psalm 107:7

Isa. 2:1-4

Isa. 4:5-6

Jer. 31:27-28

Jer. 31:32-33

Jer. 30:18-21

Jer. 31:1

Jer. 31:8

Isa. 43:6

Jer. 50:4-5

Jer. 31:9

Jer. 31:6

Isa. 2:3

Isa. 11:15-16

Jer. 16:16

Deut. 32:43

It can be noted that only two of the passages cited by Oliver Cowdery were mentioned in the Prophet's account: Joel 2:28 and Isa. 11. Furthermore, Elder Cowdery's report does not mention four of the seven passages specifically mentioned by Joseph Smith. It is also significant to note that with the exception of the introductory statement concerning the "foolish" and "weak" confounding the "wise" and "mighty" (1 Cor. 1:27-29), all thirty-five of the passages cited by Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery came from the Old Testament (Acts 3:22-23 is a paraphrase of Deut. 18:18-19).

The Mission of the Latter Days

Although Joseph Smith's prayer as he went to bed on that autumn night was for "a manifestation" to know of his "state and standing" before the Lord (JS-H 29), what he received, in addition to that, was a glorious introduction to the mission of the Dispensation of the Fulness of Times. Moroni's message to the young Prophet outlined not only the calling of Joseph Smith, but also the calling of the Church and kingdom of God from the time of the Restoration until the Millennium. Significantly, the communication was presented through scripture, as the messenger from the Lord taught out of the Bible by quoting passages from other prophets. Since the resurrected Jesus also taught by quoting and expounding scripture, during his appearance to the children of Lehi in the Americas (see 3 Ne. 22, 24-25; also 3 Ne. 23; cf. Luke 24:27), we can view this method of teaching as the model which all gospel instruction should follow. And, significantly, it is the pattern followed throughout the career of Joseph Smith. 46

From the scriptures quoted to Joseph Smith, we can see that the young Prophet was instructed in the following aspects of the mission of the Church in the last days:

1. The calling of the Prophet Joseph Smith (Mal. 3:1; Isa. 11:1, 10-12).

2. The opening of the heavens with the Restoration (Joel 2:28-29).

3. Restoration of priesthood and sealing keys (Mal. 4:5-6).

4. The gathering of the elect, both Israelite and Gentile (Isa. 11:10-16).

5. Destruction and purification prior to and during the Lord's coming (Mal. 3:2-3; 4:1, 3; Acts 3:22-23; Joel 2:30-31).

6. Deliverance in Zion (Mal. 4:2; Joel 2:32).

7. The Second Coming (Mal. 3:1-2).

8. The Millennium (Mal. 3:3-4; 4:2; Isa. 11:1-9).

Interestingly, all of the biblical passages presented in Oliver Cowdery's accounts fit into these categories, with only the following exceptions: Elder Cowdery included some scriptures that tell of the scattering of Israel—as a background to the discussion of the return—and he quoted one verse from Isaiah (29:11) that deals with the coming forth of the Book of Mormon. In my view, his consistency with the message as related by Joseph Smith adds to the credibility of his reconstructions.

Conclusion

Moroni's appearance to Joseph Smith holds an important place in our history as Latter-day Saints. With his coming, the formal process of restoring lost truths and educating the Prophet of the Dispensation of the Fulness of Times was initiated. Under the care and instruction of the great prophet of ancient America, the great prophet of the last days received training and guidance that ultimately will lead to what we call the "restoration of all things." To these greater restorations, Moroni's visit was a prelude—an instructional session from which Joseph Smith and many generations of those who follow him received the plan for the course that they must pursue in the Lord's service. Another great modern prophet. Spencer W. Kimball, has told us in recent years: "We are impressed that the mission of the Church is threefold: to proclaim the gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ to every nation, kindred, tongue, and people; to perfect the Saints . . .; to redeem the dead." 47 This ministry, building on the foundation outlined by Moroni, is our responsibility as the Church of Jesus Christ in the last days. Our calling is to fulfill the commission that we received collectively under the hands of the messenger of the Restoration, Moroni son of Mormon, and the presiding prophet of the last days, Joseph Smith. As the Prophet himself proclaimed:

No unhallowed hand can stop the work from progressing, persecutions may rage, mobs may combine, armies may assemble, calumny may defame, but the truth of God will go forth boldly, nobly, and independent till it has penetrated every continent, visited every clime, swept every country, and sounded in every ear, till the purposes of God shall be accomplished and the great Jehovah shall say the work is done. 48

NOTES

 1. Dean C. Jessee, ed., The Personal Writings of Joseph Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1984), p. 6; also "Early Accounts of the First Vision," page 307 herein; original spelling and punctuation retained on all material quoted in this article.

 2. Ibid.

 3. Ibid.

 4. Ibid.

 5. For a discussion of the long and significant mission of the prophet Moroni, see H. Donl Peterson, Moroni: Ancient Prophet, Modern Messenger (Bountiful, Ut.: Horizon Publishers, 1983).

 6. See Jessee, The Personal Writings, pp. 3-8.

 7. See Jessee, "Early Accounts," pp. 304-7 herein.

 8. Perhaps the appearance of the Father and the Son in 1820 can be called "the announcement" of the Restoration. In that majestic vision a tremendous amount of gospel truth was brought to light (for which see Larry E. Dahl, "The Theological Significance of the First Vision," found herein). With Moroni's coming the systematic process of restoring the gospel began, as the last prophet of ancient America tutored the first prophet of the last days.

 9. See Jessee, The Personal Writings, pp. 74-79.

 10. The Prophet spent parts of three days conversing with Matthews, who was a well-known religious eccentric of the day, as well as being a former convict. He claimed to be a literal descendant of the ancient apostle Matthias as well as being his reincarnation. Joseph Smith's final journal entry regarding the visit reads as follows: "After breckfast I told him, that my God told me that his God is the Devil, and I could not keep him any longer, and he must depart, and so I for once cast out the Devil in bodily shape, & I believe a murderer" (Jessee, The Personal Writings, p. 79).

 11. See Jessee, "Early Accounts," pp. 308-9 herein.

 12. Joseph Smith, History of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, ed. B. H. Roberts, 7 vols. (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1957), herein HC.

 13. Times and Seasons 3.11 (1 April 1842): 749; and 3.12 (15 April 1842): 753-54.

 14. See Edward J. Brandt, "The Origin and Importance of the Articles of Faith," found herein.

 15. Jessee, The Personal Writings, p. 214.

 16. "Letter IV. To W. W. Phelps, Esq.," Latter Day Saints' Messenger and Advocate 1.5 (February 1835): 78-80; "Letter VI. To W. W. Phelps, Esq.," ibid., 1.7 (April 1835): 108-12; "Letter VII. To W. W. Phelps, Esq.," ibid., 1.10 (July 1835): 156-59.

 17. A [sic] Interesting Account of Several Remarkable Visions, and of the Late Discovery of Ancient American Records (Edinburgh, Ballantyne and Hughes, 1840).

 18. Ibid., pp. 6-7.

 19. Ibid., p. 7.

 20. Messenger and Advocate 1.5 (February 1835): 79.

 21. For an analgamated version of the material from the Prophet's four accounts of the event, along with additional information from some of the Prophet's contemporaries, see Million V. Backman, Jr., Eyewitness Accounts of the Restoration (Orem, Ut.: Grand in Book Co., 1983), pp. 33-56.

 22. For a more detailed comparion, see Ibid, pp. 205-8.

 23. In Oliver Cowdery's words, "From that glory which surrounded [the messenger] the room was lit up to perfect brilliancy, so that darkness wholly disappeared" (Messenger and Advocate 1.10 [July 1835]: 156, emphasis added).

 24. It is interesting to note that the name Malachi means "My Messenger." Some scholars believe that it is a pen name—based on Mal. 3:1—and not the ancient prophet's actual name.

 25. Note how this terminology is used to describe John the Baptist, the messenger sent to prepare the way before the Lord's coming in mortality (see Matt. 11:10; Mark 1:2). The context here in Malachi is clearly the Second Coming, you the passage is rightly applied to John, who prepared the way for the Lord in morality just as the latter-day messenger will prepare the way for the Lord's coming in glory.

 26. For additional discussion, see Joseph Fielding Smith, Doctrines of Salvation, comp. Bruce R. McConkie, 3 vols. (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1954-56) 3:10-12; and Bruce R. McConkie, Mormon Doctrine, 2nd ed. (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1965), p. 488.

 27. Recorded by Robert B. Thompson, original punctuation and spelling retained; Andrew F. Ehat and Lyndon W. Cook, eds., The Words of Joseph Smith (Provo, Ut.: Religious Studies Center, Brigham Young University, 1980), pp. 43-44; and 50, note 1. Cf. TPJS, pp. 172-73. For additional discussion of the Prophet's statement regarding the future Levite sacrifice, see Joseph Fielding Smith, Doctrines of Salvation, 3:93-94; and Bruce R. McConkie, Mormon Doctrine, p. 666.

 28. Times and Seasons 3.12 (15 April 1842): 753.

 29. The strange grammar of this verse may simply be the result of an error that originated during the typesetting process.

 30. See Kent P. Jackson, "The Signs of the Times: Be Not Troubled," in Studies in Scripture, Vol. 1: The Doctrine and Covenants, ed. Robert L. Millet and Kent P. Jackson (Sandy, Ut.: Randall Book Co., 1984), pp. 186-200.

 31. Verse 4 is a reminder to observe the statutes of the Law of Moses. This verse may not have been quoted by Moroni at all, and it seems out of character with the rest of Moroni's message and, in fact, out of context in Mal. 4. Perhaps this is further evidence for my belief that chapters 3 and 4 of Malachi are a collection of short utterances—a quote book—and not a continuous prophecy, which seems to be borne out in the incongruous nature of those two chapters. It has seemed to some that the short quotes may not even be those of Malachi himself. Elder Bruce R. McConkie has suggested that Malachi quoted (specifically in Mal. 4:2) from the writings of the ancient prophet Zenos, whose writings were contained on the brass plates but are not found in the Bible as it stands today ("The Doctrinal Restoration," in The Joseph Smith Translation: The Restoration of Plain and Precious Things, ed. Monte S. Nyman and Robert L. Millet [Provo, Ut.: Religious Studies Center, Brigham Young University, 1985]).

 32. Robert J. Woodford, "The Doctrine and Covenants: A Historical Overview," in Studies in Scripture, Vol. 1, pp. 14-15.

 33. See Charles R. Harrell, "Turning the Hearts of the Fathers and the Children," in ibid., pp. 57-63.

 34. See Milton V. Backman, Jr., and Robert L. Millet, "Heavenly Manifestations in the Kirtland Temple," in ibid., pp. 426-29.

 35. Harrell, in ibid., pp. 61-62.

 36. See Kent P. Jackson, "Revelations Concerning Isaiah," in ibid., pp. 330-33.

 37. Ibid.

 38. See ibid., pp. 326-32.

 39. For further discussion of the calamities of the last days and the signs of the times, see George A. Horton, Jr., "Knowing the Calamity," in ibid., pp. 44-47, and note 13. See also Kent P. Jackson, "The Signs of the Times: Be Not Troubled," in ibid., pp. 186-200.

 40. See Kent P. Jackson, ibid., pp. 188-89.

 41. See note 16, above.

 42. Oliver Cowdery had been the Prophet's scribe and was designated "Second Elder" of the Church at its organization. At the time he wrote the articles about the beginnings of the Church, he was (in addition to being editor of the Messenger and Advocate) Assistant President of the Church.

 43. Messenger and Advocate 1.7 (April 1835): 109.

 44. Ibid., p. 112.

 45. Eyewitness Accounts, p. 41. Concerning this same matter, H. Donl Peterson wrote: "It is this writer's opinion that Oliver Cowdery's account is a poetic rendition of Moroni's message, utilizing a considerable amount of literary license" (Moroni: Ancient Prophet, Modern Messenger, p. 102).

 46. See the Prophet's addresses in Ehat and Cook, The Words of Joseph Smith.

 47. Spencer W. Kimball, The Teachings of Spencer W. Kimball, ed. Edward L. Kimball (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1982), pp. 434-35; also Conference Report, April 1981, p. 3.

 48. Jessee, The Personal Writings, pp. 218-19.

 
 
© 1985 Deseret Book Company 

Printed from Gospelink.com
