Stephen R. Covey, How to Succeed with People ( 1971)

2

Be Strong in Hard Moments

There are certain moments in every person's day that, if excellently used, will determine the direction and quality of all the other moments. These certain moments are few in number—sometimes very few. They are necessarily hard moments, testing moments.

Missionary work illustrates this well. There are generally three crucial moments in a missionary's day, and if he can be strong or true in these three hard moments, everything else tends to fall into place successfully.

These three moments are (1) getting up at 6:00 A.M.; (2) the initial moment of contacting; and (3) the moment when he gets an investigator to make a commitment.

Isn't it also true that if we, as parents or students, are courageous in just a few hard things each day, all else will fall into place? Sounds simple, I know, but I believe the answer is yes. The proof is in the doing, and this is not simple.

Certainly these things vary with each individual. Each must examine himself to find the few crucial daily moments that determine so much else.

Consider three things, three hard moments that are so basic and so determining for so many.

First, getting up in the morning when we know we should.

Always being a few minutes behind in our work is a kind of emotional mortgage on the day. Tyrannized by the clock, we interpret almost every event selfishly. We fret and worry. We become overly impatient with weakness and mistakes, our own as well as those of others. Interruptions and inconveniences are resented. No time for kindness, for listening, for extra service. The spirit of rushing and hurrying destroys a good family spirit.

The consequences of a few minutes more sleep are often so exhausting!

Second, making reconciliation to the Lord's will.

To reconcile means to bring together, to unite, to bring back into harmony and friendship. If we are not careful to daily drink of the "living waters," we can easily and slowly become strangers to the Lord and his ways and to our own divine identity and purpose. We learn his ways from prayerfully searching the scriptures. Listening then to the still small voice of conscience and then committing in secret prayer to obey its promptings that day complete this reconciliation.

Third, to control our tongue.

To not say the unkind or critical thing, particularly when provoked and/or fatigued, is a supreme kind of self-mastery.

President McKay taught, "Never must there be expressed in a Latter-day Saint home an oath, a condemnatory term, an expression of anger or jealousy or hatred. Control it! Do not express it! You do what you can to produce peace and harmony no matter what you may suffer."

As in all things, the Savior is again the perfect model of this principle. Everything culminated in his supreme tests at Gethsemane and Calvary. We are all beneficiaries of his being strong and true in that transcendent moment of eternity.

To simply understand the pervasive power of a few moments in a day is highly motivating in itself, in marshaling and unifying our will, our nerve, and our energy.

Someone rightly defined courage as the quality of every quality at its highest testing point.
