Stephen R. Covey, How to Succeed with People ( 1971)

3

Work on the Roots

What would you think if a person were to construct a dam, for aesthetic reasons, on a mountain top instead of the base of a canyon?

Or what would you think if one were to attempt to build an internal combustion engine on the principle that gases contract when heated?

In either case you would answer that the individuals were ignoring basic natural laws: gravity and expansion of gas when heated. Neither the dam nor the engine would work, regardless of how beautifully located or well constructed.

These two farfetched examples illustrate a simple point: to make things work we must understand and work with, not against, the nature of things.

Actually, these examples are not so farfetched after all. The history of every field of science gives abundant evidence of how new scientific discoveries upturn and make obsolete many well-established theories and practices. Many of the great scientific breakthroughs have been break-withs.

Take the applied science of medicine as another example. In tribal days witch doctoring was the accepted thing. The natives thought they understood the nature of things—that the evil spirits caused disease and that the witch doctor possessed magical powers. To them, these ideas or assumptions were facts. To us today these assumptions are superstitions, born of ignorance and fear. Pure research into the nature of things has enabled applied medical science to work seeming miracles, extending our life-span twice that of our forebears several generations ago.

This thinking has direct application to the fields of human behavior, such as family relations, communications, and leadership, for, as with the physical and medical science analogies, if our theories of reality (and we are all acting on them) aren't accurate, we're in trouble.

The vital question, therefore, is: What is the nature of things regarding man and his relationships?

Our answers come from basically two sources: man's discoveries and God's revelations. If these two ever seem to conflict, revelations must take precedence, for the tools of science are finite and cannot refute or explain the infinite.

To deny or to ignore what has been revealed about man doesn't change the nature of things one bit! It simply becomes another case of witch doctoring.

The following basic realities about man have been revealed and have profound, far-reaching consequences in our discussions of human relations.

Based on the above analysis, I offer two personal convictions. First, the real nature of our problems is spiritual.

That is, the roots of our problems lie in our disobeying natural laws—knowingly or unknowingly.

Examine any problems you face from that standpoint, whether family finances, relationship breakdowns between husband and wife or parent and child, fear of failure, obesity, confusion in making decisions, despair over world conditions, or whatever.

Start with the surface complaint and ask what caused it. Then ask what caused that and what caused that and so on. Such causal-chain thinking will eventually lead back to show either a lack of understanding of reality (life's purpose, man's nature, the governing laws) or a lack of commitment and self-discipline to live accordingly—thus procrastination, impatience, overeating, selfishness, etc.

Notice how most of these discussions eventually return to the fundamental principles of understanding or commitment or discipline, expressed in various ways.

Second, the basic solution to our problems also lies within ourselves. We can't escape the nature of things. Like it or not, realize it or not, God's authority is in us. That is, his nature, his laws, and our conscience.

It's futile to fight our battles on the wrong battlefields. We must work on causes, not symptoms. Taking aspirin for a headache won't eliminate future headaches.

The spiritual resources available to us are fathomless and possess infinite wisdom and power. But the initiative, the first step, lies with us.

"For every thousand hacking at the leaves of evil, there is one striking at the root." (Thoreau.)
