Stephen R. Covey, How to Succeed with People ( 1971)

4

The Power of Self-Understanding

One of the principal reasons we have a hard time understanding others is because we lack understanding of ourselves.

A little thinking will reveal why this is so. The very tool we use to understand another is within us, and if we are confused about ourselves—the lens we look through—obviously, inevitably, we will also be cloudy about others.

In light of this idea, study the following story of a woman who came to better understand her family problems and who changed her life through gaining precious insights about herself and acting on them.

"For years and years I fought with my children and they fought with each other. I was constantly judging and criticizing and scolding.

"I knew something had to be done. But I didn't know what. I did know my incessant critical nagging was hurting their self-esteem and the whole spirit of our home, causing much of the contention.

"Again and again I would resolve and try to change. And just as often I would fall back. Then I'd feel awful—guilty—angry with myself. I hated myself, and as I saw my own weaknesses in my children's behavior, I took out my self-anger on them. Then I'd feel more guilty, and the more guilt I felt the more anger I expressed.

"Eventually I decided to make my problems a matter of sustained and specific and earnest prayer. Gradually I came to two insights about my real motives and reasons for my negative critical behavior.

"First, I came to see more clearly the impact of my own childhood home experiences. Our home was broken in almost every way and eventually ended in divorce. I can't ever remember seeing my parents talk through their problems and differences. They would either argue and fight or they'd angrily separate. The silent treatment—sometimes for days.

"So when I had to deal with the same issues and problems with my own family, I had no model or example to follow. I really didn't know what to do. Instead of finding a model or fighting it through within myself, I'd take out my confusion and frustration on the kids. And yet, as much as I didn't like it, I found myself dealing with my children just as my parents did with us.

"One more immensely helpful self-insight came to me. I was trying to win, to wrest social approval out of my own children's behavior. Because I was constantly fearful of being embarrassed, I constantly instructed and threatened and bribed and manipulated to get my kids to behave—all so others would think well of me.

"I could then see, in my own hunger for approval, that I was shielding my own children from growth and responsibility. I was helping cause the very thing I feared the most—irresponsible behavior."

I asked this woman how these two self-insights helped her.

She answered, "They've made all the difference in the world. I now realize I have to conquer my own problems within myself instead of taking them out on others.

"My unhappy, confused childhood inclined me to be negative but it didn't force me. I still had my agency. I could choose to respond differently. It was futile to blame my parents or my circumstances.

"Oh, it was hard to admit this to myself—very hard! I struggled with years of accumulated pride. But once I swallowed the bitter pill, I had a marvelously free feeling. I was in control. I could choose a better way. I was responsible for myself.

"I've now learned to retire frequently to myself and win my own battles privately, to get my motives straight. And now when I get into a frustrating situation I stop. I pause. I back away from impulsively speaking or striking out. I try for perspective and control. Sometimes I simply go alone and struggle the thing through on my own. I find new models, new examples to follow, the perfect one being the Savior. The scriptures and prayer have helped greatly."

Look at the miracles these two self-insights produced! This woman's new understanding of herself taught her how to use it to control herself. It also inspired her to take responsibility for her own behavior and attitudes, for both her actions and her reactions.

We simply do not win our own battles on someone else's battlefield.

"The greatest battles of life are fought out daily in the silent chambers of the soul." (David O. McKay.)

Private victories precede public victories.
