Stephen R. Covey, How to Succeed with People ( 1971)

5

Patience: Its Nature and Its Growth

Many admit to being impatient. "I have some virtues but patience isn't one of them. I wish I could develop more patience," we say.

Not knowing exactly how to develop patience, we generally forget about it and go about our lives in the spirit of rush and hurry, critical of the slowness and weaknesses of others. Then, in times of stress, particularly around loved ones, our impatient mood surfaces and our temper flashes. We may say something we don't really mean or intend to say—all out of proportion to reality.

Or we may become sullen, slowly burning inside and communicating through emotion and attitude, rather than words, eloquent messages of criticalness, judgment, and rejection. Our harvest is bitter: hurt feelings, strained relationships, little growth. Again seeing the fruits of our impatience, we repeat, "I wish I were more patient," almost as if this were a quirk of our nature we could do nothing about.

Let's examine two questions: What is patience? and How can we develop it?

For instance, what kind of father would slap or criticize or otherwise punish his infant son when he totters and falls while learning to walk? Why is this extreme foolishness so self-evident to us? Because we all know that falling is part of learning to walk. We know if we punish falling, the boy will stop trying. Unless he tries he'll never learn to walk. He'll just crawl.

This simple analogy can be extended to include all learning and development. Patience accepts the reality of life that in all things there is a process, a step one, step two, step three process that cannot be ignored or bypassed.

Faith embodies patience. It is a contradiction for someone to think or feel he has faith but lacks patience. Faith deals with the unseen. The father helps and encourages his tottering son to walk. Why? Because of what he sees? No, for he sees only falling. He does it because of what he does not see, because of what he believes. He believes in his son's potential to walk and he acts accordingly. That's faith. It's also hope. That's why he patiently encourages and waits.

Patience obviously, therefore, is not indifference, is not sullen endurance, is not a matter of doing nothing. Patience is faith in action. Patience is emotional diligence.

Consider the scriptural definition of patience: longsuffering. We suffer inside when we want something now and can't have it. We suffer inside when we have to wait for someone to bungle through the learning process to do their job. "It's easier to do it myself," we reason. We suffer inside when the results we want, and are judged by, require the willing cooperation of those who either don't know how or don't care.

The willingness to suffer inside so others can grow takes love. As we become aware of our suffering, we learn about ourselves and our own motives and weaknesses. Knowledge of ourselves and life's processes, combined with self-restraint, produces the sense and ability to know when to do what. This is wisdom.

What a small price such long-suffering is for such huge gains! "Patience is bitter but its fruit is sweet." (Rousseau.)

Similarly, there are three aspects in the development of patience fiber.

First, purpose and a commitment to it. Those who would like more patience but lack a strong desire and sense of purpose (the way of it) will be easily uprooted under the first strain.

Second, resistance. Patience is not developed as knowledge is acquired from books, but only under testing and strain. Life provides abundant opportunities to practice patience—to stretch the emotional fiber—from waiting for a late person or plane to listening quietly to your child's feelings and experiences when other things are pressing. Cheerfully bearing the little annoyances and trials of every day builds and strengthens the emotional fiber for times of real stress and calamity.

Third, be patient with the development of patience itself. Otherwise, you'll give up on both the effort and yourself. The roots of impatience lie in other weaknesses and habits and are not pulled up without some pain and consistent effort through time. Have faith in your own unseen potential.
