Stephen R. Covey, How to Succeed with People ( 1971)

6

Three Processes: Knowing, Choosing, Doing

The most spectacular and celebrated—and certainly the most involving—technical achievement of all time was the Apollo 11 moon trip. How ironic to witness such herculean feats while fighting hot and cold wars all around this globe. As one observer put it, "We are technical giants and moral pigmies."

Why? Why such a massive gap between our technical and our human relationship achievements? Many think it is because the physical sciences have outstripped the social sciences and therefore we need to pour more of our energies and resources into the study of how to improve human relationships. I believe this idea is not only false but highly misleading.

If we include the teachings of the Lord, the social or human behavior sciences are far ahead of the physical sciences. The basic principles and laws given have never been improved upon or changed since Adam, the first man. Founded on the Ten Commandments, they move to the Golden Rule and the laws of love, repentance, and forgiveness.

This is not so with the physical sciences. Much that was taught as scientific fact in school years ago is discarded today. Many of the great "breakthroughs" were "breakwiths."

Where, then, is the lag? In doing. In applying. The applied social sciences lag far behind the applied physical sciences.

Each of us can look about our own lives to see the evidence and the origin of this gap between knowing and doing. Few of us "do" as well as we "know." Why is this so? I suggest the answer lies in our skipping or neglecting a fundamental connecting step or link between what we know and what we do. This is the step or process of choosing.

Choosing means to pause and stand back for perspective, to think deeply, and then to decide our own actions and reactions. Choosing means to accept responsibility for ourselves and our attitudes, to refuse to blame others or circumstances.

Choosing, then, means to commit ourselves strongly to that which we decide to do. This committing process often involves a real internal struggle, ultimately between competing motives or between conflicting concepts of ourselves.

This choosing (deciding and committing) step can break the binding power of habits if enough effort goes into it. This is more than strong resolution or sheer willpower. Many exert great willpower to overcome a fault or habit or to accomplish an important project, but they don't inwardly believe they will really succeed. They see themselves, perhaps unconsciously, as incapable or unworthy of success. They've failed before—they'll fail again. So before the doing process begins, they are already defeated. Private defeats precede public defeats.

This choosing process, therefore, also involves "belief power" (meaning great mental exertion)—seeing and imagining and feeling ourselves successfully doing what we desire to. Such a believing process welds the conscious and the unconscious forces together.

We have all experienced something powerful "connect" within ourselves once we made our mind up on a matter. We simply knew we could and would do it. And we did it. The private victory preceded the public victory.

In this choosing opportunity rests man's free agency—his supreme unique gift—and his accountability. Through it, man alone can use and build on the accumulated knowledge of the ages. No animal can do this. Through it, man alone can break with the past, even deeply imbedded habits, and determine his own future. No animal can do this. Deterministic philosophy—the idea that biological heritage and/or social environment sets or determines man's character and conduct—is animal psychology.

But unless we realize both our free agency and our power to choose and then use them wisely, our actions will be determined by the conditions, within and without, of our lives.

Look at it this way. Unless the choosing gear connects knowing to doing, we will still be connected to old habit gears and/or to the gears of others and of circumstances.

This choosing process takes time and great mental and spiritual exertion. Prayer and ordinance work can serve this purpose magnificently and release great powers, within and without. We'll do what we know we should if we regularly covenant deep enough to do so.
