Stephen R. Covey, How to Succeed with People ( 1971)

7

Distinguish Between Person and Performance

Parents, teachers, and leaders frequently bemoan the power that acceptance and popularity by the peer group have over their youth. "What can we do to decrease its influence and increase our own?" they plead.

There is, I believe, a common denominator behind much of the behavior of youth, an understanding of which is immensely helpful in dealing with them. It has to do with what is the primary source of their security or sense of worth.

Consider two terms—intrinsic and extrinsic—and the subsequent reasons. First, intrinsic. This means that one's primary source of security or sense of worth lies within. One has worth apart from his performance and apart from others' opinions of him. He feels deep inside, without having to think about it, "I'm good. I'm of worth, in and of myself."

Such a person possesses the inner strength and courage to act on what he knows is right regardless of popularity. In his own eyes he is somebody and stands for something, so social pressure, even rejection, doesn't control him or "wipe him out."

Second, extrinsic. This means that one's primary sense of worth and value lies outside himself, particularly in the opinion of other people.

Again, it isn't so much an intellectual matter as it is emotional. This person may think "I am a child of God" but not feel it. His sense of goodness lies almost entirely in the good he does, not in the good he is.

Consequently, lacking security within, he seeks it without—sometimes almost desperately in trying to be all things to all people.

Policed by the reactions of others, he's torn inside as he finds everyone expects different things: "My parents expect this, the Church that, and my friends that." Confused and lonely, he often withdraws into a "safe" world of his own making.

Perhaps a more typical reaction pattern with many youth is to conform to the values and expectations of the group from which they seek acceptance and approval, and to rebel, to greater or lesser degrees, against their parents and their parents' values. The first outward manifestations of this rebellion to conformity may be dress and hair styles, language used, and defensive attitudes. It will often lead to other compromises—vulgarity, lying, cheating, stealing, and eventually smoking, drinking, drugs, unchastity. Then, of course, these perversions of life horribly compound and complicate both the root problems and the way back.

Our efforts to reach them, to reclaim them, are sometimes done in the very way (judging, moralizing) they interpret as rejection of them as persons, exalting again only the good they should do. This solidifies both their rebellious patterns and their present loyalties as the only source of their identity or sense of being a person, an individual.

In some way we need to communicate an understanding and acceptance of them as persons without approving or condoning their behavior. Although difficult to do, it can be done. Our youth want it more than they would dare tell us.

One of the basic early causes of extrinsic sense of worth is the widespread tendency at home and school and in society to compare one person with another and, most importantly, to emotionally reward (praise, warmth, love) and punish (impatience, displeasure, judgment, rejection) on the basis of that comparison.

Think this through carefully: when comparisons are habitual, when a person's worth and his performance are one and the same thing, gradually the source of worth moves out of him (intrinsic) and into someone else's opinion (extrinsic) of his performance. "She's our bright one." "He's the slow one." "He's smart but he just won't apply himself like his brother." "I just can't understand it at all—you should have done better than Susan." "Your grades are getting embarrassing to us, honey."

Such labels or definitions habitually given are soon believed and lived up to and emotionally accepted as part of a person's concept of self. "Of course I failed—'cause I'm a failure. Just ask anybody."

It is vital to distinguish between a person and his behavior or performance. While we need to disapprove of bad behavior and reward superior performance, we first need to communicate and help build in our young people a sense of intrinsic worth and goodness and esteem totally apart from these comparisons and judgments. Ironically, success in doing this will powerfully serve to inspire superior effort. It is a self-fulfilling prophecy.

The very power to understand the crucial distinction between person and performance and to communicate intrinsic worth to others flows naturally out of our own sense of intrinsic worth and value. Otherwise we will find ourselves wresting our own personal security from the performance of our youth and will therefore be unable to communicate intrinsic worth to them.
