Stephen R. Covey, How to Succeed with People ( 1971)

8

Eight Sources of Inner Security

When a person has a deep inner sense of personal worth, he is more effective in all phases of his life. He is also genuinely happy for the successes of others, feeling that nothing is being taken from him.

Consider eight different, although interrelated, sources of a deep sense of intrinsic worth and inner personal security. Carefully notice how the items emphasized, under each of the eight sources, deal with developing a sense of worth within each individual, rather than without, from opinions or comparisons.

First, the family.

One's emotional roots lie primarily in the unconditional love and regard that parents have for their children and for each other. Frequently, time is taken for each one for private visits and understanding. When one parent shows kindness, respect, and courtesy to the other parent, the children feel value is also given to them—intrinsic value.

Family councils are held. Each opinion is listened to, respected, and considered. There's an absence of comparing one against another, of arbitrary rule making, of inconsistent mood-of-the-moment disciplining. There's the presence of family prayer, family traditions, family goals, schedules, duties, limits, rules, rights, privileges, consistently firm and fair discipline, honoring of promises.

"There is beauty all around when there's love at home."

Second, church activity and service.

Condemning the sin, yet valuing the sinner, the Church places supreme value on the intrinsic worth of each individual. Whenever we reach outside ourselves in the Lord's pattern to serve another, we communicate value to him and receive value in return. Genuine involvement ("with real intent") in teaching, leading, ordinance work for the living or the dead, or merely attending and participating in the church climate yields a sense of individual worth and personal security.

Third, nature.

Nature is very life-affirming and bequeaths its silent strength to one who takes time to feel and to appreciate. To absorb ourself in the magnificent beauty of the mountains, to spend time at the beach or in any lovely natural setting, including our own backyard, brings an intrinsic sense of worth, if we take the time to be still and to meditate, to drink it all in.

Fourth, continuing education.

Education's main value does not lie in getting knowledge, much of which will be obsolete sooner or later. It certainly doesn't lie in credits earned or degrees conferred. These may open doors of opportunity, but only real competence will keep them open. In fact, in our rapidly changing world there is no "future," no economic security in any job or situation. The only real economic security lies within the person, in his competence and power to produce.

Education's main value lies in learning how to continually learn, how to think and to communicate, how to appreciate and to produce, how to adapt to changing realities without sacrificing changeless values. Result? An inner confidence in the basic ability to cope successfully with whatever life brings.

To keep informed and alive, adults need some kind of system that contains balance and substance and requires mental concentration and discipline—a reading program, discussion groups, a correspondence course, an education week, or whatever.

Children need to be encouraged to be conscientious on a daily basis in their school and homework. Value should be placed on their disciplined efforts and love of learning and creativity as well as on grades and other academic achievements. Youth really know inside how they're doing in school, in several important ways, far more than their teachers or parents do, and their own honest self-evaluations should be discussed and respected.

Fifth, anonymous service.

Whenever we do good for others when no one knows save God and us alone, our intrinsic sense of worth and respect increases. ". . . thy Father which seeth in secret himself shall reward thee openly." (Matt. 6:4.)

Sixth, daily work.

Doing ordinary everyday work well brings its own rewards to each person. But doing it excellently, going the second mile, doing something creative and unique multiplies those intrinsic rewards. Two activities in work will influence results the most: planning and honest two-way communication with key people. A personal sense of self-mastery is internally more rewarding than any form of economic or social reward.

Seventh, a spiritually rich private life.

Daily and weekly immersion in gospel teachings, in the scriptures, in private worship, in meditation and prayer releases enormous resources within us of peace and serenity, understanding and courage. The scriptures teach that we will abide in the Lord's love—the perfect source of divine definition of self—if we abide in his word.

Eighth, integrity.

When we live true to the light and truth we have received, we will receive more light and truth. If we are untrue to that light (our conscience), we experience disunity and insecurity within. Then, unless we repent, this internal warring will breed guilt, anger, and defensiveness, and will undermine both our resolve and our capacity to tap the other seven sources of personal security.

The key is to be a doer, not just a hearer; to be a light, not a judge of the darkness.
