Stephen R. Covey, How to Succeed with People ( 1971)

9

True Freedom Lies Within

The ultimate, perhaps the last, freedom is the right and power to decide within how anybody or anything outside ourself will affect us. Many people are simply unaware they have this capacity, this freedom.

During a speech on this subject once a woman in the audience literally lit up. She seemed so ecstatic and radiant she could hardly contain herself. At the conclusion of the talk I went to her and asked what had happened. She answered, "You have no idea what the point on attitude control means to me. You see, I have been a full-time nurse for over three years to the most miserable, ungrateful, crotchety old man you can imagine. But up until tonight I have been feeling how miserable he has made my life. Tonight I have come to realize that I have chosen to be miserable. He hasn't made me miserable. I have chosen to respond to his behavior in that way. This is a bitter pill to swallow. But the thing that really hit home to me was the thought that since I had freely chosen the negative response to a negative situation, I have the freedom to choose otherwise. No longer will he control my disposition. I will control it."

Dr. Viktor E. Frankl, a Jewish Austrian psychotherapist, was imprisoned in various concentration camps in Germany during the second world war. His parents, his brother, and his wife died in the camps or were sent to the gas ovens. Except for his sister, his entire family perished in these camps. He was stripped of all his possessions. He suffered torture and innumerable indignities. He never knew from one moment to the next if his path would lead to the gas chambers or the ovens, or if he would be among the "saved" who would remove the bodies or shovel out the ashes of those so fated.

One day, alone in a small room, stripped naked, he began to become aware of the last freedom. It was the only freedom, he said, they could not take from him: he could decide within himself how all of this was going to affect him. He proceeded to act upon this awareness. It grew and grew through mental concentration and self-discipline until he acquired unusual controls within himself. He became an inspiration to those around him, even to the guards. He helped others find meaning in their suffering and dignity in their prison existence.

The essence of the Savior's life and teachings deals with internal freedom or control: turn the other cheek, go the second mile, "pray for those who curse you," "love your enemies," etc. The Lord told the Prophet Joseph Smith that his suffering "shall give thee experience, and shall be for thy good." This very kind of internal attitude control, this freedom, provides the most powerful evidence of overcoming the world and of one's true discipleship to the Son of God.

The world's doctrine of determinism links stimulus and response together as inseparable. However, once we are aware that we can decide within ourself what our response will be to a given stimulus (environment or person), they become separated. This very awareness becomes the embryo of our freedom. If we then continue to act on that awareness by overcoming evil with good, by returning cheerfulness in the face of gloom and pessimism, patience toward the impatient, kindness to the unkind, our internal freedom will continue to grow and grow. It is exactly because we have this freedom that we are responsible and will be held responsible by its author, our Creator.

For our purpose here, let us define liberty as the opportunity in life to choose between alternatives and freedom as the internal power or capacity to choose between alternatives. In this sense Dr. Frankl had freedom but not liberty. Similarly we may have liberty (opportunity) but not freedom (power), perhaps because of our addiction to the habit of gratifying an appetite or passion.

For instance, in sports, a golfer studies each situation and uses the appropriate club. He has freedom (developed power). But if he only knows how to use one club, although he could choose others, he has no power (freedom).

So in our relations with others. If we are addicted to interpret every situation in terms of our own convenience or pleasure or ego and then become upset or angry when things don't go our way, we truly are slaves, even as we proclaim our freedom to do our "own thing."

Therefore, freedom is responsible self-discipline, the opposite of license. We act from divine principles and conscience within rather than react to changing and fickle values and realities without.
