Stephen R. Covey, How to Succeed with People ( 1971)

10

Step-by-Step Victory Over Self

Most relationship problems stem from personal problems, in at least two distinct ways.

First is the way we take out our guilt on others. When we are not true to our conscience, we are at war with ourselves. Rather than repenting, the natural tendency is to take that war out on others. We do it when we find their weakness, the mote in their eye, and thus can momentarily forget the beam in our own—mote-beam sickness.

Much of the arguing, contending, and criticizing in family circles follows a combination of low achievement and high fatigue. As one put it, "When I don't feel good about myself, you better watch out!"

The second kind of personal problem is interwoven with the first and perhaps is its prime cause—a lack of self-discipline. When we are controlled by our appetites and passions, we inevitably have relationship problems. All it takes is a time of stress and/or fatigue to uproot our best intentions.

The following true story is one clear illustration of how relationships inevitably deteriorate through a lack of self-discipline and how they can be made beautiful by growth in self-discipline, which I'm defining here as the ability to make and keep promises.

It involves an undisciplined missionary who pleaded with his mission president for a transfer from his companion, claiming, "We just can't get along." The president counseled him that he could learn to get along if he would only hold his tongue, serve his companion, and obey true principles of self-control, of love and service. The missionary resolved to do so but his hair-trigger temper gripped him more than his resolve. As with many, he had the habit of making and breaking resolutions.

Again and again he requested a transfer, once saying, "I'm afraid of what I might do if I really lost my temper." And again and again his president would commit him to principles of self-control, of love and service. Nothing seemed to take until one day the leader realized that, in a sense, he was teaching him to run before he could walk, for his reactions and emotions were controlled far more by the habits and appetites of his flesh and the temper of his spleen than by the momentary sincerity of his resolves.

If hungry, he'd eat, and eat, and eat. If sleepy, he'd sleep—even in meetings. If upset, he'd show it. If angry, he'd express it. Yet, when he felt fine, he was ever so sweet and pleasant and ever so repentant and resolved. He merely took the course of least resistance in each situation.

So, one day, after weeks of counseling, the leader asked the missionary to promise to get up at 5:55 A.M. for one month.

"I can't understand it," he retorted. "I asked you to help me with my relationship problem and you ask me to get up at 5:55."

"Elder, how can you possibly control and direct your emotions until you have more control of the very instrument through which you express your emotions—your body? Let's begin at the first step and take one at a time. Will you get up at 5:55 for one full month?"

"I'm not sure I can."

"Then don't promise to. Will you for a week?"

"I will," he answered.

A week later: "Did you keep your promise?"

"I did."

"Congratulations! Now let's take step two. Will you study alone and with your companion for two and one half hours every morning for a week?"

"I can't. My mind jumps all around the place."

"Will you just sit there for two and a half hours and try?"

"I will."

He did it. Week by week, month by month, he made and kept promises. Little by little, line upon line, he grew in self-mastery, in integrity, in spirituality. His relationships with others, even with difficult persons, were magnificent, and he became one of the most powerful and effective and respected missionary leaders in the field. Through making and keeping small resolves, small promises, he had won a victory over himself. He learned the hard way that "the body is a good servant but a bad master."

There are several principles of personal growth and human relations here. Consider five, which build on each other.

Therefore, in one sense, the whole system of relationships—human and divine—is based on a step-by-step victory over self.

"A 1,000-mile journey begins with a single step."
