Stephen R. Covey, How to Succeed with People ( 1971)

II

Relationships

11

How to Influence Others

The accompanying diagram shows how one can effectively influence others. It will help to refer to it as you consider the subsequent reasoning together with the real human influence problems and challenges you face.

First, note the three basic interrelated phases or levels: (1) example, (2) relationship, and (3) advice/instruction. To illustrate how each phase necessarily builds on the other, assume for a moment I am the person—your spouse or child or worker or boss or neighbor or whoever—you are attempting to influence, perhaps after some past failure to do so.

"Your essential character is constantly radiating, communicating. From it in the long run, I come to instinctively trust or distrust you and your efforts with me. It is a matter of degree, of course.

"If your life runs hot and cold, if you're both caustic and kind and, above all, if your private performance doesn't square with your public performance, it's very hard for me to open up with you. Then as much as I may want and even need to receive your love and influence, I don't feel safe enough to expose my opinions and experiences and my tender feelings. Who knows what will happen? I've been hurt before and I'm not going to chance it again."

"You say you care about and appreciate me. (Oh, how I wish I could believe that!) But how could you appreciate when you don't even understand? Just words. I can't trust words. If you would just try to understand . . . "

In our attempts to influence others, we commonly make three kinds of mistakes, all related to either ignoring or shortcutting these same three intertwined phases of influence.

First, we try to tell or advise others before we have established any understanding relationship, any real communication. Our advice, however sound, will generally not be received until the feeling is good. I suggest the supreme skill needed here is empathy.

Second, we try to build or rebuild a relationship without making any fundamental change in our conduct or attitude. If our example is pockmarked with inconsistency and insincerity, no amount of win-friends-influence-people technique will work. As Emerson so aptly put it, "What you are shouts so loudly in my ears I can't hear what you say."

Third, we assume that a good example and a good relationship are sufficient, that we don't need to explicitly teach the "shoulds" of life. If this were true, we would need neither weekday school nor Sunday School.

We need to teach the words of life and of eternal life by both example and precept. We need to give the vision and to testify of it. Just as vision without love contains no motivation, so also love without vision contains no goals, no guidelines, no standards, no lifting power.

And realistically we need to focus others' attention on our Lord and Savior, the perfect exemplar, so as to gradually lessen their dependency on our imperfect examples (as was evidenced in the above monologue). As "the Way, the Life, and the Truth," he simultaneously embodies and integrates all three levels and is the perfect source and model of influence.
