Stephen R. Covey, How to Succeed with People ( 1971)

12

Give Positive Experiences

One of the main reasons behind communication breakdowns is because the people involved interpret the same event differently. Their different natures and different background experiences condition them to do so. If they then interact without taking into account why they see things differently, they begin to judge each other.

This judging tears at the relationship, compounding the communication breakdown and spawning longer-term personality conflicts.

For instance, take as small a thing as a difference in room temperature. The thermostat on the wall clearly registers 75 degrees. One complains "It's too hot," and opens the windows; the other complains "It's too cold," and closes them.

Who is right? Is it too hot or too cold? The fact is they are both right.

Can two people disagree and both be right? Obviously yes. Each is right from his own point of view. And probably each will respect this fact and either stop complaining or make a compromise satisfactory to both.

But what if they tried to prove each other wrong, saying such things as, "Too hot? Are you crazy? I'm freezing!"

Judging another's sanity or sincerity is a personal attack and creates new and different relationship problems that are far more difficult to solve.

When we apply this same reasoning to the sense of seeing or to the sense of hearing, we open up a fruitful understanding of human problems.

We do this in the classroom with some simple pictures. First, we briefly show a picture of a young girl to one group and a picture of an old lady to another group. This first experience conditions how they will see and interpret the next experience. We then show both groups a composite picture, containing the outlines of both the young girl and the old woman. Finally, we ask them what they see and watch them interact with each other.

Several things inevitably happen. First, with few exceptions, they see as they were conditioned to—one group asserting "She's a young woman," and the other group answering "No, she's an old woman." Second, they begin to argue and frequently end in personally attacking either the judgment or the sincerity of the other. One says, "Don't put me on. You can see that wrinkled face and haggard old look just as well as I can!" The other answers, "Wrinkled face! What's wrong with you? She's lovely, young, and petite!" As each grows defensive he becomes even more convinced that "I'm right and you're wrong."

One person will eventually come to see another's point of view by first assuming that the other is sincere and then seeking to understand through asking and listening rather than telling and judging. Gradually, through respectful communication, almost everyone comes to see both points of view, usually with an "Oh! I see it!" Yet, I have students to this day who cannot. They invested so much ego in their defense as to freeze their initial perception or point of view.

The accompanying diagram attempts to summarize this most useful learning, which is applicable to every area of life, particularly the family.

While referring to the diagram, consider three implications:

In short, since people trust their own experiences, we had better give positive ones if we wish to influence them.
