Stephen R. Covey, How to Succeed with People ( 1971)

13

Assume the Best of Others

In human relations there is one attitude that continuously produces good fruit. It is the attitude of assuming good faith. This means to assume the best of others, to assume that they want to do well, that they mean to do well.

By acting on the assumption others are trying to do their best as they see it, though perhaps not as you see it, you can exert a powerful influence in bringing out the best in them. And vice versa.

Let me illustrate.

A friend of yours warns you not to trust your new boss. "He's cold, defensive, and simply doesn't care about his employees. I know—I used to work for him."

Accepting your friend's forewarning, you go forearmed. You keep up your own defenses. You guard your communication.

Your new employer senses your defensiveness and reacts similarly. He doesn't want to be hurt either. Seeing this defensiveness, what do you report to your friend?

"Thanks a lot, friend, I'm glad you told me. He was just like you said."

Now turn the illustration somewhat. This time you're the employer, and a trusted associate confides in you about one of your new employees—"a lazy clock watcher who'll produce only if you hover over him. I know—that's the only way I got anything out of him."

Grateful for the "inside" information, you hover.

However, the employee, with a concept of himself as being dependable and responsible, is eager to demonstrate his self-reliance and resourcefulness in this new job opportunity. His past job was only a means to an end. He wants new and challenging work with satisfactions within itself.

Now put these two attitudes together and watch what happens. "Sure enough," you report to your associate, "just as you said: the man's plain lazy, and hovering supervision's the only hope."

And the employee reports to his wife, "Let's keep looking around. There's no hope in this new job. I can barely wait till four-thirty every day."

These illustrations are typical of scores of daily commonplace occurrences in businesses, in schools, in neighborhoods, in homes. They are self-fulfilling prophecies. (Acting on a belief about the future helps to bring it about, thus self-fulfilling.)

In this very way the ideas and theories we have about leadership, management, parent-child relations, child development, or any subject where the human factor is dominant, tend to prove themselves true. We produce our own evidence. Attitudes create events.

Some, thinking themselves realistic, try to assume nothing; instead, they wait for the "facts" about people, to see what they'll do before making any judgments. These people also lose the tremendous power and motivating influence that is behind, first, clearly expressing belief and trust in others, and then, most important, acting accordingly.

Several studies in both the business world and education strongly point out the powerful influence of the leader's or teacher's attitude on the production and achievement of others. A classic one involved groups of low I.Q.-rated students. Most of the teachers were informed of the low I.Q. scores and taught accordingly. Some were not so informed, assumed normal I.Q. distribution, and treated the students accordingly. The unlabeled students consistently performed better than the labeled ones!

Our efforts to classify and categorize, judge and measure, often emerge from our own insecurities and frustrations in dealing with complex, changing, fluid realities. While our labels may appear neat and realistic and expedient, they may also be damaging, demoralizing, and highly unrealistic.

Each individual person is many things and has many dimensions, many potentials, some in evidence, most still dormant. He's a compound of many facts—even contradictory facts. He tends to react to how we treat him, what we believe about him.

Some may let us down. Some may take advantage of our trust, considering us naive or gullible. But most will come through, many simply because we believed they would. It is best not to bottleneck the many for fear of a few! Whenever we assume good faith, born of good motives and inner security, and then act accordingly, we appeal to whatever good there is in the other, even if there is very little.

The three wise monkeys put it this way: "Hear no evil—see no evil—speak no evil."

Goethe put it another way: "Treat a man as he is and he will remain as he is. Treat a man as he can and should be and he will become as he can and should be."
