Stephen R. Covey, How to Succeed with People ( 1971)

14

Empathy: A Problem Solver

I'll never forget a teacher friend of mine who was heartsick over his relationship with his teenage son. "When I come into the room where he is reading or watching TV, he gets up and goes out—that's how bad the relationship is," he reported.

I encouraged him to try first to understand his son rather than to try first to get his son to understand him and his advice. He answered, "I already understand him. What he needs is to learn respect for his parents and to show appreciation for all we're trying to do for him."

For the son to really open up, his dad must work on the assumption he doesn't understand his son and perhaps never fully will but that he wants to and will try.

Eventually the father agreed to work on this assumption, for he felt he'd tried about everything else. I assured him he would have to prepare himself for the communication, for it would really test him, particularly his patience and self-control. He'd really have to have his mind made up.

The next evening at about 8:00 P.M. the father approached the son and said, "Son, I'm not happy with our relationship and I'd like to see what we can do to improve it. Perhaps I haven't taken the time to really understand you."

"Boy, I'll say you haven't! You've never understood me!" the son flashed back.

Inside the father burned, and it was about all he could do to keep from retorting, Why, you ungrateful little whipper snapper! Don't you think I don't understand you! Why, I've gone through the mill. I know the story!

But he restrained this impulse and said, "Well, son, perhaps I haven't, but I'd like to. Can you help me? For instance, take that blow-up we had last week over the car. Can you tell me how you saw it?"

The son, still angry and smarting inside, gave his defensive explanation. The father again restrained his tendency to rush in with his own self-justifying explanation but decided instead to continue to listen for understanding. He was glad he'd made his mind up to do this before the test came.

As he listened, something marvelous began to happen. His son started to soften. Soon he dropped his defenses and began to open up with some of his real problems and deeper feelings.

The father was so overwhelmed by what was happening between them—for the first time in years—and what he had wanted so badly for so long, he could hardly contain himself. He opened up also and shared some of the deep feelings and concerns as well as understandings he had regarding what had happened in the past. For the first time in years they weren't attacking and defending, but were genuinely trying to understand each other. What happiness it was for both!

Around 10:30 P.M. the mother came in and suggested it was bedtime. The father said they were communicating "for the first time" and wanted to continue.

They visited until after midnight and discussed many things, most of which were far more important to them both than the concerns they had been dueling and fencing around so long. The son had longed for a relationship with his dad, with whom he had identified when he was younger. Inside he had many self-doubts and mixed feelings he wanted to talk about. He would talk to his close friends about some of them but he found himself, in his desire to impress them, never being fully honest. Besides, they listened only in terms of their needs and experiences, so very little real empathy or satisfaction resulted.

The father told me of this experience a few days later and tearfully said, "I feel like I've found my son again and he's found his dad." He was truly grateful he had gone into the experience determined inside to first understand before trying to be understood.

It has always been impressive and instructive that the Prophet Joseph was so struck with the assurance that if he asked God for wisdom he would not be upbraided. Upbraiding means to accuse or reprove.

"I at length came to the determination to 'ask of God,' concluding that if he gave wisdom to them that lacked wisdom, and would give liberally, and not upbraid, I might venture."

Too often we punish honest, open expressions or questions. We upbraid, judge, belittle, embarrass. Others learn to cover up, to protect themselves, to not ask. The greatest single barrier to rich, honest family communication is the tendency to criticize and judge—in short, to upbraid. Watch closely and listen carefully and you'll find this tendency everywhere. Also notice what it does to you.

When we're communicating with another, we need to give full attention, to be "completely present," as one put it. Then we need to empathize—see it from the other's point of view, "walk in his moccasins" for awhile. This takes courage, and patience, and inner sources of security so we're not afraid of new learning or changing what we wanted to say before we began to listen.
