Stephen R. Covey, How to Succeed with People ( 1971)

16

If Offended, Take the Initiative

At the end of a speech on the importance of "going to the one who offended you," an individual approached me and said, "I liked your speech enough to do what you said. You offended me once and, frankly, I've discounted all you've said since."

He said that he was attending a fireside speech and had to leave for a minute in the middle. "As I walked down the aisle you commented, 'Don't run away mad,' and everybody laughed. I was embarrassed to leave as it was, but that comment, and everyone's laugh, knifed right into me. When I returned I sat in the back, still smarting and angry inside. I was so upset I could hardly listen to what you said then, and I felt about the same way even tonight."

This individual took the initiative to come to me rather than nursing his hurt and judging privately, thus fortifying the barrier between us. We both learned and benefited from the experience.

"And if thy brother or sister offend thee, thou shalt take him or her between him or her and thee alone; and if he or she confess thou shalt be reconciled." (D&C 42:88.)

Why is the initiative with the one who has been offended, when the natural tendency when we are offended is to say within ourselves, "He is the one at fault; therefore he should come to me."

Oftentimes a person offends unknowingly, as I had in the above situation. If someone offends you unknowingly and continues to do so, you are responsible for the strain in the relationship if you do not take the initiative to clear it up. Often you'll find you made unrealistic expectations. You may discover you simply didn't understand the situation at all.

One lady told me that for a long time she felt that her own husband had been unjustly treated by a leader in her stake. The resentment grew and grew until her children were similarly inflicted by this poisonous venom and the attitude of the entire family toward this man, his family, his business, and his stake leadership became critical and negative.

Eventually she took the initiative to go to him, and she returned with feelings of gratitude and sorrow—gratitude for clearing it up and sorrow because she learned the other side of the story. She had not acted on the entire picture. She was sick to think how long she had mothered such hostile feelings on the basis of a completely inaccurate understanding.

Consider two tragic consequences of not taking the initiative. First, the one offended often broods about the offense until the situation is blown all out of proportion. Like a poison, bitterness and resentment spread and afflict other relationships and situations totally removed from the initial one. Then guilt grows within, causing anger to flash and bite, feeding on the weaknesses of others. Eventually the mounting vindictive spirit can contain itself no longer, and it explodes irrationally at the slightest provocation on its "enemy," inflicting wounds and scars that may never be healed. Now the whole problem has changed, both in location and in complexity. The offended becomes the offender.

Second, sometimes we make expectations of another, and when he doesn't come through, we are offended. We then judge and behave defensively to avoid further hurt. The other sees this defensiveness and may react similarly, thus giving us new evidence to support our earlier judgments. We, the offended, bring about the very treatment we feared. This is the self-fulfilling prophecy.

Obviously, therefore, it's better not to take offense, whether intended or not. It's best not to judge another at all but to forgive "seven times seventy," if need be.

But if we are offended and we can't fully forgive or resolve it inside, we should go to the other shortly after the offense so reconciliation can take place.

I give two suggestions in taking the initiative.

First, we should do this in a good spirit, in control, not in the spirit of vindication and anger, to avoid giving offense ourself, thus compounding the problem. The roots of the courage to admit we were offended are spiritual.

Second, we should describe our feelings—when the offense took place—rather than judge or label the other. To say "I felt belittled and so embarrassed" is more accurate and less offensive than to say "your dominating attitude" or "your childish behavior." This preserves the dignity and self-respect of the other, who then can respond and learn without feeling threatened.

We must be aware that our feelings, opinions, and perceptions are not facts. To act on that awareness takes thought control and fosters humility.
