Stephen R. Covey, How to Succeed with People ( 1971)

17

Paying the Uttermost Farthing

"My biggest worry and concern is my poor relationship with my fourteen-year-old son. I have set a poor example in the past with my yelling and losing my temper. How can I erase this image he has of me?" a father asked.

Perhaps there is no greater heartbreak than for parents to feel they are losing or have lost contact and influence with a son or daughter who is being drawn more and more into the lower roads of life.

What can be done in such a tragic situation? Fortunately a great deal can be done. Few, if any, situations are hopeless. There are yet several approaches, including the prayer of faith, which can be taken to heal the broken relationship and to exercise righteous influence again.

One of these approaches is to pay "the uttermost farthing." Consider very carefully a possible meaning of a teaching in the Savior's Sermon on the Mount:

"Agree with thine adversary quickly, whiles thou art in the way with him; lest at any time the adversary deliver thee to the judge, and the judge deliver thee to the officer, and thou be cast into prison.

"Verily I say unto thee, Thou shalt by no means come out thence, till thou has paid the uttermost farthing." (Matt 5:25-26.)

Applying this teaching to any seriously broken or strained relationship—not just the family—I emphasize six points.

Although inside he is crying out for parental direction and emotional support—playing roles and pretending adequacy is fatiguing—still we remain "judged" in his mental prison for an indeterminate sentence.

Sometimes we make a stab at this process but inwardly hold back, saying to ourself, "He should be sorry also. I can only go so far but no further until he acknowledges his part and seeks forgiveness also." This kind of peacemaking is superficial, insincere, and manipulative. While it might temporarily calm the waters on the surface, the suspicious turbulence underneath still rages and the next stress situation on the relationship will reveal it. The "uttermost farthing" means exactly that. The uttermost—not the first, second, or third, but the uttermost.

If this approach is used only because it works, it will boomerang, for unless a real and sincere change takes place deep within us, sooner or later we'll trespass again on tender feelings and the new mental prison will have thicker walls than ever. He simply will not believe us when we say again how sorry we are. Repeated token repentance wins no confidence, human or divine.
