Stephen R. Covey, How to Succeed with People ( 1971)

18

Let Quarrels Fly Out Open Windows

On December 1, 1969, a great storm, centered around the Aleutian Islands, spawned and drove huge waves toward the island chain of Hawaii, almost two thousand miles away. The surf built and built until some of the highest waves (50 to 60 feet) ever reported in Oahu's recent past began to pound her north shore.

It seemed so ironical: beautiful clear days, almost idyllic; yet the presence of this snarling, snapping, white-fanged sea monster.

The irony invited thousands of natives and tourists to come and see. But how deceiving! We thought we were in a good safe position, standing with everybody else many feet from the high-water mark of past waves, and then out on the horizon we could see an unusually large one rolling in. Everyone commented curiously at first, but as it came closer the danger became apparent and we ran. Twice that afternoon, hundreds of us watching from the so-called secure high shelf were enveloped in water to our knees.

Those who lived there were enveloped by terror. One couple watched in horror as a wave pushed their two-year-old girl, crib and all, out into the yard, where a wall then collapsed on her.

Many were literally sucked out of their cars; others were dragged off streets and out of service stations. A few were killed, many were injured, many were rescued. Scores of shore homes were blown apart; hundreds were damaged.

Days after the surf serpent had spent her fury we visited the destruction. I'll never forget seeing two homes, side by side, high up on Sunset Beach. One solidly built on a cement foundation was of good brick construction. The other was flimsy and frame, but standing three feet high on stilts.

When the waves reached the solid front wall of the first home, they had no place to go but through it. It literally exploded; all that was left was the good solid foundation and part of the side walls.

But when the waves slammed against the flimsy neighbor, they had somewhere to go—under it! It "withstood the rude blast" with almost no damage.

This whole experience reminded me of the German expression, "Let arguments fly out open windows." As I understand it, this means to give no answer to a contentious argument or an irresponsible accusation. Let such "fly out open windows" until they spend themselves. If you try to answer or reason back, you only serve to gratify and ignite the pent-up hostility and anger within, just as the solid wall ignited the pent-up power of the wave that destroyed it.

Your reasoning in such an argument may be sound, your logic consistent and convincing—but it isn't a matter of reason and logic. The battlefield is emotion, sometimes unbridled explosive emotion, and sometimes raw feeling veiled by a thin veneer of seeming reasonableness and sincerity.

As with the north shore that beautiful day, it may also seem at first a pleasant sunny situation, but the real source of the interpersonal storm that seems to erupt at the slightest provocation has its source in other places, in other problems, generally personal, and may have been building for days, months, even years.

When you remain silent, giving no answer, and go quietly about your business, the other has to struggle with the natural consequences of irresponsible expression. He or she may grow reasonable and may even apologize for taking it out on you or for being so irresponsible and childish. Sometimes merely restating or mirroring back the other's hostile comments will reveal to him his irresponsibility. But an answer only justifies the irresponsible spirit, and the argument reduces itself to an ego battle, however well masked by clever language. And no one ever wins one of these.

We must not allow ourselves to be drawn, either through our curiosity or our defensiveness, into any poisonous, contentious orbit or we will find ourselves bitten and afflicted similarly. Then others' weaknesses will become our own, and all this will sow a seedbed of future misunderstandings, accusations, and wranglings.

It is highly significant that the very first message the Savior delivered to the Nephites contained strong counsel against both doctrinal disputations and the spirit of contention.

"For verily, verily I say unto you, he that hath the spirit of contention is not of me, but is of the devil, who is the father of contention, and he stirreth up the hearts of men to contend with anger, one with another.

"Behold, this is not my doctrine, to stir up the hearts of men with anger, one against another; but this is my doctrine, that such things should be done away." (3 Nephi 11:29-30.)

The power to be still, to be patient, and to let arguments fly out open windows comes partially from understanding this very principle, but primarily it flows out of an inward peace and unity that is freed of the compulsive need to answer and justify. And the source of this peace is living responsibly, in control, and obedient to conscience.
