Stephen R. Covey, How to Succeed with People ( 1971)

III

Family

19

Build Harmony in Your Family

The late secretary-general of the United Nations, Dag Hammarskjold, once made this profound observation: "It is more noble to give yourself completely to one individual than to labor diligently for the salvation of the masses."

A father could be terribly involved and dedicated to his work, to church and community projects, and to many people's lives, yet not have a deep, meaningful relationship with his own wife. It would certainly take more nobility of character, more humility, more patience and understanding for him to develop such a relationship with one person, his wife, than it would take to give continued dedicated service to the many.

A bishop, a priesthood leader, or an auxiliary executive can be ever so devoted to working for the salvation of others, but perhaps be unwilling to do that which is necessary to build a rich relationship and meaningful two-way communication with a teenage son or daughter. To the many he serves by giving his time and talents, but to the one he may need to give more of himself, perhaps even his pride.

Some may even justify neglecting the one to take care of the many, feeling sustained in this attitude by many expressions of esteem and gratitude. Yet in quiet moments, within, we know differently. "No other success can compensate for failure in the home." (David O. McKay.)

The Savior again is our standard, our model. He spent most of his ministry with a few individuals. Many of his most significant messages and teachings were given to or about one or two individuals. The real, deep conversion of these few disciples has changed the history of the world for all the rest of us.

One Saturday morning the phone interrupted some quiet office work. It was my wife asking me if I couldn't come home and give some help. "I've got an appointment downtown in less than thirty minutes; I've still got to bathe the babies, and the other kids just aren't doing their work this morning. (Background noises punctuated this point.) Besides, I haven't even changed my clothes yet."

I explained I was preparing for a meeting and couldn't come but would give some advice. (Advice from quiet sidelines to those fighting it out in the arena is always easy and often cheap.)

I knew if my wife could get willing cooperation from our oldest daughter her problem would be solved. "But she won't cooperate at all this morning," she replied.

"Take her into her bedroom alone for just a few minutes and give yourself to her. Listen to see what's bothering her," I suggested.

"I haven't time to do that."

Then I quoted something that has come to have meaning to both of us. "Too busy sawing to take time to sharpen the saw?"

"Okay, I'll try."

Our daughter knew what was happening, and as soon as she felt she was being sincerely listened to and valued, she immediately told her mother, "Just get changed. I'll take care of the kids and clean up."

The depth and quality of the unity between a husband and wife, between a priesthood leader and his counselors, between an employer and his immediate staff, between a parent and a child, is being communicated—radiated—constantly.

We need to set aside uninterrupted blocks of time in giving ourselves completely to one, in being "completely present."

Harmony cannot be feigned or pretended. Others will sense it and their confidence in our sincerity and integrity will be strengthened or weakened, as the case might be. Nothing undermines confidence (often unjustifiably) in a leader or a teacher quite as much as the feeling that he can't even govern himself (or his household or immediate staff) by the principles he teaches. Such a feeling diffuses itself throughout the entire organization and punctures the spirit of devoted service.

And nothing builds confidence in another's leadership and teachings quite as much as the example of harmony, mutual consideration, and selfless devotion that that person has with the key people of his life. Such a person doesn't have to testify of himself. Others do it—his works do it.
