Stephen R. Covey, How to Succeed with People ( 1971)

20

Talking Through Differences

If we are careful observers, we can see our own weaknesses reappear in the lives of our children. Perhaps in nothing is this so evident as in the way differences and disagreements are handled.

To illustrate, a mother goes to the family room to call her sons to lunch and finds them arguing and fighting over a toy. "Boys, I've told you before not to fight! You work it out so each has a turn." The older grabs it away from his smaller brother with "I'm first!" The younger cries and refuses to come to lunch.

The mother, puzzled by why her boys never seem to learn, reflects for a moment on her own handling of differences with her husband. She remembers "only last night" when they had a sharp exchange over a matter of finances. She remembers "only this morning" when her husband summarily left for work without the best of feelings after a disagreement on plans for the evening.

In fact, the more this mother reflects, the more apparent it becomes that she and her husband have in reality demonstrated over and over again how not to handle differences and disagreements. They have taught their children, by example, to either fight or flight whenever they disagree.

Fighting takes many forms, ranging from violence and open expressions of anger and hate to subtle sarcasm, sharp answers, clever comebacks, belittling humor, and various kinds of cold, sophisticated judging and rejecting. Usually, out of guilt, the fighter also releases much of the stored-up venom and bitterness on himself. Guilt and anger are generally two sides of the same coin.

Flighting ("copping out," escaping) also takes various forms. The most common is to simply withdraw, feeling bad toward the other and sorry for oneself. Such sulking often feeds the fires of revenge and future retaliation.

People also flee by growing cold and indifferent, by escaping involvement and responsibility in their own world into the fabricated worlds of TV and movies or the unreal world of drugs and drink or the alluring world of illicit romance.

Because each person in a family is different and unique, differences are inevitable. Furthermore, for purposes of balance and growth, they are necessary, even desirable. Latent upbringing and temperamental differences will surface under pressures and stresses, with changing circumstances and expanding responsibilities.

When such differences arise, parents have a supreme teaching opportunity. They can show a new way of coping with them—a third alternative.

They can teach their plastic, highly impressionable children, by example, how to talk through differences and disagreements, even how to "agree to disagree agreeably."

Two intertwined elements are foundational in this third alternative, this talking-through approach.

First, both parents have and continually renew their basic commitment to the things that unite them. Their deepest loyalties and strongest feelings attach to these fundamental things rather than to the problems or issues around which differences may emerge. Differences are not ignored; they are subordinated. The issue or one's point is never as important as the relationship.

Second, the parents show respect for each other by the way they listen to and address each other, by the kindness and gentleness in their tone of voice, by their willingness to give and take, and by their coming finally to an agreement that they unitedly sustain.

The first two alternatives—fighting and flighting—represent the immature course of least resistance and involve no internal control and discipline. Sometimes, in the heat of the moment, we may need to temporarily withdraw for perspective and control. But self-restraint, respect, and love for the other and the courage to face realities are the heart and fabric of the talking-through approach.

As in the Savior's parables, such responsible peacemaking, so greatly needed in a day of violence and noninvolvement, naturally follows and is empowered by a pure heart.
