Stephen R. Covey, How to Succeed with People ( 1971)

21

The Importance of Timing in Teaching

There's a time to teach and a time not to teach.

The father in the following illustration was unaware of the latter. Perhaps his approach isn't too different from those used by many of the rest of us.

Returning home from work late one afternoon, he stepped into quite a scene. There, in the corner, was his little birthday girl, Sue, defiantly grasping all of her presents, unwilling to let other eager hands play with them.

All eyes were on Sue, and to the father it appeared that everyone was disappointed with this selfish display by his own daughter. He particularly felt the expectations of several parents who had come to pick up their children.

The father knew he should teach his daughter to share, so he moved in to teach sharing. He used five methods.

First, a simple request. "Honey, it would be nice to share your presents with your friends for a few minutes before they go home."

"No! I don't want to." Her ego was invested in her refusal.

Second, a little reasoning. "Honey, if you learn to share your toys with them when they are at your home, then when you go to their homes they will share their toys with you."

Again, "No!"

The daddy, feeling more social breath on his neck, was beginning to invest his ego also in his teaching effort.

Third, bribery. Very softly, "Sue, if you'll share I'll give you a piece of gum."

"I don't care. I don't want a piece of gum!" she exploded.

Fourth, fear and threat. In exasperation, "Unless you share, Sue, you'll be in trouble. I mean, after all, they gave you these things."

"I don't care. These are my things. I don't have to share."

Last method, force. The father merely took away some of the toys and gave them to the other kids. "Here, kids, play with them."

How foolish this father was. He couldn't give understanding so he expected his little girl to give things. Because he feared social disapproval more than he valued Sue's growth, he couldn't give respect for Sue's right to possess before she chose on her own to share.

In his effort to teach sharing, he exemplified selfishness.

A wise father could have sensed what was happening and, after a simple request or two, understood and honored Sue's right to possess the things she had just been given. He then might have directed the attention off Sue and onto an interesting game or activity. This is teaching by example.

Then, at a later time, when the feeling was good, he could teach the value of sharing by precept (telling, explaining). Sue would share—naturally, freely—out of her own desire.

Consider four suggestions on when to teach.

It's often better to wait for or to create a new situation in which the person is in a secure and receptive frame of mind. Your very forbearance in not scolding or correcting in the emotionally charged moment will communicate and teach respect and understanding.

In other words, when you can't teach one value by precept, you can teach one by example. And example teaching is infinitely more powerful and lasting than precept teaching. Combining both, of course, is even better.

Restrain yourself. Or go apart. Then teach another time, when you have feelings of affection, respect, and inward security.

A good rule of thumb: If you can hold the arm or hand of your son or daughter while correcting or teaching and you both feel comfortable in this, you'll have a positive influence. You simply can't do this in an angry mood.
