Stephen R. Covey, How to Succeed with People ( 1971)

22

Unity and Consistency in Discipline

At ten o'clock one night, returning home from the office, I was sitting alone in my study going over some mail when my four-year-old son suddenly appeared at the door. I looked up, surprised. He just stood there expressionless. I'd had a good day and felt good inside and was so happy to see my boy. "Hi, Michael Sean! How are you?"

He said nothing, just whipped around, ran to the top of the stairs, and yelled down, "Hey, Stephen! He's nice!"

In other words he said, "Daddy's in a good mood tonight. It's safe to come up and play. He'll protect us from Mommy."

Mommy had put them down long before—several times! The last time they knew she meant it. But when they heard Daddy's car drive up, new hope was born again.

With fresh courage Stephen, the older, wiser son, had sent his naive brother up to "test the wind."

Sure enough, the wind was fair, and before long Daddy was trying to explain things to Mommy. Another victory, however short.

This homely incident is an illustration of some vital principles of discipline in the home. Rules and limits and consequences must be (1) clearly established, (2) agreed upon by both parents, (3) understood by the children, and (4) consistently followed through on.

When discipline is based on the mood of the moment, no one knows what is expected or what will happen. Personal security is largely born of a sense of justice—knowing what is expected, what the limits and rules are, and what the consequences are of honoring or dishonoring them.

We all know how we would react if, in the middle of chess, our opponent were to suddenly begin to move his castle like a queen, explaining he'd changed the rules "in order to even things up."

Similarly, the whole game of life can be thrown out of kilter with uncertain expectations and shifting of limits or arbitrary rule making. One day this, the next day that. One day, permissive indulgence; the next, unfair control.

The impact of this on a child's, or anyone's, personal security can be disastrous. In one sense a person's security comes from being able to answer the question, "What can I depend on?" Think about it. "What can I depend on?"

I'm convinced that for a young person to be able to answer that question is far more important than for parents to answer the question, "What method of discipline is best?"

I further believe that children's concepts of God and their feelings toward him and toward his rules and his limits and his consequences are initially and largely formed out of the justice and security they experience in the home. I extend this reasoning to include any form of human authority.

No wonder many grow up learning to depend only on their own ability to manipulate people and life. They learn how to just about talk themselves into or out of almost any situation. Since the rules of life for them shift and can be influenced, why not learn how? "Is there any security in any other way?" they reason.

One of the most effective ways is to pit one parent against the other—learn how to test the wind—cater to the most lenient—get him to carry your banner and fight. Children learn early how to get parents to argue with each other over the matter. "Keep the heat off us—one way or another we can get out of the consequences," they say.

When life becomes a game to be manipulated, its sin becomes getting caught. A distorted social conscience eclipses the divine conscience. The way back then is very hard, for so much has to be unlearned first.

I see three lessons in this story and analysis for all of us as parents, teachers, or leaders.

First, we (husband and wife) need to achieve a deep harmony and agreement on what the limits and rules and expectations are and to be deeply committed to following through with the agreed-upon consequences.

Second, these decisions should be clearly communicated and understood by our children. Genuinely involving them in setting rules and consequences is desirable to the extent that they evidence the maturity in judgment and responsibleness in action.

Third (and perhaps this should be first), to do these two things assumes a great deal about the quality of our own personal lives and of our relationship with each other and with them. We must live what we teach.

It's obviously impossible to communicate clearly and to discipline consistently when our own lives are undisciplined and inconsistent. And how long can we pretend harmony on these crucial matters with our mates when such harmony doesn't exist? The first real incident will expose us!

We inevitably return to the spiritual roots of our lives.
