Stephen R. Covey, How to Succeed with People ( 1971)

23

Don't Give Up and Don't Give In

What can we do to stop misbehavior? What can we do to establish patterns of right behavior? Perhaps these two questions are either thought about or asked more often by parents, teachers, and leaders than any other two. The answers are obviously not simple. So much depends on the situation and the people involved.

One approach is highly effective in many situations: reality therapy.

A few years ago a young psychiatrist, Dr. William Glasser, developed this approach initially for the professional handling of mentally and emotionally disturbed people, working on a radically different and untraditional theory.

Basically, the theory is: man's basic psychological needs are to love and be loved and to feel worthwhile to himself and to others, and the only way to satisfy and fulfill these needs is to behave responsibly and do what is right. In short, to feel better, we must behave better.

Building on this theory, the approach could be as follows:

When a person excuses his misbehavior by blaming others or circumstances or feelings, he feels less responsible for it. Then he logically reasons within himself, "Since I'm not responsible, I'm not expected to and I can't behave responsibly."

Therefore no excuses for misbehavior can be accepted. While we are not responsible for all that happens to us, we are responsible for how we react.

Now, to illustrate, consider the following abbreviated dialogue.

Mother: "What are you doing, son?"

Son: "Watching a movie on TV." (He identifies his own behavior.)

Mother: "Earlier you said you needed several hours to prepare for your midterm tests tomorrow. How do you expect to do on them?"

Son: "Good, I hope. I'll study after the movie. It's so interesting."

Mother: "What happened last time you studied half the night for your tests?"

Son: "I really messed up." (He identifies possible consequences.)

Mother: "Is that what you want this time?"

Son: "No, I don't." (He judges.)

Mother: "What should you do?"

Son: "I had better get at it now." (He decides.)

Mother: "Fine. I'll try to keep the kids quiet while you study."

Reality therapy is sometimes seen and experienced as a harsh, cold, unfeeling technique of facing the misbehaving person up to the realities of life.

Yet the most powerful and the most difficult aspect behind reality therapy is the personal warmth and emotional involvement of the one practicing it. It takes little courage to be strong and firm with people we don't really care for. It's caring that brings our courage into play.

It is also unkind to shield people from the consequences of their own behavior. In doing so we teach them they are inadequate and weak. Further, when we give in to irresponsible behavior—by excusing it or sympathizing with it—we condone and actually foster spoiled, law-unto-self behavior. But, if we give up—by ignoring them or tearing into them—we undermine their motivation to try.

Dr. Glasser wrote: "Parents who are willing to suffer the pain of the child's intense anger by firmly holding him to the responsible course are teaching him a lesson that will help him all his life."

This kind of discipline, tempered with love, can only come from responsible, disciplined lives. Otherwise, we will take the course of least resistance—giving in when we care or giving up when we don't.

The story is told of a boy who was spellbound in watching the metamorphosis of a butterfly out of its cocoon. One last tendon kept the butterfly bound. It struggled, thrashed about, and fought to break free. No success. The boy's sympathies led him to cut that remaining thin tendon with his pen knife. At last the butterfly was free! But it never flew. Undeveloped muscles.
