Stephen R. Covey, How to Succeed with People ( 1971)

24

How Attitudes Create Events

H2O. What is it? We normally think of it as the chemical formula for water. What states does it exist in? Liquid, gas, and solid. What is its natural state? We can't say. That depends on the pressure and the temperature in the situation.

So also with people. To a considerable extent we are all like H2O. We are in a constant state of radiation and absorption—radiating our feelings and attitudes, absorbing the feelings and attitudes of others. Our own attitude, our state of mind, as it were, is largely a function of the attitudes of those around us. Similarly the attitudes of those we live and work around are largely a function of our own attitude. The implication of that last sentence is profound and far reaching.

As parents, teachers, and leaders we can use this knowledge to influence, even determine, the attitudes of others and therefore the main circumstances of our lives.

This H2O thinking is particularly applicable in our homes, with our loved ones, for at least two reasons.

First, because our lives are so emotionally interwoven with each other. We depend heavily on home and family for emotional release and for emotional support, for nurturing hopes and plans, for nursing wounds.

Second, because in the social safety and comfort of home we drop our roles. We let down. We become ourselves. And often, particularly when we are tired or low, we become our worst selves. We take advantage. We take each other for granted. We forget small courtesies. We forget to say "please" and "thank you" and "I'm sorry" and "what is your feeling?" We get too full of ourselves, of our own needs, to accurately sense and appropriately respond to the needs of others or of situations.

Sometimes we even release our pent-up frustrations and anger on the innocent, on those near and dear to us. And, because their emotional needs are so tied to our attitudes, they are hurt at first, and they withdraw. Sometimes, however, to protect themselves against further hurts, they respond in kind. They also wrongly learn that the best defense is a good offense.

In this way many good marriages deteriorate. Criticism, nagging, sharp exchanges, belittling humor, sarcasm, and cynicism pollute the emotional climate of the home. And the children grow up touchy, angry, fearful, and insecure.

President and Sister David O. McKay were magnificent models of sincerity and consistency in living lives of mutual respect and consideration. Sister McKay once remarked, "My husband treats me the same in private as he does in public."

Perhaps it is because our home is our greatest responsibility that it is also our greatest leadership challenge and character test. It is a test of whether we practice in private what we preach in public, a test of our integrity in living by a single standard.

In public, social expectations define roles for us. These expectations put brakes on our tongue and restraints on our behavior.

Is this true with you? To find out, ask yourself how you would handle a difference on an emotionally charged issue with your spouse or child if a house guest were in the background, and then how you would handle it if one were not there. Further, ask yourself how you would discipline an unruly child in each situation.

Speaking for myself, I remember talking to my wife somewhat critically over the phone once about something that had upset me. Suddenly I became aware of the presence of someone in the next office. What a break on my tongue! How I changed my tone of voice! What hypocrisy I felt.

In our long-term struggle for true maturity and integrity, consider one simple but amazingly helpful practice.

Mother, before the children return from school full of their own needs, and before your husband returns from work (or whatever the crossroad situation is), stop and pause. Get control. Plumb your resources. Set your mind and heart. Choose pleasantness and cheerfulness. Choose to give full attention, to supply needs.

Father, sit an extra moment in the car before coming in and do the same. Ask yourself, "How can I bless my wife and children tonight?" Plumb your resources. Choosing to be your best self will arrest fatigue and renew your spirit.

Then watch H2O—how attitudes create events.
