Stephen R. Covey, How to Succeed with People ( 1971)

25

Helping Youth at the Crossroads

One of our gravest concerns is the tendency of our youth to make decisions that have important long-range consequences on the basis of short-range emotional perspectives.

We have seen young people go steady because "everyone else is doing it." We've even seen young people go into early engagements and early marriages far before they are prepared for the inevitable tests and responsibilities, in the name of love alone—or again out of a sense of personal insecurity or home frustration.

We have seen young people drop out of school in order to make car payments. I've personally seen college students at the end of a most exasperating registration process select courses, and even majors, on the basis of the shortest line!

We have seen young people turn down mission calls or a temple marriage out of fear of what others may think, or go into the mission field or into a temple marriage without any real understanding and commitment because of social pressure.

Why? Why this tendency to make important crossroad decisions—involving education, marriage, careers, etc.—on the basis of strong emotions and moods?

I'm sure there are many reasons, but I suggest the threads of personal insecurity and self-doubt run through most of them. And, of course, the roots of these feelings and fears lie deep in the history of each person, his upbringing, home life, and choices.

But what do we as parents, teachers, and leaders do now, with the situation as it is? This is the practical question.

Often we won't face this practical here-and-now question. In our justifiable desire to right the wrong, we rush in with judgments, with "shoulds" and "should nots." In a sense we try to change or retrieve the irretrievable past through words.

"You should not think that way." "School is much more important than a car." "You're too young to get married—you don't know what it involves." "You really 'oughta wanna' go on a mission."

What happens? Often to their ears this well-meaning and well-founded advice comes across as: "Don't be that way. Don't think that way. Don't feel that way. Don't be you. I just can't stand it if you're like that."

Then, out of a renewed desperate clinging for identity and worth, they often rebel and seek their unworthy ends more aggressively and defensively than ever.

In return we moralize and react more justifiably, and more ineffectively, than ever.

Somehow we need to break and reverse this destructive, overreactive, self-feeding cycle. For unless we do it, who will influence our children's crossroad decisions? Their friends will. But their friends are young too, with similar tendencies. Generally they advise from extremely limited perspectives and experiences and usually out of their own needs, without stewardship and inspiration.

Consider two suggestions in meeting this difficult challenge.

First, think before you react. Don't be controlled by your own short-range emotional moods and do something that injures whatever relationship and influence you now have. Unless you are in control and act from within out of deeply anchored, true principles, you won't be able to apply the next suggestion.

Second, try to understand that people tend to act in terms of how they feel instead of what they know. Motivation is more a function of the heart than the head. It isn't what a person thinks he should do, but rather how he feels about that should and about himself that motivates him.

When we sense that our language of reason and logic isn't communicating with their language of sentiment and emotion, we should try to understand their language as we would a foreign tongue, without condemning it or rejecting them. We should try to empathize, to reach out to understand how the other sees it and feels it. This very effort communicates respect and acceptance. Defenses lower. The need to fight diminishes. The desire to do what is right is generally set back into motion.

Because a young person's unique problem, feelings, and worth first influence us to understand rather than to judge, then our encouragement and counsel to make long-range decisions on long-range or eternal perspectives will influence him. Influence is a two-way street.
