Stephen R. Covey, How to Succeed with People ( 1971)

26

Speak Two Languages: Logic and Feeling

I'll never forget my first real encounter with the language barrier. It took place in the streets of Paris on Bastille Day, July 12, 1952, when I was still single.

Perhaps out of the sole desire to be able to say that I had danced in the streets of Paris, I invited a lovely young French girl to dance. She first looked to her guardian uncle for permission and then nodded her assent to me.

What a lost, insecure, frustrating feeling! We were totally unable to communicate with each other. (Remember, this was in the days when it was customary to visit while dancing.) We talked, trying to communicate, but in vain. We simply knew nothing of each other's language. Our only communication was in a common understanding of our plight, with its strain of embarrassed laughter.

I often remember that experience and those feelings whenever I find myself in a difficult communication situation. And it helps, because it makes me realize, in at least two ways, the tremendous effort that genuine and successful communication involves.

First, the language of logic and the language of feeling are as different, in the fundamental sense, as English and French. But the problem is we often don't realize this. The mother thinks she can successfully tell her children to cooperate when they are crying out "unfair! unfair!" The husband thinks he can logically point out where his wife needs to improve after her all-day fatiguing battle with the kids. The leader thinks he can successfully explain why Sue should not marry Tom until he joins the Church, while Sue feels that "you don't understand; with us it's different. I love him so and he loves me."

Thinking we understand, we tell instead of ask. Feeling little need for feedback, we talk instead of listen.

Second, when we realize we don't have a common language, we really reach out to each other. We learn to communicate in other ways. We search and seek for understanding of another, for a sense or spirit of what he or she means, without judging or rejecting or making one an offender for a word.

We need to use our "big communication guns" more in our counseling and relating—that is, to communicate our basic feelings, often before or at least alongside our logical explanations.

How is this done? Consider four ways and note how each is a form of emotional communication that helps eradicate the causes of many communication breakdowns—self-doubt and judgment.

We may think, in our hurry-hurry world, that we are accomplishing nothing when we just spend time with or by another person. The opposite is often the case, for when we cheerfully give time, we are transferring its worth to another, together with all the values embodied in our example and character.

One rich private visit or a date with one child—focused on that child's interests—will work wonders in righteous motivation.

Feelings, not logic, do this.

Fundamentally, it takes a lot of self-honesty, self-mastery, and purity to be able to effectively speak the languages of both logic and feeling.
