Stephen R. Covey, How to Succeed with People ( 1971)

27

Have Frequent Private Visits

Years ago, the daughter of a mission president asked her father what he was doing when he visited privately with each missionary. "I'm holding interviews to help the missionaries with their problems," he answered.

"Daddy, why can't I have an interview? I hardly ever get to discuss my problems alone with you."

To that young daughter the word interview meant a time to be alone with her father discussing whatever she wanted to. Her interests, her problems, her concerns were to control the interaction, rather than his. This was the basic ground rule.

The father accepted her definition and started a practice of holding private interviews with each child on a weekly or biweekly basis. It continues to this day. In fact, it is not uncommon at any time for one of his children to say, "Daddy, I want an interview."

Consider two significant benefits of such a practice.

First, each child knows he will have his day in court, an unrushed time when the full attention of the parent is given to his problems and concerns. Relatively few young people (or adults, for that matter) have the experience of being fully listened to without fear of being censored, lectured, or compared.

To simply know one can have an understanding private talk in the future inspires responsible behavior in the present. The frustrating feeling that no one will really listen, much less understand, leads to irresponsible behavior, even to extreme irrational measures calculated to get attention at any cost.

Second, from the unguarded private visit will flow increased warmth, affection, understanding, and confidence. Parents will be both startled and enlightened by the openness and by the live concerns and interests of their youth. And the youth will, in turn, vividly sense the sincerity and depth of concern and interest in their parents and will therefore more readily follow their leadership. What respect is communicated! What recognition and intrinsic value is bestowed!

As with God, so with his children: when communication is honest and continual and when it flows openly in both directions, all things go right.

Question No. 1: Why do we have to formalize private visits? Can't they grow normally out of everyday interaction?

Answer: Yes they can, and perhaps should, but do they? I find that in most busy, complicated family lives, they simply do not. We need to structure times for home evenings, family councils, family prayers, and private visits or they will simply be pushed aside by the heave and thrust of that which is structured—the tasks of life.

To adopt the practice of regular private visits is relatively easy with young children. They love the attention. With older children it is more difficult. Interaction patterns and defenses are more set. Having private visits with them may feel awkward at first, so a parent may need to start in a more natural way out of everyday activities and interactions.

It may take the commitment and determination of an upstream swimmer to regularly have one-to-one visits and to make them successful. But how they will pay off!

Question No. 2: Why should the youth control this particular private visit? Youth are already running too many homes. Don't they need to receive the direction and discipline of the parents more than ever today?

Answer: Yes, youth need and want direction and discipline. And considerable time, structured and unstructured, should be devoted to this. But there also needs to be some time given on a private basis for just listening, empathizing, supporting. If this becomes a time for lecturing or disciplining or parent-initiated advising, many young people will simply not open up. Then parents won't know their hearts.

They need to feel that "there is one time, one twenty-minute (or so) segment of the 168-hour week, that is completely mine. In it, Dad (or Mom) will listen and try to understand."

Such youth-centered visits will test our self-restraint and patience, but ironically they will also increase the positive influence of our teaching and disciplining at other times. Influence, like communication, is a two-way street.

"To every thing there is a season, and a time to every purpose under the heaven. . . . a time to keep silence, and a time to speak." (Eccl. 3:1, 7.)
