Stephen R. Covey, How to Succeed with People ( 1971)

IV

Leadership

28

Begin with the End in Mind

The scriptures teach us that the Lord created the world spiritually before he created it physically.

There is a profound, far-reaching principle here for parents, for leaders—-in fact, for anyone who is serious in trying to accomplish anything.

The principle is: before you start an endeavor, form a clear picture of what you intend the outcome to be. Begin with the end in mind.

Whether making a cake or a dress, the housewife has the recipe or pattern in hand or in mind. She knows before she starts what she wants the cake to taste like or the dress to look like.

Before a building contractor puts a shovel into the ground, he has a detailed blueprint of the final product in hand. The intellectual creation comes first.

Before he takes up the baton, the great orchestra leader has an internal sense of the exact sounds he'll work for, of what the final outcome will be.

Yet for some reason most of us undertake many of our important personal family and occupational tasks without a clear outcome in mind. We focus on methods instead of results or objectives. In fact, gradually our methods often become our objectives.

To illustrate: a schoolteacher professes his major objective is to develop in his students the skill of problem solving and decision making (his intended outcome). Then he proceeds to do his favorite "thing"—lecturing.

Obviously his method, lecturing, won't achieve his objective. However good he may be as a lecturer, the development of the problem-solving/decision-making skill requires a method that dynamically involves the student in practicing the skill.

Another example is found in the mission field. The purpose or intended outcome of finding people is to teach them. However, if a missionary comes to think of tracting as his objective instead of as a method, he'll feel successful when he improves his tracting technique. He won't seriously consider other effective methods of finding people simply because, in his thinking, his method is his objective.

However, once this same missionary has a clear idea of his real objective, he will manifest amazing openness, ingenuity, and resourcefulness in achieving it.

There are several powerful advantages in first thinking results or objectives, then methods. Consider four:

Someone defined a fanatic as a person who, having lost sight of his destination, redoubled his speed. "I'm too busy preparing my lectures to ask why I lecture."

This way of thinking—begin with the end—is having a powerful influence today in industry (management by objectives, management by results, etc.) and in education (performance objectives, behavior objectives, individualized instruction, etc.)

Many believe our space effort really began to focus and accomplish when the vague, nebulous goal of 1957 to "achieve maximum capability in space" was changed in 1962 to the specific, measurable goal of "putting a man on the moon and returning him in safety by 1970."

The opportunities to apply this way of thinking in our personal and family lives and in our occupations are abundant, whether it be the character development of our children, or the development of creative home evenings, or doing results-oriented home teaching, or forming a successful business or whatever. In fact, if we choose, we can create each of our days in our minds and hearts before we live them in fact.

Private victories precede public victories.
