Stephen R. Covey, How to Succeed with People ( 1971)

30

Keys to Effective Delegation

Delegation is the key to multiplying oneself. We delegate, of course, out of necessity: we simply have more work to do than we can do alone.

Let's examine the classic case of Moses and Jethro. Moses was killing himself off, trying to do everything for the children of Israel, to judge all matters, large and small. His father-in-law, Jethro, saw all this and advised, "The thing that thou doest is not good. Thou wilt surely wear away, both thou, and this people that is with thee: for this thing is too heavy for thee; thou art not able to perform it thyself alone."

Jethro then counseled Moses to do two things. First, Moses was to teach the people principles that embodied his judgments so they wouldn't have to come to him to decide every matter. They could reflect on the principles and think their problems through on their own. This is a powerful form of delegation—teaching true principles and trusting the people to apply them.

Second, Moses was to choose faithful followers and delegate all small matters to them, retaining to himself only matters of major importance.

Both of Jethro's recommendations required Moses to take more time at first in setting things up and to take risks. Instead of rendering judgments directly, he had to carefully select and train judges and put his faith in them. They might do it differently than he would. They might make mistakes.

However, Moses realized Jethro's counsel was right. The greater risks were not delegating. He delegated. (Study Exodus 18.)

Consider two reasons for not delegating: time and risk.

Delegation does take more time in the beginning, and many who feel they are now pushed to the hilt simply won't take this time to explain, to train, to commit. Take the housewife who reasoned why she was still doing household tasks her children or other help could do: "I can do the job faster than it takes me to explain it. Besides, I do it better." Soon she accumulates so many things to do she feels even less time to delegate—to explain and train.

By analogy, her reasoning reminds me of the time I was too frantic picking up all my precious papers, which were blowing around my office, to take the time to close the window.

I'm convinced that we parents do many time-consuming tasks around the home that our children can and should do. But the time and process of identifying these tasks and of effectively training and committing our children to do them becomes the obstacle.

The initial delegating time spent, in the long run, is our greatest time saver.

To work through others involves the risk of doing things differently and sometimes doing things wrong. Often the top man in an organization, who is unwilling to delegate more than routine matters, has faith primarily in his own judgment and way of doing things. "It has brought me to where I am now. Why change? Why quarrel with success?" he reasons.

He has a point, and as long as he can continue successfully, we can't argue. Some people have extraordinary capacity and ability and can produce amazing results without delegating major responsibilities.

However, it somewhat depends on how we define success and results. Obviously people don't grow much as automatons, without solid responsibility for results and some freedom in method. In addition, organizations under such an arrangement are necessarily confined to the capacities of the top man. They reflect both his personal strength and weaknesses. To multiply oneself and to compensate for one's personal limitations require delegation.

The late J. C. Penney was quoted as saying that the wisest decision he ever made was to decide that he couldn't do it by himself any longer and that he had to let go. That decision, made long ago, enabled the development and growth of hundreds of stores and many thousands of individuals.

Many supervisors and organizations give lip service to the importance of delegation and development of people, but over a period of time, people learn otherwise. They learn to play it safe, to "make no waves." The politics of yesmanship and the art of mind-reading and second-guessing the boss are developed instead of resourcefulness and responsibleness.

Fearful of their boss and his autocratic, arbitrary ways, wanting everything done his way, they tell him what he likes to hear. Gradually, imperceptibly, he becomes insulated and isolated from what is really going on in the situation. His decisions and judgments suffer accordingly.

The boss didn't really want thinking, committed, responsible producers—he wanted carbon copies of himself. Consequently, the organization will perpetuate, not compensate for, his weaknesses and limitations. He also finds himself unable either to attract or to keep the very talented people he needs the most, unless they are rewarded in other ways.

In short, if we want responsible people and children, we must give them responsibility and hold them accountable. Consider the following simple four-step procedure in thinking through your own delegation opportunity:

Perhaps the crucial question is "If I delegate and trust another, am I willing to stick to my guns, to follow through?"

Delegation is the law of growth, both for organizations and for individuals. As with a child learning to walk, errors and mistakes are inevitably a part of the learning and growing process.

In the final analysis, effective delegation takes the emotional courage to allow, to one degree or another, others to make some mistakes on our own time, money, and good name. This courage consists of patience, self-control, faith in others and in their potential, and respect for individual differences.
