Stephen R. Covey, How to Succeed with People ( 1971)

31

Three Steps of Effective Delegation

Effective delegation is very much like effective communication. It must be two-way. A responsibility is given. A responsibility is received.

There are three distinct, yet interrelated, phases or steps in effectively delegating responsibility.

First, the initial agreement

This means both people have a clear understanding of what is expected and what resources, authority, latitude in method are given. This is the crucial step. It takes strong, clear thinking, a lot of two-way unguarded communication and commitment.

So far as practical, we should try to delegate by the results we expect of the person. Giving some freedom in method will help release the greatest potential in another. For when one is committed to results, he does what is necessary to achieve them. His creative potential is released. He'll grow the most with this approach, and so will the organization.

The typical delegating approach is to talk "duties" and "activities" and "time spent," which are methods in getting things done, not results.

The following are typical attitudes of people given responsibility for methods rather than results:

An employee: "I just knew it wouldn't work but he told me to do it that way. It's not my fault it didn't work out."

A daughter: "Mother won't like the way we do it anyway, so let's wait till she tells us what to do."

Whenever we delegate activities and specify all procedures, we retain responsibility for results ourselves. Perhaps this is the way we want it. That's fine, but let's not give the others the impression they're responsible for results or kid ourselves that we're effective motivators.

Rather, our attitude will likely become: "Unless I carefully follow through, I can't be certain the job will get done." Or we might even try to "hedge our bets": "Sometimes I even give two people the same job—unbeknown to each other—hoping at least one will come through."

When the expected results are obscure, neither person in the agreement knows how well things are going. Then, as with a vague legal contract, the likelihood of misunderstanding and personality conflicts are magnified many times.

Our real test in delegation comes when our employees or children do the job differently. If we think in terms of methods and procedures, to do things differently means to do things wrong. Then we can't bear to stand by and watch such mistakes, such neglect. So we step in.

When we step in and do the neglected work ourselves or have someone else do it; when we trounce someone for taking some initiative for doing it differently; when we double check everything and insist all decisions must be cleared; when we meticulously spell out every duty; when we overrule "their" decisions pertaining to "their" expected results; when we get rid of responsible yet independent thinkers and decision makers; when we multiply policies and procedures and rules—we take back responsibility.

And sometimes, in some situations, with some people, we should do this. But this is not delegating responsibility for results, and we'll need to provide closer, more time-consuming supervision to achieve them.

In short, we can't delegate results and supervise methods.

Second, the process of sustaining the delegatees (employee, child, etc.)

The original agreement of giving and receiving a responsibility immediately turns the supervisor into a source of help rather than of judgment and fear. As one effective executive put it, "I choose good men, give them the job, and then get out of their way."

The supervisor becomes their helping advocate, not their feared adversary. He provides resources. He removes obstacles. He sustains actions and decisions. He gives a vision—the big picture—and provides counsel and training when sought. He shares feedback in the form of information about results just as soon as it comes in.

Whenever the person falls down on the job, on the original agreement, this supervisor's attitude is "How can I help?" rather than "What's wrong with you?" It may be necessary to reaffirm the original agreement or to make out a new one.

Then who supervises? we ask. The delegatee is supervised by results, by actual performance. His conscience (sense of responsibility, commitment, and integrity) is enthroned, not his boss. And it is always with him. Generally a man who has a clear picture of exactly what's expected knows in his heart how he's doing better than his supervisor. This is one of the reasons, when vision and opportunity are given, why people set high goals for themselves and are more strict in evaluating their own work than others would dare be.

Third, the accountability process

The "days of judgment" are based on the original agreement or contract. It is largely one of self-evaluation, since result information was given as soon as it was available. This is also an ideal time to revise objectives and plans in terms of the current situation to challenge, to commit, to inspire, to appreciate.

There is no need to "fire" people with this delegation process. People are dignified throughout and will resign themselves or seek a new assignment, training, or special help to make them equal to their present one.

In contrast to the traditional approach, in which the supervisor evaluates and motivates, the follow-up process in this approach is always in terms of the original agreement. The delegatee evaluates and motivates himself. What time it saves! What human potential is released!

The key throughout this entire three-step process for the delegator—whether parent or supervisor—is to think clearly and to be strong and consistent within himself.
