Stephen R. Covey, How to Succeed with People ( 1971)

32

The Best Way to Learn Is by Doing

The only way to learn how to play tennis is by playing it. Hearing about it, reading about it, watching others play it will help teach good theory, but good skill is developed only in practice.

This idea holds not only in the world of sports but also in less obvious areas of life, in developing true skill and competence in anything, whether it be how to give an understanding response, how to resolve conflict, or how to courageously confront another with certain realities.

Two principles of learning are involved. First, we learn what to do by listening, reading, watching, etc. Second, we learn how to do by doing, by practicing the what.

What to do and how to do it are two different kinds of knowledge and are frequently confused. Each kind of knowledge is vital and complements the other. One cannot be substituted for the other. Neither can one stand alone. For effectiveness, they depend upon each other.

What-to-do knowledge might be called intellectual or mind knowledge. How-to-do-it knowledge might be called instinctive, habit, or nerve-fiber knowledge.

Let me illustrate.

A mission president determined to teach the district and branch presidents how to give a call. He believed that if the calls were given correctly, resulting in a deep commitment, a fundamental cause of many problems would be eliminated.

The training meeting dealt with the great importance of giving a call right and with fundamental principles in doing so.

What happened? Some momentary inspiration and resolution. But shortly the leaders dropped back to their old ways and habits.

The leader then decided the district and branch presidents needed a second session to "see" the principles demonstrated.

Result? Again very little, if any, change. He wrongly assumed learning plus seeing would do the trick. He had again taught the "what" but not the "how." They were reconvinced but not converted, not changed. How to give a call is a skill, like tennis, and is learned best by doing.

Thus, the third training session provided opportunity for each person to practice giving calls, utilizing where appropriate the principles. They practiced all day—giving several calls, to different people, in differing circumstances. After each practice they'd get feedback from both an observer and the one receiving the call. Then they'd practice again. Then more feedback and theory. Then more practice in light of it. Then reflect. Then practice.

Something very basic was beginning to happen. Knowledge was becoming skill and their success thrilled them. They left that day fatigued but converted and happy. The effect in the mission was immediate in most areas. The leaders enthusiastically reported the results of giving calls right, both on themselves and with their people. Success bred more success.

Consider two additional implications for all of us who are interested in improving our own human skills and in helping others improve theirs.

First, learning by doing, however vital, is difficult. It obviously seems less efficient than telling or showing. It takes more time, more patience, more courage.

It usually involves an awkward phase of unlearning for many adults. Like trying to learn the right tennis grip, after years of doing it wrong, you don't know where you are for a while. It's uncomfortable. Sometimes it's downright embarrassing.

Second, when possible, it's best to practice in an environment that makes it easy and rewarding to learn from mistakes. You wouldn't practice your new tennis grip for the first time in a tournament.

I find most people are in this very dilemma in life: they know what to do but not how to do it. And they're afraid to go through the inevitably awkward mistake-making process of learning how for fear of embarrassment or ridicule. The guilt resulting from this "knowledge gap" is often crippling—unnecessarily.

A gentle home is an ideal place to learn human skills. Husbands and wives can even role play with each other how to communicate with their children on sensitive issues. The priceless skill of empathy is thus sharpened. Leaders and teachers can also design training programs that include opportunity for practice and for feedback.

When you think deeply about it, from an eternal perspective the principle of learning by doing is the essence of our purpose in mortality.
