Stephen R. Covey, How to Succeed with People ( 1971)

33

Integrity: The Foundation of Leadership

A great deal is heard nowadays of the credibility gap. It's another way of saying: "Are they giving us the straight scoop?" "Can we trust them?"

These questions are felt, if not asked, everywhere—children ask of their parents, employees of their bosses, church workers of their leaders.

All of this inward doubting and questioning underscores the most fundamental but often neglected (with so much emphasis on technique, knowledge, style) principle of successful leadership: that the character or integrity of the leader is supreme.

The Lord gives a magnificent illustration of this as he contrasts three different leadership and teaching types or methods. Study the chart below in relation to John 10:1-15.

First note that since the shepherd (No. 1) truly cares for the sheep, he can be open and honest in communicating with them. He has no need to pretend or to manipulate from a distance. With pure motives, the sheep trust him and will also be open with him; thus, two-way communication. He has listened and understands their hopes and fears and needs. They know he cares, for he is kind and is willing to sacrifice himself for them. Therefore, he can lead them from in front through the drawing power of example and love. They give their loyalty, cooperation, and best effort. And their common goals are achieved.

But the hired sheepherder, a hireling (No. 2), has no such character. He's in it for his wage, whether it be money or power or even a better job, with more prestige. However, to win approval and to make good impressions, he pretends to care. Sometimes he professes his sincere intentions most vigorously. But since attitude communicates more eloquently than words, the sheep are puzzled. The trumpet isn't giving forth a certain sound. ("White man speaks with forked tongue.")

Consequently he can't lead in front. They won't follow. So he drives from behind and uses one approach after another to keep them moving or working. Carrot (reward) and stick (threats), hovering over, lecturing, "psyche up" cheerleading meetings, and other manipulations, such as buttering 'em up, chewing 'em out.

He doesn't need to wonder why attendance is low, why meetings and activities lack punch, why loyalty is superficial. "A double minded man is unstable in all his ways." (James 1:8.)

When the going really gets rough, when "the wolf" comes, his real motives surface. He deserts the sheep. He gives up on that ungrateful, rebellious son. He asks the bishop for a release or another job—and, of course, he has a "good" reason.

But sometimes he just resigns inside and grows indifferent and goes through the motions, like the sheep-type leader.

The sheep leader (No. 3) wants to be liked by everybody. He's often socially intelligent, knowing what others want, but has no vision or lifting power. He compromises the program, even the standards. His children and those he supervises like all the good and fun times—the course of least resistance—but when the going gets rough he can't understand why they desert him and follow a stronger-minded sheep.

Far and away the most important factor in leadership is the depth of sincere care in the leader. If we don't really care, all the latest techniques and leadership formulas will bring failure. But with it we can have success in spite of some bungling. As someone once put it, "I don't care how much you know until I know how much you care."

To become shepherds we must follow the True Shepherd.
