Stephen R. Covey, How to Succeed with People ( 1971)

V

General Principles

34

Understanding Our Problems

What are your problems?

A problem that can be understood is half solved. Consider three steps in understanding your problems.

First, think deeply about the problems that concern you most. What are they? Personal problems, such as a big career decision or the habit of procrastination? Family problems, such as improving your communication with your spouse or child? Financial problems, such as meeting payments or how to get ahead and save for college and missions?

Church problems, such as how to get people out to meeting, how to internally motivate the home teachers, how to get the priesthood leader to understand the needs of your auxiliary, how to release someone without offending them?

Work problems, such as how to get the ear of the boss, or how to secure more cooperation and dedication from your employees?

Or how to do all your church jobs without neglecting your family? How to handle rebellious teenagers? How to reach or reactivate an indifferent family member?

Second, classify all your problems under one of three categories: (1) direct control (own behavior, attitudes, decisions); (2) indirect control (others' behavior, attitudes, decisions); (3) no control (the past, natural laws and forces, certain fixed realities you live in).

This second step will take careful thinking and you may be amazed, if not chagrined, to find that you have no control whatever over many of your concerns and problems. Furthermore, you may have unwittingly acted on the assumption in the past that, in the name of position or authority or money, you could directly influence or control the behavior of others.

Perhaps you can buy a man's time, physical presence, or even his skill to do a particular job. You can almost force or pressure an employee or a young person to conform. But you cannot buy cooperation, you cannot buy loyalty, you cannot buy enthusiasm or initiative or resourcefulness. You cannot buy the dedication of heart, mind, and soul. You have to earn these things.

This is why some of us have been frustrated in the past; knowingly or unknowingly, we have assumed that indirect control problems were under our direct control.

Third, by using the same three categories, decide on a plan of action to deal with or solve the problems. In this process you'll discover one very simple, yet profound, truth. The answer to any of your problems lies in changing yourself.

Let me illustrate.

With regard to direct control problems—your own behavior—this truth is self-evident. If your problem is weight, you can immediately begin a regimen of dieting and/or exercise to solve it. If your problem is lack of ability to communicate, you can begin to take steps, such as acquire training, to overcome it. In short, direct control problems are solved by changing your habits of doing and thinking; in other words, self-control.

What about indirect control problems? You say, "Why must I change when it's my wife's (or husband's or child's or boss's) fault?" Simply because your past methods of influence haven't worked. If they had worked, you wouldn't have the problem, would you? Since they didn't work, you had better use new methods of influencing others. And this means you will have to change. You need to change your methods of influence, which means changing your own doing and thinking behavior. Again, self-control.

For instance, we all hear complaints from time to time that "if only the boss could understand my program or my problem. . . ." But few complainers take the time to prepare the kind of presentation that the boss would listen to and respect, in his language, with his problems in mind.

Now take the last category—no control problems. Since we can't control the problems, we can control our reaction to them. We decide within ourself how anything or anybody outside ourself will affect us. This attitude control frees one from circumstances and the judgments of others. We can learn from failures; develop patience and courage from trying situations; radiate cheer and hope in suffering. Our Lord is the supreme exemplar of this kind of overcoming, this self-control.

The great psychologist-philosopher William James put it: "The greatest single discovery of my generation is that we can change our circumstances by a mere change of our attitude."

We must look to ourselves for solutions.

"Keep thy heart with all diligence; for out of it are the issues of life." (Proverbs 4:23.)
