Stephen R. Covey, How to Succeed with People ( 1971)

35

Keep Means and Ends Straight

It was going to be the best trip the family had ever taken—and the best vacation too. They were going east. A whole month's trip!

Oh, how thrilled the parents were, especially for their children! When they were young they had never had such a privilege. "Just think, kids," they would enthusiastically say, "to see the very birthplaces of our church and our country. When you visit the Sacred Grove and the Hill Cumorah you'll come to appreciate the truth and value of the Church just as we do."

At first the children were excited, but gradually, beginning with the teenagers, they grew indifferent and apathetic toward the trip and, at times, even resentful. They began to moan about having to leave their friends and all the summer fun on the social agenda.

The parents were both hurt and puzzled by this reaction. They had saved and prepared so long and held such high educational and spiritual expectations for such a trip! Now the children seemed so ungrateful, so unaware, so self-centered.

With the trip still weeks away, they were about to call the whole thing off when they discussed the situation with a friend who wasn't so emotionally involved.

This friend observed that the children might be reacting against the feeling that more value was being attached to the marvelous trip than was being given to them. "They may also be reacting against the fear of not being able to meet your high learning expectations."

A fear of failure, particularly of becoming unacceptable through it, destroys the very desire to try. Many people fear success for a similar reason: one success creates the expectation of more, which means more pressure and possible disappointment.

The friend suggested the parents stop pushing the trip and talking out their excitements and expectations. "Just live naturally and cheerfully, leave travel brochures and material about, and let the children express themselves as they naturally desire to. Don't judge their expressions; just listen to them. Listen to their interests, their enthusiasms, what they are looking to. Give value to your children rather than to the trip."

The parents did this and within a short time the children were all fired up about the trip. No one could talk about anything else, right up to departure time.

And the trip surpassed everybody's expectations!

This little family episode illustrates how easy it is to confuse means—methods and experiences—and ends, or ultimate purposes and values. These parents had placed more value on what they wanted their children to learn than on the children themselves. The children sensed this and rebelled by going in the very opposite direction, almost as if to test whether the parents put any value on them as they were. Once they felt assured of intrinsic worth and of their parents' unconditional love for them, they were freed of the need or desire to rebel. They were acceptable as they were and therefore could take on this new adventure without fear of becoming unacceptable if certain expectations were not realized.

But when we show respect only for certain shoulds of life and condition our love on conformity to these shoulds, we have a reactive, negative influence. Youth often then rebel against the very thing we're trying to teach under the popular, although defensive, banner "I gotta be me."

We have all seen people almost reactively driven into bad attitudes, bad experiences, even bad marriages, by well-intentioned but unwise parents who confuse ends and means by communicating conditional love and acceptance.

I saw this in myself just the other day in as small a thing as trying to teach my little son to swim. Placing more value on his swimming than on him—his level, interests, fears, and feelings—I found myself almost forcing through shame and comparison, through subtle threats and conditional love. Result? Hurt feelings and an aversion toward swimming in spite of my repentance.

The supreme value is the individual personality. Its growth and development according to the gospel plan is the supreme purpose. Everything else is a means to that end.

Outside of example—love's expression—nothing encourages a person to obey the sacred principles and laws of life more than our obedience to the laws of love toward that person.
