Stephen R. Covey, How to Succeed with People ( 1971)

36

We Reap Only What We Sow

Hearing a knock at the door, I opened it and invited Clyde, a student of mine, in.

"I've come to find out how I'm doing in your class," he commented.

I had sensed a tendency to just get by in Clyde since the beginning of the term, and from other contacts we developed a good rapport together, so I felt safe in confronting him directly.

"Clyde, you really know how you're doing far better than I do. You didn't really come in to find out how you're doing but rather to find out how I thought you were doing, to see if you were 'beating the system.' You tell me, Clyde, just how are you doing?"

"Not very well," he answered. "I really haven't been able to put the time in I should have. I have such a heavy load and have been so busy with school activities."

I continued to confront him. "Clyde, aren't these just excuses for your own laziness in getting down to your studies as you should?"

He then opened up and admitted he'd been goofing off and that it was getting so late in the term he was beginning to worry and was now attempting to find out how he stood with each teacher so he could intelligently begin the cramming process.

The practice of "psyching out" the teacher, figuring out what he wants, how he tests, what one has to do and doesn't have to do, develops the attitudes of second guessing, masterminding, and appearing to be, as well as the skills of memorizing, regurgitating, and forgetting. As one student put it, "I don't work to learn. I just work to get good grades."

These tendencies are widespread not just with the youth in school today but with all age levels in all fields of endeavor. Consider your own past school experiences and habits, and you may find you too had these tendencies. I did.

The problem is that this approach in many social or manmade systems works. Some cramming experts learn to get by well in school without really learning how to think, to work, to communicate, to cooperate. Many whose personal and family lives are pockmarked with inconsideration, irresponsibility, and selfishness learn how to wear a different mask for the public and make quite an impression. They are successful for a while, but constant role playing is tortuous and fatiguing, and sooner or later a stress or dilemma situation will shear away their false facade, revealing the hypocrisy underneath. Justice is an exact taskmaster, and all accounts are eventually paid to him in full.

Even in church work we can strive for appearances of activity and faithfulness, so as to impress others, while inside we know we are not magnifying or being magnified.

Although its harvest in the long run is bitter, this shortcut approach is powerfully appealing, for it excuses consistent personal effort, initiative, and responsibility. Manmade religious doctrines of salvation are built upon it. Economic and political philosophies revolve around it.

I believe the key for parents, teachers, and leaders in resisting such shortcut doctrines and cramming practices is found in studying natural or God-made systems, as opposed to those that are social or manmade.

Take farming, for instance. Can you imagine a farmer cramming to bring in the harvest? You know, forgetting to plant in the spring, throwing some seed out in the summer, neglecting the weeding and watering, and then just before the big harvest really hitting it in an all-night session?

Can you imagine a mile runner, competing in the Olympics, cramming? Even though he looked great at the gun, within a lap the months of dissipation and violated training rules would show in his lungs and legs.

This means to raise your young with increasing amounts of real responsibility for results, where results can be seen, if possible. No escapes. No excuses. Appearances only are unacceptable.

This means to patiently teach and train them in the law of the harvest: we reap only what we sow. Then we must commit them, followed by showing trust in asking them to judge their own effort and performance, in terms of their consciences, their trained sense of responsibility. My experience convinces me that if we are honest and genuinely care, they will tell us how they are really doing and they will often ask for our help rather than pretending everything's okay.

This means we will also need to get close enough to them to do some honest confronting and to give candid feedback. We will need courage to keep from shielding them from the consequences of their actions and attitudes, particularly when some of those consequences might embarrass us.

Obviously to try to teach and do these things when we ourselves live by appearances, cramming, and shortcuts is like playing golf with a tennis racket.
