Stephen R. Covey, How to Succeed with People ( 1971)

37

Accept in Order to Improve

One of the most common hang-ups people face in solving human problems is their own inability or unwillingness to face present realities. They refuse to start working on the situation as it is. They want it the way they want it or the way it should be.

To avoid facing and dealing with present facts is as foolish as a father saying to his son, "I don't care if the doctor says you've got rickets. You look perfectly healthy to me. Get up and do your work!" The very first step in that son's recovery is for both father and son to accept the fact that the boy has rickets! The next step is to begin to do something about it. But unless the first is taken, the next will never follow.

Take a wife, for instance, who constantly badgers and nags her husband to change. She refuses to accept him the way he is. "Of course I refuse!" she exclaims. "That's not how he should be! If I accept him, he'll never change."

However ironical it may seem, the first step in changing or improving another is to accept him as he is. Similarly, nothing reinforces present defensive behavior more than judgment or rejection.

Why is this so? First, simply because to be accepted is deeply satisfying and to be rejected is deeply threatening—like being eliminated from the human race. (One father actually told his asthmatic daughter to "leave the room if you have to breathe that way.") And second, because a feeling of acceptance and worth frees a person from the need to defend and helps release the natural growth tendency to improve.

Acceptance is not condoning a weakness or agreeing with an opinion. Rather, it is affirming the intrinsic worth of another through admitting or acknowledging that he does feel or think a particular way.

The apostle Peter, in substance, counseled, "Wives, if you have 'the word' and your husbands have not 'the word' and you want to bring your husbands to 'the word,' then do it without the use of 'the word.' Do it by your good behavior and by the unfailing loveliness of a meek and gentle spirit." (See 1 Peter 3.)

Many a wife or husband has seen miracles gradually happen in their homes once they stopped trying to reform their spouses and began to work upon themselves so as to be a light rather than a judge.

Look to your children for abundant evidence of the power of acceptance. Just recently I saw it in my six-year-old son as he learned to catch a baseball. At first he refused to play with the older children. He said he didn't care to play, that he wanted to do other things. The other things essentially amounted to spying on the others out of the corner of his eye. Actually, the problem was that he cared too much. The possible hurt and embarrassment of failure, of not being able to catch, outweighed the enjoyment of learning.

Then I saw my teenage daughter take him aside and let him know she accepted him and accepted the fact he didn't know how to catch very well but that she would teach him how to catch if he wanted her to. He did. Acceptance punctured the fear and sting of failure; in fact, it redefined it as a kind of success. Success is often on the far side of failure.

Consider three additional reasons why we often hold back from accepting another or agreeing to begin working with the situation as it is.

First, it is so much easier to reject and judge than to accept and understand. It takes so little effort to preach the shoulds and so much patience and courage to deal with the knotty or the unpleasantness of what is.

Second, we think accepting certain realities is negative. To think positively is not to reject or deny certain seen realities but rather to accept them and then to believe in the unseen realities (the potential within), and to act accordingly. Our attitude can be "I accept you as you are but I treat you as you can and should be." For what a person is includes what he can become.

Few things are more negative and frustrating than that brand of positive thinking which denies the existence of things as they are and finds itself unable to give straight answers to simple questions.

Third, to accept another and to willingly and patiently work within the present situation, beginning at the present level, takes self-acceptance. This, in turn, emerges from honest self-communication and searching. This may be agonizing, for accepting another as he or she is now may make us feel responsible and guilty for the unhappy consequences of failure to do so in the past.

As it is put in boxing lingo, "You have to hit from where your fist is."
