Stephen R. Covey, How to Succeed with People ( 1971)

38

Mercy Must Not Rob Justice

It was the night before the last day of finals. I could hear someone opening drawers and files in the office of another professor who I knew was out of town. A student shortly came out and explained to me he was turning in some late papers and had found the door unlocked.

After some checking about I was convinced this student had stolen the final exam, but the nature of the evidence was such that I would have to involve the other professor to clearly establish proof. I hesitated to do this, for I knew the teacher would immediately flunk the student. There would be no mercy. The student needed the class for graduation, which was to take place the next day. The student's parents and family had traveled a considerable distance to participate in all the final festivities and to see him graduate. He had his job lined up and was to start within a month. He was a very prominent school officer. On and on I reasoned with myself.

I decided to confront him directly rather than involve his professor. He denied everything and explained away all the circumstantial evidence I presented.

Again I debated within myself, finally deciding to let him know that I knew he had cheated but would not involve his professor because I felt the consequences on so many people would exceed his terrible wrong.

Almost a year later I asked an officer of the company he hired with how he was getting along.

"He's now with another company," was the answer.

"Why, what happened?" I inquired.

After pressing a little more, this company official said, "We have enough on him to send him to the federal penitentiary for five years." And then he gave the history: how outstanding his first months were—so outstanding they took a deep look and found all kinds of wheeling and dealing, some illegal, much borderline.

"Why didn't you confront him with the law?" I asked.

"We were afraid of the consequences. His parents, family—so many were involved."

How those words pierced my conscience! I wondered how much guilt was mine for letting "mercy rob justice." In fact, I found that this individual had a consistent pattern of getting away with things for years. He was able to talk himself out of almost everything. There was always an escape. A smooth talker, popular with many, trusted by none. Several of us, through his formative years, could see this pattern evolving and could have done something about it, could have faced him up to the real consequences of his own actions.

The cancerous spirit of lawlessness afflicting our nation today also had small beginnings. We can do something about the seeds we sow and how we tend them, but nothing about the harvest we reap. We have no control over consequences, only over actions and attitudes.

One of the kindest things, therefore, we can do for our children is to let the natural or logical consequences of their own actions teach them responsible behavior, justice. They may not like it or us, but popularity is a fickle standard by which to measure character development. Only sincere repentance, not mercy, can satisfy the demands of justice. (Study Alma 42.)

Insisting on justice demands more true love, not less.

We care enough for their growth and security to suffer their displeasure. It is at this time, or shortly after their negative emotions spend themselves, that we need to "show forth an increase of love." They learn that law governs life and that we ourselves can be depended upon to be faithful to that law.

Whenever we, as parents or teachers or leaders, see a pattern of lawlessness or phoniness developing in our young people, then is the time to do some serious one-to-one teaching. Often, however, talking isn't enough; it may be their long suit. We need to clearly point out exactly what the consequences are if things continue. Then our consistent, kind-but-firm follow-through will eloquently communicate our sincerity and serious purpose.

Just as shock treatments help bring some highly disturbed people back to reality, so does candidly confronting someone we are responsible to, that we see through their phoniness, that we care enough for them to not let them get by with it anymore, and that we believe in them enough to expect more.

A life of pretense is so tortuous many literally hunger to be released from it by someone who they know "sees through me," who "understands me," and most importantly, who "cares enough to stay with me on the road back."
