Stephen R. Covey, How to Succeed with People ( 1971)

39

The Need for Meaningful Projects

He was a restless boy. Irritable, too—always picking fights with younger brothers and sisters. He was uncooperative and bored. You could tell he was unhappy.

This teenager's parents were almost beside themselves trying to get him to change.

But through honest introspection and prayer, the parents eventually got a grip on themselves and refused to be controlled any longer by the spirit that he brought to the home. Then one day the father noticed, and was surprised by, his son's interest in some sketchy plans for a fence around the yard. He quickly seized the opportunity to involve his son. Little by little the boy became so involved in planning the project that he wanted to build it himself.

And build it he did. It took him several hours every day for over two months. He made a lot of mistakes—his father let him. But the final product was beautiful. And what a transformation in the attitude of the boy and in the spirit of the home! What a sense of achievement all around!

Just as soon as the teenage son found a meaningful project and reacted responsibly to it, all his energies were unified and focused. Reaping an inner sense of purpose and fulfillment, he lost the need to take his inner void and conflict out on others.

This story illustrates the healing influence of a meaningful project and implies two principles.

First, what is meaningful to a parent may be meaningless to a child. In addition to teaching values, we need to empathize with and show respect for the child's own interests and then to create opportunities for developing them.

Second, projects take on meaning when people are involved in the planning and thinking processes. Your thinking and my doing aren't nearly as involving or exciting as my (or our) thinking and my (or our) doing.

The story also involves an even more basic principle of life with much wider application, one that applies to all of us, It is the supreme importance of having a sense of meaning or purpose in our daily activities.

Dr. Viktor E. Frankl, president of the Austrian Medical Society for Psychotherapy, is the father of a fascinating philosophy based on every person's need for a sense of meaning, called logotherapy.

He developed logotherapy out of harrowing years in Nazi prison camps during World War II. He learned what he called "the last of human freedoms"—the ability to choose one's attitudes in a given set of circumstances.

A doctor primarily deals with problems or diseases originating or manifested in the body. The psychotherapist is primarily concerned with mental and emotional illnesses. Inevitably, both the doctor and the therapist deal extensively with psychosomatic illnesses, those having to do with the intimate relationship between mind and body.

Logotherapy concerns itself with the relationship between mind and spirit, teaching that many mental/ emotional illnesses or neuroses are caused by a sense of meaninglessness, a sense of inner emptiness, a spiritual void. In short, many so-called mental and emotional illnesses are really symptoms of spiritual sickness.

Logotherapy attempts to eliminate this sickness, this emptiness, by helping the individual to detect, not invent, his unique meaning in life, even in suffering. How encouraging it is to find a therapy that attempts to deal with the whole of man's personality, particularly that spiritual dimension which is filled with meaning and potential and with a consciousness of responsibility.

All people need to be "anxiously engaged in a good cause." Without such projects, life loses its meaning and we wither and die before our time. The life-span of people who retire, looking for a tensionless state, without meaningful projects, is short. Dr. Frankl found that when prisoners lost a sense of hope and meaning, they gave up their will to live and they died.

Life is actually sustained by tension between where we are now and some goal out there worth straining and struggling for.

This kind of goal tension is fundamentally different from that kind of dissipating tension which emerges from conflicting motives and desires, from trying to be all things to all people, from hectic pressurized schedules, and from immersion in, as one put it, "the thick of think things."

Instead of asking what the meaning of life is, in the abstract sense, we need to ask, "What is life asking of me in this situation?" We then give our answer to life (conscience) by reacting responsibly in that situation. Responsibleness is the essence of mental health and happiness.

This whole idea, and much more, is best expressed in the incomparable philosophy of the Savior. "He who loses his life for my sake shall find it."
