Stephen R. Covey, How to Succeed with People ( 1971)

40

Seven Final Convictions

I would like to share seven of my deepest convictions regarding human and family relations.

Most of us do the very opposite. We want to be first understood. For example, take a parent who says, "How can I reach my teenagers? They won't listen to me at all!"

Examine this puzzled father's expression again. I suggest the declaration "They won't listen to me at all" is the answer to his opening question "How can I reach my teenagers?" This father feels sure he's right in what he wants to tell his children—and he probably is—but, like it or not, in order to reach his teenage children, he may have to listen to them first before they will listen to him.

Often when we do listen we're too like the rushed driver at a red light. We anxiously wait for the green light so we can go, so we can have our say, so we can be understood. We simply aren't listening—we only stop talking and prepare our next response.

We must diagnose (understand) before we prescribe (advise).

When another feels you genuinely care about him and that you understand his unique problems and feelings, he also feels he has influenced you. He will then become amazingly open to your influence.

We take the prescription because it is based on the diagnosis.

People are extremely tender inside, particularly those who act as if they are not, and very often those we think self-sufficient. And if we'll listen carefully with the third ear, the heart, they'll tell us so.

The key to people lies in showing love, particularly unconditional love. This is a basic kind of love that gives people a sense of intrinsic worth and security. It is unrelated to conforming behavior or comparison with others. Many have never experienced it in their upbringing, and they live out of internal doubt and fear. They therefore borrow their security and strength from external things—appearances, status symbols, authoritative positions, past achievements, associations.

This pattern passes from generation to generation, for borrowing strength inevitably builds weakness. "Only by persuasion, by long-suffering, by gentleness and meekness, and by love unfeigned. . . ."

A love-starved child is as incapable of truly responsible behavior as a cripple is of winning foot races. One little act of kindness, one effort to understand, will do more to win cooperation and confidence than a thousand logical lectures. Such pure love is magic and will work miracles in reforming lives.

We all distrust superficial human relations techniques and manipulative success formulas that do not flow out of a sincere attitude and a character of integrity. Over time they boomerang. "Though I speak with the tongues of men and of angels, and have not charity, I am become as sounding brass, or a tinkling cymbal." (1 Corinthians 13:1.)

The statement "the child is always father of the man" means that the first few years of childhood so structure the character as to last a lifetime. Such widely believed determinism may have some validity except for the power of the Savior who gives, to those who will receive him in the revealed way, a new birth, a new childhood, a divine nature.

There is no other way to change man's nature, to purify his heart. Legislation won't do it. Education won't do it. Believing repentance unto Christ will.

Those who have entered into gospel covenants are under a different set of laws and expectations—a different psychology, if you will—than those who do not. The mental and emotional consequences of disobedience are more severe and are infinitely more sublime to the faithful. Gospel therapy alone can heal the sick soul or the broken relationship. Such therapy embraces the true principles and methods in every other therapy and, in addition, embodies the transcendent power of the Savior.

Because the root of our problems is spiritual, the root solution must be also.

Growth, therefore, is a step-by-step process. It can't be skipped, forced, or feigned. Through diligent obedience to the right laws it can be accelerated. But expecting perfection before sundown is sure discouragement, like trying to do calculus without understanding algebra. We must simply do some things before we can do other things.

The common thread, therefore, that interweaves itself through success in every department of life is self-discipline. Our flesh must increasingly become a servant of our spirit and our spirit a servant of the Holy Spirit.

The center of the spiritual exercise is two-way prayer, which involves listening with the heart to the still small voice of the Spirit and then committing to obey what is heard. The Lord often awaits our answer before he will give his.

Such a daily private victory is the key to all other victories.
