The following are additional ideas Primary leaders may use with the Sharing Time printed in the February 2007 Liahona. For the lesson, instructions, and activity that correspond with these ideas, see “I’ll Follow Him in Faith” on pages F4 and F5 of the children’s section in this issue.

1.  Create a display showing some of the beauties of the earth. You could show pictures of animals, flowers, plants, and foods. Ask the children to think about the beautiful world we live in. While the pianist plays a reverent song, pass around a flower, and ask the children to look carefully at it. Ask the children, “Who made the flower?” (Jesus Christ—it was part of the Creation.) Ask, “Why did He make the flower?” (Because He loves us and wants us to live in a beautiful world.) Challenge them to remember Heavenly Father’s love every time they see a flower.

    Give each child a piece of paper and some crayons. Ask them to draw a picture of one of God’s creations while the pianist plays softly. When the children are finished, display them in the Primary room.

2.  Ask the children what a miracle is. (A miracle is an amazing or unusual occurrence that cannot always be explained logically. It shows the power of God.) Have them share examples of what a miracle could be, such as the sun not setting at night or manna appearing on the ground each morning. Look up 2 Nephi 27:23. Point out two things: that God is a God of miracles and that He works according to our faith.

    Divide the children into four groups. Several days before Primary, ask four Primary leaders to discuss a miracle that the Lord performed while on the earth. For example, discuss how He cleansed the 10 lepers (see Luke 17:12–19), healed a blind man (see Mark 8:22–26), and so on. Use four stations (see “Stations,” Teaching, No Greater Call [1999], 179), and have the children rotate to each station. Ask each leader to explain that Jesus Christ performed miracles to show His power and to bless people. Ask each to bear testimony of the Savior.

3.  Song presentation: “This Is My Beloved Son” (Children’s Songbook, 76; Liahona, Dec. 1997, F4). You may want to teach this song in several successive weeks, giving attention to the story contained in each verse. Divide the children into three groups. Assign each group one of the first three scriptures listed at the bottom-right corner of the music: Matthew 3:16–17; 3 Nephi 11:6–8; Joseph Smith—History 1:17. Ask the children to listen to discover what the verses have in common. In these scriptures, Heavenly Father introduces His Son and bears testimony of Him. Sing the last line of the song, “This is My Beloved Son. Hear Him!” Have the children sing the line with you several times. Ask what happened in the first scripture (Jesus was baptized). Display Gospel Art Picture Kit 208 (John the Baptist Baptizing Jesus) as you sing the first verse. Have the children join you when you sing the last line. Repeat, having the children sing all of the words. Ask what happened in the second scripture (Jesus appeared to the Nephites). Display Gospel Art Picture Kit 315 (Christ Appears to the Nephites) as you sing the second verse. Again, have the children join you when you sing the last line. Ask what happened in the third scripture (Heavenly Father and Jesus appeared to Joseph Smith). Display Gospel Art Picture Kit 403 (The First Vision) as you sing the third verse. Have the children join you when you sing the last line. Explain that this time Heavenly Father was more than a voice from heaven—He was right there! Have all of the children look up D&C 18:34–36. Ask them to listen and answer the question, “Who else can hear the voice of our Heavenly Father?” Sing the final verse to find the answer.
