Various authors, Regional Studies in LDS History: British Isles ( 1990)

British Isles Symposium: 1987 Introduction

Continuing the tradition established in 1985, the Department of Church History and Doctrine focussed its attention on the British Isles in 1987. New England in 1985 and Arizona in 1986 had been the object of their scholarly attention. A volume has been published on each of these areas.

1987 was an ideal time to study about the British Isles because it marked the 150th anniversary of the Church in that area. The first LDS missionaries had set foot on English soil in 1837.

In keeping with established patterns, faculty members of the department prepared papers, some of which were presented at BYU prior to departure and some of which were presented on site in the British Isles.

The itinerary in the British Isles was designed to take people to the key Church history sites as efficiently as possible. Under the able direction of James R. Moss, they traveled to Scotland, England and Wales. Sites visited included Edinburgh, Preston, Liverpool, Herefordshire, Merthyr Tydfil and London.

This volume includes only a selection from the papers presented in 1987. Some of these papers have been published in other books and journals and have, therefore, been mentioned here only in a bibliographical entry rather than reprinting the article. Other papers never reached the final written form. Consequently, in this volume we are publishing only part of the papers presented in 1987.

The committee which planned the trip and arranged for the papers consisted of James R. Moss, Keith W. Perkins, Larry C. Porter and Donald Q. Cannon.

These Church history experiences have been a source of inspiration and knowledge for every member of the Department of Church History and Doctrine. The series of books, it is hoped, will help share this knowledge with interested people everywhere. This volume is designed to assist in capturing the significant history of the Church in Great Britain.
