Various authors, Regional Studies in LDS History: British Isles ( 1990)

The Church Comes of Age in Britain

Richard O. Cowan

Following the disrupting devastation of World War II, a new day dawned for the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints in Britain. Hugh B. Brown, who had served as mission president before the war, returned in 1944. The mission office, which had been moved to a safer location during the German blitz, was now reestablished at its former London location. President Brown commended the British Saints for their faithful fortitude during the difficult days of the war. Speaking at district conferences with characteristic fire and enthusiasm, he told them that the First Presidency now wanted them to rededicate themselves to living the gospel, reminding them that even though the war with a physical enemy might be over, the war with Satan would continue. [^1]

193 James R. Moss has identified three distinct stages in Church development worldwide which can be applied to the developments which occurred in Britain during the postwar decades. "The first stage of growth is essentially one of laying the foundations of the Church." Most converts are drawn from the lower socio-economic classes. Leadership is typically provided by missionaries from abroad. The relatively small congregations meet in rented halls, often in undesirable neighborhoods. At worst, the Saints are persecuted; at best, they are either ignored or regarded as belonging to a strong religious sect.

"The second stage of development has historically been one of building the kingdom upon a solid foundation to enable the Church to come out of obscurity and become a force for good in society." Second and third-generation members, as well as new converts, increasingly come from the middle class. Local Saints begin to assume leadership. Meetinghouses are frequently remodeled residences. The Saints have developed their own traditions and look to local role models.

194"The third and final stage in Church development is characterized by the flowering of gospel programs and the development of member maturity." The organization of stakes reflects the Saints' ability to provide leadership and support for the whole range of Church activities. The Church constructs attractive and well-equipped meetinghouses which give the impression of permanence and stability. The erection of temples indicates the Saints spiritual maturity. "As members begin to assume positions of responsibility in the community and render Christian service, there is a positive recognition of the Church and its members by other institutions and individuals." [^2] A review of various developments within the Church in Great Britain since World War II will reveal the extent to which it fits Moss' third stage and thus has truly come of age.

Unprecedented Growth

In 1851 the total number of Latter-day Saints in Great Britain had peaked at 32,894, but apostasy and emigration reduced this figure to only 13,853 in 1860, and 8,804 a decade later. A slow decline continued, and by the midpoint of the present century, the Church membership in Britain stood at 6,357. During the next two decades, however, unprecedented growth occurred for several reasons:

Church leaders discouraged emigration. Writing in the Millennial Star, Elder M. Russell Ballard (the twenty-one year old first counselor to the mission president) echoed the counsel of the First Presidency as he reported unemployment in America, and warned British Saints not to leave established jobs they already had. [^3]

195When David O. McKay became President of the Church in 1951, he demonstrated a vital interest in the Saints worldwide. He quickly became the most widely traveled President in the Church's history, visiting members in Europe, Africa, Latin America, and the Pacific. During each of the years between 1952 and 1955, Church business brought him to Britain. The Saints' contact with his magnetic personality and deep spirituality undoubtedly provided added incentive for the Church to progress in the British Isles.

195ChurchYearsMembershipIncreaseMissionaries19506,35713419559,20945%153196016,62381%372196566,371299%1,414197067,8492%1,272197575,69212%1,441198087,77616%1,727

195A renewed emphasis on missionary work gave a significant boost to Church membership. With the end of World War II and the Korean War, missionaries were assigned to Britain in increasing numbers. New areas could be opened to proselyting. For example, in 1959, missionaries returned to the Isle of Man for the first time in over a century. [^4]

A new and more effective missionary plan, adopted throughout the Church in 1961, gave new impetus to proselyting in Britain. In addition, T. Bowring Woodbury, who served as mission president from 1958 to 1962, used his background in business to bring more enthusiasm to missionary work. As a result, missionaries used a variety of methods to meet their proselyting goals. Sports programs attracted hundreds of youthful converts. Special quotas spurred missionaries to greater efforts. While in the past, only scores or perhaps hundreds had joined the Church in Britain each year, beginning in 1960 thousands were baptized annually. For example, during that year in the months July and August alone, missionaries set a goal of baptizing more than a thousand as a birthday tribute to President David O. McKay. After the goal had been achieved, all the missionaries signed a scroll honoring the Prophet as "the greatest missionary in this present dispensation." [^5]

196The flood of new converts pushed membership totals to new heights. For example, in 1954 when Stephen R. Covey served as a missionary in Ireland, there were only four elders and 300 Saints in that country. Ten years later when he returned to preside over the newly formed, separate Irish Mission, there were 154 missionaries and 2,300 members. [^6] During the early 1960s the number of members in Britain surpassed the 1851 peak for the first time in over a century, doubling it by 1965. Hundreds joined in the Preston area, where the gospel was first preached in England. Many wanted to be baptized in the river Ribble, though this was not advised, "for health reasons." [^7]

196As the number of members and missionaries swelled, the British Mission became the largest in the Church. Thus, after 123 years of its history, the mission was divided. Bernard P. Brockbank, a building contractor from Salt Lake City, became president of the new North British Mission in 1960. As this growth continued, missions were divided and redivided, reaching a total of nine in 1964.

Unfortunately, not all who joined the Church remained faithful. When a General Authority, Elder Marion D. Hanks of the First Council of the Seventy, was appointed to preside over the British Mission in 1962, one of his major assignments was to assure that stability was maintained, despite rapid growth. Some people, both in and out of the Church, criticized the missionaries' methods, especially their baptizing so many youth. When a Protestant minister in Falkirk, Scotland, warned his flock against the "Mormon invasion," a landlady ordered the elders out of their digs, even though they had been ideal lodgers. Nevertheless, a local newspaper carried a positive report of interviews with several youthful Mormon converts. A seventeen-year-old girl indicated she had joined the Church "because it is the only true faith on earth," and insisted that the elders "offered me a better way of life, and I knew the Mormon faith was for me." [^8]

The London Temple

In the midst of Britain's rapid postwar growth, a long-anticipated and eagerly awaited blessing was finally realized-the dedication of a holy temple in that land. As early as 1852, Elder Franklin D. Richards concluded a Millennial Star editorial by emphasizing that the fulness of gospel blessings can be obtained only "in the House built unto the Lord. Therefore, Saints in the British Isles," he exhorted, "let us arise and build!" [^9] [^10]

When President David O. McKay announced plans to construct a temple in Switzerland, he indicated that it "would be the first of several such temples to be erected for the Saints in Europe." [^11] [^12] [^13]

198Formal groundbreaking came two years later. About a thousand gathered for the service on Saturday, 27 August 1955. The Salt Lake Mormon Tabernacle Choir, then in Europe on a concert tour in connection with the Swiss Temple dedication, took part. Although the weather was sunny during most of the service, a light shower of rain was falling as President McKay turned the first spade of soil. [^14]

Construction progressed to the point that the cornerstone could be placed. Elder Richard L. Evans of the Council of the Twelve presided at the service 11 May 1957. Among the thousand attending the noon service under showery skies were Kenneth Burton Kimball and Wallace K. Penrose, both grandsons of Latter-day Saint pioneers in Britain, then serving as missionaries in that land. In his dedicatory prayer Elder Evans expressed appreciation for the important contribution of the British Isles: "We are grateful that from this land have come tens of thousands of faithful men and women who, having heard the truth have accepted it. We are grateful for those who have stayed here to strengthen the Church; and for those who have left to live in other lands, and whose sons and grandsons have come back to carry Thy word and to continue Thy work in this, the land of their fathers." [^15]

199The temple was completed in 1958. The ground floor measured 84 by 159 feet. The lead-covered copper spire rose to a height of 156 feet. The 34,000 square foot structure had been erected at a cost of $1.25 million. The formal gardens with their beautiful rhododendrons, azaleas and huge oaks were listed in a nationwide directory. During the two-and-a-half-week pre-dedication open house, some 76,324 persons visited the temple.

199Twelve thousand Saints were able to attend the six dedicatory services held Sunday, Monday, and Tuesday, September 7-9. In his dedicatory prayer, President McKay expressed appreciation for the fundamental freedoms guaranteed by the Magna Charta, signed centuries earlier in the same county of Surrey where the Temple was located. [^16] "I will never forget the dedication at the London Temple," President Henry D. Moyle later recalled, "one of those choice moments when heaven seems so close." President McKay declared that "his predecessors, the Presidents of the Church, were there in spirit, and were pleased with the proceedings of that day." [^17]

The first ordinances commenced the morning after the dedicatory services concluded. Saints came from all parts of Britain to enjoy the blessings of the House of the Lord. Members in the North British Mission, for example, typically rented twelve-passenger mini-buses for the 200-mile trip. But the temple's impact was not limited to Latter-day Saints. Shortly after the temple's dedication, an amateur photography club in the area sponsored a contest. Seventeen-year-old John H. Cox spent an entire day photographing the temple's grounds from all angles in varying light. His pictures won the prize. When William's father told temple president Selvoy J. Boyer about the pictures, he ordered some prints. He and other temple workers later ordered more than a hundred additional copies. Each time the youth came to deliver his pictures, President Boyer took time to teach him some principles of the gospel. At the dedication, President McKay had stated that many would view the temple and its grounds, be impressed, and even be baptized. Young Cox was the first known fulfillment of this prophecy, joining the Church in 1960. Eventually he became president of the London Stake. [^18]

Stakes Organized

The rapid growth in Church membership eventually led to the formation of stakes in Britain, but only after a period of needed preparation. As late as the 1950s, most training of local leaders was provided by mission presidents-typically men from America with many years' experience in church service. In 1955 the First Presidency authorized the organization of elders quorums in the missions. The five quorums formed in the British Mission were very large. For example, one served Liverpool, Manchester, and all of Ireland. These new organizations provided broader opportunities for fellowship and leadership development.

A second important event in 1955 was the visit of Elder Spencer W. Kimball of the Quorum of the Twelve. During a period of twenty-three days in June and July he covered 2,200 miles, conducted public meetings and leadership sessions, and interviewed missionaries throughout England, Ireland, Scotland, and Wales. He was the first General Authority many of the British Saints had ever seen. He challenged his listeners to prepare for stakehood, to become thoroughly dedicated in church activity, to develop an expanded missionary program, and to assume leadership roles in business and society. He also encouraged the Saints to remain and strengthen the church in Britain, rather than emigrate to America. [^19]

201Beginning in the 1940s, regular missionwide conferences were important sources of motivation to the Saints. In one of these gatherings in 1959, President Henry D. Moyle, First Counselor in the First Presidency, addressed over two thousand members, the largest congregation of British Saints in over a century. These conferences helped the members appreciate the fact that the Church was more than just their small local branch. "Isn't it wonderful," a teenage girl exclaimed. "Everyone I meet is a Mormon!" [^20]

201President McKay had declared that the dedication of a temple marked "the opening of a new era in the British Mission." Mission President Woodbury used the phrase "new era" to identify a program designed to prepare the Church in Britain for the organization of stakes. He stressed the importance of ending emigration, strengthening local leaders, and providing more buildings. He also urged the Saints to live their religion with more devotion and to increase their missionary outreach. [^21]

201While touring the British Mission in 1959, Elder Marion G. Romney addressed a congregation of 1067 members at Manchester: "It is my judgment that there will be a stake here shortly. In fact," he prophesied, "the time is not too far distant, when we will have stakes dotting this beautiful land. You get ready for it and you will live to see it." [^22]

The first British stake was organized at Manchester on 27 March 1960. Selected as stake president was Dr. Robert G. Larsen, a research chemist from Utah. Both his counselors, Dennis Livesey of Huddersfield and William Bates of Manchester, were English. The following year, stakes were organized at London, Leicester, and Leeds; and in 1962 President McKay returned to his ancestral homeland to organize personally the first Scottish stake at Glasgow. The first stakes in Ireland and Wales would be formed in 1974 and 1975 at Belfast and Merthyr Tydfil respectively.

202The establishment of new stakes is probably a better measure of true Church progress than a mere increase in membership figures. Comparing latter-day Zion to a large tent, the Prophet Isaiah referred to "stakes" as sources of strength. ( Isa. 54:2 .) In contrast to a mission district, which generally must receive strength from the Church, a stake is able to give strength and stability to the Church, just as stakes support a tent. Church leaders have pointed out that "stakehood" is the ideal for which every mission district is preparing. Stakes cannot be organized until there is not only sufficient membership but also leaders trained and experienced in operating the full programs of the Church. [^23] Hence the formation of stakes in Britain is a reliable measure of maturity and development in Church activity and spirituality. On 28 May 1978 five thousand attended a special meeting in Royal Albert Hall in which six London area stakes were realigned, and three new ones formed. Then, on 12 October 1980, some 2600 Saints came from all over Scotland for a conference in Edinburgh's Usher Hall. On this occasion three stakes were formed, completely covering Scotland with stakes. Elder David B. Haight of the Council of the Twelve (and former president of the Scottish Mission) declared to the group that this would be "one of the most significant dates in Scottish history." [^24] Finally, by 1982, the whole of the United Kingdom was covered in stakes of Zion. Only the Republic of Ireland was still served by mission districts. In the mid-1980s there were forty stakes in Britain: thirty-two in England, five in Scotland, two in Wales, and one on Northern Ireland.

Presidents of the first two stakes, Manchester and London, were both professional men from Utah. However, beginning with the appointment of Derek A. Cuthbert to head the Leicester Stake, all British stake presidents have been indigenous. Interestingly, by contrast, there were still many stake presidents in North America who were not native to the area where they were serving, but who had moved there from the predominantly Latter-day Saint centers in the Intermountain West.

203British members continued to expand in the area of leadership. In 1967 the Church created the new post of Regional Representative to provide training and encouragement to stake leaders. In 1970, Derek A. Cuthbert became the first Briton called to this post. By the mid-1980s at least a dozen others from Britain had received this responsibility. Yet a further expansion of involvement in Church leadership came in 1972 when Dennis Livesey, a member of the original Manchester Stake presidency and later president of the Leeds Stake, was called as the first Briton to serve as a mission president when he was assigned to Scotland.

Building Program and Church Activity

Providing adequate meeting places for Britain's growing Latter-day Saint congregations posed a major challenge during the postwar years. In the later 1940s mission officials began purchasing the needed facilities. Most of these were formerly private residences, remodeled to provide chapels and classrooms. In some cases where zoning laws required the buildings to retain the basic residential character, quarters were provided for missionaries and caretaker families. By the mid 1950s about fifty of these meetinghouses were in service.

A particularly significant building project was the construction of the imposing Hyde Park Chapel. In 1955 when President David O. McKay called Clifton G. M. Kerr to preside in Britain, he spoke of the need for an appropriate building in this world capital. The Church obtained a choice site on Exhibition Road, in the museum district near the center of the city. Ground was broken in 1959 by Elder Marion G. Romney of the Council of the Twelve. The magnitude of the project was suggested in 1960 by the fact that there was a formal cornerstone-laying ceremony. The building was designed by Sir Thomas Bennett, who had served as consulting architect for the London Temple. The ninety-foot tower of alternating panels of glass and stone was surmounted by a thirty-five foot spire. The chapel had a seating capacity of fourteen hundred. This four-story building not only provided badly needed facilities for London congregations, it also served as a tangible symbol of the Church's "new era" of progress in Britain. President McKay personally dedicated the Hyde Park Chapel on 26 February 1961. An International Singing Mothers Chorus, composed of women from Utah as well as from throughout the United Kingdom, also participated. On this same day the London Stake was organized. The chapel was filled to capacity, and six hundred others witnessed the proceedings by closed-circuit television in other parts of the building. Twelve former presidents of the British Mission returned to London to be present on this auspicious occasion.

204While at the Hyde Park dedication, President David O. McKay expressed his vision of the Church's progress: "In a few years we hope to have chapels throughout Europe, where men and women, converted to the church, can join in stakes, and participate in all the activities of the Church and not have to travel to another country and leave their homes and their friends. They [then] canÂ�worship with all the opportunities and advantages that an organized stake of Zion may have." [^25]

The 1960s witnessed an accelerated building program in Britain. Between May 1961 and August 1962 some thirty-seven projects were initiated. In 1964, British chapels were being completed at the rate of almost one each week. By 1967 seventy-three had been completed, and the building program continued. Much of this was accomplished by means of the "building missionary" program which had been developed in the South Pacific a decade earlier. Young men, usually supported by local branches, accepted calls to serve full-time missions building chapels. Working under experienced supervisors, they learned valuable skills while they built. One supervisor remarked that building a meetinghouse with the assistance of four teenagers who had known nothing of construction just a year before helped him appreciate the challenge faced by Nephi when he set out to build a ship with no prior experience. [^26]

205Missionaries found it easier to invite their investigators to the attractive new meeting places. The more adequate facilities also allowed wards and branches to conduct the full range of Church activities formerly available only in the Inter-mountain West. The Church's British Athletic Association, formed in 1966, sponsored three-day meets each summer. One year the competition was held at Manchester. Friday and Saturday were filled with football, basketball, volleyball, tennis, swimming, as well as track and field events. In some events teams represented stakes or missions, while in others competition was on an individual basis. Events climaxed with a dance Saturday night and testimony meeting Sunday morning. [^27]

205In 1968 the Church Educational System inaugurated programs in Britain. A conference of the Latter-day Saint Students Association attracted college-age members from all over Britain. Home-study and subsequently early morning seminaries provided religious instruction for high school students. Institutes of religion offered classes for college students on many campuses, as well as for a large number of other interested adults.

Other Church activities were instituted: regions began sponsoring welfare projects; Social Services provided adoption, counseling, and other services; an employment office helped members find work. In 1985 British Boy Scouts met in the first LDS jamboree in Britain, spending two days in a beautiful outdoor park in Ayrshire, Scotland. That same year a young adult conference in London heard from novelist Ann Perry and other notable Church members. Also in 1985 the Britannia Ward for singles began meeting at the Hyde Park Chapel.

206The expansion of Church activities created the need for an improved system of distributing curriculum materials. It had been necessary for British Latter-day Saints to bear heavy shipping costs, as they ordered materials individually from Utah. In 1961 however, Deseret Enterprises, Ltd., was formed with Derek Cuthbert as director. It supervised the distribution of English-language materials outside of North America. Later, a fully-stocked Church distribution center, like those in other parts of the world, opened in England.

Area Conferences

Area conferences, which began in 1971, became an important means of communication between the General Authorities and Church members worldwide. The first of these conferences convened in Manchester, England, in August of that year. The official announcement described this gathering as "a significant move by the First Presidency to bring the leadership and various programs closer to the members of the Church" who were not able to attend the general conferences at Church headquarters. The press provided extensive coverage as time for the conference drew near. Lengthy articles in such noted papers as the Guardian Times, and Sunday Telegraph traced the Church's progress in Britain and commented favorably on such principles as the Word of Wisdom and latter-day prophecy. The Mormons were also the subject of a fifty-five minute documentary aired on BBC television.

The British area conference opened Friday afternoon, August 27, with meetings for leaders and for youth. That evening, men in dark suits and ladies in formal dresses packed the Cumberland Suite Ballroom for a dance and social activity. Hence there was light laughter when the dancers were asked to clear space for the floor show. This program presented various facets of the British culture. Principal meetings on Saturday and Sunday convened in King's Hall, with auxiliary sessions in the nearby Free Trade Hall. "King's Hall had the appearance of the [Salt Lake] Tabernacle" as the Brethren were seated in high-backed red chairs on the stand. Regional choirs provided music for the general sessions. Priesthood and Relief Society choruses from throughout Britain sang in the Saturday evening priesthood and sisters meetings respectively.

207From twelve to fourteen thousand attended the general sessions, a number equal to approximately one-fifth of the Church's total membership in Britain. Addressing this vast throng, President Joseph Fielding Smith asserted: "We are members of a world church, a church that has the plan of life and salvation, a church set up by the Lord himself in these last days to carry his message of salvation to all his children in all the earth. The day is long since past when informed people think of us as a peculiar group in the tops of the Rocky Mountains in AmericaÂ�. But now we are coming of age as a church and as a people." [^28]

207Speaking in the concluding session Sunday afternoon, Regional Representative Derek A. Cuthbert, who had coordinated local arrangements for the conference, declared: "There is no longer a need for British Church members to leave their homeland to partake in the blessings of Church membership." [^29]

207As the conference ended, the entire congregation stood as President Joseph Fielding Smith prepared to leave the stand. Nobody moved, and conversations were in subdued tones. "It was as though they did not want to leave the spirit that had prevailed in the meeting." After a few moments, with tear-filled eyes and emotion-choked voices, the Saints spontaneously began to sing "We Thank Thee O God for a Prophet" and then "God Be With You 'Til We Meet Again.'" Those present truly had been "motivated, lifted to new heights, and welded together in the work of the Lord." [^30]

208The 1971 area conference provided an unprecedented opportunity for the British Saints to have personal contact with a large group of General Authorities and to be blessed by their spirit. Such an opportunity was repeated five years later when three area conferences were conducted in Britain. This was the first time that more than one such gathering convened during a given year in the same nation. These gatherings took place simultaneously in London, Manchester, and Glasgow during the weekend of 19-22 June 1976. Thanks to careful planning of schedules, President Spencer W. Kimball was able to attend some meetings in all three locations. He expressed the confidence that instructions given at these conferences would bring "an upgrading of the Church in Great Britain." The need to increase missionary work was an oft-repeated theme throughout the sessions. For months the Saints had eagerly anticipated these conferences, arranged time off from work, organized bus excursions, and made other arrangements to attend. Some ten thousand people crowded into the Empire Pool Stadium in London, and large crowds were present in the other two cities. [^31]

Sharing the Gospel

As British Latter-day Saints realized the blessings of living gospel principles as well as of participating in the Church's expanding programs, they became increasingly eager to share these opportunities with others. To this end they cooperated with the missionaries and employed a variety of means to share the gospel. In 1948 a member of the St. Albans Branch produced 200 attractive five-color posters about the American Indians and the Book of Mormon, and placed them in busy stations of the London tube. [^32] [^33] [^34]

209Even before the emphasis on sports in proselyting during the early 1960s, missionaries had formed baseball and basketball teams as a means of winning friends for the Church. In 1948 a team of elders from the London District had gospel conversations and shared tracts in the locker room before and following basketball games; they often succeeded in attracting to Church meetings players from opposing teams. [^35] The following year a missionary basketball team won the national championship and went on to represent Britain in games on the Continent. [^36] As early as the 1930s, elders made friends as their baseball team set a good example of sportsmanship. In 1954 two elders even succeeded in securing an audience with Winston Churchill, to whom they presented a leather-bound edition of the triple combination. [^37]

209Concert tours by the famed Mormon Tabernacle Choir attracted widespread favorable publicity. At Manchester in 1955, for example, Elder Richard L. Evans asked all choir members with British ancestors to stand. "When almost the whole choir arose, applause from the audience was deafening." At Cardiff, an appreciative Welsh audience broke into the program twice to sing favorite songs along with the choir. [^38] In 1982, the choir made its weekly radio broadcast via satellite from the century-old Royal Albert Hall in London. A bus carrying Saints from Wales had a sign in its window, "We're the Mormons, follow us!" A lady, not a member of the Church, rode all the way from Dublin to attend the London performance. [^39] The Singing Mothers also made a concert tour following the 1961 dedication of the Hyde Park Chapel and were likewise well received.

The improved attitude toward the Saints was impressed on President McKay as he accompanied the Tabernacle Choir to Glasgow in 1955: Nobody knows or can tell what this great missionary endeavor means to the Church. You can understand how deeply this affects me when I tell you of my own missionary labors here 57 years ago. Nearly every day when I passed St. George's Square in Glasgow and looked in marble halls, cords and guards barred my passage. Friday, together with this great choir of 400 members, we were welcomed in that great hall with highest honors, and received by the Lord Provost. A half century ago we were attacked and vilified in street meetings by professed ministers of the gospel and members of the congregations. What changes have occurred in these 57 years. [^40]

210Church leaders, recognizing the importance of good public relations, took steps to facilitate favorable attention. A British edition of the Book of Mormon, designed to attract attention to the book when displayed on racks for sale, featured a multi-colored painting by Arnold Friberg on the cover. President McKay held a televised news conference in conjunction with the Hyde Park dedication. The noted Tabernacle organist Alexander Schreiner inaugurated a series of free organ recitals in this chapel. A visitors' center at the London Temple, dedicated in 1969, featured displays on "the Message of the Restoration" and on highlights of Mormon history in Britain. Because of the Hyde Park Chapel's prominent location, another visitors' center was opened there with displays on the true purpose of life; guides welcomed about one hundred visitors per day from all over the world.

Individual Latter-day Saints also attracted favorable note. About three thousand people, two-thirds of them nonmembers, attended a special fireside presented by the popular Osmond family of entertainers. They shared their experiences and feelings about the gospel, and concluded with powerful testimonies. Over a thousand phone calls and five hundred letters were received, people seeking more information. When George and Olive Osmond, parents of the entertainers, served as guides at the Hyde Park Visitors Center, they became the subject of many articles in the media. [^41] [^42]

211Robert Todd, of the Mount Pottinger Branch, achieved greater influence when he was elected to the Northern Ireland Senate. [^43]

211Not just famous members attracted attention. The media often looked at "ordinary" people and reported how the Church had affected their lives. For example, Janet Sleet Travers of the Kingston Branch was chosen "Super Mum" by the Surrey Herald Weekly. [^44] In 1985, national publicity was given to Fred Bishop, a fireman who rescued a cabinet minister from the Grand Hotel fire in Brighton caused by a terrorist incendiary bomb. Bishop, a high councilor in the Crawley Stake, later was invited to Buckingham Palace to be decorated by the queen for his heroism. [^45]

211The number of full-time missionaries called from Britain has increased steadily, the number topping 400 by 1983. Ten missionaries were serving at once from the North London ward of only 280 members. Three of these, all lady missionaries, left in 1985 following a joint farewell. These missionaries are serving all over the world. Merthyr Tydfil Stake, for example, has missionaries serving not only in London, Leeds, and Scotland, but also in California, Colorado, and Winnipeg. Three brothers from the Dewsbury Ward were serving overseas-two in Italy and one in Canada.

A great step forward was taken early in 1985 when a Missionary Training Center, the eighth in the Church worldwide, was opened adjacent to the London Temple. This meant that missionaries called from Britain and other parts of Europe, as well as from South Africa, no longer had to travel to the United States for training before entering the field. The Elizabethan-era manor house with its flagstone floors, hand-hewn oak beams, and wrought-iron fixtures provided accommodations for twenty men and ten women. During the three-week orientation, missionaries reviewed gospel principles and learned proselyting skills. Returned missionaries living in the area assisted in this instruction.

To What Extent Has the Church Come of Age in Britain?

The approaching sesquicentennial milestone provides an opportune time to evaluate the status of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints in Great Britain. Its members command a growing respect as their way of life is more widely known, and as they reach out and become more involved in the community. Under local leaders, the Saints are enjoying the full range of Church activity and worship in attractive chapels. Perhaps a better indicator of the Church's coming of age is the fact that it is reaching out to give service even beyond Britain. British missionaries are teaching the gospel in the United States. Saints in the Manchester Stake raised funds to aid their brothers and sisters at the time of severe floods in Utah. An outstanding example of this reaching out was the call of Derek A. Cuthbert to the First Quorum of the Seventy in 1976. Elder Cuthbert thus became the first resident Briton to be called as a General Authority in the history of the Church.

Despite these obvious strides forward, there are still some lingering challenges. Even though the Church has grown significantly, it still represents only about one tenth of one percent of the total British population. If its influence is to be more widespread, it will need to increase this proportion. It will need to expand its ability to reach all groups, including such minorities as the non-English speakers of Wales. Other challenges are suggested by an examination of Church membership data. In North America, 17.1 percent of all Latter-day Saints are men holding the Melchizedek Priesthood-the group from which stake and ward leaders must be drawn. In Britain only 8.8 percent fall into this category. From another perspective, in North America 41 percent of all men have not received the Melchizedek Priesthood, while in Britain this group accounts for 70.7 percent.

213There are other kinds of challenges as well. This is notable in Ireland where religious strife hampers the Church's progress. On a more positive note, at the 1976 area conference in Glasgow, President Spencer W. Kimball challenged the Scottish Saints to reach for yet higher levels of attainment: "The temple in Scotland hasn't come, but it will come if you really want it, but you must really want it." [^46]

---
Notas:
[^1] See Millennial Star, vol. 14, no. 11 (8 May 1852), p. 169. The Stars circulation had increased from about six thousand semimonthly to over twenty-three thousand in that time period. It was published weekly as of 24 April 1852 (vol. 14, no. 9).
[^2] His aggregate service was a little over four years and eight months: 15 January 1847 to 1 February 1847; 1 January 1851 to 8 May 1852; 8 June 1854 to 13 July 1856; and 30 June 1867 to 9 September 1868.
[^3] The five-year period 1848-54 was the most productive period for baptisms in the British Mission during its first century. According to Richard L. Evans in A Century of Mormonism in Great Britain, 37,886 persons were baptized in that period. This figure is probably inflated; current estimates place the total number of Saints in Great Britain in 1851 at 32,894.
[^4] F. L. West, Franklin D. Richards, p. 159.
[^5] Text, including errors, as in the original. I am indebted to Dr. H. Donl Peterson for providing this extract from this unpublished letter.
[^6] Chad J. Flake, ed., A Mormon Bibliography 1830-1930, p. 492.
[^7] JD 4:68-69 (November 2, 1856).
[^8] As found in James R. Clark, The Story of the Pearl of Great Price, pp. 204-5. See Journal History for 13 August 1857.
[^9] This copy was discovered by James R. Clark in the public stacks of the Widener Library. It is now in the rare book room of the Houghton Library at Harvard.
[^10] The first publication of these revelations was as follows: D&C 20, the Evening and Morning Star (vol. 1, no. 1), June 1832; D&C 27, the Evening and Morning Star (vol. 1, no. 10), March 1833; D&C 77, the Times and Seasons (vol. 5, p. 595), August 1844; D&C 87, the Pearl of Great Price, July 1851; and D&C 107, the Millennial Star (vol. 1, no. 1), May 1840. While D&C 20, 27, and 107 were included in the first (1835) edition of the Doctrine and Covenants, D&C 77 and 87 were not added until 1876. Elder Richards used an independent source for the revelation on war, D&C 87.
[^11] Based on research of James R. Clark.
[^12] That the Book of Abraham was derived from the papyrus is indicated by Joseph Smith's own account: "I commenced the translation of some of the characters or hieroglyphics, and much to our joy found that one of the rolls contained the writings of Abraham, another the writings of Joseph of Egypt, etc.,--a more full account of which will appear in its place, as I proceed to examine or unfold them" (HC 2:236; italics added).
[^13] The text of Abraham was published in the July and August 1842 issues of the Millennial Star (vol. 3, nos. 3 and 4, pp. 33-36 and 49-53) exactly as it appeared in the Times and Seasons. However, Parley P. Pratt, the editor, omitted facsimiles 2 and 3 from the Star printing. In all likelihood, Elder Richards used the Times and Seasons rather than the Millennial Star as his source for the Abraham material. Evidence for this is threefold: 1) he attributed the heading of the Book of Abraham to the Times and Seasons, 2) the spelling and punctuation of that heading follows that of the Times and Seasons rather than that of the Star, and 3) the three facsimiles--printed only in the Times and Seasons--were also used by Elder Richards. In regard to these facsimiles, the engravings found in the Times and Seasons, the Millennial Star, and the Pearl of Great Price are all dissimilar. It appears that Elder Richards had new engravings prepared in England which differed somewhat from those prepared by Reuben Hedlock in Nauvoo (whose name appears on facsimiles 2 and 3 in the Times and Seasons, but is understandably missing from those facsimiles as printed in the 1851 edition of the Pearl of Great Price). The current (1981) edition has happily used the engravings of the Times and Seasons.
[^14] See Peter Crawley in BYU Studies, Summer 1972, pp. 505-7.
[^15] Of it Milton V. Backman stated: "The earliest known manuscript of this work is in the handwriting of James Mulholland who was serving as scribe for the Prophet in 1839, indicating that the manuscript was probably copied by Mulholland that year" (Pearl of Great Price Symposium, BYU, 22 November 1975, p. 63).15 This history was published first in the Times and Seasons between 15 March and 1 August 1842.
[^16] Truth, p. 4.
[^17] Journal, p. 45.
[^18] Joseph Smith assumed editorship of the Times and Seasons with the issue of 15 February 1842.
[^19] Some punctuation and capitalization of the Articles of Faith as found in the 1851 Pearl of Great Price differs from the original in the Times and Seasons. Also, in the tenth article, Elder Richards changed the phrase "this continent" to read "this (American) continent." Subsequent versions, including the current (1981) edition, reflect additional textual changes.
[^20] In 1854 Elder Richards published another work by John Jaques, Catechism for Children: "The first LDS children's book. Its importance, however, goes beyond this bibliographical footnote: for by claiming to list the doctrines of Mormonism, it, along with three or four other books of the period, helped to standardize Mormon theology" (Crawley and Flake, A Mormon Fifty, item 44).
[^21] The Millennial Star, vol. 14, no. 16 (June 12, 1852), pp. 246-47.
[^22] Life, pp. 265-266.
[^23] Leah D. Widtsoe, Brigham Young, The Man of the Hour, (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, Inc., 1947), pp. 87-88.
[^24] HC, 4:10.
[^25] Truth, p. 145.
[^26] HC, 4:115.
[^27] Elden Jay Watson, comp., Manuscript History of Brigham Young, 1801-1844 (Salt Lake City, Elden J. Watson, 1968), pp. 96-97.
[^28] Millennial Star, 1:53.
[^29] Kate B. Carter, comp., Heart Throbs of the West, vol. 3 (Salt Lake City: Daughters of the Utah Pioneers, 1951), pp. 88-89.
[^30] Ibid., pp. 95-99.
[^31] Wilford Woodruff, pp. 116-117.
[^32] Ibid., p. 119.
[^33] Ibid., pp. 119-120.
[^34] Ibid., p. 149.
[^35] JD, 24:34.
[^36] Life, p. 273.
[^37] Andrew Jensen, Latter-day Saint Biographical Encyclopedia, 4 volumes (Salt Lake City: Andrew Jensen History Company, 1901-1936), I:16. Hereafter cited as Biographical Encyclopedia.
[^38] DHC, 4:403.
[^39] Russell M. Rich, Ensign to the Nations (Provo, Utah: Brigham Young University, 1972), pp. 351-352.
[^40] William E. Berrett, The Restored Church (Salt Lake City, Utah: Deseret Book Co., 1973), p. 272.
[^41] Seymour H. Spencer, Life Summary of Orson Spencer (Salt Lake City: Mercury Publishing Co., 1964), p. 27.
[^42] Ibid.
[^43] Ibid., p. 28.
[^44] B. H. Roberts, A Comprehensive History of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, (Provo, Utah, Brigham Young University Press, 1965), 4:117. Hereafter cited as CHC.
[^45] Preston Nibley, Exodus to Greatness (Salt Lake City: Deseret News Press, 1947), pp. 109-110.
[^46] Aurelia Spencer Rogers, Life Sketches (George Q. Cannon & Sons Co., 1898), pp. 87, 104.
