Ardeth Greene Kapp, I Walk by Faith ( 1987)

Preface

When we come to understand the purpose of this earth life, we develop increased determination, perseverance, optimism, and great faith. Our time here is a time of trial and testing to prepare us for all the blessings our Father in heaven has in store for us.

Away from our heavenly home, we occasionally have quiet longings for those things we once knew, the familiarity of our pre-earth life experiences, and our association with our Father in heaven in a family relationship. We were true and faithful there. And now a veil is drawn between our pre-earth life and our earth life, requiring us to walk by faith. We know that Satan and his influences are here to tempt us and persuade us to follow him as he endeavored to do there. We resisted; we stayed true to the teachings of our Father and his Son Jesus Christ then, and we are proving ourselves now.

We learn to walk by faith as we meet each day endeavoring to keep the commandments. Every law of God that we obey helps prepare us for our return home, our exaltation. Our Father in heaven has promised us that if we have faith in him and keep his commandments, we can always have his spirit to be with us, and one day we can return to his presence and dwell with him eternally. "God has reserved spirits for this dispensation, those who have the courage and the determination to face the world and all the powers of the evil one, visible and invisible, to proclaim the gospel and to maintain the truth and to establish and build up the Zion of our God, fearless of all consequences." (George Q. Cannon, Gospel Truth 1:21-22.)

We are better able to walk by faith when we have an abiding assurance of who we really are, what our mission is, and what we are to accomplish in this time of testing away from our heavenly home. Our ultimate goal is to be true to our sacred covenants and to qualify for exaltation. In the song "I Walk By Faith," by Janice Kapp Perry, we learn of these things:

I will prepare to make and keep sacred covenants, Seek promised blessings of the priesthood through obedience, Live my life to claim the blessing sweet of exaltation, My testimony growing each new day. I walk by faith, a daughter of heavenly parents. Divine am I in nature by inheritance, The Spirit whispers of my mission, my individual worth, So I seek for precious knowledge, for learning and for growth. I understand the meaning of accountability, Every choice for good, for ill is my responsibility. I want to build the kingdom, and good works is the key, By doing what I know is right, I show integrity. I walk by faith, a daughter of heavenly parents, Divine am I in nature by inheritance, And someday when God has proven me, I will see him face to face, But just for here and now, I walk by faith.

As we learn to walk by faith, we witness miracles in our daily lives. "If there be no faith among the children of men God can do no miracles among them." (Ether 12:12.)

I am grateful for the thousands of young women who continually strengthen my faith as they walk by faith through happy and sometimes difficult times. The stories in this book are examples of valiant youths who have faced trials and tests, joys and successes, with growing and abiding faith. May these examples help you find joy in each day as you walk by faith—faith in the Lord Jesus Christ with assurance that "someday when God has proven me, I will see him face to face, but just for here and now, I walk by faith."
