Ardeth Greene Kapp, I Walk by Faith ( 1987)

My Prayer Was Answered

On board the British Airways flight that morning, we waited for the jet to pull away from the gate. We were parked at the gate at Heathrow Airport in London, on a flight that would arrive in Oslo, Norway, within little more than an hour. This would make the seventh country we had visited within the past twenty-one days. Just four more countries, seven more days, and we would be boarding a plane in Helsinki, Finland, for a brief stop in Copenhagen, Denmark, and then home. Getting on and off planes each day for a month had become almost as routine as getting up, brushing our teeth, combing our hair, eating breakfast, and going to work.

My husband and I had been traveling with one small piece of luggage apiece that, with just a little juggling, would fit under the seat in front of us. In addition to these two small pieces containing our clothes and a few personal belongings (much less than you would ever think you could get along with at home), we had taken one lightweight tan canvas bag I had borrowed from a friend. In this bag was everything we couldn't possibly get along without, except our passports and money, which we carried in our jackets in a special folder accessible at all times. In the canvas bag were the complete records of our trip so far: names and addresses, records of meetings held, all the details needed to prepare the reports that would be expected upon our return home. In one pocket of the bag was a small tape recorder with several tapes on which I had dictated many letters and instructions as a follow-up to commitments I had made to people in six countries. In addition, there were two small cameras with about eight rolls of film used to record the memories of places visited and people we had met, and my small set of scriptures, which had finally become as familiar to me as the old set that I had reluctantly given up for the advantage of the additional references in the new edition.

While all of these things were of great importance, even more essential were the transparencies in Norwegian, Swedish, Finnish, and Danish that I desperately needed for the training I had come so far to do. With these visual aids, which had been translated to facilitate the difficulty of language barriers, I had discovered that little was lost in the process of communication.

The plane was about to pull away from the gate, so we fastened our seat belts as instructed. By now we felt like seasoned travelers. The only thing different about this part of the journey was that instead of carrying our small suitcases on the plane to place under the seat in front of us, for the first time we had been asked to check them through to Oslo when we went through the security check. We were somewhat relieved to be free of luggage for the first time. It felt different, like releasing your arm from a sling after it finally healed. With nothing to do now but sit back and relax until we reached our next destination, Heber turned to me and asked, "Where did you put the tan bag?" "The bag?" I sat up straight and the seat belt pulled tight across my legs. "Don't you have it?" I asked. "I thought you had it," he said. Suddenly he released his seat belt and began to get out of his seat. The tan canvas bag was missing—the one we did not need to check through. We were to carry it with us. With the change of routine and the unexpected freedom from carrying our bags, neither of us had picked up the case with all our records!

Heber quickly made his way to the front of the plane. The aisles were clear, with the passengers all buckled in their seats for take-off. He left the plane, and I waited in my seat for only a moment, then followed him to the door. The flight attendants were ready to close the door of this giant jet with me on the inside and Heber on the outside—and that arrangement simply was not acceptable. I stood at the door as if to stop the plane from taking off without him and explained that my husband had left the plane. The steward threw up his hands and said, "Lady, we can't hold up this plane. You will have to either get off or take your seat. "Just one minute," I pleaded. "Just one minute."

I left the plane and ran the short distance to the building, where Heber and an airport employee stood in serious conversation. Heber turned to me. "It isn't here," he said. "What shall we do?" A decision had to be made fast; there was no time to consider many alternatives. We could both stay and go back through the different areas where we had been waiting during the past ninety minutes and hope to retrieve our missing luggage, but what about the people who would be waiting to meet us in Oslo? And what about those who were gathering for the meeting that was to be held within an hour after our arrival? Surely that was not the right alternative. There was another possibility. I could go on and Heber could remain behind to look for the luggage and then come on a later flight. The insecurity that accompanies traveling without being able to speak the language, meeting people you've never met before, and the uncertainty of a later flight all added up to one decision. We must board the plane immediately and take our assigned seats.

The airport attendant understood our plight and agreed to see what he could do to track our missing luggage while we were in flight. We were mindful that during the past hour and a half a voice had droned over the loudspeaker, "Do not leave any luggage unattended." I had paid little attention to the instruction. We already knew we should not leave our luggage unattended. After we had been checked through security, we had been directed from one waiting room to another three different times. The burning question "Where did we leave the bag?" was less important than the anxiety caused by the question "Will we ever get it back?" and of greater concern was "How?" The attendant assured us he would see what he could do, and if the bag could be located, he would try to get it on the next flight to Oslo, Norway.

With only a glimmer of hope and a knot in my stomach, I took Heber's arm and we returned to the plane, where we met impatient looks in the eyes of our fellow travelers. I wanted to stand up and explain it all so they could share in our anxiety, but I realized we carried our burden alone. We sank into our seats and fastened our seat belts. There wasn't much to say. In fact, it had all been said. Talking at this point would do little good. We both looked out of the window as we taxied down the runway and lifted into the air, leaving the enormous Heathrow Airport, where masses of humanity move through daily to link up with all parts of the world.

High in the air, far above the clouds, is a good place to consider what resources might be called upon to save the day. I closed my eyes and began praying. While I could not appropriately get in a kneeling position, it made little difference to the intensity of my prayer. Each morning and each night before retiring we had reported in. We had expressed thanks for protection in our travels and had asked that we be able to make all of our connections and maintain the necessary health and strength to accomplish the purpose of our mission. After three weeks with every detail working so smoothly, it is easy to become casual about blessings given that are hardly realized. But this time there was nothing casual about my prayer. We needed help! What if the bag could not be located? What if it was located but the tapes, the records, the transparencies, or any other item had been taken? What if I had to conduct the long training meetings for which people had traveled such long distances and had no materials in their language and not even scriptures in my own? What would I ever do? I had never been very good at finding my favorite scriptures in someone else's books, and I knew for sure that I couldn't do so in Norwegian, Finnish, Danish, or Swedish.

With my eyes closed from the time we left London until the flight attendant interrupted my thoughts with instructions to fasten our seat belts and return our trays to the locked position for landing in Oslo, I prayed fervently. Into my mind came comforting words that I had marked in my scriptures that were now somewhere far away. In my mind, as if on a page in front of me, I read: "Wherefore, as ye are agents, ye are on the Lord's errand; and whatever ye do according to the will of the Lord is the Lord's business." (D&C 64:29.) Surely I am on the Lord's business, I consoled myself. There had been little or no time for anything else. My mind jumped from the Doctrine and Covenants to the Book of Mormon. I had read and even memorized the statement of Nephi about how he trusted in the Lord, but this time the words had even greater meaning. "I will go and do the things which the Lord hath commanded, for I know that the Lord giveth no commandments unto the children of men, save he shall prepare a way for them that they may accomplish the thing which he hath commanded them." (1 Nephi 3:7.) If I was to accomplish the thing I had been asked to do, I felt that I must have that bag. The question was, how would it be returned to me?

Could an angel be dispatched, if necessary, to watch over that bag and get it from England to Norway? I wondered. I opened my mental scriptures again to the book of Ether, to that great chapter on faith where Moroni says, "Ye receive not witness until after the trial of your faith." And then came the statement, "For if there be no faith among the children of men God can do no miracle among them." (Ether 12:12.)

By now a calm, warm feeling was forming in my heart, interrupted by the thought, But what if the bag doesn't show up? I began to remember all the seemingly less important prayers that I knew had been answered in the past and thought that if those were answered, surely this prayer would be heard and answered. Again that warm feeling returned. In my mind I could see my friends, members of the Young Women general board, praying for me at home as we always did each Wednesday night for any of our number who were away on assignments. I remembered a drawer full of letters in my desk from young women all over the world saying that they were praying for me. Finally, I could see in my mind's eye the homes of my sisters, with their families gathered around their breakfast tables in the morning and in their living rooms in the evening, kneeling in prayer. I knew we would be included in those prayers. In answer to my own fervent prayer mingled with theirs, a warm feeling enveloped me from my head to my toes.

With the assurance that the bag would be returned, I turned my attention to the challenge I would face at the first meeting that afternoon, before the late-afternoon flight arrived from England. I put my concern for the evening meeting and the subsequent meetings out of my mind for a time. It was that one o'clock meeting that I must give attention to right now.

Again I considered what scripture I would like to read if only I had my scriptures. I again turned the pages in my mind and read from the Doctrine and Covenants: "Neither take ye thought beforehand what ye shall say; but treasure up in your minds continually the words of life, and it shall be given you in the very hour that portion that shall be meted unto every man." (D&C 84:85.) And how will this happen, I thought, without my outlines and my scriptures?

The promises of the Lord came to my mind: "I will go before your face. I will be on your right hand and on your left, and my Spirit shall be in your hearts, and mine angels round about you, to bear you up." (D&C 84:88.)

As the plane landed, Heber broke the silence. "Everything is going to be all right," he assured me.

We waited our turn to leave the plane, full of anticipation at meeting strangers who in an instant would be our brothers and sisters and shortly thereafter would seem like dear and long-time friends. At the bottom of the stairs, a representative of British Airways stopped us, asked our name, and advised us that he had received a telex with the news that our bag had been located and would arrive on the six o'clock flight that evening. He told us where we might pick it up at that time. With thanks more grateful than he could possibly have realized, we expressed our deep appreciation.

As we turned to leave, Heber noticed a shiny coin on the concrete near his foot. He picked it up, recognized it as a foreign coin of a small denomination, and handed it to me, saying, "Let this be your faith coin, a reminder of this experience." I tucked the coin in my pocket, and we proceeded to look for the people who were meeting us. We did not tell them of our experience lest we raise any concern about our preparation for the meeting.

At the conclusion of the afternoon meeting, the stake president stood before the audience and expressed appreciation for "some of the finest training we have ever had." The words of Ammon in the Book of Mormon came flooding to my mind: "I do not boast in my own strength, nor in my own wisdom; but behold, my joy is full, yea, my heart is brim with joy, and I will rejoice in my God. Yea, I know that I am nothing; as to my strength I am weak; therefore I will not boast of myself, but I will boast of my God, for in his strength I can do all things; yea, behold, many mighty miracles we have wrought in this land, for which we will praise his name forever." (Alma 26:11-12.)

Before the seven o'clock meeting, the tan canvas bag that belonged to my friend and contained all that I needed to fill my assignment was in my hands, not a thing missing.

Sometimes when I feel concern for things beyond my ability to solve, I find myself fingering my little faith coin, and that familiar warm feeling starts in the region of my heart, and I remember.
