Ardeth Greene Kapp, I Walk by Faith ( 1987)

A Time for Hope

I wish I could sit with you in the swing on my back porch, just as the sun is going down. It is so fun to listen to the crickets. Those who have trained themselves to listen well can distinguish between a cricket's love call, a danger signal, and other messages that simply say "I'm here." Did you know that crickets actually listen with ears that are located on their knees? When I'm on my knees I try to listen—listen that I might better understand the needs, the wants, the yearnings of the young women of the Church. I do this when I read their letters and whenever I have an opportunity to hear them speak their thoughts and feelings.

Imagine yourself sitting with me in the swing on my back porch, and together we will listen to the messages in some letters I have received from young women recently.

Dear Sister Kapp: This year I have had a hard time with my self-esteem and with my friend (who is also LDS) turning on me and going off with other friends. Sometimes I feel terribly lonely. I know Heavenly Father is aware of my problems but I also know that I must have them to grow, even though that is hard to remember sometimes.

Let us listen to another young woman who pours out the feelings of her heart:

They always say something must happen in your life so you want to change. Well, that something has happened. I still have a long way to go. I finally realized that my Father in heaven is on my side even though I have betrayed him in a way. I am trying awfully hard to get my life in order and do what is right. I am bound and determined to do so, no matter how long it takes, but it is so hard. I just wish I could go up and give Heavenly Father and Heavenly Mother a big hug and tell them that I made it back.

Let us listen to part of a letter received by an anxious but grateful mother. Her seventeen-year-old daughter, who would be considered a troublemaker by some who have not learned to recognize her call for help, writes:

Dear Mom and Dad: I know I haven't been much of a daughter. I really hope things can get better between us. Please don't give up on me. Just because I don't say I love you doesn't mean I don't. Please understand what I am trying to say. We'll stay together and love each other through the worst and hardest times. We'll make it 'cause we're a family.

I hear these messages from our precious young women. I hear them with my ears and my heart. I want to reach out to each one and share with her what I have learned over the years about hope. I would give hope to you too, if I could, yet I have learned that hope comes only from our own upward climb. You see, this brief time away from our heavenly home and parents is a time when we are given our agency for the purpose of being tried and tested in every way. (See 2 Nephi 2:24-28.) We can expect some down days and some hard tests. But if we learn from them and grow from them, we will each be stronger and better because of them. Whenever I face things that are difficult and that I don't understand, I repeat in my mind the words of a song I learned years ago when I wondered if my prayers were being heard and I needed hope to carry on:

In the furnace God may prove thee, Thence to bring thee forth more bright, But can never cease to love thee; Thou art precious in his sight. God is with thee, God is with thee; Thou shalt triumph in his might.

My sister Sharon had a record that she played over and over until she memorized the lines, and she still repeats them to me on occasion. It tells the story of a young girl in a small mining town in Leadville, Colorado. She was found by some backwoods people. They didn't know where she came from, but they took her in and raised her. She had a drive and a hope inside her that took her in time from that tiny mining town in Colorado to some of the most prestigious places in all of Europe.

As the musical version of Molly Brown's story unfolds, we see her first as a young, backwoods girl with few opportunities, no education, and no refinement. She is wrestling with her adopted brothers, who get her down. Her brother says, "You're down, Molly. You're down." And young Molly responds, "I ain't down. I ain't down. And even if I was, you'd sure never hear it from me. I hate the word down but I love the word up, 'cuz up means hope, and that's just what I got. Hope for someplace prettier, someplace cleaner. And if I've gotta eat catfish heads all my life, can't I eat them off a plate just once and in a red silk dress?" Then she begins to sing at the top of her lungs. "And then someday, with all my might and my main, I'm gonna learn to read and write. I'm gonna see what there is to see. And if you're goin' from nowhere on the road to somewhere and you meet anyone, you'll know it's me." Does that sound like hope to you?

Molly's hope and determination took her to great heights. Then one day she found herself on the ill-fated Titanic, which sank to the bottom of the ocean with more than a thousand people on board. But Molly Brown did not go down. She managed to get into one of the lifeboats with a few others, and she began rowing. It was dark and cold, and the survivors were gripped with the fear of a watery grave. Some cried out in anguish, "We can't make it!" But Molly refused to give up. She just kept rowing. The headlines of the New York Times called her "the unsinkable Molly Brown." She was full of hope, and her unwavering hope inspired others with hope.

I used to wonder about that road to somewhere that Molly sang about, and how I'd ever find it. As a young girl I remember standing at the kitchen window of our home and looking down the gravel road toward the east as far as I could see. On each side of the road was tall grass in the summer and deep snow in the winter, and there were only a few houses sprinkled along the way. I used to wonder, "What is out there for me? Where do I belong?" I'm sure you must wonder that sometimes. Things didn't seem too hopeful at that time. School had been very difficult for me. My friends were moving on without me, and I felt dumb. Do you have any idea what that feels like? It's awful.

When I was twelve years old and feeling very discouraged after a long, hard winter, my mom and dad had a plan they worked out at some sacrifice that they hoped would give me hope. They determined to take me with them beyond our gravel road, out across the Canadian border, through the big states of Montana and Idaho, and on to Salt Lake City, Utah, the headquarters of the Church, to attend general conference.

We arrived early on the first day of conference and waited in line, hoping to enter the great dome-shaped Tabernacle, which I had seen only in pictures. Finally we found seats in the balcony, where I could look down and actually see the prophet in real life, and hear him speak, a thing I had never dreamed would ever happen to me. The feeling I had at that time was one of hope, and I began to understand about the real road to somewhere. I determined right then to plant my feet on that road, the straight and narrow path leading to the celestial kingdom, and to never ever give up. I have come to know without any question that the gospel of Jesus Christ is the pathway to hope that leads us back to our Heavenly Father and our eternal home.

Listen to our Father's promise to us. He says, "Be faithful and diligent in keeping the commandments of God, and I will encircle thee in the arms of my love." (D&C 6:20.) And he comforts us, saying, "Come unto me, all ye that labour and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest. Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me; for I am meek and lowly in heart: and ye shall find rest unto your souls." (Matthew 11:28-29.)

Now if we were sitting together on my back porch, I would stop and ask you, "Do you understand the plan of our Heavenly Father and your part in it?" To every young woman, I plead: Find your own back porch, away from the demanding, loud voices of the world. Learn to listen, not to the crickets, but to the constant whisperings of the Spirit with its messages of hope that will prompt you each step of the way on your road to the celestial kingdom.

Can you imagine what could happen if every young woman were to send out a message of hope to the world that would inspire others to never give up? That is exactly what has happened. All 300,000 young women of the Church were invited recently to participate in a magnificent, worldwide celebration. They were invited to prepare brief messages of love and hope to the world and attach them to helium-filled balloons that were released at sunrise on a memorable fall day.

Angela Santana sent her message of love from Brazil: "Peace is what we feel when we live righteously. It is having the Spirit with us who testifies about our Heavenly Father and his Son, Jesus Christ. It is preparing for the day when we can live in the kingdom of heaven with our Heavenly Father eternally." On the envelope she printed, "If a man still has hope, he is never completely unhappy."

Shauna Bocutt, age fifteen, from Kinshasa, Zaire, in Africa, sent her message of hope and included this personal testimony: "I know my Heavenly Father loves me because I have asked."

From the Philippines, Dhezie Jimeno wrote: "I would like to share with you a message which I hope you'll keep to your heart's delight. The message is that God cares and loves you very, very much. Yes, in life we experience pain and heartaches, sorrows and tribulations, but mind you, all these things are just to give us experience, and besides, we can make them work for our own good. Difficulties are just God's errand. If we are sent upon them, it is an evidence of his confidence. Therefore, let us be glad, be happy, for it is a way of being wise. God loves you, and he is ever willing to help you at all times Just call on him through fervent prayers. I know God never fails; he is there, he is listening, and he cares very deeply about you. You've got a friend."

With the gospel in our lives and our feet firmly planted on the road to the celestial kingdom, we can move forward and upward. There will be some steep climbs ahead, but our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ has covenanted and promised to climb with us every step of the way. Your hope, when united with the hope of thousands of others, can bring the light and the hope of the gospel of Jesus Christ to a troubled world. Covenant this very day (if you haven't already) to plant your feet firmly on the path to the celestial kingdom, and never ever give up. This time, above all other times, is a time for hope.
