Ardeth Greene Kapp, I Walk by Faith ( 1987)

Letters from Home

How I wish I could sit on the edge of your bed with you, look into your eyes, and feel the greatness of your spirit. We'd talk about the desire to be popular and the influence of peers and the importance of families and the good times. You would tell me about when you have felt discouraged, disappointed, confused, or afraid.

I think of questions young women have asked me. "How do I stay close to the Lord?" "Can I make it?" "Is there a way back?" In answer to those questions, I raise my voice and say with all the fervor of my soul, "You can feel a closeness to your Heavenly Father. You can make it no matter how tough the test." And to some I'd say with the deepest conviction, "Yes, there is a way. Come back."

I would tell you how studying the scriptures can make it easier to know all the things Heavenly Father wants us to do. I remember a difficult time in my life when I thought I couldn't make it. I had failed a grade in school. I was humiliated and lacked confidence in myself and my abilities. It was awful. I didn't want to go on. I remember praying with all my heart that I could be smart. Sometime after that, I became aware that the scriptures could help me find answers when I needed help. I'd like to share with you one scripture that really helped me at that time in my life: "Trust in the Lord with all thine heart; and lean not unto thine own understanding. In all thy ways acknowledge him, and he shall direct thy paths." (Proverbs 3:5-6.)

You might think that I never lack confidence now, but I do sometimes. And when I feel that way, I reread that scripture. I can feel his love and the secure, quiet feeling of peace, and know he is near.

You might wonder how this happens. Maybe you're like many young people—you find the scriptures boring, or they don't have much meaning to you. Learning to love the scriptures is a lot like learning to walk. At first you're unsure—you sometimes stumble, and you don't get anywhere very fast. If you stopped trying to walk just because you fell down a few times, you'd never know the joy of walking. But once you learn how to walk, soon you can run and go places you couldn't go before.

Let me tell you how learning to walk is like learning to study the scriptures. When you first begin reading the scriptures, you feel unsure; you'd much rather read something familiar, like a favorite story. But I can tell you from experience that if you will try reading the scriptures every day, just as you kept trying to walk, the scriptures will be as important to you as being able to walk. In fact, I believe they will be more important. But you've got to begin. If you haven't done so already, start tonight by marking a favorite scripture before you go to bed. Just take a step or two each day. If you don't have a favorite scripture, you could mark the one I shared from Proverbs and put today's date beside it.

You might start by first reading the chapter headings to get the sense of the story. I'd suggest that you start with Third Nephi in the Book of Mormon. The heading of chapter one reads, in part, "The night of Christ's birth arrives—the sign is given and a new star arises." You're already familiar with that miraculous story, and by reading this chapter, you can be comfortably on your way—a first step that can lead to many more each day.

Recently I spent three days in a wilderness camp with 150 young people. We did a lot of hiking and had some hard physical challenges, such as rappelling down an eighty-foot cliff. On the last day we were given instructions to go into the woods alone. Before leaving the group, each youth was given a letter from home that had been written by one of his or her parents for this occasion.

When I went out alone, I took my scriptures with me. I read about the love of our Father in heaven for all of us and for me. And right then I realized that the scriptures are like letters from home.

After the time alone, we gathered together to share our experiences. Many spoke of their letter from home. One young woman stood before us and expressed the feelings of her heart as she held her letter from home close—a precious treasure. She told us, "I bawled my face off when I sat there alone and realized how much my mom and dad love me."

It can be that same way for each of us when we read the scriptures. Can you imagine being away from home and receiving a letter from your parents and not bothering to open and read it? This is what happens when we don't read the scriptures. The scriptures are like letters from home telling us how much our Heavenly Father loves us. They tell us how we can draw near to him. He tells us to come as we are; no one will be denied. (See 3 Nephi 9:14, 17-18.)

Open your scriptures and read them every day. Why? So you can have a sure testimony of his love for you. So you can know the gospel plan and the blessings that come through obedience and right choices. So you will have many, many scriptures marked that you can turn to quickly for comfort, for courage, for faith and hope and peace, and for wisdom and joy, and experience the feelings of being close to him. The verses you mark will become anchors to cling to when the voices of the world confuse you. They will lift you up in spirit and literally save your life when you're down. If you will ask Heavenly Father in your daily prayers to help you understand the messages, and if you will strive to keep the commandments, you can have the spirit of the Holy Ghost to teach you and to open your mind to the special messages that are there for you for your needs at particular times in your life.

I know this is true. It can happen over and over again. It has happened for me. Often, while you're studying, you will feel very close to your Heavenly Father, and you will want to have your scriptures with you always to renew that feeling over and over again.

I have a set of scriptures in a small size so I can carry them with me wherever I go. You already carry your purse and school books; will you carry your scriptures? If you will, others will follow your example. You'll discover special friends who will be excited to share with you scriptures that are special to them. I have a friend who often calls me and asks, "Have you got your scriptures there?" With excitement in her voice she'll add, "Let me share with you what I've found." And then she will read a scripture to me. I'll ask, "Where did you find that? What is the reference?" Then I get excited and mark my scriptures. But I had to learn to walk first. As you keep trying, sooner than you realize you'll have a few favorite scriptures marked that you can turn to easily. And you'll love the standard works like special friends. If you do not have your own set of scriptures, will you make a plan to get them?

Let me tell you about an old set of scriptures that my mom and dad gave me when I turned seventeen. I had read the Book of Mormon before, but one day it was different. Perhaps I was more in tune with the Spirit, or maybe I had studied more diligently and prayed more fervently. I was young, but I wanted to know for myself if the Book of Mormon was true. On that particular day I came to the part about faith in the thirty-second chapter of Alma. As I finished that chapter, I experienced a feeling that I recognized as a witness from the Holy Ghost—I knew the Book of Mormon was true. I wanted to stand up and shout. I wanted to tell the whole world what I knew and how I felt, but I was alone. So with tears of joy streaming down my face, I wrote on the margin all the way around the page the feelings in my heart at that moment. I made a big red star in the margin on the top of the page and wrote, "May 31st, 7:30 A.M. This I know, written as if to me." Then I wrote in the margin on one side, "I have received a confirmation. I know the Book of Mormon is true." Across the margin on the other side I wrote, "One month ago I began fasting each Tuesday for a more sure knowledge. This I know."

I am anxious for you too to know and love the scriptures so they can be your comfort when the climb is steep and scary and risky. When you study them diligently, they become your scriptures. Like letters from home, they can guide you with feelings of inspiration as you make important choices every day. As you become more and more familiar with the scriptures, they can eventually become your favorite stories, easy to read, and they will help you have determination to stand firm for righteousness even when it's difficult.

Now, will you join me in making a renewed commitment to increase your scripture study? Will you make a plan to have a set of scriptures of your own to keep close and carry with you? Will you accept this invitation, this challenge, to read the scriptures regularly? If you will do this, I promise you that our Father in heaven will draw near to you because you will be drawing near to him. (See D&C 88:63.) You will find peace in your heart with a conviction of his love and nearness that you cannot deny in happy times or troubled times. You live, and one day you will die. And when you do, you will know the Savior, for you will have studied his words, and kept his commandments, prayed fervently and daily, and felt his nearness as he walks with you along the steep and sometimes hard path on our journey home. To this I bear my testimony.
