Ardeth Greene Kapp, I Walk by Faith ( 1987)

My Dad Came After Me

Every young woman, wherever she is, who is striving for righteousness, can join with a quarter of a million other young women in becoming a mighty force for good. Yes, you can bring light where there is darkness, hope where there is despair, and faith where there is doubt. It is not easy, I know. You know it too. I believe it may be as hard as—maybe even harder than—the struggles of our young pioneer sisters who pushed handcarts, suffered extreme fatigue, or were deserted by family or loved ones when they joined the Church.

An account from my great-grandmother's journal gives this example: "Almost a century and a half ago, the Book of Mormon was brought into the home of Susan Kent when she was sixteen years of age. After studying the Book of Mormon, Susan gained a testimony of the truth of the book that was so strong she could not reject it, although to accept it meant a great sacrifice for her. She was at the time engaged to a young man and felt she could not endure being separated from him, but he would have nothing to do with anyone who would join the Mormons. She did not count the cost; she chose the path of peace for her conscience, but her heart was so grieved that she could partake of no nourishment for several days. Then she lapsed into a coma so profound it had the appearance of actual death. Preparations were being made for her funeral until she awoke asking, 'How long have I slept?' With tender care, she slowly regained her health and, with her sister Abigail and their parents, joined the Church." I'll be eternally thankful to my great-grandmother Susan Kent for her testimony of the Book of Mormon and what it meant in her life and now in mine.

In today's world, you will have different kinds of experiences; nevertheless, they will require personal sacrifice. Your challenges will require moral courage to mark a straight and narrow path for others to follow. Your challenges maybe similar to Susan's. Perhaps you will have to break an engagement or decline an invitation to a dance or a party because you have chosen to follow the teachings of the Book of Mormon and our modern-day prophet. This is a time when the influence of many movies, fashions, music, and fads would try to desensitize us so that the greatest and most dangerous hazards appear not so bad, and the loud voices of the world would be allowed to interfere with the whisperings of the Spirit within us and thus threaten our eternal life.

Recently a young woman from Texas told about her struggle to be good. She spoke of the constant bombardment of evils made to appear appealing at school, on the TV, and in advertisements. There is hardly an area of life that is protected from messages of immorality. "We simply can't make it alone," she said.

Because of these enticements in the world, we all need to strive together. None of us need travel alone; in fact, we must not if we are to avoid the dangerous hazards along the way. When we strive together in righteousness with our families and friends, there is increased safety. Now some families are more complete than others, but every family is precious. There are times when we need help from our families and don't even know it, and may not even want it, and it doesn't make sense until later. Let me explain what I mean.

One evening years ago, while attending a Sunday School party, I looked at the clock and saw that it was past the time I had been told to be home. Just then a knock came on the door. I was horrified—my father had come after me. I felt humiliated in front of my friends. I thought I wanted to die. I was not pleasant with my father; disobedience never makes one pleasant.

A few years later, some friends and I were driving home from a dance across an Indian reservation ten miles from any shelter. It was forty degrees below zero, and the wind chill continued to lower the temperature. A few miles farther into the blizzard we discovered the heater was no longer working; it was frozen up. The car would no longer run, and we came to a slow stop. We watched the snow swirling in front of us only until the windows quickly froze over. Then we were quiet and sober as we contemplated our fate. Our very lives were in danger. The silence was broken as a friend in the back seat asked, "How long do you think it will be before your dad will get here?" Why do you think they thought my father would come? One time I had thought I wanted to die because he came after me; this time we lived because he came through the blizzard to save my life and the lives of my friends. This time I was pleasant with Dad—pleasant and very grateful.

This life provides many causes for disunity and strife. Evil forces are working relentlessly to have us bring contention into our homes over any issue and threaten our happiness, our peace, and our love for each other.

Some time ago a young girl came to my office with anger in her voice and hurt in her eyes. She wanted to tell me all the things she didn't like about her mother. I listened and listened until she got it all out. It was a long list. There was silence; then I asked, "Is there anything good about your mom?" I waited. I think she had refused to let her mind think in that direction until that moment. I asked, "Amy, how do you feel about your mom?" She raised her head, tears streaming down her cheeks, and said, "She is my mom, and I love her." She had discovered love. Now there is no magic formula. She still had to go home and work her problems out day by day, but she let go of the strife in her heart, and now she wanted to strive together with her mother. And that's exactly what her mother had been praying for.

Miracles can happen when we decide to work together. In Amy's case something of a miracle did happen. It's okay that your parents aren't perfect; no parents are. And it's okay that they didn't have perfect children either; no children are. You see, our whole purpose is to strive together in righteousness, overcoming our weaknesses day by day. We must never give up on one another.

Sometimes a daughter can rescue a parent in times of storm when she cares enough to help. I know of a family where the father has had to move from job to job. In his kind of work, many people are getting laid off. He might have come home and called his wife into the other room and said, "My dear, we don't have enough money to pay the bills, but I know how much Julie wants that expensive sweater. I told her we would try to get it for her. I don't want to disappoint her. What am I going to do?" There might have been some teenage daughters saying, "But all of the other kids get new things. We deserve them too. Besides, Dad promised." But that wasn't the way it happened. The father came home, but he didn't have to say anything. Julie and her sister knew. Julie didn't say, "Dad, what are you going to do?" She put her arm around his shoulder and said, "Oh Dad, we can help." How do you think her father felt? Do you have any idea how her mother must have felt?

Since that time Julie has been working two jobs, twelve hours a day, to pay for her college tuition in the fall. On the day her twelve-year-old brother wanted to go to camp but couldn't because he had no suitable pants to wear, Julie received her pay from both jobs. Her mother told me that she held out the money for her tithing, held back the portion she must save each week for her college tuition, and had enough left to take her brother shopping for the much-needed pants. How do you think her brother felt? How do you think Julie felt?

Disappointment and sacrifice can provide the struggles that make us pull together or it can become the enemy that will divide and destroy families. Each of us will decide which it will be.

I am convinced that if each of us will stop, like Amy, and think of the good things instead of the bad, we will discover that love which will bind us safely together with our families through all of the skirmishes that occur with loved ones (like having to share the bathroom, the car, the one nice dress, or whatever with loved ones who are not yet perfect—striving together through thick or thin). And, lest we become anxious, let us remember that perfection is hard work and comes only a step at a time.

Every Sunday as we partake of the sacrament we promise again to strive to keep the commandments so the Spirit of the Lord will be with us always. When we learn to listen to the whisperings of that Spirit within us and have the courage to follow its promptings, we will become noticeably different because we won't be doing many of the things that are popular with the world. It won't be easy, but we can handle that.

Let me share with you the last lines of a poem written by my sister Shirley for her children:

Listen to your inner drummer, Step to its quiet beat; The world beats another rhythm, A rhythm of defeat. We'll become a holy people, Peculiar and divine, Living in the world But walking out of time.

There will continue to be strife in the world, but because of the covenants or promises we have made to care about one another and the promises our Father in heaven has made never to leave us or desert us, we will come through the storm together to rescue each other in times of danger, even as my father came after me. We will look forward with faith in God, having our hearts knit together in unity and in love one toward another.

We can do this; I know we can.

The evils of our day will increase, even as the wicked armies of Pharaoh threatened the children of Israel in the time of Moses, but with faith in God, striving together in righteousness, we of all people have reason to rejoice and take heart. With our eyes fixed on heaven, we'll watch the Red Sea part.
