Ardeth Greene Kapp, I Walk by Faith ( 1987)

Divine Nature

Influence, Not Power

In order to realize the full blessings of our Father's plan involving the power and authority of the priesthood, each young man and each young woman must prepare to do their part. While the duties and responsibilities, the influence, and the native endowments of young men and young women are different, I believe their preparation to receive the full blessings of the priesthood is more alike than different.

Let's start at the beginning, at least at the beginning of our earth life, and consider those times when the power and the authority of the priesthood become very important to us personally.

When we entered earth life as tiny infants, we were each blessed and given a name by one holding the authority to act in God's name. We began our earthly mission and our names were recorded on the records of the Church.

This pattern was observed even before the birth of our Savior, when Zacharias and Elisabeth presented their son to receive his earthly name and blessing. The child's name had been revealed to Zacharias by an angel. He was to be known as John, the forerunner of Jesus Christ. By the power of the priesthood, this blessing was given.

When we were baptized and became members of the Church of Jesus Christ, we participated in the first priesthood ordinance in which we made covenants. It opened the way for us to start on the path to our Father in heaven. We were baptized by the same power and authority as John the Baptist exercised when he baptized Jesus Christ, our Savior, in the river Jordan.

The gift of the Holy Ghost follows baptism and constitutes the next essential ordinance of the gospel. We each had hands laid upon our head by one having the authority of the Melchizedek Priesthood, and by that power we were blessed to receive the Holy Ghost. The Holy Ghost can be a companion to us throughout life. The Holy Ghost is given to guide us, teach us, comfort us, inspire us, and bear witness to us of the reality of the Savior and the truths of the restored gospel.

Many of us have had or will have other experiences with the blessings and power of the priesthood and with the gift of the Holy Ghost. Some young people are called and set apart, by one having authority of the Holy Priesthood, to serve as quorum or class officers. When we are set apart, hands are laid on our heads and we receive the power and authority to act in the office to which we are called.

One Laurel president explained it this way: "I was called to be a class president of seventeen girls, and the bishop said I was responsible to help them. I was scared to death. I didn't even know for sure where they were. Then he told me to decide on my counselors and reminded me of the need to pray and ask the Lord. I wondered how it worked—how would I know who the Lord wanted? I wrote seventeen names on a piece of paper," she continued. "Then I prayed about those names. I kept thinking and praying and crossing off names until the third day. With only two names remaining, I had a strong feeling that I knew who Heavenly Father wanted. That's how it works!" (New Era, May 1974, p. 14.)

It is appropriate for her and for each of us to recognize and witness the power of the Holy Ghost as we seek inspiration concerning the calls we receive from our Heavenly Father through our bishop.

The power of the priesthood and the importance of its restoration and blessings came to have special meaning in my life when I was just fifteen. My mother and father were miles away from our home, and my grandmother was staying with me. While they were away, a serious ear infection developed, and I was rushed to the hospital. The infection required major surgery, which was carried out immediately. Following the operation, I overheard one of the doctors tell a nurse that the damage to my ear had been so severe that I would permanently lose my hearing and my equilibrium.

When my parents arrived at the hospital and realized the seriousness of my situation, they knew what to do. My father and another Melchizedek Priesthood holder, having the power and authority to act in the name of God, administered to me, using oil that had been consecrated by the priesthood for the healing of the sick. My father placed his hands upon my shaven head, which was mostly wrapped in bandages, and gave me a blessing. My mother was also impressed that she should place my name on the prayer roll of the Alberta Temple, where those in attendance would join their faith in prayer for me. It was the first time I knew that people could have their name placed on the prayer roll in the temple. In time, through faith and the power of the priesthood, my healing was complete.

As a member of the Church, have you felt the power of the priesthood in the administrations and blessings you may have received? Have you received a father's blessing? Have you asked your father to give you a blessing at special times of need—like the beginning of a new school year, or during times of discouragement, or when you are carrying a heavy responsibility, or when you are struggling for understanding? These are times when you can receive that strength which you need. And in the absence of your father, you can ask your home teachers, your bishop, or a special friend who has been ordained to act in God's name. I know that such blessings can be a great comfort to you. They have for me and they can for you.

You are at an age when you are thinking about and making important decisions, sometimes difficult decisions, that will affect the rest of your life. As a member of the Church, you have the privilege to receive another unique priesthood blessing, a patriarchal blessing. This blessing can be given to you, upon your request and worthiness, by a patriarch ordained of God to this special calling. A patriarchal blessing can serve as a guide to you with promises that are predicated upon your faithfulness in keeping the commandments. When I was sixteen, Brother Anderson, our stake patriarch, placed his hands on my head and declared my lineage and gave me a patriarchal blessing. This blessing has been a tremendous strength to me throughout my life. Through the years, when unanswered questions have weighed heavily on my mind, I have read and reread my blessing hundreds of times. It has been an anchor, a comfort, and a guide to me. Through the authority of the priesthood, a patriarchal blessing can be yours also to guide you and help you throughout your life.

Another of the great priesthood ordinances designed to bless us was instituted by the Savior when the final hours of his earthly ministry were approaching. During his last supper with his apostles, he blessed some bread, broke it in pieces, and passed it on to them, saying, "Take, eat; this is in remembrance of my body which I give as ransom for you." He then took a cup and gave thanks and passed it to them, saying, "Drink ye all of it. For this is in remembrance of my blood of the new testament, which is shed for as many as shall believe on my name, for the remission of their sins." (JST Matthew 26:22-24.)

Each Sunday young men who hold the Aaronic Priesthood prepare and administer the sacred ordinance of the sacrament. For the sake of order and wise government, our Heavenly Father has bestowed the priesthood and accompanying administrative responsibilities upon his sons. While it is the duty of the Aaronic Priesthood holders to prepare and pass these sacred emblems, every worthy member is privileged to partake and to receive the blessings promised in this priesthood ordinance.

It is also by the authority of the priesthood that both young men and young women are set apart to be messengers of truth and teach the gospel when they receive calls from a prophet of the Lord to serve as missionaries for The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

Likewise, in the House of the Lord, the temple, all things are done by the power and authority of the priesthood. In the temple, men and women are endowed and make sacred priesthood covenants that are accompanied by promises and blessings. One day every righteous young man and woman will have the privilege and opportunity—if not in this life, in the eternities—for a celestial marriage and an eternal family. The highest blessings of the priesthood are conferred only upon a man and a woman together in the temple. This priesthood ordinance is necessary for exaltation in the highest degree of the celestial kingdom. As the Apostle Paul said, "Neither is the man without the woman, neither the woman without the man, in the Lord." (1 Corinthians 11:11.) They are truly partners in priesthood blessings.

And so we come together and rejoice together as we recount the blessings we each receive as a result of the priesthood. It is a power that blesses us daily and prepares us for eternity.

Through the restoration of the Church in this dispensation, priesthood ordinances and covenants that set young men and young women apart from the world are available to each person. This is according to our Heavenly Father's plan. The preamble to the Young Women Values states that young women are to prepare to make and keep sacred covenants, receive the ordinances of the temple, and enjoy the blessings of exaltation.

We are well acquainted with the duties and responsibilities of young men who hold the Aaronic Priesthood. But what of our young women? What is their calling? President Spencer W. Kimball said, "To be a righteous woman is a glorious thing in any age. To be a righteous woman during the winding-up scenes on this earth before the Second Coming of our Savior is an especially noble calling. A righteous woman's influence can be tenfold what it might be in more tranquil times." (Ensign, November 1978, p. 103.)

How can a woman use her influence in this calling? How can she use it in righteousness? Let me tell you what one young woman did. Following her decision to take a stand for truth and righteousness in a very difficult situation, she received a letter from an older friend, which read: "I just wanted to apologize for last night. I was proud to see you holding your standards and not just going along with the crowd which is so easy to do. I want you to know that you made me think twice and reevaluate my own standards on immoral, R-rated movies. Your example has made me want to try harder in listening to the Church's counsel on this matter. I'm sure the Lord is proud of you. Thank you for your friendship."

Age is not a limitation. Each of us has a significant calling. Each young woman, magnifying her calling to become a righteous woman, as this one did, can help thwart the powers of the adversary, deter the proliferation of pornography, and guard against immorality. Our righteous influence can affect many things—the degree of love and harmony in our homes, the number of young people proclaiming the gospel, the behavior of a friend, the atmosphere in our classrooms and workplaces. Elder Russell M. Nelson has said to young women of every age, "Your powerful influence for good is needed today as never before. A righteous young woman's influence is great."

How do we prepare, as a prophet has said, to be ten times more influential than we might be in more peaceful times? (See Spencer W. Kimball, Ensign, November 1978, p. 103.) Our preparation comes as we learn who we are and what we are to do. The Young Women Values can guide us in this preparation. To the question "Who am I?," the values of Faith, Divine Nature, and Individual Worth teach us that we are all daughters of a Heavenly Father who loves us. We have inherited divine qualities. We are each of infinite worth with our own divine mission.

To the question, "What am I to do?," the values of Knowledge, Choice and Accountability, Good Works, and Integrity will help guide us. As we "continually seek opportunities for learning and growth," we will increase our knowledge and testimony of the gospel. We will be strengthened in our desire always to choose good over evil and to accept responsibility for our choices. We will learn to nurture others and play a major part in building the kingdom of God through righteous service, beginning within our own families. And finally, we will develop the moral courage to make our actions always consistent with our knowledge of right and wrong, allowing us to stand as witnesses for Christ "at all times and in all things and in all places." (Mosiah 18:9.)

As we study the Young Women Values with their scriptural references, they will help prepare us to exert a righteous influence. And as we use the values as guides to live by each day, the Lord will strengthen us and his Spirit will bring a marvelous awakening within us. We will begin to understand what it means to become a "light in the Lord" and to "walk as children of light." (Ephesians 5:8-9.)

Sometimes I have walked at dusk in the hills near my home. I watch the sun setting in the west over the lake and the shadows lengthening until the most familiar landmarks around me are gradually obscured in the darkness. I suddenly feel alone and a little unsure. But then a little miracle occurs. One by one the lights begin appearing—in the houses, along the streets, and even in the surrounding darkness—and I regain my sense of direction. Reassured and cheered by their brightness, I make my way safely home.

Each of us is like those lights. In a world of increasing darkness, when the adversary is doing all in his power to eliminate light and obscure every familiar landmark, the Savior's words lovingly implore, "Hold up your light." (3 Nephi 18:24.)

It is not power and authority but rather the strength of our light, our great example, and our influence that will significantly affect the spiritual growth of the Church in the last days.

"Women are appointed . . . to be guides and lights in righteousness," said Elder Bruce R. McConkie. (Ensign, January 1979, p. 63.) I promise you that as you follow the Savior's example, live the principles of the gospel, and stand for truth and righteousness, you will become light- and life-giving. This is the glorious mission of young women.
