Ardeth Greene Kapp, I Walk by Faith ( 1987)

Who Are You Anyway?

Late one afternoon in the San Jose, California, airport, people were milling around, waiting for the luggage to appear on the carousel, with few seats available for waiting. The usual airport noises added to the restlessness of the impatient travelers. A group of strangers, we were each interested in our own destinations.

Against the wall near the outside door, an elderly woman sat hunched over on one of the few benches in the waiting room, a couple of boxes tied with string tucked next to her feet. I moved over near her and watched. She seemed not to notice me. She wrung her frail hands, spotted with age, over and over again, while deep lines furrowed her face. Many people walked by with little notice as she kept a steady watch on the outside door.

Taking a few steps closer, I asked, "Could I be of any help to you?" She looked up, startled, then said, "I'm supposed to meet my daughter out in front. She said she would come and pick me up, but I don't know where to go, and I can't carry my things."

Together we got through the big door with her packages and found a bench near the area where people were being picked up. I wondered how long she had been waiting, and if her daughter knew how frightened and unsure her mother was in this unfamiliar place. Might better arrangements have been made for this elderly woman who seemed so alone, frightened, and unsure? The anxious traveler slowly sat down once again and pulled her packages close to her. Looking up through her wire-rimmed glasses, she asked, "Who are you anyway? You must be somebody."

I told her my name and then asked this stranger bent with age and the care of years, "Who are you?" "Oh, I'm nobody," she said. Nobody? I thought. You're somebody's mother and you're . . . At that moment a car pulled up, and a middle-aged woman in fine clothes got out of the driver's seat and hurried toward the elderly woman. "That's her. That's my daughter," the mother told me.

The daughter, without taking time for a greeting or welcome, grabbed her mother's arm and hurried her toward the car, too fast for the comfort of tired and worn-out legs. Maybe her impatience had something to do with her concern for being double-parked. I hoped that was the explanation for her impatience. When the mother was seated in the car, the daughter returned to the bench and picked up the two boxes, which looked quite out of place with her appearance and her fine car. Then she got in the driver's seat, her mother in the seat beside her with her head barely peeking above the window, and together they drove away.

Since that day in San Jose, I hear ringing in my ears a tired voice, saying, "Oh, I'm nobody." Just how many nobodies are there in this world? And how many somebodies? And how do you tell the difference?

In London, England, on a beautiful day in April, that question popped into my mind again. We arrived at Heathrow Airport and took a taxi to our hotel by way of Buckingham Palace. It was three o'clock in the afternoon, and large numbers of people were moving toward the palace. As we rode down the street opposite the palace entrance, we saw uniformed policemen mounted on beautiful black horses. Lines of school children in navy uniforms with brass buttons, looking as official in their uniforms as the officers of the law, were carrying beautiful bouquets of bright yellow daffodils. "Surely this is not a regular occurrence," I said, and the taxi driver informed me that it was a celebration for Queen Elizabeth's birthday. The celebration was to begin at four o'clock, when the children would gather in front of the great palace and begin singing. Fifteen minutes later the Queen of England, Queen Elizabeth II, would appear on the balcony and everyone could participate in this historic event by singing happy birthday to her.

In my mind, I remembered my childhood and how my grandmother who came from England would recite a nursery rhyme to me: "Pussy cat, pussy cat, where have you been? I've been to London to visit the queen. Pussy cat, pussy cat, what did you there? I frightened a little mouse under a chair." I remembered the many times my mother told me about the queen and that I could be like a princess if I did all the things a princess should do—"like using good table manners even when you're eating all by yourself," she would say. She read to me about how the queen's dresses have little weights in the hemline so that if she is in public and the wind blows, she will never be seen in an unqueenly situation. My sisters and I collected pictures of the queen and made scrapbooks. And in my hometown in Canada, almost every public gathering was closed by the congregation singing "God Save the Queen."

You can be sure that at four o'clock, I was at Buckingham Palace, the very palace we had gathered pictures of years before. I looked around at the people—young and old, poor and well-to-do. I watched as they stood with eyes riveted on the balcony, which was decorated with red, white, and blue bunting. At four o'clock the children began to sing. Fifteen minutes later a hush fell over the crowd. The balcony doors opened, and out stepped six uniformed buglers in fancy attire. They raised their instruments, with long banners hanging from each horn, and played a stirring fanfare. Then the people in the courtyard cheered as the queen came into view. She was dressed in a bright yellow suit, and as if by signal, the children waved their bright yellow daffodils and sang the special birthday song. The queen waved to the people, many of whom had tears in their eyes. Quite by surprise I wiped tears from my own eyes, thinking about the history of this royal family—their nobility, their example, their service to their country, their loyalty, and their royalty. There stood the Queen of England, a real somebody surrounded by her subjects, her kingdom, and her empire.

I supposed no one had ever asked Queen Elizabeth, "Who are you?" If they had done so, everyone could answer, "She is the Queen of England." No more would need to be said.

Is it power and authority, popularity, prestige, and position that makes one a somebody? My mind raced by from the Buckingham Palace in London to the airport in San Jose, from the Queen of England to the elderly woman who told me, "Oh, I'm nobody."

In the book Roots, author Alex Haley says, "In all of us there is a hunger, marrow-deep, to know our heritage, to know who we are and where we have come from. Without this enriching knowledge, there is a hollow yearning. No matter what our attainments in life, there is still a vacuum, an emptiness, and the most disquieting loneliness."

When we know who we are, we have a great sense of well-being, a purpose for being, a reverence for life, and a sense of whom we have the capacity to become. President George Q. Cannon, a counselor in the First Presidency nearly a century ago, taught, "We are the children of God, and as His children there is no attribute we ascribe to Him that we do not possess, though they may be dormant or in embryo." (Gospel Truth, Deseret Book, 1974, 1:1.)

Elder Bruce R. McConkie has told us something about becoming queens: "If righteous men have power through the gospel and its crowning ordinance of celestial marriage to become kings and priests to rule in exaltation forever, it follows that the women by their side (without whom they cannot obtain exaltation) will be queens and priestesses. Exaltation grows out of the eternal union of a man and his wife." (Mormon Doctrine, Bookcraft, 1966, p. 613.)

I wanted to tell the old woman in San Jose that she could become a queen. I wanted to tell her about the gospel of Jesus Christ. I wanted to tell the Queen of England that she too could become a queen—not just the Queen of England, but a queen forever in God's kingdom. I want every woman—young or older—who feels that she is a nobody, and everyone who feels that she is a somebody, to know that in the gospel of Jesus Christ every woman can become a queen through the ordinance of celestial marriage in the holy temples of God.

As I watched the crowds of people at the Queen's birthday, I wished I could stand on the balcony of Buckingham Palace and shout to every young woman within the sound of my voice, "You are a somebody!" Then I would tell them about the Young Women Values. If it were possible, I wish that I could talk to every young woman personally. I would say, "You are a daughter of a Heavenly Father who loves you and who has an eternal plan for you that is centered in Jesus Christ your Savior." I would tell her that she has a divine nature and has inherited divine qualities. I would tell her of her individual worth, her infinite worth, with her own divine mission and the promise of exaltation through sacred ordinances and covenants in the House of the Lord. I would ask every young woman in The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints to ask everyone she meets if they have heard, and, if not, to shout it loud and clear: No one is a nobody! Everyone is a somebody in our Heavenly Father's kingdom! We are all daughters of God.

"And now, because of the covenant which ye have made ye shall be called the children of Christ, his sons, and his daughters; for behold, this day he hath spiritually begotten you; for ye say that your hearts are changed through faith on his name; therefore, ye are born of him and have become his sons and his daughters." (Mosiah 5:7.)
