Ardeth Greene Kapp, I Walk by Faith ( 1987)

You Are One Terrific Person

It was our last day in Hawaii, and I had carefully selected several gifts to take to my family at home. I already had several small gifts for five-year-old Kent, but I could not resist buying a T-shirt that caught my eye as we were waiting in the airport. When we arrived home and opened our luggage to hand out the various souvenirs to the children in our family, the gift that received the greatest response was the T-shirt presented to Kent.

At first it appeared to be just another T-shirt, of which he had plenty, but when his sister read the message printed on the front, it became much more. Kent immediately pulled and pulled to get his shirt over his head, ready to replace it with this gift with big letters in bright colors that read "Inside this Hawaiian shirt is one terrific kid." He smoothed the shirt over his chest and stomach and walked around proudly for everyone to see. It was obvious that this statement worn so boldly made him feel he was one terrific kid, and with the T-shirt on, he had the evidence to prove it. He ran out to the neighbors' homes to show his friends. That night he slept in his new T-shirt.

The next afternoon, after he had played outside all morning, Kent's mom suggested that he change his shirt. He agreed only after she gave in to his request that she wash it immediately and then put it in the dryer so he could wear it again as soon as possible.

One evening a couple of weeks later, when I agreed to take care of Kent while his parents were away for a few hours, I was surprised to see him wearing his special T-shirt. By now it was showing signs of considerable wear. He didn't need anyone to read the message on the front. He knew what it said and was anxious to remind me. Pointing to his chest, he announced with confidence, "Inside this Hawaiian shirt is one terrific kid," and I agreed.

When I got him ready for bed, together we pulled the shirt over his head. Then he folded it carefully ready for another day. I thought to myself, what if that message, which seems to increase his confidence, could be written on his skin so he could wear it always, so he would never take it off and would always be reminded that he is a terrific boy.

I rubbed his bare back. "Kent," I said, "this shirt of skin is made of fine material." He laughed and said, "Rub it some more." I continued to rub his back and to explain. "This shirt of skin is washable and it grows with you. You will never outgrow it. If you fall down and get a hole in it, such as when you skin your knee, it will even mend itself without a needle or thread. It is really very fine. It's like a coat of skin, and you look wonderful in it."

Often since that evening together, Kent has asked me to tell him about his coat of skin and how inside that coat of skin is one terrific kid. I want him to know that when his T-shirt wears out or when he grows out of it, he is still the same wonderful little boy inside.

Sometimes, even when we get older, some people feel they need to wear certain clothes that they believe will tell their friends that they really are special. Many years ago, when I was in high school, it seemed to me that all of the girls who were popular wore certain brands of clothes. I thought that if I could just own a sweater and a pair of shoes with the right brand names, I would never ever lack confidence or feel unsure again.

Today, just as when I was young, many young women want to wear the "right" labels. In fact, manufacturers are so aware of how important labels are that they even sew them on the outside of clothing, so everyone can see what brand you are wearing. Of course, stores can charge very high prices for popular brands. Sometimes the quality of brand-label clothing is really worth the extra money, but often it is just the label that costs so much, a label gives a person the message: "If I wear this brand, I'm special."

One young woman actually saved her meager lunch money for weeks and went hungry each day because she was starving for the confidence she thought she could buy with a certain brand of T-shirt with a little brand symbol on the front. Another young woman was reported to have sold the label from her old shirt to a friend who couldn't afford to buy that brand but who thought she would feel better if she could sew even an old label in the neck of her sweater.

Oh, what a plight the merchants and fashion designers would be in if the truth were ever known and everyone understood about their own coat of skin, that marvelous covering that is always with us and can never be taken off. When we understand its divine nature, we can be reminded that inside the coat of skin of each individual is one wonderful human soul. While we may decide by choice or circumstance to wear clothes without popular labels, we can radiate a confidence that may even cause people to ask, "What brand is your outfit?" And we might answer with a smile, "You mean my coat of skin? I call it Divinity." If there is further question, we might refer them to Webster's dictionary: "Divinity: The quality or state of being divine; goddess."

When we each discover who we really are and the reality of our divine nature, we will always be anxious to look our very best and act our very best. Our confidence will come not from the labels we are wearing but rather from what is inside. Our knowledge of our divine nature and our individual worth helps us understand what the Psalmist meant when he said, "What is man, that thou art mindful of him? and the son of man, that thou visitest him? For thou hast made him a little lower than the angels, and hast crowned him with glory and honour." (Psalm 8:4-5.)

To every young woman I would say, on days when your confidence is low and your dress is not the very latest fashion, just close your door, talk to your Heavenly Father, and tell him you need extra courage and confidence this day. Before leaving the privacy and security of your own room, stop long enough to repeat the first three Young Women Values:

"Faith: I am a daughter of a Heavenly Father who loves me, and I will have faith in his eternal plan, which centers in Jesus Christ, my Savior.

"Divine Nature: I have inherited divine qualities which I will strive to develop.

"Individual Worth: I am of infinite worth with my own divine mission which I will strive to fulfill."

Now you are ready for the day, and whatever label you are wearing or not wearing will make little difference if you remember who you really are inside your wonderful coat of skin.

Live for the day when you will be privileged to go to the temple, the House of the Lord, and from that day forward you will have a special garment to wear. When you fully understand, you will draw strength from that blessing and, like Kent, will want to wear that garment night and day.
