Ardeth Greene Kapp, I Walk by Faith ( 1987)

The Gift

Late in the evening, the Christmas lights sparkled like jewels in the night as we left the city and drove through the snow-packed streets to the outskirts of town. The lights were not as plentiful here, but each colorful bulb added beauty to the more humble homes nestled together in the gently falling snow. Driving down one street and then another, we tried, with difficulty, to read the snow-covered street signs. Finally we found the address we were looking for, with the house numbers above the front door protected by an overhanging roof. Filling the front window was a huge Christmas tree, which gave privacy to the living room with the curtains drawn wide.

Making our way through the deep snow of the unshoveled walk, we rang the doorbell and were immediately greeted by Brent, an eight-year-old boy. He invited us in. The living room was small but warm and cozy, with a fire burning in the fireplace. The boy's eighty-six-year-old grandfather rested on the couch near the tree with his leg in a cast. He had slipped off the roof while attempting to shovel the heavy snow that had fallen the night before. We had heard of the accident and were anxious to see him at this Christmas time.

While we exchanged greetings and hugs, Brent stood anxiously waiting for the first opportunity to ask a question. In a most forthright and direct way he simply asked, "Have you ever shaken hands with the prophet?" The eagerness with which he asked gave me reason to believe that he may have rehearsed that question in his mind several times in anticipation of my visit.

"Yes, Brent," I said. "I have shaken the hand of the prophet."

"Oh," he said. His eyes were wide, and his voice reminded me of what a great privilege that is. "If I could just shake the hand of the prophet," he went on. His tone suggested that should that be a possibility, it would surely be the greatest Christmas gift he could have; and if not the greatest, at least it would be among the very top.

Sensing the love and respect Brent obviously felt for our prophet, and wanting to somehow provide a tie between the prophet and the young boy, I reached out my hand. "Brent," I said, "this hand has shaken the hand of the prophet."

He grabbed my hand and shook it vigorously. Then, letting go, he turned his hand over from front to back to examine it thoroughly. "I'll never wash my hand," he said. Considering the problems this decision might cause, I suggested that he probably should wash his hand and just keep the memory in his mind. This suggestion was not acceptable. He had a better idea. "Okay," he said, "I'll wash my hand, but I'll save the water." That seemed like a good suggestion, although I supposed he was only joking. Shortly Brent left the room. The warmth from the fire and the lights from the tree created a wonderful setting to visit. Together with Brent's adopted grandfather and his grandmother, we shared memories of Christmases past.

A few minutes later Brent returned, this time carrying a plastic bag dripping with water. Before anyone could question him, he proudly announced, "I washed my hand," holding up the bagful of water for all to see. We talked about the water in the bag and how that was a distant connection to the prophet; then our visit about Christmases past continued. Brent sat on the floor facing the Christmas tree, his knees peeking through his faded bluejeans, and from the corner of my eye I watched him examine the bag of water as if he were expecting to see some evidence that this was holy water. The fire burned low and the lights on the tree seemed to brighten.

After a few minutes Brent got up and, taking his treasure with him, left the room. While I wondered if we would see him again before we left, he returned—this time without the plastic bag full of water. He had determined a better solution for his desire to be in touch with the prophet. Standing in the door way with his T-shirt wet all the way down the front, he explained what he had done. "I drank the water," he said.

This creative solution was not to be viewed as a joke or something to be made fun of. Brent was serious. He was carrying something important not on the outside, where he could lay it down, but on the inside. The water from the hand that he had washed that had shaken the hand of someone who had shaken the hand of the prophet was now part of him on the inside, and he would keep it. He seemed very pleased with his solution.

Would it really make any difference? I wondered. What did it really mean to Brent? It was much more than water, I was sure, but in the rush of the Christmas season the incident slipped from my mind until a few days later. Then, at sacrament meeting on the Sunday before Christmas, I received some understanding of what this young boy, just recently baptized, was feeling and wanting.

The sacramental prayer had been offered, and the sacred emblems were being passed quietly and reverently. The Sunday before Christmas brings a sensitivity that makes important things even more important—a time of recommitment and rededication, of sorrow for wrong-doings and resolve and hope to do better in the new year. As the sister on my right passed the sacrament tray and held it while I raised the small cup of water to my lips, into my mind came this thought: "I want to get this water on the inside." I thought of Brent, a newly baptized member. I remembered the baptismal covenant. I thought of the symbolism of the water, the washing away of our sins. The cup of water of which I would partake renewed the promises and blessings of the atonement of Jesus Christ. It was his birthday we were celebrating. I could hear in my mind again the sacramental prayer on the water: "that they do always remember him, that they may have his Spirit to be with them. Amen."

It was Christmas, a holy celebration in memory of the birth of Jesus Christ, our Lord and Savior. The symbolism of the water was to represent his blood, which was shed for each of us so that we might live and have eternal life. The words of a little verse I had heard many years earlier came to my mind with new meaning: "Though Christ a thousand times in Bethlehem be born,/ If he is not born in thee thy soul is still forlorn."

"Thank you, Brent," I said to myself, "for this wonderful gift you have given me, the increased desire to drink the water—the symbolism of his atonement—to get it on the inside so that I might become more like him."

When we become more like Christ as we renew our covenants each week and partake of the bread and drink the water, committing ourselves to keep the commandments, we can have his Spirit to be with us; we will become more like him, and it will show.

Alma asked the members of the church in his time, "Have ye spiritually been born of God? Have ye received his image in your countenances? Have ye experienced this mighty change in your hearts?" (Alma 5:14.) The question is paraphrased in the words of a song by Janice Kapp Perry, "His Image in Your Countenance":

Have you received his image in your countenance? Does the Light of Christ shine in your eyes? Will he know you when he comes again Because you will be like him? When he sees you, will the Father know his child By his everlasting image in your eyes?

And one day we will answer, Yes, he will know us. He will know us because we will have not only the water inside but the Spirit of God also burning in our hearts. To the question from Brent, "Have you ever shaken hands with the prophet?" my answer is "Yes, but I've also shaken hands with a little eight-year-old boy, and I've learned important and eternal truths from both—a precious gift."
