Ardeth Greene Kapp, I Walk by Faith ( 1987)

Is There Any Way Back?

She sat beside me on the ground with her head down, her fingers picking at the last piece of bark on a small branch. The spongy earth along the creek bed was soft with a thick layer of pine needles and dried leaves accumulated over many seasons. We watched the water bubbling over the shiny rocks, illuminated by the sun filtering through the leaves of the big cottonwood trees. The water in the creek was lower now. The spring runoff had receded, and the gushing sounds of a few weeks ago had quieted to a gentle gurgle.

I'd never seen this young girl before today and had spoken to her only briefly over the telephone that very morning. She had sent me a note through the mail asking me to call. She sounded very troubled. At my insistence she had agreed, reluctantly, that maybe her house wasn't too far away, and she would allow me to drive the several miles to pick her up so we could talk together face to face. She said she would be in the street in front of the house. I told her to watch for a red Honda.

As I made my way to her neighborhood, I noticed a young girl in faded blue jeans get up slowly from the curb. She appeared to be nervous, glancing in both directions. I pulled up beside her, leaned over to open the door, and called her name. She quickly got into the car, then slumped down in the bucket seat and slammed the door a little harder than seemed necessary. I let my foot off the brake and we drove down the narrow street. "Would you like to go anywhere special?" She shook her head. "Then would it be okay with you if we drove to a special place of mine by a creek some distance from here?"

"Yes," she said, not looking up.

"I'm glad you wrote to me," I said, hoping to ease her tension, "because I have something I want to tell you." There was no response on her part, except the nervous popping of her gum. She appeared to be about fifteen years old. She was wearing a generous amount of dark blue eye shadow, and her jaw moved back and forth as she ground her teeth nervously. We drove in silence until we reached the creek.

And now, with the final piece of bark removed from the branch she had been fidgeting with, she tossed it into the creek and began talking. Her tone was at first full of resentment, anger, and doubt. Bit by bit she unloaded the burden of her heart. The sound of the flowing water was a soothing accompaniment to the anguish of her story. I listened. Finally, after many pauses during her long account of suffering and heartache, the remaining drops of torment squeezed out a burden too long carried. And yet, the burden still remained. Telling about it was not enough to provide relief.

Her story was one of sorrow, tragedy, and regret for wrong choices, wrong friends, wrong timing, and wrong places. As she glanced up, her eyes revealed the turmoil, the hurt, and the hopelessness of her soul. In a different tone than before, she asked searchingly, "Is there any way back? I'm only thirteen." She didn't want a quick, easy answer. She was pleading for truth and help. We watched the water together for a moment until the creek itself seemed to provide a visual aid for this very moment. I picked up a clump of loose dirt and tossed it into the stream. It separated, polluting the stream at that spot, but was soon carried out of sight and then the water was crystal clear once again.

"Yes," I said softly, "there is a way back. There is, there is."

"What do I have to do?" she asked, a small note of hope in her anxious voice.

"Before I tell you what you have to do," I said, "I would like you to understand how and why it works. May I tell you that part first?" She nodded in agreement.

"Will you come with me where I was at this time last year and let us walk together where Jesus walked?" I could feel her spirit, which told me she was ready. "I'll be your guide along the way, and together we'll imagine we're singing the songs, walking the paths, and reading the scriptures as we go, just as I did a year ago." I glanced at her to catch the response to this imaginary journey. She was willing.

"There is Bethlehem," I said as we both fixed our eyes on the water in the stream. "It is the birthplace of our Savior, just five miles from Jerusalem. Can you hear our group singing the last line of that sweet song, 'O Little Town of Bethlehem'? Listen carefully." The creek bubbled in accompaniment: "The hopes and fears of all the years /Are met in thee tonight."

I glanced at my young friend. "That means all of our fears—yours and mine. See that sunlit meadow just outside of Nazareth where Jesus spent his childhood. There must have been time for him to play and dream there. He became acquainted with the birds and the flowers, the mustard seed, the fig tree, and all of God's creations. Later on he used them to teach the people so they could understand what he wanted them to know." The water washing over the shiny rocks in the creek bed provided the continuity needed for this imaginary pilgrimage.

"Come and stand by me now on the shores of Galilee. It is Sunday evening. This is the sea of miracles. Jesus was here. He crossed this water many times. He walked on its surface. People were hungry, and he fed them near here. Touch the water with me. It's real. It's all here, and it really happened just as the Bible stories said. And now we're standing on the banks of the Jordan River where it is narrow and swift. We'll walk reverently and quietly here. This is holy ground. This is where Jesus was baptized and the voice of God spoke these words: 'This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased.' (Matthew 3:17.) That happened. It really did, in this very river."

Again the little creek somehow added reality to our experience. The young woman, watching the water, appeared to be listening and hoping. I paused a few moments, then went on.

"Now will you climb with me up the rugged Mount of Olives?" I asked. "Jesus must have climbed this mountain to the very top many times. The people crowded around him. They wanted to be near him and with him. The righteous people followed him and became his disciples. Remember the Primary song?"

I think when I read that sweet story of old, When Jesus was here among men, How he called little children like lambs to his fold, I should like to have been with him then.

The memory of my own longing for that experience as a Primary child filled my voice with emotion. "Everyone who knew him wanted to be with him, and they still do. He loved everyone—everyone—and he still does." I tried to tell her in a way that her heart would believe.

"Let us go down now to the foot of the mountain into the Garden of Gethsemane. It's very quiet. People are speaking in hushed tones or not at all. The gnarled old olive trees are still here, just as they were then. It was on this sacred spot that Jesus Christ, our brother, became our Savior. He suffered and died to atone for us—for you and for me. He really did." I glanced at her as she continued to listen.

"It was here," I explained, "that his sufferings were beyond all mortal comprehension, that the weight of our sins caused him to feel such agony, pain, and heartbreak that he bled from every pore as he suffered in body and spirit."

The memory of standing in that garden and trying to comprehend such suffering and such love was so real. There was silence. I wiped the tears from my eyes as my young friend glanced up.

"He voluntarily took upon himself your sins and mine, because that's how much he loves us," I went on. We listened to the creek and pondered. "His part in this great plan of salvation was essential to our getting back to our heavenly home. It is his great love for us that gives us the strength to struggle and suffer to overcome our sins. It was in this very Garden of Gethsemane that Christ atoned for each one of us. It is Christ's atonement that can, if we will just do our part, save us and rid us of our sins and purify us. Our part is to repent and to do what is right."

There was silence now. Even the stream seemed hushed for a moment. "Can you hear voices singing?" I asked.

I stand all amazed at the love Jesus offers me, Confused at the grace that so fully he proffers me; I tremble to know that for me he was crucified, That for me, a sinner, he suffered, he bled and died.

By now her tension had eased; she was relaxed, her spirit anxious. "We know the Son of God knows our struggles and even understands them, all of them. Even though he was perfect, he suffered pains and afflictions of every kind so that he would know exactly how we would feel. In this way he can help us with our most difficult struggles. He didn't have to suffer for us, but he did so because of his great love for us and his obedience to the plan of God, his Father and our Father. And when we make mistakes, even big ones, and feel like pulling away, the great promise of the atonement that took place in the Garden of Gethsemane is offered to us so that we can qualify to return to our heavenly home and have eternal life and live with him some day."

The sound of the water increased, as if in testimony to the great eternal truth. I then repeated these words we know so well:

I am a child of God, and he has sent me here, Has given me an earthly home with parents kind and dear, Lead me, guide me, walk beside me, Help me find the way. Teach me all that I must do to live with him someday. I am a child of God, rich blessings are in store; If I but learn to do his will I'll live with him once more.

The afternoon breeze began stirring the tiny leaves on the quaking aspen. I turned to my young friend and asked, "Do you remember the third Article of Faith, which says: 'We believe that through the atonement of Christ, all mankind may be saved, by obedience to the laws and ordinances of the Gospel'?" She nodded. "Do you understand better now how it works and why you must go through the steps of repentance, and even suffer in your way?" She nodded again.

We talked about her visit to the bishop, and how anxious he would be to help her unload this heavy burden, and how he would give her direction and counsel and love. "Can you talk to your Heavenly Father about this?" I asked.

"I don't know."

"Then may I talk to him about it for you?"

She nodded. Together we knelt on the banks of the little creek that had served us so well during our journey together. It seemed as though even the light breeze was reverent during our earnest prayer.

As she whispered "Amen," the anguished expression on her face was softened. "I think he cares about me," she said.

"He does care for you, enough to die for you," I testified.
