Ardeth Greene Kapp, I Walk by Faith ( 1987)

Individual Worth

More than Seventeen

When I asked Julie how old she was, she told me she was seventeen. Yes, she was seventeen according to her earth life, but she was thousands of years old, taking into account her pre-earth life. She had forgotten the time before her mortal existence. And so it is with each of us. We remember just the few short years we've been here. One day in the great eternal plan, we will remember everything—who we really are and what we are to become. Julie was more than seventeen, and much more important than she realized.

We sat together on my back porch just as the sun was going down. Her sandy-colored hair was brushed back from her face. Her features were not fine and delicate but distinctive and classic. Her clothes were not fashionable or fancy but youthful and comfortable.

Julie slumped down in the chair and stared out across the backyard, past the fence to the lake and far beyond. Her gaze seemed riveted on the sun as it sank on the horizon, giving a final benediction on another day. It was quiet except for the sound of crickets. I knew Julie had a heavy heart, and sometimes the best way to help is to listen. I waited for her to break the silence. Minutes seem like hours when you're waiting. I wanted to listen to her thoughts, her feelings, and her concerns. I wanted her to share some of the burden she seemed to be carrying. It's hard to help carry another's burden if you don't know what it is.

"Julie," I finally asked, "can I help you?"

She shrugged her shoulders. I tried again. "Do you want to talk?" Since she didn't say no, I supposed she wanted to say yes but didn't know where to begin. Beginning is always the hardest part. Knowing how important the feeling of individual worth is to one's happiness, I asked, "Julie, how do you feel about yourself?"

Without turning her head or blinking an eye, she continued looking straight ahead while tears formed and began running down her suntanned cheeks. I waited. Finally she broke the silence. "If I was just pretty," she said in almost a pleading tone, "then maybe people would like me."

I wanted to start a strong argument defending the reality of her beauty, but I knew that if in her mind she thought she wasn't pretty, it would make little difference that I could see before me the evidence that her opinion of herself was incorrect. This was not a time to disagree.

"What makes you think you're not pretty?" I asked.

She continued staring ahead as the dusk gradually subdued the shapes of the trees and the evening breeze could be felt. "If I was pretty, people would like me," she said.

"Has anyone ever told you that you are not pretty?" I asked.

"No," she said, "but I can see."

"What can you see?" I pressed for an answer.

Now a little impatient, she looked straight at me. "I can see that I'm not pretty. I'm ugly!" Her tears by now were flowing freely, and she made no attempt to hide them. Her secret was out. She was hurting inside because of an idea in her mind that she believed—the idea that she was ugly.

Until Julie could change her thoughts about herself, I knew in her mind she would always be ugly. She had convinced herself of that. I realized that it was not her looks that needed change, but her thoughts, her false opinion of herself. She had been telling herself the wrong things. She had listened to her own messages, and they had gradually undermined her confidence. I continued to listen to her story until finally darkness closed in on another day of earth life with all of its challenges, blessings, and struggles.

"I'm not pretty," she said again. "Why should I try? It's no use."

I resisted the impulse to interrupt and disagree. She continued: "Nothing ever goes right no matter what I do. Nobody likes me, and sometimes I wish I hadn't been born." She buried her face in her hands.

I knew that if I were to help Julie, it would be by helping her change her thoughts about herself. Disagreeing with her was not the answer, and to deny her feelings would only add to the problem by causing her to feel that I didn't care either. I thought and thought. How do you convince a person against her own convictions? I had an idea. It might not help—but maybe it would.

"Julie," I said, "would you let me share an experience with you that I had some time ago, even though at first it may seem that it has no bearing on your problem?"

"Okay," she said in a tone that seemed to say If you want to. I began.

A number of years ago I was on a Church assignment in Korea. On Monday no meetings were scheduled, so Sister Till, the mission president's wife, graciously offered to take me to town to the open marketplace to see the stalls and hundreds of people selling and buying. I had been impressed with the Korean people and was anxious to better understand their habits and traditions. We milled around the marketplace, observing the different sights and sounds and smells. Then Sister Till suggested a visit to a factory where we might want to make a few purchases.

We walked some distance to the factory, which was in an old warehouse. Inside, we found row after row of tables piled high with wooden boxes in many shapes and all carved out of wood. The varied designs on top of the boxes appeared, through the dust, to be made of shells. Sister Till asked if I'd be interested in buying one of the boxes. I don't think so," I said. They didn't appear to be anything I would want, and I wouldn't use one as a gift for anyone. We stopped at one table and brushed off the dust, exposing a lacquered finish that to me appeared cheap. Sister Till gently suggested that I really should buy at least one, and if I had no use for it, I could give it away. Since she had been so kind to take me shopping, I felt that for only seventeen dollars I should buy at least one as a courtesy, if nothing else. I randomly picked up a box and paid my money, and we left to continue our walk through the marketplace. Back at the mission home, I tucked the box away in my luggage; and when I returned home, I tucked it away in a closet and forgot about it.

One day months later, I visited a friend who was working at a very elegant gift shop. While I waited for her to finish with a customer, I looked around at the beautiful displays of exquisite gifts from all over the world. Suddenly I saw a box that looked amazingly similar to the box I had bought in Korea. I wondered, Could this possibly be the same as my box? After careful examination, I determined there might be such a possibility. The box was resting on a glass case, with a mirror at the back exposing the piece from all sides. A light above reflected off the pieces of inlay on the top of the hexagon-shaped box. As I carefully studied this item that was displayed so artistically in this elegant store, my friend returned and commented, "It's a beautiful piece, isn't it? We get them from Korea." She picked up the box and said, "Notice the craftsmanship in this piece. It is made of a special kind of wood found only in Korea. Notice the skill with which this exquisite mother-of-pearl has been inlaid, making such an artistic design." Even the design looked somewhat familiar to me, though I had not really paid much attention while shopping in Korea. "Just run your finger across the surface," she continued, demonstrating how smooth it felt to the touch. "It has more than ten coats of lacquer that are carefully applied and hand rubbed between each coat. This piece sells for 150 dollars—really a good buy for such artistry and craftsmanship." I had to agree with my friend. I felt that I would gladly have paid 150 dollars for this piece. It appeared to me to be worth it.

By now Julie must have been wondering what this had to do with our discussion. I invited her to come into the house to the living room and to sit on the couch. There on the table before her was a hexagon-shaped box decorated with inlaid mother-of-pearl. The top had ten coats of lacquer, hand rubbed. I handed the box to Julie, and she ran her fingers across the smooth surface and smiled.

"Do you know why the box isn't in my closet anymore?" I asked. "Because you think it's pretty," she replied. "And what do you think?" I asked. "It is pretty," she said, examining it very carefully. It was a duplicate of the very box my friend had taken time to tell me about in the gift shop.

"You see," I said, "I didn't recognize the quality. I didn't understand the care taken in the creation. I had not given attention to the intricacy of the design. Not until I saw it as a single box apart from all the rest, in a store where my friend opened my eyes to its value, did I have any appreciation for this beautiful piece. Julie," I asked, "what do you think changed its worth?"

She responded, "The box didn't change. It just looked different to you."

"But how could that be?" I asked. "How did my opinion change?"

She looked thoughtful, so I tried to explain.

"You see," I said, "I had looked at the box in Korea, but I didn't really see it. It wasn't until my friend opened my eyes to its real beauty that it had real value for me. When I understood how it was created, and I saw the price it brought in her shop, my appreciation for the value of my piece changed. I went home and retrieved it from the closet and really saw it for the first time. Now it has this special spot in my home."

I paused a moment, then went on. "When we learn about the worth of something and the price paid for it, we begin to better understand its real value. You see, Julie, you really are very beautiful, and someday when you learn more about your divine nature, you will begin to understand the depth of your own worth. Peter taught us, 'Be partakers of the divine nature, . . . giving all diligence, [and] add to your faith virtue; and to virtue knowledge; and to knowledge temperance; and to temperance patience; and to patience godliness; and to godliness brotherly kindness; and to brotherly kindness charity.' [2 Peter 1:4-7.] Just as my friend opened my eyes to discover the value of the little box from Korea, I would like to be your friend who will help you to see the reality of your own value. Until you learn to feel good about yourself, you'll never be able to believe that people like you, and you'll never believe that you are pretty even if you are."

It was late now, and Julie knew her mother would be concerned about her. She always was. There hadn't been much communication between them, and when Julie had left home, she hadn't told her mother where she was going. She didn't really feel that anyone cared.

"Before you go, Julie," I asked, "will you try a little experiment for just three weeks and then come back and we'll talk again?"

She smiled and said, "What is it?"

"I want you to try very hard to never say discouraging things to yourself," I explained. "That is called 'self talk,' and your mind believes what you tell it. When you say things like 'I'm not pretty, so why try,' you contribute to feelings of self-doubt and self-depreciation. I remember reading once that self-depreciation is a sin." I picked up some sheet music. "Every time negative thoughts about yourself come into your mind, stop and think of the words to this song. I wish I could sing well, and I'd sing for you; but since I can't, I'd like to just repeat the words. Listen carefully and then tell me how you feel."

I repeated the words to the song "I Am of Infinite Worth," which was written by Joy Saunders Lundberg, with music by Janice Kapp Perry:

All I need do is remember If ever I wonder if I am of worth, Remember my Savior, what He did for me When He lived among men on this earth. Pain and unspeakable sorrow He bore for my sins in Gethsemane. Then He gave up His life as He hung on the cross, And He did it all for me. Lovingly Jesus is watching. He knows I am worth all He suffered for me. Now I must fulfill my own mission in life, Ever following Him faithfully. Line upon line I am striving, Not seeking the honor or praise of mankind. I will reach for the joy of Celestial rewards 'Til all that God offers is mine. For I am of worth, of infinite worth. My Savior, Redeemer, loves me. Yes, I am of worth, of infinite worth. I'll be all He wants me to be. I will praise Him, I will serve Him, I will grow in His love and fulfill my divine destiny. For my Savior, Redeemer, loves me.

"Julie," I said, giving her a copy of the words to the song, "will you memorize the words to this song, and every night before you say your prayers will you repeat the words, and every morning while you are getting ready for school, will you say them over again?"

"Yes," she said, looking at the words.

"And just one more thing: Will you listen to the messages you are telling yourself, and every time you begin to think something in your mind that would lessen your opinion of yourself, will you stop and repeat the chorus? Will you do that?" I asked.

"Yes, I will," she promised.

As we walked toward the front door, we stopped and stood together in front of a mirror on the wall. The light from a nearby lamp magnified the beauty of her distinctive and classic features. One of a kind. A creation divine in nature. A person of individual worth. I asked, "Are you prettier now than when you came tonight?" Julie smiled at herself in the mirror. Maybe she was, for the first time in months and months.
