Ardeth Greene Kapp, I Walk by Faith ( 1987)

I Didn't Make It—or Did I?

"I had always wanted to be a cheerleader," Kay declared. "Some people like to play the piano and other things, but for me it was cheerleading." Her long, honey-blond hair framed her delicate face as she sat tall in the chair. She crossed one leg over the other and her foot bobbed as she spoke, revealing her excitement.

"People don't realize all the work cheerleaders have to do," she explained. "It's not all fun and games as it may appear." With a smile of confidence she continued, "I was a cheerleader during my junior year, and I found out you have to be very dedicated. You have to really love it and really want to do it, or there is no way you can handle the discipline it requires."

Hardly stopping for a breath, her eyes bright, she went on. "It can't be something you are doing just to be popular. You have to really enjoy it. Being a junior cheerleader is actually a test, because you don't get all the glory and the applause from the audience. That doesn't come until you are a varsity leader." Underlining the depth and intensity of her commitment to her goal to become a varsity cheerleader, she explained, "All my life I've heard that if you really want something and want it badly enough, and if you are willing to work hard enough for it, it will happen." Then, leaning forward with both feet on the floor in front of her, she concluded, "I believe that. I had really worked hard that year, and being a junior cheerleader helped me realize how much I really wanted to be a varsity cheerleader."

The summer months quickly slipped away. Soon the tryouts became a focus of interest for the entire student body. Anticipation was high, not only for the participants, but for neighbors, relatives, teachers, and anyone close to a candidate for this coveted honor.

Those who tried out performed first for the official judges appointed by the high school. Candidates successful in obtaining a certain rating from the judges went on to perform before the entire student body. Those who failed to achieve a rating high enough were eliminated from the competition, seemingly forgotten. Only in the privacy of the homes where the unsuccessful took refuge was the impact of such results recorded, never to be forgotten. The hurt reached into the hearts of all who cared. No one hurts alone.

Kay leaned back in the chair and reflected for a moment. "I had determined my goal. I had worked hard, and I was prepared." She dropped her head, and her blond hair fell forward, covering her beautifully proportioned profile. Then, as if it was hard to believe, she whispered, "I didn't even make it past the judges."

There was a long pause. "And how did you feel?" I asked quietly.

Kay looked up. She recalled the emotions she had experienced at that never-to-be-forgotten moment. "When you lose after you've worked so hard, you hurt inside really bad. You can't explain it—you just get sick and feel mixed up. I ran out of the school. I just wanted to run and never stop. I felt like dying and thought 'It isn't worth it.' Then I broke down and cried and cried. I couldn't help it."

She paused a moment, then looked up with a faint smile when I asked, "And how did you feel toward the judges?"

"I was unhappy with them, I have to admit. I didn't want to have bad feelings toward anyone, but I was really disappointed. I wanted to be a cheerleader so much. That's what I'd worked for all my life, and I just couldn't understand it. My best friend and I tried out together. She made it past the judges, and when she found out I hadn't made it she said, 'I don't want to be a cheerleader if we can't do it together.' She was willing to give up her place for me. But I didn't want that; I'd never want that. I wouldn't want to take away from her just because I didn't make it."

"How did you feel when you finally returned home, Kay?"

She smiled as she reflected on the support from her family. "They were very disappointed, because they knew how much it meant to me. I know it was really hard for them to see me so disappointed. My mother put her arm around me and hugged me to help me know she really cared. My sisters cried—it was hard for them too. I don't remember exactly what everyone said, but they let me know they knew how important it was to me and that they still loved me whether I was a cheerleader or not.

"I guess the really hard thing was to love myself even if I wasn't a cheerleader," she confessed. "I realized that I had to go back to school the next day, and that my life had to go on." She explained, "When I got to school, all my friends were really supportive. In fact, people I didn't even know came up to me and told me that I should have been chosen. They told me they were circulating a petition to have me try out in front of the entire student body and have another chance. I couldn't understand it. I thought, 'Why are they making such a big fuss over this just for me?' Suddenly it really hit me. I stopped hurting and began to think. It's almost worth it to lose, even if it hurts. I found out how many friends I have and how everybody cares." And then she confided, "But I still kept thinking, 'Why did it have to happen to me?'"

"How did the hurt disappear?" I asked.

"Gradually," she said. "Time helps—and prayer. I don't know exactly how, but always when I pray I feel comforted when I get up off my knees. I kept thinking that it must have happened for a reason." She reflected, "My seminary teacher talked to me after tryouts and said, 'Even if there isn't a reason now, maybe someday when you're a mother, your children will be going through the kinds of things you're going through. If you always had things easy, it would be hard for you to understand how they feel and to encourage them. You wouldn't be able to comfort them and help them keep trying.' I think that encouragement helped me the most." She paused as if reviewing again the counsel from her seminary teacher. "Maybe I can help someone else."

Having to face disappointments can sometimes leave lasting scars and kill one's enthusiasm. "Has this experience dampened your spirit?" I asked.

Kay responded, "Oh, no. I'm not like that. No matter how much it hurts, I'll try again and again. I love life. I enjoy being with people. I enjoy being at school. I wouldn't want to change anything I have."

"But what about being a cheerleader?"

"Oh, I still would love to be a cheerleader, because you are in front of everybody and you are able to get everyone involved. But I think a lot of times girls want to be cheerleaders because they think more people will like them. Maybe the best thing for me was finding out how everybody cared—really cared—and liked me even though I wasn't a cheerleader.

"I've learned a lot of other things, too. I've begun to realize that everything doesn't always come the way you want it to, even when you work hard for it. You have to learn to take the bad with the good. These are important lessons, and I'd rather learn them now so I will know how to handle disappointments."

"Kay," I asked, "what would you say to comfort other girls who do not make it past the judges and who suffer similar disappointments?"

"I'd tell them not to give up," she said, sitting tall and confident. "I know how they feel and how they hurt, and I know they think they won't ever try again, but if they do give up and quit trying, they'll never become all that they could become. I don't think I'm any less of a person because I'm not a cheerleader.

"Besides," she added, "who's to say I'd have really enjoyed cheerleading this year? Maybe something would have happened that wouldn't have been good for me. I think my Heavenly Father knows better than I do what's best for me. Sometimes when I think back on that experience, I wonder if maybe I really made it after all."
