Ardeth Greene Kapp, I Walk by Faith ( 1987)

Do You Think the Lord Is Proud of Me?

There were many families at Aspen Grove Family Camp that week—grandpas and grandmas, aunts and uncles, cousins, mothers and fathers, brothers and sisters. That first evening, after all the participants had been assigned to small cabins tucked away in the pines and decisions had been made about who should sleep in which bunk, people young and old, in groups of twos and threes, were seen sauntering through the wooded area to explore the sights and sounds and smells in their temporary home in the mountains. As they walked together on the pine-needle carpet, sharing feelings more than thoughts as the shadows crept in on the soft evening breeze, a wonderful bonding began to take place—the kinds of feelings that keep people caring about and loving each other even when they sometimes don't think they like each other.

During the next few days I watched from the little balcony of the Sunrise lodge, where I was staying, all the happenings that occurred near or around the center of camp. From this strategic location I could see the immediate response to the dinner bell that called everyone to the dining room for a family-style meal. It seemed much like at home, I thought: those who were first in line were always first, and those who brought up the rear were the same ones each day. It was almost as though they had been assigned those positions in line, just as they had been assigned specific cabins and beds.

The first evening it was quite apparent that families were grouped together with their own. In fact, several groups had matching T-shirts as if to announce a clear identity either for others to be aware of their shared relationship or maybe to remind the family members of an important membership that bound them together in this summer retreat. By noon of the second day, with activities to interest every age and disposition, the family divisions were less clear. First the younger children, then the teenagers and adults, were stepping over the family circle and eagerly wandering into other groups, enlarging their circle to include new friends.

In the camp was a man named Max. Small of stature, he wore heavy black horn-rimmed glasses held together on one side with a twisted paper clip. They sat at an angle across the bridge of his nose, which may have explained why he tilted his head and walked haltingly. His unshaven face, dark with stubby whiskers, and his unsteady walk set him apart from the others. As I watched him move among the people at the family camp, I wondered about the things that were setting him apart from the group. At first the adults were respectful but distant; it was the children who began to open the circle to let him in. They invited him to play games with them. The fact that he was in his forties made little difference to them. Long after other adults had become weary with the children's games, Max would continue to play with them. His greatest contribution was his constant and enthusiastic encouragement to each child, win or lose. Above the cheers and shouts, you could hear Max calling each person by name, shouting, "You done good!"

In a shaded area next to the main lodge was a Hi-Ball court, which was very popular, particularly in the cool hours of the morning and later afternoon. Hi-Ball is played on a trampoline encased on all sides by a net and divided across the middle, like a tennis court. At each end is an opening, somewhat like a basketball hoop, where competing players try to score baskets with a sponge ball while trying to keep their balance on the trampoline.

The first evening in camp, I had met nine-year-old Sandy, who had volunteered to help me with an assignment in the family-night program. I was impressed with her confidence and willingness to help a stranger, since we didn't know each other at that time. On the third day in camp, when I walked past the Hi-Ball court in the early afternoon, with the sun beating down, I was surprised to see Sandy on one side of the court and Max on the other. Sandy spotted me and cried out, "He has forty-five points and I have nine!" To that enthusiastic announcement, Max stopped jumping long enough to explain, "She's my coach," and then the game continued.

As I continued walking down the tree-lined path, listening to the birds, I pondered the impact of this young coach and the extent of her influence. Then I turned around and returned to the court. I realized that while Sandy was Max's coach, as he had announced, she was also coaching me. I wanted to be closer to her, to learn from her.

She was still cheering Max on, calling out the lopsided score. Then she looked up, saw me, and shouted, "Sister Kapp, will you come and play Hi-Ball with Max?" They continued to play while I considered the invitation. I realized that without the first powerful lesson from this young coach, I might have failed this test by making some excuse about the heat or how tired or busy I was. A question was lying in the balance: Had I learned her great lesson or was I just an observer?

"Will Max play with me?" I asked. His response was immediate. "Sure I will!" he shouted. Without further discussion, I found myself climbing through an opening in the net onto the trampoline.

Sandy instructed me briefly, then climbed out and took a place nearby where she could continue coaching both Max and me. She was now cheering Max every time he made a basket, and cheering me every time I tried. Mastering some skills is harder than might be apparent at first, and while I didn't do very well in making baskets, I was aware that my coach was teaching me to score in ways that are not tallied numerically.

Max continued to make baskets, one after another, and Sandy continued to call out his score encouragingly. It seemed that his successes sustained and even increased his energy level. He jumped higher and higher, his skills increasing each time. "The Lord gave me a talent and I didn't know it!" he called out. Then, proudly pointing to Sandy, he added, "And she is my coach!" Though my own skill level was still low, both Max and Sandy shouted encouragement each time I tried to make a basket. "Good try!" they'd yell.

Having been reminded that we do not all have the same talents and energy, especially if we're out of breath and out of balance, I finally suggested that maybe I had had enough of a lesson for one day. Sandy agreed and came over the court to help me out of the net. Max followed. Summing up his lesson for the day, he repeated enthusiastically, "The Lord gave me a talent and I didn't even know it!" Then, in order to not take undue credit to himself, he pointed at Sandy and said, "And she is my coach!"

Sandy smiled broadly and with great pride as her important role was acknowledged. Little did she know, however, of the impact of her lesson on her other student. As we sat on a bench to put on our shoes, Max turned to me and asked, "Do you think the Lord is proud of me?" My answer came quickly. "Yes," I said, with conviction in my heart; "I'm sure the Lord is proud of you and of Sandy too." I thanked Max and Sandy, then walked alone down the path through the tall pines. Max's words continued to ring in my ears and in my heart: "Do you think the Lord is proud of me?" In a grove of trees alongside a mountain stream, I stopped to replay the game in my mind. Then I asked myself, How well am I playing the real game? Is the Lord proud of me?

I wanted to thank Sandy, my young coach, for teaching me so much. And I wanted to thank Max, the man in camp who was different, for his differences. I vowed in my heart that I would remember their teaching, their example, their coaching, and their cheering me on every time I tried, and next time perhaps I would initiate the invitation to play in the game and use better the talents the Lord has given me.

I sat for a long time, watching the birds and listening to the breeze rustling the leaves and the mountain stream gurgling over the shining rocks. In the distance, Mount Timpanogos majestically looked down on all that was happening in this mountain retreat, this refuge from the world, where big things can become small, making room for small things to become big.
