Ardeth Greene Kapp, I Walk by Faith ( 1987)

The Heavenly Grandstands Are Cheering

Have you ever set a goal and not reached it? The answer is probably yes. And how does that make you feel? Like somewhat of a failure? The answer again is probably yes. Then how do you avoid those feelings of failure that destroy your self-confidence? Just don't set any goals, right? Wrong! On the other hand, what happens when you have a goal clearly in your mind and you work and work and work until you reach your goal. How does that make you feel?

Six-year-old Kent sat at the breakfast table impatiently waiting for the family to gather for family prayer. This was quite irregular, since it had almost become a family ritual that everyone would be in places, kneeling by their chairs, when their mother called, "For the last time—if you don't come right now, you'll have to go without breakfast!" Kent's older sister smiled at that idle threat, which she had heard over the years. She hadn't remembered ever going without breakfast after such a threat, and she doubted that Kent would. Sometimes he would come slowly down the stairs; this would give him the feeling of being in control of the family while they waited for his grand entry. However, it was different this morning. He had gotten up early and prodded everyone to hurry.

Immediately following a breakfast of rolled oats (which he didn't like) and cinnamon toast (which he did like), Kent slipped away from the table while the family members reviewed their plans for the day, arranged for car-pool responsibilities, and determined who was to be where and when. Kent's plan was clear in his mind, and to delay was to postpone the realization of his goal.

He slipped out the door leading to the garage, apparently unnoticed, until the sound of the garage door gave him away. His mother left the table and hurried to the door, where she saw Kent struggling to get the bicycle between the car and the truck and out onto the driveway. "And where do you think you're going?" she asked. "I'm not going anywhere," he responded, pushing the bike out onto the driveway. His mother sensed his obvious determination. He had tried once before to ride the bike, but his legs were much too short, and it would require several months of growth before his goal could be accomplished.

"Maybe by the end of the summer," she had consoled him the last time he had tried to reach the pedals. That was only two weeks ago, and it was still the first part of June, with the whole summer ahead. The wait apparently made no sense to Kent, so his mother suggested that he push the bike up and down the street just to get the feeling of walking alongside it. Then she returned to the house and began her morning activities.

At about nine o'clock, she went to the front window to check on her son. He was steadying the bike and trying to get on. The bike wobbled back and forth, and before he had gone even a foot, it fell over with him on top, hitting his chin against the handlebar. His mother ran from the house, picked him up, brushed him off, examined his skinned chin, and offered to take the bike back to the garage for him. Kent wanted to keep it, and she agreed, assuming he would be content now to just push it after such a fall.

Before she could get back to the house, she heard a crash and turned to see the boy and his bike in a heap on the sidewalk. Again she ran to the rescue. This time she noticed blood coming from his elbow, which he had skinned. With such persistence from this child, Kent's mother determined that she should assist him in his efforts. She steadied the bike while he mounted and then ran alongside, holding it until he gained a little speed. He then called out, "Let go! Let go! I can do it by myself!"

Responding to his direction, she let go of the bike. He went only a few feet and, with the added speed this time, crashed again, hurting his knee. As he lay on the ground obviously injured, his mother regretted her decision to let go. Feeling responsible for this additional injury, she ran to his side, knelt down, and comforted him. "I'll take you in the house and we'll put lotion on your sores and give you a warm bath," she said. To this suggestion Kent sat upright and declared, "Mom, I don't want lotion on my sores and I don't want a warm bath. I want to learn to ride this bike."

He persisted throughout the day, with his mother holding the bike, running alongside, and then letting go briefly. When she had no more energy or time, she returned to the house thinking that he would surely have pursued his goal enough for one day.

Late in the afternoon Kent stood on the driveway and watched eagerly until he saw his father's truck coming down the street. When the truck was within a block from home, Kent began running. His father stopped to pick him up. "Dad," Kent cried, "I did it! I did it!" And so he did.

With his mother and father and some neighbors making up the audience for this great performance, Kent determinedly picked up his bicycle, pushed it over to the mailbox, and leaned it against the post while he mounted it. He made a quick survey to make sure all were watching, then pushed himself away from his support and tried to get both feet coordinated while the front wheel fishtailed back and forth like a leaf in the wind. He persisted until he had control enough to ride halfway down the block.

He had not yet learned to turn around or to stop, but that was not his goal for this day. He stopped by simply falling over as if he planned it that way. Then he got up and stood at his full height, proudly acknowledging the cheers from his supportive audience. "I did it all by myself, didn't I," he said, more as an announcement than a question.

After he got into bed that day, Kent still could not contain his joy. He jumped out of bed, ran to his parents' bedroom to use their phone, and dialed my telephone number. "Hello," I said. Without taking time to announce himself, he exploded with the exciting news. "I did it by myself, all by myself," he said. "What?" I asked. "What did you do?" "I rode the bike all by myself." "Oh, not really," I said, "not all by yourself," hoping to acknowledge the magnitude of his victory. "Yes, I did all by myself. I really did. Can you come and see?" "Tonight?" I asked. "Yes," he said, "right now." "I'm afraid it's too late tonight but I can come tomorrow." "In the morning?" he asked. "I'll be there at five o'clock tomorrow afternoon. Will that be all right?" I said. "Okay," he agreed. Then he added, "You'll be so proud of me."

That night I called Kent's mother and got the full details of his heroic accomplishment. I heard about the bruises, the determination, and the final victory.

And now, when I give thought to my goals, I remember what I learned from Kent. He awakened in the morning with the goal on his mind. Most likely he had envisioned himself riding that bike, just as the big boys do. When the vision of his accomplishment became clear enough, his confidence increased. In his mind he had already seen himself succeeding. With that kind of faith in himself, he knew he could do it. He didn't know how hard it would be, but he knew he could make it and that it would be worth the effort.

Next, he made a plan. Not a plan to sit and think about. Not a plan to wait until he was bigger or until others thought he was big enough. His plan was that right after breakfast—even before, if he had thought he could get away with it—he would get the bike and that very day he would accomplish his goal. His desire to ride would carry him through the hard and sometimes discouraging struggles. Such times always come with important goals, experiences that cause us to reach and stretch beyond where we are. Sometimes it's painful, and some person may give up and wait for another time, but with determination, regardless of the obstacles, most goals can be reached. Then we can say proudly to ourselves, "I did it! I did it!"

Self-mastery is deeply satisfying. It provides a tremendous source of confidence to tackle the next goal and the next and the next. And when a goal such as learning to ride a bike is a thing of the past, the lessons learned in the process can be called up and used again and again with each and every goal.

Sometimes there are friends and family to cheer us on. Other times there are those who would try to discourage us or say it can't be done. But whether a cheering crowd is visible or invisible, we can always remember that when we are striving for worthwhile goals, the "heavenly grandstands" are cheering. (Ezra Taft Benson, fourteen-stake fireside, Brigham Young University, March 4, 1979.)
