Ardeth Greene Kapp, I Walk by Faith ( 1987)

Seek Learning by Study and Faith

Many years ago, when I taught elementary school, I had a parent-teacher conference with the mother of one of my students. She expressed her deepest gratitude for a miracle that she felt had taken place. Her fourth-grade daughter was experiencing some learning difficulties and had struggled for months with the seemingly impossible task of mastering long division. But earlier that day she had come home in ecstasy, exclaiming, "Mom, I can do it!" Her mother thanked me for "saying it right," for "unlocking her little girl's mind," as she put it.

I didn't tell that mother that as a child I myself had mastered the art of figuring everything out the wrong way before I found the right way, and that I could therefore track her daughter's thought process. At that moment all of my own personal struggles with learning in years past seemed worth the effort. I thought of the admonition to "teach one another." (See D&C 88:77.) That day was a great payday for me as a teacher and as a person.

Each of us can be learning every day of our life. Time goes so fast that it makes fast learners of all of us—if we are seeking diligently. Through the Prophet Joseph Smith, the Lord counseled the Saints: "Seek ye diligently and teach one another words of wisdom; yea, seek ye out of the best books words of wisdom; seek learning, even by study and also by faith." (D&C 88:118.) If we can hold on to the thirst for knowledge during our whole life, every day will be more zestful, and the speed with which we learn will not be nearly so important as what we learn.

President Joseph F. Smith wrote: "We hear concerning much of men who are specially gifted, of geniuses in the world's affairs; and many of us force ourselves to think that we are capable of little and therefore may as well take life easy since we do not belong to that favored class. True, not all are endowed with the same gifts, nor is everyone imbued with the strength of a giant; yet every son and daughter of God has received some talent and each will be held to strict account for the use or misuse to which it is put. The spirit of genius is the spirit of hard work." (Juvenile Instructor 18:689.)

I remember one time asking my father in anguish, "If the glory of God is intelligence and you are not smart, what will happen to you?" And my very wise and learned father, who never graduated from high school but who was self-taught and intelligent through diligent study and great faith, eased my concern when he explained, "My dear child, if you are diligent in your studies and do your very best and are obedient to God's commandments, one day, when you enter the holy temple, the university of the Lord, you will be prepared in your mind and spirit to learn and know all you need to know to return to your Father in heaven." It was faith in that promise that seemed to unlock my mind. It was study and faith working together.

But that was years ago, when spelling bees and times tables measured one's preparation for the future, at least for the next grade. What of today, with its computers, word processors, space travel, satellites, and newfound truth? Will we keep up? Should we? What learning should we seek? And what should we teach, write about, and talk about?

For each of us the challenges of today require the greatest preparation of mind, body, and spirit. Education presupposes the wide use of knowledge and should prepare people to develop the skills, attitudes, and values to build the kingdom of heaven here on earth. Our homes are a part of the kingdom. They should reflect some of the spiritual beauty of our celestial homeland, even when they are surrounded by storm clouds of darkness and are under attack.

The highest priority should always be to enrich, to protect, and to guard the home. To do this, we must have the Holy Spirit to guide us in our individual lives. We must know the truth and not be deceived. Our learning, our study, and our faith should be focused on that preparation which will strengthen the home and the family.

Our attitudes and decisions regarding learning are worthy of the most serious consideration. Wisdom is a gift of the Spirit. I am impressed by the apparent longing of Emma Smith, wife of the Prophet Joseph, for wisdom and understanding. When her husband decided to return to Carthage, a fateful decision that would lead to his death, she asked him to give her a blessing. He asked her to write the best blessing she desired, and he would sign it upon his return. Emma wrote the blessing, but the Prophet never returned from Carthage. Her words show that the greatest desire of her heart was for wisdom:

"First of all that I would crave, as the richest of heaven's blessings, would be wisdom from my Heavenly Father bestowed daily, so that whatever I might do or say, I could not look back at the close of the day with regret, nor neglect the performance of any act that would bring a blessing. I desire the Spirit of God to know and understand myself, that I might be able to overcome whatever of tradition or nature that would not tend to my exaltation in the eternal worlds. I desire a fruitful active mind, that I may be able to comprehend the designs of God, when revealed through His servants without doubting. I desire the spirit of discernment, which is one of the promised blessings of the Holy Ghost.

"I particularly desire wisdom to bring up all the children that are, or may be committed to my charge, in such a manner that they will be useful ornaments in the Kingdom of God, and in a coming day arise up and call me blessed.

"I desire prudence that I may not through ambition abuse my body and cause it to become prematurely old and care-worn, but that I may wear a cheerful countenance, live to perform all the work that I covenanted to perform in the spirit-world and be a blessing to all who may in any wise need aught at my hands.

"I desire with all my heart to honor and respect my husband as my head, ever to live in his confidence and by acting in unison with him retain the place which God has given me by his side. I desire to see that I may rejoice with [the daughters of Eve] in the blessings which God has in store for all who are willing to be obedient to His requirements. Finally, I desire that whatever may be my lot through life I maybe enabled to acknowledge the hand of God in all things." (Relief Society Courses of Study 1985, p. 199.)

Everything we do takes time, and our time is our life. Some give their life for little or nothing and then it is gone. But if our life is spent in learning and teaching truth, used in righteousness, then the investment is good. It is worth the price because the acquisition of that knowledge is transportable. We are told that "whatever principle of intelligence we attain unto in this life, it will rise with us in the resurrection. And if a person gains more knowledge and intelligence through his diligence and obedience than another, he will have so much the advantage in the world to come." (D&C 130:18-19.)

We are in an era of knowledge that has been termed an information explosion. Much of the learning of the world quickly becomes obsolete; much of what we learned last year is now outdated. In contrast, gospel knowledge is never outdated; it is gospel truth.

My heart aches and I am troubled when I hear of people who spend much of their time watching a distorted portrayal of life day after day on television soap operas, or who view mundane video programs or read books with similar content, in exchange for actively participating in this life and preparing for the life to come. If we were to spend most of our time on the trivia of life, what would be the quality of our reservoir of learning? How deep the water? What would its color be? What could we draw up in time of need? What could we recall from the depth of memory?

President Joseph F. Smith wrote this about learning and our ability to recall: "In reality a man cannot forget anything. He may have a lapse of memory; he may not be able to recall at the moment a thing that he knows, or words that he has spoken; he may not have the power at his will to call up these events and words; but let God Almighty touch the mainspring of the memory, and awaken recollection, and you will find then that you have not even forgotten a single idle word that you have spoken!" (Improvement Era 6:503-4.)

One day we will recall all things that have come through our minds, and this could be a magnificent and glorious blessing. Imagine having quick access to a reservoir of knowledge accumulated over an entire lifetime, all of it available for immediate recall. All of the good things stored there that have been just out of reach, forgotten for a time, will still be part of our learning. The frustrations of forgetting will be a thing of the past.

The question is: What will we have to call up from the books we have read, the TV we have watched, the videos we have viewed? What are the things to which we have given our ear or attention or our life?

Elder John A. Widtsoe helps us understand more clearly our responsibilities for what we need to learn: "We need, in this Church and Kingdom, for our own and the world's welfare a group of men and women in their individual lives who shall be as a light to the nations, and really standards for the world to follow. Such a people must be different from the world as it now is . . . unless the world has the same aim that we have. We are here to build Zion to Almighty God, for the blessing of all the world. In that aim we are unique and different from all other peoples. We must respect that obligation, and not be afraid of it. We cannot walk as other men, or talk as other men, or do as other men, for we have a different destiny, obligation, and responsibility placed upon us, and we must fit ourselves for that great destiny and obligation." (Conference Report, April 1940, p. 36.)

In other words, you can't be a life saver if you look like all the other swimmers on the beach.

What is the path, the way, for seeking learning? By study? Yes, but also by faith. The voice of the Spirit teaches truth. One young man, just nineteen years old and in his second week at the Missionary Training Center, explained how this works: "When you study with the Spirit, it is incredible how fast you learn. One time in particular, when I was working very hard and felt the Spirit strongly, I learned an entire concept in a little over five minutes. I'm beginning to get a sense of the power that is behind this work."

It is our responsibility to seek learning by study and by faith in order that we might fulfill our covenant to stand as witnesses and to build the faith of others. We are surrounded by the Korihors of our day just as Alma faced them in his day—those who refer to the "foolish" traditions of our fathers, those who would raise questions, distort the truth, confuse us, demand a sign and seek to raise doubts in our minds, even some who profess membership in the Church. As these questioners surround our camp and threaten our safety, our testimonies must ring strong and true, unwavering and uncompromising. In addition, "a testimony is not enough," President J. Reuben Clark warned. "You must have besides this, one of the rarest and most precious of all the many elements of human character,—moral courage."

While an inquiring mind is most desirable, the tendency for some is to be forever testing even the ordinary events in life to see if they are valid. There are some things that have to be accepted in faith at least for the moment, and perhaps the questions will be put on the shelf to be answered at a later time. To constantly peck away at even the most basic gospel principles can eventually destroy, at least for ourselves—and sometimes for others—everything that is important. Sometimes our desire to test everything may not be so much the result of lack of confidence in the truth as it is the lack of security within ourselves. We need never fear truth when it is used in righteousness.

President Joseph F. Smith gives us this enlightening observation: "The mere stuffing of the mind with a knowledge of facts is not education. The mind must not only possess a knowledge of truth, but the soul must revere it, cherish it, love it as a priceless gem; and this human life must be guided and shaped by it in order to fulfil its destiny. The mind should not only be charged with intelligence, but the soul should be filled with admiration and desire for pure intelligence which comes of a knowledge of the truth. The truth can only make him free who hath it, and will continue in it. And the word of God is truth, and it will endure forever. Educate yourself not only for time, but also for eternity." ( The Contributor 16:570.)

We must not be casual in our commitment to academic excellence. We must row with both oars—study and faith—if we are to be fully prepared and reach our goal. We are not immune in the Church today from those who are pulling only on the intellectual oar. Without balance in our effort, we will find ourselves going in circles.

If a person chooses to set aside the things of the Spirit while pursuing only academic endeavors, the outcome is predictable. For those who choose to row with only one oar for an extended period of time, one set of muscles is strengthened while the others become atrophied. At a later date, as graduates with degrees, such individuals may stack their acquired academic knowledge against the thin threads of a faith that has been weakened through neglect. Their spiritual strength may have remained at or retrogressed to an elementary school level. And when they endeavor to make judgments of things of the Spirit that come only by faith, the great reservoir of truth into which they could have dipped will be shallow, discolored, or stagnant. This is the condition of which Nephi spoke:

"O that cunning plan of the evil one! O the vainness, and the frailties, and the foolishness of men! When they are learned they think they are wise, and they hearken not unto the counsel of God, for they set it aside, supposing they know of themselves, wherefore, their wisdom is foolishness and it profiteth them not. And they shall perish. But to be learned is good if they hearken unto the counsels of God." (2 Nephi 9:28-29.)

It is sad to realize that some Latter-day Saints blessed with great intellectual capacity are depriving themselves by using only one oar. Hence the wise counsel to "seek learning by study and also by faith," which helps ensure that we stay on course.

There is much that we can learn by study, but truth cannot be acquired by study alone. We must seek learning by faith also, if we are ever to know for ourselves that God the Father lives; that Jesus Christ is his divine Son; that they appeared personally to the young Joseph Smith; that through Joseph the "only true and living church upon the face of the whole earth" (D&C 1:30) was restored. It is by faith that we can know that Joseph Smith and his successors are prophets, seers, and revelators; that they receive direct revelation concerning the administration of the Church; and that the Book of Mormon was in fact translated by the Prophet through the power of God.

Many insights to learning by faith were given during the Savior's ministry. At one time during the Feast of the Passover he went into the temple and taught, and "the people listened intently. The Jewish teachers were amazed, so much so that they questioned among themselves, 'How knoweth this man letters, having never learned?' Jesus was not a graduate of their schools of the rabbis. They had their training by tradition passed from one great rabbinical teacher to another and claiming to reach back to Moses. But where had this tradesman, this uneducated Galilean, learned?

"Jesus answered their troubled questions saying, 'My doctrine is not mine, but his that sent me.' Then, knowing they would dispute it, he offered this test: 'If any man will do his will, he shall know of the doctrine, whether it be of God, or whether I speak of myself.' The burden of proof was placed on the listeners. It was an invitation as well. Try the doctrine; introduce it into your very being. Live it and you will know." (Ardeth G. Kapp and Judith S. Smith, The Light and the Life, Bookcraft, 1985, pp. 71-72.)

The Pharisees of the Savior's day kept watch, hoping to find any reason to question his message. They had trained their eyes and ears to see and hear what they hoped was wrong—whether it was healing on the Sabbath or winnowing the wheat or forgiving the woman in sin. They knew the law; they had studied the law. Each time Jesus' message was heard, there was fervor among them as they counseled together to determine if there were weaknesses or errors in his message to prove that he was not the Son of God. The choice of their course closed their ears and hearts and dulled their spirits so they could not hear the message. While they haggled over words and details looking for fault, they missed the message they might have learned by the Spirit and by faith that would have saved their eternal lives. They were "ever learning, and never able to come to the knowledge of the truth." (2 Timothy 3:7.)

This was not the case with the two thousand stripling sons of Helaman, who fought with miraculous faith and none were slain: "They had never fought, yet they did not fear death; and they did think more upon the liberty of their fathers than they did upon their lives; yea, they had been taught by their mothers, that if they did not doubt, God would deliver them. And they rehearsed . . . the words of their mothers, saying: We do not doubt our mothers knew it." (Alma 56:47-48.)

It is my testimony that if we continue to seek learning by study and by faith, we will receive the truth as the Spirit bears witness, and the power of discernment will be ours to guide us and protect us from being deceived. We have been promised that as we study diligently, we shall learn of Him; and as we seek diligently, we shall surely find Him.
