Ardeth Greene Kapp, I Walk by Faith ( 1987)

The Irrigation Ditch

The alfalfa patch was best of all, partly because it was located at the lower edge of our eighty acres by the grove of elm trees, and partly because of the irrigation ditch, its banks covered with yellow buffalo beans, which marked the boundary along the south side of our fields. But mostly, I think, it was best of all because of the smell. It is the recollection of that smell of alfalfa in the stillness of the early morning that brings every emotion of that occasion back over the years as clearly as though I were experiencing it for the first time. In the early morning, before breakfast, when one is fresh from sleep, the smell is the very best.

Dad and I would often walk together through our fields. He'd wear high rubber boots and carry a shovel over his shoulder, a long stem of wheat hanging from the corner of his mouth. I loved the way the heavy morning dew, still sparkling like crystals on the alfalfa leaves, made our boots appear new and shiny with each step. As I walked by his side, occasionally he'd stop and pick up a handful of earth, almost reverently, then let it slip through his fingers as the breeze carried it gently to the ground. Looking upward into the cloudless blue sky, he'd say, "God has given us this good earth, but we must do our part," and then almost under his breath he'd repeat, "We must do our part." It always seemed as if he were talking to someone but not to me, so I didn't feel the need to respond.

On this particular morning we walked together through the alfalfa until we stood side by side at the edge of the main irrigation ditch. We had not come this way before, and I didn't know the plan, but I had learned to watch and listen first and save questions for later.

Dad took the shovel from his shoulder and made his way down the bank of the ditch to the water's edge. Then he turned and, with one foot high on the bank, stretched his big hand toward me. Taking my hand in his, he steadied me until we stood together near the water. I could often tell by the shape of his eyes and the angle of his chin the nature of the lesson he was about to teach, and I knew this was going to be "a good learning opportunity" as he always called it, quietly adding, "if your attitude is right."

"We're going to vault across the ditch," he explained. "I'll show you how."

I watched him as he reached with the shovel to about the middle of the ditch. He poked several times to avoid the rocks before he pushed the shovel deep into the bottom. Then, pulling the handle at an angle toward him, he took hold with both hands and swung forward, landing on the other side. "Like that," he said.

I watched carefully. I had one more chance to observe before it was my turn. He demonstrated again, returning to my side of the ditch.

Now was the time for the questions. "Dad, what if I don't make it?" And he always saved his counsel to use when it counted. "If you give it all you've got, you'll make it." Then I noticed a slight smile as he further counseled, "And if you don't, you'll land in the middle and get soaked."

"And then what will I do?" was my next question.

"You'll still have to get to the other side."

With those options, it seemed important to try hard to follow his first counsel. Dad didn't rush me. It was as though he knew the crossing of the ditch was perhaps even more important than the water in the ditch he used for irrigating.

I stood and watched. Suddenly there seemed to be a vast audience encouraging me. The birds in the elm trees nearby were chirping, almost as though they were cheering. A big bumblebee that had been weaving back and forth among the yellow buffalo beans along the bank even joined in by buzzing in a circle while casting a shadow on the water's surface for water skeeters to dodge.

As I stood for some time watching those skeeters skim the surface of the water, Dad offered his next suggestion. "Honey, don't concentrate on the water. You have to keep your eye on the bank on the other side. It's keeping your eye on the target that makes all the difference."

I guess he sensed my readiness and also the proper timing. He slowly pulled the smooth handle of the shovel toward me and helped me get a firm hold with both hands. I looked up and noticed his straw hat hiding his wavy hair, his eyebrows forming a partial frame for the kind blue eyes that could look right through you. He smiled and said, "Give it all you've got."

With that, my hands tightened on the handle of the shovel. I paused a moment and then fixed my eyes on a particular clump of buffalo beans on the other side of the ditch. Taking a deep breath, I tightened my grip, glanced quickly at Dad, gave it all I had, and swung forward. I made it, landing right on top of the buffalo beans.

Quickly I turned to look back at Dad. He gave his usual sign for victory by clasping both hands together raising them above his head, and shouting as though it were a glorious accomplishment. "I knew you could do it!" I watched then as he jumped the ditch with such ease that I wondered, Why all the fuss just for me?

It was a good morning, and by early afternoon we had cleared all the small ditches of any grass or weeds that might obstruct the free flow of the precious water. Dad paused now and pulled out his pocket watch, which was tied to his belt loop with an old shoelace. With a quick glance at his watch and then a look up at the sun, as if to check either his watch or the sun, I was never sure which, he announced, "Time for lunch."

We headed for the trees near the old granary. It was a familiar place. A narrow path had been worn through the grass leading toward the trees. In the middle of the trees, the tall grass lay flattened from many previous lunches. I sat down in a favorite spot, and Dad separated the tall grass where our lunch pail had been placed to keep it cool. With the lunch pail opened, he removed his straw hat, the imprint of the inside band still on his forehead, and wiped his damp brow with one big sweeping motion of his arm. After a brief expression of thanks for the bounties of life, we were ready to eat.

It was the big water jug covered with wet burlap that I remember best. Something about the smell, that wet coarse texture so close to my nose, and tipping my head back waiting for the clear, cool water to touch my lips while Dad held the jug, made the whole event seem almost like a ritual. After I had my turn, Dad took his.

Following lunch, we stretched out on the soft, tall grass and looked up through the trees. Sometimes I'd talk and Dad would listen, or Dad would talk and I would listen. As I recall it now, it seems as if Dad always listened as much as he talked, but this time it was my turn to listen.

"You know, Ardie," he said, "you learned an important lesson today."

I quickly agreed. "Yes, I learned to jump the ditch."

"Yes, you did," he said. Then he raised up on one elbow and asked, "Just how do you think you did that?"

That sounded like a strange question to me since he saw how I did it, but he seemed to want more, so I tried to explain. "Well, first I watched you, and then when it was my turn, I got a scary feeling inside."

That seemed to be the thing that he was after as he quickly inquired, "And then what?"

"Well, I just looked at the buffalo beans on the other side and tried real hard and jumped across."

As if to reinforce the lesson, he reviewed it again. "That's exactly right, Ardie. You had your eye on the other side and gave it all you had, and you made it."

Moving the support of his arm, he lay back on the grass and we watched in silence as the feathery clouds began to invade the blue sky. We could hear the birds in the trees, the distant moo of the cows, and the faint sound of the water falling over the drop in the ditch.

It seemed like quite awhile until Dad spoke again, and then in a tone that remains with me yet. "Ardie, my dear," he said, "there are a lot of irrigation ditches to cross in life. Many of them you must cross alone." Then, as a final summary to his lesson, he repeated, "Keep your eye on the other side, give it all you've got, and you'll make it."
