Ardeth Greene Kapp, I Walk by Faith ( 1987)

Choice and Accountability

What Have You to Declare?

It was the last day of the school quarter, and finals were over. With a group of fellow students, I piled into a friend's old car for the trip home to Canada. There were always more people than comfort would allow, but what we lost in comfort, we saved in cost. With tuna sandwiches and whatever else we could find in the cupboard, we headed north.

At the border we were required to open our suitcases—usually full of gray-white laundry that we hoped our mothers could remedy. The customs officer stirred around and routinely asked, "What have you to declare?" Wise travelers usually make a list of the valuables they are carrying to facilitate the passage through customs and expedite their arrival home. For us, there was never much to declare—just our name, our destination, and our present place of residence.

As we crossed the border, I began wondering about our ultimate journey, our journey to our eternal home. When we reach that border crossing, how will we respond to the question, "What have you to declare?" I believe that the list we will each be required to present will be written "not with ink," as Paul said, "but with the Spirit of the Living God; not in tables of stone, but in fleshy tables of the heart." (2 Corinthians 3:3.) I believe it will be the evidence of our love for each other that will qualify us for the passage. And the customs officer—who will that be? Nephi tells us what we might expect: "Behold, the way for man is narrow, but it lieth in a straight course before him, and the keeper of the gate is the Holy One of Israel; and he employeth no servant there; and there is none other way save it be by the gate; for he cannot be deceived, for the Lord God is his name." (2 Nephi 9:41.)

As I, in my times of quiet meditation, consider the ecstasy and joy of experiences we have in this life, I believe they will be paled by what we will experience in that moment when we give an accounting to the Holy One of Israel, a silent declaration of accountability that will speak loudly of how we exercised our agency, of the choices we made, and, finally, of the values and principles we claimed as our very own to protect us and direct us over the treacherous narrow passages on our journey.

I know something about the risk of traveling over icy winter roads when travel warnings are posted, when the danger of blizzards threatens our safety and sometimes delays our progress while loved ones take turns standing watch, waiting for us. I knew in those days that family prayers had been offered in our behalf that we might return home safely.

Can you, in your own thoughts, sense that moment of greeting, even if you haven't had such an experience? On the other hand, consider the tragedy if the highway patrol had to report to anxious loved ones that the mountain pass and highway were steep and slick, that you must not have read the warning signs or were sleepy and not alert enough to respond to the dangers, that you had missed the turn—and no one survived. Think of those loved ones waiting. I want to share with you what I believe will be the joy as we approach our heavenly home. But first, let us consider what road signs we are following to secure our safe travel.

Would you knock on the door of your own soul and inquire within concerning the markers or values you declare publicly and privately, the ones you have determined to follow. If we use only external markers, such as other people's values or rules, regulations or policies, if we use only external signals to determine our course, what will happen on a stormy night when the clouds and fog obscure the signals and we are alone in the dark? It isn't a committee or an institution or a crew that sets our sail. We must have our own clearly defined values burning brightly within. Only then will we have an inner court to which we can appeal for judgment of our performance—our performance, not someone else's.

I find myself reaching and stretching when I learn of others who navigate well in troubled waters. Even more heroic is the conduct of those who make choices in waters that appear to be calm and of little concern to others. Let me illustrate with this account:

"I was driving to a scene I didn't want to see. A man had accidentally backed his pickup truck over his baby granddaughter in the driveway of the family home. It was a fatality.

"As I parked, I saw a stocky white-haired man in cotton workclothes standing near a pickup. Cameras were trained on him and reporters were sticking microphones in his face. Looking totally bewildered, he was trying to answer their questions. Mostly he was only moving his lips, blinking and choking up. I can still see in my mind's eye that devastated old man, looking down at a place in the driveway where the child had been.

"Beside the house was a freshly spaded flowerbed and nearby a pile of dark rich earth. 'I was just backing up there to spread that good dirt,' he said to me, though I had not asked him anything. 'I didn't even know she was outdoors.'

"I went into the house to find someone who would provide a recent photo of the toddler. A few minutes later, with all the details in my notebook and a studio photo of the child in my pocket, I went into the kitchen where the police had said the body was. Entering the kitchen, I came upon this scene:

"On a Formica-topped table, backlighted by a frilled curtain window, lay the tiny body wrapped in a clean white sheet. The grandfather had managed to stay away from the crowd and was sitting on a chair beside the table in profile to me and unaware of my presence, looking uncomprehendingly at the swaddled corpse. The house was very quiet. A clock ticked. As I watched, the grandfather slowly leaned forward. He curved his arms like parentheses around the head and feet of the little form, then pressed his face to the shroud and remained motionless.

"In that hushed moment I recognized the markings of a prizewinning news photograph. I appraised the light, adjusted the lens, locked a bulb in the flash gun, raised the camera, and composed the scene in the viewfinder. Every element of the picture was perfect—the grandfather, in his plain clothes, his white hair backlighted by sunlight, the child's form wrapped in the sheet, the atmosphere of the simple home. Outside the police could be seen inspecting the pickup while the child's mother and father leaned into each other's arms.

"I don't know how many seconds I stood there unable to snap that shutter. I was keenly aware of the powerful story-telling value that photo would have and my professional conscience told me to take it. Yet I couldn't make my hand fire that flashbulb and intrude on the poor man's island of grief. At length, I lowered the camera and crept away, shaking with doubt about my suitability for the journalistic profession.

"I never told the city editor or any fellow reporters about that missed opportunity for a perfect news picture. Every day on the newscasts and the papers, we see pictures of people in extreme conditions of grief and despair. Human suffering has become a spectator sport, and sometimes when I am watching the news film, I remember that day. I still feel right about what I did." (James Alexander Thom, "The Perfect Picture.")

As we look back to yesterday, last week, last year, the question for each of us is, Do I feel right about what I did? As we travel the treacherous way of mortal life, we kick up dust in our daily living. We make mistakes, but in quiet moments of meditation, when the dust settles and we examine our thoughts and actions to carefully and honestly determine what it is that we have to declare, we all need to make continuous "inflight correction."

I like what C. S. Lewis says about that process: "A wrong sum can be put right: but only by going back till you find the error and work it afresh from that point." And who determines if it is an error? The regulations and policy officers? Yes, if they must, but hopefully not. To them, it may not even be seen as an error. But that may not excuse us in our own minds.

In the novel The Chosen, by Chaim Potok, the Jewish father cries out to the master of the universe as he addresses him in prayer in behalf of his son, who has a brilliant and capable mind. The father says, "A mind like this I need for a son? A heart I need for a son. A soul I need for a son. Compassion I want from my son, righteousness, mercy, strength to suffer and carry pain. That I want from my son. Not a mind without a soul." The son, speaking of his father, says, "He taught me to look inside myself, to find my own strength, to walk around inside myself in company with my soul."

When you walk around inside yourself and find your own strength and live in company with your own soul, can you answer the questions the way you would like to? Would you have snapped the shutter on the camera in that private moment? When we get a wrong sum, can we put it right? In a public setting, would there ever be a chance that we would succumb to the pressures of power or prestige or position or popularity?

Our values, our road signs that keep us on course and on schedule, are not to be tucked away for safekeeping. They are to be carried daily, used continuously, tested against our performance regularly, and literally worn out as a constant measuring device that keeps us accountable. The powers and plans of Satan are cunning and subtle and very real. The most destructive threats of our day are not nuclear war, not famine, not economic disaster. Rather, they are the despair, the discouragement, the despondency, the defeat caused by the discrepancy between what we believe to be right and how we live our lives. We are on a stormy sea. These are threatening times, and we may be ignoring or even cutting ourselves loose from the very signals that would save us.

May I tell you about another time I crossed that border between the United States and Canada, this time with family members. We were taking our parents back home, knowing that for Dad it would be the last time. As we cleared customs, Dad raised up from his sickbed in the back of the car and commented, "This prairie has never looked so beautiful. It's at its very best for my last inspection."

During our brief stay in our old hometown, we sauntered down the gravel road past the tall cottonwood trees, where the old school had stood. Dad took the lead. "It was the old bell," he said, and we all looked in the same direction, seeing it clearly in our mind's eye. "The school bell kept us in line. There were two bells," he went on. "A fifteen-minute bell would ring six times, giving ample warning before the final five-minute bell sounded a simple dingdong—and you'd better be there." His weakened voice increased in intensity as he added, "It's important to listen for the bell."

As we mused together in silence for a time, I pondered the possibility of my own inner bell being silenced, if only for a moment. As if reading my thoughts, Dad lay back on the soft, grassy ditch where we had stopped and began with a familiar phrase we had all learned to love. "I remember the story in the old fourth-grade reader," he said. He began his story.

"There was an old and very large inch-cape rock. It got its name from being located just one inch below the water's surface, where it couldn't be seen, and it lay dangerously in the path of the mariners returning from sea. Many seamen had lost their ships and their lives because of the rock, especially in times of storm. An abbot in the small seashore town of Aberbrothok devised a solution to this life-threatening hazard. With great care and in the face of considerable danger, he fastened a buoy with a large bell on the inch-cape rock. From then on the bell rang continuously and faithfully with the motion of the waves of the sea.

"Ralph the Rover was a bit of a pirate and he disliked the praises the abbot received from the mariners whose lives he spared. So one day, Ralph the Rover cut the bell from the inch-cape rock.

Down sank the bell with a gurgling sound, The bubbles rose and burst around, Quoth Sir Ralph, "The next who comes to the rock, Won't bless the abbot of Aberbrothok." Sir Ralph the Rover sailed away, He scoured the seas for many a day.

"On his way back, it was night and the sea was high, and he thought the moon would be up. In the darkness, he said with great anxiety—but only to himself—'I wish I could hear the bell of the inch-cape rock,' and the rhyme continued:

Sir Ralph the Rover tore his hair, He cursed himself in deep despair. The waves rushed in on every side, The ship sinking beneath the tide. (Robert Southey, The Inch Cape Rock)

Dad's stories always stood without any editorializing, left for me to figure out the message. I am not sure how I felt then, but in years since, I have come to feel that rather than wishing to silence the bell within, I feel myself strain a little so that I might hear it more clearly.

After our trip to Canada, Dad and I talked about going home on that final journey and about the border crossing. His body was now less than one hundred pounds, and his mortal journey was coming to a close. He talked about the sweetness and sacredness of these times and spoke of the nearness of the Lord, the Holy One of Israel, the gatekeeper. Life had presented ample and enough struggles, and he had used them to prove himself worthy and to cleanse the soul. And he was ready for the border crossing.

That last day, Dad spoke of Addison, his younger brother who had gone on before him. I wondered if his brother, and maybe his mother and father, were standing at the kitchen window an hour before his expected arrival, anxious for his safe return home.

By midafternoon I had decided to sit with Dad. His eyes seemed to be open, yet he wasn't seeing me. I took his hand in mine, a hand that had spanked me and blessed me and caressed me throughout my life. "Dad," I whispered. He didn't respond. "If you know I'm here, please squeeze my hand." I wasn't sure if there was a squeeze, but it didn't seem like it. I bent over and put my cheek next to his very bony cheek, with my hand on the other side of his face. I waited just a second, then straightened up. He looked at me just a moment, and in his eyes I saw complete peace—joy, trust, confidence, and anticipation, all mingled together in that look. He was ready for the border crossing and the gatekeeper, the Holy One of Israel. A tear escaped the corner of his eye, and I pressed my cheek to his again. There are things we cannot find words or even sounds to express, but in that moment I had some sense of what that final crossing might be and the ecstasy that we'll never fully understand in this life.

Someday we too will arrive at a border crossing and will have an opportunity to make a declaration. We will remember then that we were free "to choose liberty and eternal life, through the great Mediator of all men, or to choose captivity and death, according to the captivity and power of the devil; for he seeketh that all men might be miserable like unto himself." (2 Nephi 2:27.) The choices we make each day of our lives will make us what we are at that time. When we open our luggage on our final journey and make our declaration, will we be carrying gray-white laundry as evidence of the unwise choices we have made along the way? There will be for each of us many unwise choices, but when we do our part, a cleansing will have taken place, and we will not be ashamed but will be so very, very grateful.

Alma's teaching explains it for us: "There can no man be saved except his garments are washed white; yea, his garments must be purified until they are cleansed from all stain, through the blood of him of whom it has been spoken by our fathers, who should come to redeem his people from their sins." (Alma 5:21.) We are God's children, you and I. He is our Father, and he loves us very much. He wants us to come home, to his home—our home after the completion of our time here. I know that he guides us and comforts us and forgives us; that he hears our knock and waits at the gate for our return. And to the question, "What have you to declare?" it will be written in the fleshy table of our heart, our journey at a glance. May we stand in confidence as evidence of our faith in the Lord Jesus Christ, our daily repentance, living true to the ordinances and covenants that qualify us for the companionship of the Holy Ghost and prepare us to stand as a witness of Christ at all times.
