Ardeth Greene Kapp, I Walk by Faith ( 1987)

The Rescue

She had come to my door many times during the past few years, sometimes when she had skipped a class at school and other times late at night. We spent hours talking about how things were with her. "It all started in the sixth grade," she explained one day when she spoke of her dislike for school, her parents, and the Church. "I knew my parents wouldn't approve of some of the things I was doing, so I kept everything a secret. I refused to talk to them. I guess that was the real beginning. I began doing a lot of things I shouldn't, and I quit talking to my parents. I wish now I could go back," she added, "but how do you go back?"

For several years many people had tried to get through to Mindy, but it was as though the lines of communication were down. No messages could get through. Occasionally her mother would call me and ask anxiously if I saw any signs that might give any hope of Mindy's attitude changing. "It is so unlike her," her mother would always explain. "She was such an obedient happy child, I can't understand what has happened or what we have done wrong. I'd do anything to help her, but she won't listen to a thing we say."

Mindy often complained, "My parents won't listen to me. They're too busy. They don't like my music, they don't like my clothes, they don't like my friends, and they don't like me." Any attempt to talk things over at home resulted in shouting, crying, and anger. "It's my life!" she exclaimed. "It's no one else's business what I do with my life—I can take care of myself!"

Mindy's Young Women adviser at church was determined to reach her, to include her in the class activities and help her be part of the group. The girls in her Young Women class worked together to make her a quilt for her birthday. That would surely help her know they cared about her. They worked hard to include her in their group, but whenever they called her on the phone she wasn't home, and she would never call back even though her mother gave her the message.

When her mother told her the girls at church had invited her to a class party, her response was the same. " I'm not going to that party," she said, not knowing that it was a party to celebrate her birthday. The party was being held at the adviser's home. Some of the girls in the class had offered to pick Mindy up, but she refused their offer. Her adviser, knowing where she might be, left the party, drove around a few blocks, and saw her walking down the hill toward the mall. She drove up alongside her and called, "Mindy! Mindy!" Mindy turned her head and began running in the other direction. Her adviser could not get through to her. There seemed no way to communicate with her. Mindy had found new friends where the lights were dim, the music loud, and the world enticing. Why trade that for the things they do at church? she thought. She had no fear. It was a new way of life and very exciting.

The bishop inquired about Mindy. He wanted to visit with her, help her, and encourage her, but she refused to meet with him. This may be because there was no way to hide the strong smell of tobacco that was always present wherever she was.

At school the counselor called Mindy in for an interview. She had received a report indicating that Mindy's academic and attendance records were poor. Finally the school officials determined that Mindy could no longer participate in regular school activities, and they referred her to an alternate school that dealt with students who had special problems. A teacher was assigned to visit her once a week to help with her lessons, but Mindy had no interest in lessons and she wouldn't listen to the teacher.

Mindy was in trouble, and no one could reach her. She lived in a world of her own making. Loud music, videos, and her newfound friends helped isolate her from those who would have come to her rescue if given a chance, but she could not—or would not—listen to their warnings. She was in danger, and no one was getting through. She was in deep water.

So it is with each of us as we meet the challenges of life. It is our maiden voyage, a new experience, and we are inexperienced travelers in a strange land.

And so it was with another voyage that ended in disaster. The great White Star ocean liner Titanic, the largest ship the world had ever known, sailed on her maiden voyage from England to New York on April 10, 1912. This great ship, which was thought to be unsinkable, carried more than 2200 passengers. On Sunday morning, April 14, the steamer Caronia sent a message to the captain of the Titanic: "Captain, Titanic—Westbound steamers report bergs, growlers and field ice in 42 degrees N. from 49 degrees to 51 degrees W." The message was acknowledged but not acted upon.

Just before noon another ship in the area, the Baltic, also warned the Titanic of the ice. The captain read the message, then handed it to one of his officers, who stuffed it in his pocket.

Later in the day a third ocean liner, the Californian, sent a message about icebergs but no one bothered to take it down. By ten that evening at least seven messages warning of ice had been sent, but those who could have changed the course away from the danger chose not to listen. To one message, the Titanic responded, "Shut up, shut up; keep out. I am talking to Cape Race; you are jamming my signals." The man on duty had been warned to watch for icebergs, but nothing unusual appeared as the Titanic raced across the calm, black sea.

Suddenly in the blackness of the night, the lookout reported a small dark object that grew larger and closer. The man rang the warning bell three times and called the bridge on the phone to report the danger. "What do you see?" asked a calm voice at the other end. "Iceberg right ahead" was the reply. "Thank you," came the response. Nothing more was said.

Suddenly the foaming green sea water exploded through the Titanic's side. The conclusion was inescapable. The Titanic was sinking. Within ninety minutes she would rest on the bottom of the ocean floor, 13,000 feet below.

"Send the call for assistance," the captain ordered.

The officials on the ill-fated Titanic tried desperately to get through to the Californian, who had tried to call a warning earlier. But the Californian communication lines had closed down at 11:30. The ship was less than ten miles from the sinking liner, but there was no way to get through. Another ship some distance away, the Carpathia, picked up the SOS signal: "Come at once. We have struck a berg." The answer came back, "We are coming as quickly as possible and expect to be there within four hours." The Carpathia was a 14-knot ship, but that night for three and a half hours she worked up to 17 knots.

The passengers on the Titanic had no fear. They were unaware of the danger they were in. When instructed to get into the few lifeboats available, they wondered if it was a boat drill. Why trade the bright decks of the Titanic for a few dark hours in a rowboat? they asked. "We are safer here than in that little boat," one man said. The band was playing ragtime, the best band on the Atlantic. Why leave the lights, the music, and the excitement?

At 12:45 A.M., a rocket shot into the air. Immediately everyone on the deck knew what that meant. There was no time for lights or music; there was hardly time to say good-bye. The Titanic's stern steadily lifted, and suddenly her lights snapped off. They came on again only briefly, then went out forever. As the largest ship the world had ever known sank out of sight, the sea closed over the flagstaff of her stern and she was gone.

The Carpathia never slackened her speed in an effort to come to the rescue. At 3:35 A.M. she was almost there. In the distance the crew saw a green light from a small boat. Reaching the boat, the officer called out, "Where is the Titanic?" "Gone," was the reply. "She sank at 2:20 A.M." "Were there any people left on board?" "Hundreds, perhaps thousands," was the response.

At a youth conference I saw a young woman showing signs of approaching an iceberg. She was getting into deep water. Her dress, her conduct, her language, and her behavior indicated she was not hearing the warnings—those guidelines that often appear more like harsh rules than wise warnings. It was her adviser who pleaded with me. "Maybe she will listen to you," she said. "I've tried and tried." Any possibility was worth the effort, so I agreed. If the young woman and her adviser would come together, I would be happy to spend some time with them. We sat on the steps behind the stage, away from the activities, and I told them about a great and powerful ship on her maiden voyage, the Titanic.

It wasn't a time for judgment or preaching, but one more attempt to break through lines that had been closed down for a time. We talked about the communication lines we use in prayer and how our Father in heaven is always on duty and will never close down the lines. Our prayers can always be heard, and the message can get through.

We talked about the still, small voice, the warning signals, and the danger of icebergs on our journey home. In our time together, I saw and felt the love and concern of an adviser who, with the help of the Lord, was reaching out to a young woman in trouble. Tears filled the eyes of the young girl, for she could not deny the love of her adviser for her.

As we met together, the adviser prayed—she gave the call for help. She talked to Heavenly Father about her love for her young friend and her great desire to help this young woman build a good relationship with her parents. She spoke about the young woman's divine destiny, her individual worth, and her struggles and temptations. She prayed that the young woman would be protected from the powers of the adversary until she could gain enough strength to withstand. It was a call for help, and as the prayer ended, I watched two sisters embrace and weep together.

That night a signal got through; the warning was heard. The young woman heard her adviser pray to our Heavenly Father in her behalf for her safety and her safe voyage through troubled waters. That night, as she heeded the warning and responded to the prayer of her adviser, many lives were saved—perhaps as many as lost their lives on the Titanic. For one young woman responding to the warnings can save generations. Her faithfulness provided increased safety for her children and her children's children for generations unnumbered.

"And now, if your joy will be great with one soul that you have brought unto me into the kingdom of my Father, how great will be your joy if you should bring many souls unto me!" (D&C 18:16.)
