Ardeth Greene Kapp, I Walk by Faith ( 1987)

The Things That Matter Most

It was the last session of the youth conference just before the closing testimony meeting, the best part of all. I had not been able to attend the entire conference but had been there long enough to recognize that this group of young people seemed to have been abundantly blessed with material things. Their clothes were the latest fashion, and the labels on their shirts gave me reason to believe that these young men and women had developed a taste for the things that money can buy.

I wondered how my message would be received and whether or not I could get through to them with the valuable things that money can't buy. As the group gathered, I observed that there was a definite pattern to their seating arrangements. Some of the young men stood at the back near the doorway, as if to be ready for a quick escape in case of fire. Some of the young women entered and left, entered and left several times, as if to test the water before they were ready to make a commitment and jump in. When the young women finally took their seats, this was the signal for the young men at the back to make their final decision about where to sit. The few vacant benches and chairs left little opportunity for indecision.

The opening song was led by a woman who had obviously had some experience in conducting music. She captured everyone's attention and participation for "Shall the Youth of Zion Falter?" To that question the chorus began with a loud and strong response "No!" and continued: "True to the faith that our parents have cherished/True to the truth for which martyrs have perished." On the high notes, which left many without sound for their efforts, her voice rang out loud and clear until the notes descended and everyone could once again join in.

After the opening prayer and a generous introduction, I took my place at the pulpit. At that moment in a meeting, almost everyone is attentive and willing to withhold judgment as to whether they will give their full attention to the message until they get an idea of what it is going to be about. This is a critical time. If a speaker turns the audience off in that first minute or two, there may not be another chance, regardless of how interesting the message maybe later on. I wanted to talk to these young people about values, about what matters most, and about how you decide. I knew that my introductory remarks had to catch them in a net of excitement, to try to hold them captive for the next forty-five minutes.

Without any warm-up or further introduction, I asked the audience how many of them had a brother or sister about three or four years old. This was somewhat of a surprise beginning; at least their curiosity got them involved for a time. Many of them raised their hands. I then asked how many of them thought they really liked their younger brother or sister. A few hands went down, but the big smiles probably indicated some childish pranks that had caused embarrassment. Looking over the first couple of rows, I called on one young woman who appeared to be confident and who had a big smile.

"Would you please come up?" I said, looking at her. "Me?" she said, pointing to herself. "Yes," I said. "Would you please?" There was a rustle among her friends, who wondered what she had volunteered for. Then she made her way from the center of the row to the aisle and up to the pulpit.

As she stood beside me, she obviously was also wondering. I assured her she would know all the answers to the questions I was going to ask in this brief interview. "Would you please tell us your name?" was my first question. "Shauna," she responded, smiling down at her friends. Her friends were returning broad smiles as they waited for the next question. "Do you have a younger brother or sister?" I asked. These questions were not too difficult, and she began to relax a bit. "A little brother," she said. "And what is his name?" "Richard," she said. "Is that what you call him?" I asked. "No," she said, shaking her head. "We call him Ricky." "And do you really love your little brother?" I asked. A smile and a nod affirmed her love for her brother.

After that brief introduction, it was obvious that this was a great teaching moment. Every person in the audience was attentive, waiting to hear how one of their friends would answer these curious questions. And the questions became even more curious. By now Shauna seemed to be enjoying the attention she was getting from the audience. Poised and confident, she surveyed the entire gathering, smiling and capturing their interest.

I had remembered reading about an illustration that helps us determine our values, so I asked, "Shauna, do you know what an I-beam is used for in construction?" She hesitated a moment, so I explained. "I'm referring to a particular I-beam—one that is six inches wide and six inches high. It is made of steel and it happens to be 124 feet long. That is a considerable distance beyond the length of this building."

At this point we were talking together while the audience looked on. "Shauna," I said, "just suppose this I-beam six inches wide and six inches high was lying on the ground outside." She looked thoughtful, trying to envision this imaginary situation. I continued with further details. "Now suppose I am standing at one end of the I-beam and you are standing at the other, 124 feet away. I'm going to shout to you from where I am standing. 'Shauna,' I call, 'if you will walk all the way across the I-beam and don't step off, I'll give you one hundred dollars.'" Her smile broadened. "Would you do it?" I asked. "Sure," she said, without any hesitation, probably already having in mind just what she would do with an extra hundred dollars. The response from her friends assured her that she had definitely given the right answer.

"Now we're going to change the situation a little bit," I explained. "We're going to take this same I-beam all the way across the country to New York City. Have you ever been there?" She said she had. "Have you seen the tall twin towers of the World Trade Center?" Again she said she had, "Do you happen to know the distance between those two towers?" I asked. She shook her head. "Well," I explained, "those towers just happen to be 120 feet apart." Shauna's thoughts were racing ahead of the story, and she began shaking her head emphatically. I continued to explain this imaginary situation.

"It is a stormy day and the wind is blowing," I said. "The I-beam has been carefully placed at the very top of the twin towers, one end on one tower and one end on the other. Oh, yes, there is just one more detail you should know: The towers are 1,350 feet in the air." She was ready with her answer before the question was asked, but I proceeded. "Shauna," I said, "now just suppose you are on top of one tower near the end of the I-beam and I am on the other. I shout through the wind and the rain, 'Shauna, if you will come across this I-beam, I'll give you a thousand dollars.'" "No way," she said, "absolutely no way." I extended the offer with an additional amount: "How about ten thousand?" "Not for any amount," she said emphatically. "A million?" I offered. "Not ten million," she said. "I wouldn't do it for any amount." Her friends were listening intently.

"Then let me change the story just a little bit," I said. "This time we have the same situation: a stormy day, with the wind blowing, and you are at the top of one tower—but I am not at the top of the other." I paused, then went on. "By some tragic means, a person who has no respect for life and who has lost all sense of right and wrong has managed to kidnap your little brother, Ricky. This person is standing at the edge of the tower, holding your brother over the edge with his feet hanging in mid-air. He shouts to you, 'If you will come across the I-beam right now, you can save your brother.'" I hesitated a moment, then asked in a quiet voice, "Would you go?" With tears streaming down her face, she nodded. "I'd go." I looked at the audience and saw hundreds of young people who would have given the same answer. "I'd go." The tears in their eyes revealed something of their values, the things that matter most.

Shauna had spoken for all of them. It was not all the things that a thousand dollars or even a million dollars would buy that mattered most. Life is more important than taking a chance on the things that money can buy. And there is no price that can be put on a brother or a sister, or a friend.

"Thank you, Shauna," I said as she returned to her seat. To the audience I explained: "Shauna has taught you about values and what matters most in life, and how we can go about setting our goals in relation to the things we value most. When we know what our values are, we can easily decide what we will do and what we will not do—even what we would be willing to live and die for, if necessary. What would you be willing to do to ensure that you and your family could be together forever?" I asked. "You know, our time is our life. And whatever we are doing with our time, we are paying for with our life."

I observed that some in the audience had caught that message, but some hadn't, so I turned to the scriptures and read: "Greater love hath no man than this, that a man lay down his life for his friends. Ye are my friends, if ye do whatsoever I command you." (John 15:13-14.) "Our Lord and Savior, Jesus Christ, gave his life so that we might live and have eternal life," I explained. "He asks us, 'Love one another, as I have loved you.' (John 15:12.) How can we do this?" I waited. There was a hush over the audience, as each person reached for his or her own answer. "Always remember," I explained. "Our time is our life. When we spend time with our friends, we are giving them part of our life. And when that friendship, that relationship, lifts, encourages, strengthens, and helps protect our friends from dangers that could threaten not only their physical life but even more important their eternal life, then we have something worth crossing the I-beam for, something worth giving our time for, because our time is our life. On the other hand, imagine choosing to spend our time, which is our life, on things of little value or no value. One earth life is all we have, and then it's gone."

These young people appeared to be listening not only with their ears but also with their hearts. We could all feel the Spirit that was present. For some, it may have been for the first time.

"And so it is," I went on. "When we know what we value most in life, we can write down our values. With our values in place, we can more easily make our choices each and every day. Our decisions will be determined by the things that we value most, the things we would be willing to cross the I-beam for."

In the audience that night I imagined I could see several hundred young people with their values in place. These were young people who would be as courageous as Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego, whom King Nebuchadnezzar threatened to throw into the fiery furnace if they would not bow down and worship the golden image. These young men refused, saying, "If it be so, our God whom we serve is able to deliver us out of the burning fiery furnace, and he will deliver us out of thy hand, O king." Their commitments were so strong to the things they valued that they told the king, "But if not . . ." in other words, if we are not to be delivered, we will still not go against what we know to be right—our God and our values. And, as we know, the three men were cast into the fiery furnace. But when the king looked into the furnace, there were not three men but four. And they were not hurt in anyway, and "the form of the fourth was like the Son of God." (Daniel 3:12-25.) Because of their values and their faith, they were spared.

In that same audience I saw many young women not unlike the three young virgins spoken of in the book of Abraham who were offered up on an altar. Because of their virtue, they would not bow down to worship gods of wood or of stone; therefore they were killed upon the altar. (Abraham 1:11.) Their integrity demanded that they make their actions consistent with their knowledge of right and wrong, and they could not do otherwise.

Our time together had come to a close. I had been in the presence of great and noble youth anxious to commit their lives to valuable things that money cannot buy. May this be the desire of all of our youth today!
