Ardeth Greene Kapp, I Walk by Faith ( 1987)

A Wallet Is Returned

"Will you please forgive me? I want to be honest," she whispered after handing me the familiar old wallet that had been taken nine years before.

With head bowed, she briefly explained that she had never stolen anything before or since. Then, as she turned to walk away, I heard a sigh of relief escape her lips.

Occasionally in a lifetime one experiences even with a stranger the reverent feeling of being in the presence of the truly pure in heart, and it was with this feeling that I fingered the worn wallet with the broken zipper. Memories of years gone by returned to mind with the clarity of only yesterday. Snapshots of special friends along with an activity card and other identification cards gave evidence that it was indeed my old wallet. I instinctively glanced into the pocket for the paper bills and was not surprised to find what appeared to be the very same ten-dollar bill that had been there the day I lost my wallet.

It had been nine years since, as a student at Brigham Young University, I had used the telephone in the Joseph Smith Building and had carelessly left my wallet in the phone booth. I returned to the lost and found department regularly for several days before finally giving up my desperate hope of ever getting my wallet and money back. That ten dollars was all the money I had, and I was in the habit of measuring my expenditures with great care. Without an understanding landlady, its loss could have caused some real problems. But that incident, like many others, faded into the background as more important memories crowded in.

Years had passed. One snowy afternoon the mailman delivered a rather fat envelope with two letters enclosed. The first one, from Mom, included a few questions about the other letter, which began: "To whom it may concern, anyone knowing the whereabouts of Ardeth Greene please forward this letter. It is very important that contact be made as soon as possible to settle some unfinished business at the B.Y.U." A name and an address were then given.

My first reaction was of indignation, since I knew of no unfinished business for which I was responsible. When my mind flashed back to my first experience with a bank account when I had written a check for groceries on the wrong bank, I became a little less indignant and wondered what unfinished business I needed to set in order.

With some anxiety I found in the Salt Lake City telephone directory the name of the person who had signed the letter. I quickly dialed the number and asked for the person by name. A pleasant voice responded, "This is she." I identified myself and began with some apologies for any unfinished business, only to be interrupted by an intense voice speaking rapidly as if to spill out all the words at once. She continued unloading her story until finally there was evidence of a burdened heart now relieved from foreign and contaminating elements too long contained.

It seemed that this young woman, now a wife and mother, had been in nurses' training at BYU. She had worked to put herself through school, but she needed an additional ten dollars for tuition, so she turned to her boyfriend for help. She promised to return the loan by Friday, but when Friday came, she was still short ten dollars, in spite of her earnest prayers.

Not knowing why, she had walked into the telephone booth and found an old worn wallet. She explained how her heart started to pound, since she'd never been tempted like this before. She held her breath when she opened it to find a single ten-dollar bill. Then the question: was this indeed an answer to her prayer?

She interrupted her steady flow of words to explain that since then she had learned that Satan knows when we are being tested and when we might weaken under pressure, and we can be sure he will be there if there is a chance we might fall.

Then, picking up the story again, she told of paying her boyfriend, whom she later married, finishing school, and now raising a beautiful family and rejoicing in the blessings of the gospel.

Her voice choked with emotion as she painfully related the details about the old wallet. She emphasized how she had been taught right from wrong and how she was well acquainted with the principle of honesty. Her conscience had prompted her, but she had listened to the wrong voice and had acted contrary to that which she knew was right. She explained how taking the money had seemed justified at the time, but for nine years her conscience had never been at peace. She told of her suffering for what she acknowledged as being a sin.

Elder Orson F. Whitney once wrote concerning sin: "Sin is the transgression of divine law, as made known through the conscience or by revelation. A man sins when he violates his conscience, going contrary to light and knowledge—not the light and knowledge that has come to his neighbor, but that which has come to himself. He sins when he does the opposite of what he knows to be right." (Quoted in Bruce R. McConkie, Mormon Doctrine, Bookcraft, 1966, p. 735.)

For nine years, through many moves, the old burden had lain deeply tucked away in this young woman's dresser drawer. Though she had considered throwing it away many times, it seemed impossible to do. There is no way one can throw away a wrong.

One day, while she was straightening the drawer, the old wallet surfaced again. This time she felt she must get rid of it, but in the right way. She had learned many valuable lessons over the years, and she had a quiet assurance that even this experience had served a purpose. She thoughtfully opened the wallet once again and examined it. This time her fingers uncovered a small orange card tucked away in a tiny compartment not previously noticed. This orange card would be the key to unloading her burden. On it was the address of a clinic in Calgary, Alberta, Canada, where a medical examination for a student's visa had been given.

With a prayer in her heart, she sent a letter to the clinic, addressed "To Whom it May Concern," and asking that it be forwarded, if possible. The letter was forwarded first to my parents in Canada and then back to Utah, where it finally reached its intended destination. Contact had been made, but the wallet was yet to be returned. During our telephone conversation she indicated the wallet would be mailed that very day.

When one sees in another a keen sense of right and wrong and a great virtue carefully tuned by the Spirit through struggle and final victory, there is a reaching out for association with that person, a desire to meet one so honest in heart. Thus I asked her if she would consider delivering the wallet in person. She seemed a little embarrassed at the request until I assured her it would be an honor and a privilege to meet a person who had such honesty of character. She agreed to meet me that afternoon at the office where I was working.

When I returned from lunch, the young woman was sitting beside my desk, with her back to me. Her shoulders were narrow but straight, and she sat erect on the edge of the chair with both feet squarely on the floor in front of her.

As I approached, she shifted nervously, then stood up. Then, as though she had rehearsed this experience in her mind a hundred times, she reached out a steady hand, looked me squarely in the eye, and handed me the wallet. Her steady gaze reflected the radiance of a good and honest life.

When she whispered, "Will you please forgive me? I want to be honest," my words would not come. I could only reach for her hand and nod affirmatively.

"Behold," the Lord has said, "he who has repented of his sins, the same is forgiven, and I, the Lord, remember them no more." (D&C 58:42.)

I went to the window and watched her turn the corner with a lilt in her step. Then, returning to my desk, I again heard the echo of her words. "Will you please forgive me? I want to be honest."
