Ardeth Greene Kapp, I Walk by Faith ( 1987)

He Ran All the Way

The chapel was filled to overflowing. People were still coming in, and additional seats were being added to the many rows that had already been set up in the cultural hall. From the back of the hall you could see over the crowd, but you had to stretch and bob your head back and forth around families who were getting settled in their seats.

The young missionary, supported on each side by her mother and father, must have felt deep gratitude for the numbers that swelled the normal attendance on this special sacrament meeting—one more faithful youth joining the ranks of those going out into the world to serve as special witnesses for Christ and search out the true in heart.

The last chord of the prelude music was sustained while the audience gradually quieted, and the bishop took his place at the pulpit. After a few words of greeting, he extended a special welcome to all the visitors, family, and friends of the missionary, and announced the opening song and invocation. The chorister had an unusual ability to lead the music with feeling and great dignity as the audience joined in singing "I'll Go Where You Want Me to Go, Dear Lord."

Following the prayer the bishop stood again and attended to some routine ward business. Then the tone of his voice changed from that of an effective and caring bishop to that of a loving father speaking to a beloved child. Looking out across the congregation as though there was only one of his flock he cared for at that moment, he spoke loud and clear. "Chad," he said. "Chad, are you here?" Immediately the sound of a folding chair knocking noisily against another could be heard, and other chairs were pushed back to clear the way, as people turned to identify Chad.

A young boy a few rows ahead of me made his way awkwardly into the aisle. His facial features showed some abnormality, and it appeared that he probably did not have the same mental abilities as other young people his age. He was facing life with some obvious handicaps, or so it seemed. I watched as this young man energetically, with great enthusiasm, literally ran from the back of the hall up the full length of the building, his short legs moving as fast as they could. He didn't slow down until he reached the steps leading to the podium. The bishop kept his eyes on the boy until he finally reached his side. Then putting his protective arm around Chad, he drew him close and the boy and the bishop looked at each other in a private exchange only they understood. Even strangers visiting the ward that day were impressed that this was surely not the first time the bishop had called and Chad had come running. They must have shared many private and important moments together before this hour.

With Chad nestled securely in the fold of the bishop's arm, they both faced the congregation. "Chad," the bishop proudly announced, "has earned his Duty to God Award. He has qualified in every way." Then, glancing down at the young man, he said with some emotion, "We are all proud of Chad."

The presentation was made, followed by the usual handshake and an additional warm and sustained embrace. But as Chad turned to leave, he broke with tradition and raised his hand high in the air, symbolic of what he had seen between good friends. A hand slap high in the air against the hand of a friend means friendship, team spirit, trust, good job, and a lot more. The bishop knew his boys and understood the signal. He responded to Chad's invitation by raising his hand to meet Chad's, giving a resounding slap in the air (and outside the meeting, he would have added the words "give 'em five").

Chad then turned from the bishop, but before leaving the stand, he moved awkwardly but enthusiastically toward the chorister, who stood and wrapped him in his arms. The audience witnessing this great happening wondered until we learned later that the man was his father. This special recognition was an award not only for Chad but also for his father and mother, waiting for his return in the back of the hall. The young hero left the podium, and made his way down the aisle wearing a broad smile, with his arm raised high in the air as if to "give 'em five" to every ward member who had been part of the team and was now sharing in the victory.

Looking around me, it was easy to identify those who were the visitors witnessing this ward family victory and those who were privileged to feel what Chad's accomplishments had meant to all who were blessed by the radiance of his personality.

It has been months since that memorable Sunday, but in my mind I keep playing that scene over and over again—not only with Chad as the star performer, the hero, but with every young man and every young woman who is playing a part so magnificently even when it is a struggle. Some have serious handicaps, not like Chad's but challenges of their own that they refuse to let discourage them, challenges that test their courage and strength, their commitment and ultimately their faith in a loving Heavenly Father.

The bishop calls. The call is heard. And in my mind I see every young person responding. Youths who have learned to listen for the call are prepared and ready, as was Chad. No one waits, no one walks, no one stops to explain, no one says why. However long the test or whatever the circumstances, however hard the handicaps, however steep the road, I see youths who are preparing to follow Chad's example and come running when called.

In this life we learn to listen for the call of the bishop, who is a representative of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. One day there will be another call, not from the bishop but from our Savior. A call to come home. The call will not come later, when we're better prepared, but now. We might hear the words, "Come, my child, come as you are but come now." We will each come with our limitations that became part of our test in this life, just as Chad came forward with his. We will not walk but, like Chad, will run forward, and each in our own time will return home. There our Father in heaven will draw us close in the protective fold of his arms. We will recognize him and he will know us, and we will receive our reward. And in that day, may we hear the voice of the Lord saying unto us, "Come unto me ye blessed, for behold, your works have been the works of righteousness upon the face of the earth." (Alma 5:16.)
