Ardeth Greene Kapp, I Walk by Faith ( 1987)

This Is All the Money I Have

The kindly old man didn't go outside as much anymore, and he didn't cross the street over to the Gardners' home as he used to. During the winter he had been there many times, not only to the Gardners' home, but also to the homes of neighbors up and down both sides of the street. After a heavy snowstorm he was usually out at the crack of dawn to clear the snow from driveways, providing a happy surprise in the early morning hours for grateful neighbors and friends. In the summertime he carefully arranged selected vegetables in baskets and carried them across the street to share with his neighbors. But it was not his vegetables that made him so popular with the children so much as the sweets he always had for them when they came around to the back door. His dear wife, restricted to a wheelchair, insisted on including "something sweet for the children" in their weekly shopping list.

Another winter season was slipping away, yielding to the warm sun of springtime. With this season came other signs of ebbing away. The old gentleman's garden had been planted with much difficulty this year. He tended it less often than usual, but enough, he hoped, to assure a good harvest that he might share one last time with his neighbors and friends. His good health was gone. His service to his friends was now greatly restricted. Some days were difficult and some were long for both him and his wife. "The very worst thing about being sick," he explained, "isn't the pain so much as the feeling of being so useless." He swallowed hard to keep the tears under control and forced a smile into the careworn lines on his face.

Across the street in the home of the Gardners, young Elizabeth, only seven and a half years old, had acquired a keen sense of concern for others. In her family, when anyone had a problem or felt unhappy, the family members discovered little ways to cheer each other up. Over her few short years, this child had seen her faithful mother find time to wipe a tear, heal a wound with a kiss, and listen to the never-ending account of a child who needed her attention. It was not just within the busy yet happy setting of her home that Elizabeth witnessed this activity. The same concern was expressed by her mother in many ways beyond her home, up and down the street, as the children distributed hot cinnamon rolls to many, or a dinner for a family on a special occasion.

One day young Elizabeth left her home quietly without telling anyone what was on her mind or in her hand. She looked both ways, then crossed the street. She was not carrying hot cinnamon rolls from her mother's kitchen as she had often done before. She came carrying her own treasures. She walked quietly through the carport overgrown with vines breaking into bud and made her way under the balcony to the back door with the little glass window in it. She rang the bell at the home of the kind old man and his dear wife, then quickly hurried to hide behind the large bush of Oregon grape.

Inside the home the old couple looked at each other and wondered who would be calling at this hour. The man, with some effort, eased himself up from his chair, stretched his back before taking a step, then shuffled toward the door. As he opened the door, his wife strained to hear a voice that she might identify. There were birds in the feeder that he attended to each day, but no one was in sight. He stepped out to look around, looking first one way, then the other, but there was no sign of anyone.

As he turned to come in, he noticed a torn piece of paper on the step by the door. It was a piece of newsprint, the kind he had seen children carry home from school. The paper had writing on it, and on top of the paper were two coins—a nickel and a quarter. Steadying one hand on his leg, he reached to the ground to pick up the note and the money. He could see that a message had been printed by a child.

By now his wife was calling, "Ted, is someone there?" She called again, "Ted?"

He shuffled back into the living room. "No one was there," he said in a quiet voice.

"Then what do you have in your hand?"

"Someone has been here," he said. "Look at this."

He sat beside his wife on the couch, and together, straining to see through their glasses, they read these few words: "Dear Mr. and Mrs. Greene, you are very dear friends of ours, you are always nice to us. Here is something you might need. From Elizabeth Gardner." Words barely hanging on the bottom of the edge of the page completed the message, "This is all the money I have."

Holding the paper in one hand, he opened his other hand to show his wife. There in the palm of a trembling hand lay the nickel and quarter. "All the money she has," he whispered, "a mite." His wife removed her glasses to wipe a tear from her eye and brushed a lock of gray hair from her forehead. "Like a widow's mite," he added. Together they sat holding the small piece of paper and two coins while they thought of a plan.

Walking with the help of a cane, Brother Greene made his way over to the Gardners' home, knocked on the door, and asked to speak to Elizabeth. She came to the door, her chin buried in her neck while she looked at the floor. The old man stooped over to wrap her in one of his arms while he steadied himself with his cane. Giving her a gentle hug, he thanked her for all she had done to make him and his wife so happy. The child smiled and looked up at her mother, who was now standing at her side, curious to know what her daughter had done. Elizabeth then told her mother about her visit to the Greenes.

"In our family we think of little things to do for people or give to them if they are feeling bad," she said. "We write notes to each other and leave little things like a cookie or a piece of candy. One time one of my sisters carved a little heart out of soap to go with a note she wrote to me when I was feeling unhappy." In a matter-of-fact tone Elizabeth added, "I got the idea from what we do in our family, and I decided to take it outside my family. I could see that Brother and Sister Greene were getting old, and I thought they might need to pay hospital bills or something." Then in a happy tone she concluded, "so I gave them all the money I had."

Now Brother Greene felt not so useless after all. There were still lessons to learn and people to serve. The following Sunday the aged man and the sensitive child visited with the ward clerk. "We'd like to make a contribution," they said, "a contribution of one nickel and one quarter to help build the new temple." The ward clerk was somewhat surprised. He was aware that each of them had made contributions individually, but the combined donation was a curious entry on the official form.

Brother Greene asked the ward clerk if they could have duplicate receipts so both he and Elizabeth would have one, but the clerk explained that only one receipt could be made. It was decided that she would get the receipt.

"I was so anxious for it," she later explained, "and it seemed like weeks before I got it. The day I received it, I took it over and showed it to Brother and Sister Greene. Brother Greene took me by the hand and led me over to the wall by his radio and showed me my letter, which he had framed."

A few months later Brother Greene passed away. As his treasures were being tucked away, the framed letter was removed from its place on the wall. Taped to it were a nickel and a quarter, reminders of the previous gift of a little girl who had given him all the money she had.
