Ardeth Greene Kapp, I Walk by Faith ( 1987)

White Carnations

The events of the past three days would be recorded in many journals as a youth conference never to be equaled. There had been several specially planned events and activities, lots of good food, and many new friends. The dance following the banquet was the last activity on Saturday. Sunday morning after the testimony meeting, which was always the highlight of the conference, there would be a brief evaluation meeting for the steering committee before everyone boarded the buses to return home. It would seem all too soon for many.

On Saturday night, Bradley, the conference chairman, came into the dance hall with two of his friends and motioned for me to come outside where we could talk without competing with the music. Outside was a small gathering of excited boys and girls, all talking at once. Their jumbled message might have been likened to the confounding of the languages at the Tower of Babel. Finally Bradley's voice could be heard above the others as he raised his hand, signaling his position as spokesman. "Let's start from the beginning," he said. With that signal, several interrupted, ready to begin again. "Hey, you guys, let me tell it, okay?" In a tone of excitement he asked, "Did you see Jennifer come into the dance?" Not waiting for my response, he continued, "She's in there now with a bunch of kids. She's okay," he explained with a smile. "She's all better."

Jennifer was a nonmember who had been invited to the youth conference by a friend. For the past three days she had often been seen alone or not at all. Her friend had deserted her, and it must have seemed that no one cared. She was terribly lonely. To be alone in a crowd of people is the worst kind of loneliness.

On Saturday, one of the conference workshops was conducted in a log cabin at the far end of a path leading from the lodge. In the subdued light of the cabin, a small group sat close together and talked about what our prophet had said concerning small acts of service and what that meant to each one individually. After openly sharing feelings that we all have—the need to be accepted and liked by others, and the need for approval and to be involved—the idea of small acts of service took on new and added meaning. It seemed quite possible that if everyone really tried to do some small act of service for someone, maybe miracles could happen right before our eyes.

According to the plan of the workshop, the youth, many of them almost strangers, visited in pairs while each one shared something praiseworthy he or she had noticed about the other one during the conference. The dialogue was slow at first, but soon the conversation picked up. During this brief time, while nearly everyone was deeply engrossed in sharing, I noticed two young girls sitting near a broken window, holding each other's hands. A tear could be seen on the cheek of the younger girl even though she was smiling, and I wondered what might have been shared, or if the two had known each other before. At the appointed time it was difficult to interrupt the many conversations to bring the group back together. It was evident that many small acts of service had taken place even in that few minutes.

Taking some chance, I asked the two young girls sitting by the window to come forward. A little bashful, but without hesitation, they came to the front of the group. After learning their names, I asked Melinda, the younger girl, what praiseworthy thing she had discovered about Pat.

She looked at Pat, smiling, as if waiting for her approval to share, then proceeded. "I'm almost the youngest one at this youth conference," she said. "My close friend who was coming with me couldn't come at the last minute, so it's really been hard." With that confession exposed, she dropped her head, her voice full of emotion. "On my way up the path to this workshop I felt so lonesome that I sat down on a big log and whispered a little prayer that someone, anyone, would be my friend." By now everyone in the group was feeling something of Melinda's loneliness. With tears rolling down her cheeks, she looked over at Pat and explained: "Pat came up the path through the trees. Many others had gone before her and some said 'Hi.' I thought she would do the same thing, but she didn't. She left the path and came over by me. I hadn't remembered seeing her before at the conference, but she asked me to come with her." There was silence for a moment, except for the whispering of the trees.

I waited, not wanting to interrupt Melinda's message, then asked, "Pat, did you know Melinda felt this way when you saw her?"

Pat shook her head. "No, not really, but I saw that she was alone, and she looked sad. I didn't know if I could help, but I knew she didn't have to be alone."

I inquired further. "How does it make you feel to perform a small act of service and be an answer to someone's prayer?"

Tears filled her eyes as she experienced the sensation of being in His service.

"Do you realize that you two are part of a little miracle?" I asked.

The two young girls, strangers until now, embraced in a bond of friendship.

We all felt the tenderness and the joy of someone being an answer to someone else's prayer. Each of us wished we had been the one who had stepped off the path instead of being among those who just said hi and walked on. The closing prayer was given by a young man, who prayed that we might all be more sensitive about small acts of service so that we might change lives, and perhaps even be an answer to another's prayer and create a miracle.

The youths and adults left the cabin, many of them wiping their eyes. Bradley was among the group; he left the cabin carrying with him a commitment to try to do little things that are really big things.

It was one of these big things that he was eagerly reporting under the lights of the parking lot just outside the dance hall. "It works," he said, over the strains of the music coming from inside. "It really works!" He continued his report. "You know, Jennifer didn't come to the banquet. The girls said she was sick, so she stayed alone in her bunk. I kept thinking of her in her room, probably alone, and it bothered me. I wondered what small act of service we could perform to help her. I wasn't expecting any miracle, I just wanted to help. Well," he said, "after we distributed one white carnation to each girl following the banquet, we had a few left over, so I thought, why not take what's left to Jennifer. I suggested it to some of the kids around me, and before I knew it, it seemed as if half of the girls had given back their carnations to add to the ones we all decided to take to Jennifer. The bouquet began to grow and grow until it seemed almost as big as the original bunch."

He continued enthusiastically, "We all headed toward the dorm trying to be quiet, but without much success. We decided that two of the girls would go in and bring Jennifer out for the presentation of the flowers. Karen and Phyllis went inside. We waited and waited. It must have taken a little persuasion, or maybe time to fix up, before all three girls finally appeared on the porch of the cabin."

One of the other boys spoke up. "It looked to me like Jenny might have been crying," he recalled, continuing the report. "Brad just stepped up to the porch, put his arm around her shoulders, placed this oversized bouquet of white carnations in her arms, and said, 'Jenny, we all want you to come to the dance.'" Then one of the girls in the group jumped in to report what she thought was the climax of the whole experience. Leaving out unnecessary details, she announced, "And she is in there right now dancing, and she says she isn't sick anymore."

Brad's countenance revealed much that was not spoken and that many would not have understood had he tried to explain. Standing in the shadows of the street light with friends who had been influenced by his suggestion, he radiated a light that reflected on the entire group.

The following morning in testimony meeting, deep feelings of gratitude and commitment were expressed by many, including Jennifer.

A brief evaluation meeting followed the testimony meeting. Bradley conducted, with adult leaders in a supportive role. From all reports the conference had been a great success. Bradley, as the youth chairman, had reason to express appreciation to the youth as well as adult committee members for the excellence with which they had accomplished their assignments. Then he invited me to comment. I asked him, "Considering all the experiences from the beginning of this conference to the very end, what would you consider the most significant happening?"

The young man, now having experienced the responsibility of a major leadership assignment, paused a moment, perhaps taking time to review in his mind the thrill of the day he was called into the stake president's office and asked to be chairman of the conference, or the excitement of inviting a nationally known entertainment personality to take part in it. In the moment he remained silent, we all waited, searching our own thoughts for what our answer might have been.

Now standing to his full six-foot-two height and looking straight ahead, almost as though he was not directing his comments to anyone in the group, he spoke from his heart. "If only you could have seen the look on Jennifer's face last night as she stood there on the porch when we took her the flowers. It was the happy look on her face—for me that was the most significant happening."

For Bradley it might have been the look on Jennifer's face that will remain with him. But for those who saw the look on Bradley's face at that moment, it was more than a small act of service he had performed—it was a miracle. "For inasmuch as ye do it unto the least of these, ye do it unto me." (D&C 42:38.)
