Ardeth Greene Kapp, I Walk by Faith ( 1987)

Integrity

Reaching Beyond

Shortly after a Young Women's satellite program where the speakers emphasized the importance of standing up for what you believe in, I learned about a young woman named Melanie. She was with a group of friends who had attended the satellite program, and one of her friends had brought an R-rated videotape. As they were about to put the tape on, twelve-year-old Melanie stood before the group and said, "Hey, you kids, we made a commitment to stand for truth and righteousness, and I'm not going to watch this. If I have to stand alone, I will." As a result of Melanie's integrity, none of the girls watched the videotape.

When I'm asked what is the role for LDS women, I think of Melanie. She has made a choice in her life to stand up for truth and righteousness, as have many other Latter-day Saint women of many ages. At twelve, she has made a commitment to righteousness and truth in her life.

I think we sometimes look at women in a very narrowly defined role. What is the "role" of a Latter-day Saint woman? It is not complicated at all. It is simply to be a righteous woman.

A righteous woman is well grounded in the principles of the gospel. She sets her priorities according to these principles and seeks to make decisions through inspiration. She understands that the Lord has a purpose for her life, and she desires to find and magnify that purpose. She is spiritually self-reliant.

Every woman can become a righteous woman, if she is willing to live what she believes. Her foundation of the gospel and the knowledge that she is a daughter of her Heavenly Father will help her to make righteous decisions, to choose that path for herself, whether she is single, married, divorced, a single parent, working at home or in the office, facing complex or simple decisions. Her bedrock is the gospel of Jesus Christ.

If there is a cause that is worthy of the righteous woman's life, she will stand up in any situation in defense of that cause. And when the cause is based on eternal values that are linked to the gospel of Jesus Christ, she will live for it, not just be willing to die for it. It is ingrained in her life with such conviction that no matter what the pressure, she can say, I will choose what I know to be right.

The world sends us different messages, though, about the so-called role and importance of women. Through advertisements, styles, television, movies, posters, it tells us that to be attractive is of utmost importance. The world measures beauty in terms of attractiveness to men. Thus, a woman is told that the more dates, the more boyfriends she has, the greater her worth.

This is a false standard. And it leads to many problems—anorexia, bulimia, lower moral standards, preoccupation with clothes and money, and low self-esteem. I recently read in a study that half of today's young women have low self-esteem. I believe this is a result of their trying to meet a standard that is both unrealistic and not founded in that truth which brings real worth and happiness.

We know through the prophets and scriptures that each woman comes from divine parentage and has inherited divine qualities that she can develop. Her worth is not dependent on the changing styles or whims of society. She is of infinite worth, with her own divine mission from the Lord. As she strives to find out what that divine mission is, and makes the effort to study the gospel and do the work of the Savior here on earth, she can become more like the Savior.

Eventually, in the eternal plan, every righteous woman should have as her ultimate goal to be a wife and mother. But the realities of our day are such that some of our young women won't have that opportunity at the time they may anticipate or want it. It then becomes very important that each one have intermediate—not other, not conflicting—goals that are consistent with her unique mission in life. And, of course, all learning and experience in any righteous endeavor prepares her ultimately to be a better wife and mother. Nothing should stand in the way of that goal, but what a tragedy it would be if our young women just waited around for that experience and then came to it empty.

One area in which a righteous woman needs to prepare is education—both spiritual and secular. Sister Camilla Kimball has said, "What we must be concerned with is preparation for life, and that preparation is continuing education. Whether it is to earn a living or to rear a family, men and women both need to have the knowledge that enhances their natural talents." Preparation for life is for both—women who marry and those who may never marry. It is for women who will have children to help educate and others who will not. It is for women who will need to support themselves and their children at some time in their lives.

President Gordon B. Hinckley said in a recent Young Women's fireside talk, "Never before in the history of the world has there been a time when so many opportunities have been open to women. Now is the season to train your minds and your hands for the work you wish to do. I am not suggesting that all of you should be university students. There is a need for technicians of many varieties, and the work to be done is honorable and contributes immensely to the society of which we are a part.

"Some of you may think that marriage will take care of all your future needs. Marriage is important, and I hope that each of you will have the blessing of a happy marriage, but circumstances arise in the lives of many women that make it necessary to work and provide for their needs. Education can prove to be the wisest and most profitable investment you can make. Get all the help and direction you can concerning your aptitudes and ambitions, and then get training to sharpen your skills and improve your opportunities."

As women develop the divine gifts within them, to realize their potential in growing in learning and wisdom, strengthening families, the Savior will be there to guide them, love them, watch over them, help them to progress and learn. As the Savior promised, "Draw near unto me, and I will draw near unto you." (D&C 88:63.) Righteous women will have many opportunities for their wisdom, voice, and vote to make a difference.
