Ardeth Greene Kapp, I Walk by Faith ( 1987)

A Friday Night Date

Your immediate concern may be a decision about a date for a party this Friday, and yet your decisions concerning dating have something to do with generations long before your time and also future generations for years to come. It is a big decision! Come back with me in time and we will work our way forward to the date, the boy, the place, the time, and your decision about your date this very week. Be patient. It is a rather long story because it goes so far back, but you will discover what all this has to do with your date this very week.

As members of The Church of Jesus Christ of latter-day Saints, we are a covenant people. Understanding what that means is at the very heart of all our decisions, including your date this week and next. Let me explain. Our Father in heaven sent one of his strongest spirits to earth. His name was Abraham, and you and I are descendants of him. He is our great-great-grandfather many generations back. We are numbered with his posterity. Abraham was tried and tested. He was even commanded to offer up his only son, Isaac. The Lord knew that he could depend on Abraham. Only after he had proven Abraham's obedience was Isaac spared.

Through Abraham, the Lord was able to establish a covenant people. He promised, or covenanted, with Abraham that all his descendants would belong to the House of Israel, and all those who accept the gospel and keep his commandments would inherit the blessings of eternal life, the greatest of all the gifts of God. For this reason Abraham was very anxious that his son not take a wife from among the Canaanite women in the area who were out of his faith. So he commissioned his servant to go on a long and uncomfortable journey to obtain a companion of Isaac's faith. The servant took ten camels and departed.

When the servant arrived at his destination in a far country, he needed to know who was to be the companion for Isaac. He asked for the Lord's help, saying, "Let it come to pass, that the damsel to whom I shall say, Let down thy pitcher, I pray thee, that I may drink, and she shall say, Drink, and I will give thy camels drink also; let the same be she that thou hast appointed for thy servant Isaac; and thereby shall I know that thou hast shewed kindness unto my master." (Genesis 24:14.)

And before he had finished speaking, Rebekah came to the well. She was beautiful. The servant ran to meet her and said, "Let me, I pray thee, drink a little water of thy pitcher." And she said, "Drink, my Lord." She gave him some water from her pitcher, then she drew water for all his camels. (Genesis 24:15-20.)

The servant then inquired of Rebekah's father if she would go with him. They called Rebekah and asked, "Wilt thou go with this man?" And she said, "I will go." When they returned to Isaac, he was out in the field and saw them coming. The servant told him all that had happened. "And Isaac brought her into his mother Sarah's tent, and she became his wife; and he loved her: and Isaac was comforted after his mother's death." (Genesis 24:61-67.)

Rebekah and Isaac were true and faithful to the covenants they made with the Lord, and they yearned for their children to be true also, so that they might enjoy the blessings promised to those who are true to the faith. They had two sons, Jacob and Esau. Esau, however, married outside the faith. One day Rebekah, in great anguish and concern for their posterity and the need to have their children marry in the faith, said to Isaac, "I am weary of my life because of the daughters of Heth [Esau's wives]: if Jacob take a wife of the daughters of Heth, . . . what good shall my life do me?" (Genesis 27:46.)

Jacob married in the faith, and his name was changed to Israel. He had twelve sons, and all his faithful descendants became members of the House of Israel, the covenant people. Those of non-Israelite lineage, commonly known as gentiles, are adopted into the House of Israel when they join the Church and become heirs of the covenant of Abraham, through the ordinances of the gospel.

As members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, we are descendants of Abraham, a chosen people, a covenant people with promised blessings, including the ordinances of celestial marriage. Each one of us has a divine mission and an eternal destiny. But to qualify, we, like Abraham, must be tried and tested. We must be given our choice, our agency, and be proven in all things.

When you fully understand the meaning of being of the House of Israel, a covenant people, you can better understand how your choices about dating become a matter of eternal consequence: Your decision regarding eternal marriage is the link that unites generations past and future, so your decision matters very much.

So we are here, in earth life, with many tests along the way. And what of a young woman who is sixteen and who has an invitation from a young man who is popular and gentlemanly but is a gentile, a nonmember? A prophet has spoken, saying, "Marrying outside the faith has always been forbidden." (Spencer W Kimball, The Miracle of Forgiveness, Bookcraft, 1969, p. 240.) President Ezra Taft Benson reiterated this counsel in speaking to young people in 1986: "Clearly right marriage begins with right dating. A person generally marries someone from among those with whom he associates, with whom he goes to school, with whom he goes to church, with whom he socializes. Therefore, this warning comes with great emphasis, Do not take the chance of dating nonmembers, or members who are unordained or faithless. A girl may say,'Oh, I do not intend to marry the person, it is just a fun date.' But one cannot afford to take a chance on falling in love with someone who may never accept the gospel."

Just as Abraham and Rebekah were concerned about their sons marrying in the faith, so it is that you also carry the responsibility of celestial marriage if your relationship is to be eternal and your children are to be born under the covenant and sealed in the temple as an eternal family.

Young men and young women who live in areas with few or no members of the Church can be a strong influence for good and help spread the gospel by example as they associate in social groups with their nonmember friends. Invite them to activities at church and to family home evening. Participate in school activities with young people who have high moral standards. Through friendship and association they may be led to a knowledge of the gospel and even baptism. This should come through group participation and not single dating.

You are probably shaking your head by now and wondering if all this must be rehearsed and reviewed before you respond to the date for this Friday. Let me assure you that is not the case. Once you have made the decision to marry in the temple and receive the blessings promised there, and to bring those blessings to your children who will be born under the covenant, then you have the answer to enticing invitations, even this week and next.

This decision takes moral courage, but it may also provide an example from which other young women may draw strength and be led to conduct their lives in harmony with the covenants they too have made. And while you may feel you stand alone because of your knowledge of your divine destiny as a member of the House of Israel, chosen of the Lord and reserved for this time, there are thousands of young women who are demonstrating the same moral courage and saying no when it would be so much easier to say yes.

President George Q. Cannon tells us what we might expect by way of tests. He says, "If there is a point in our character that is weak and tender, you may depend upon it that the Lord will reach after that, and we will be tried at that spot for the Lord will test us to the utmost before we can get through and receive that glory and exaltation which He has in store for us as a people. When we think about the character of the exaltation promised unto us, we can understand why this should be the case." (Gospel Truth, Deseret Book 1974, 1:103.)

I believe that when a young woman at age fifteen and a half has an invitation to a special dance from a most desirable young man, and all of her friends, both members and nonmembers, are accepting dates to that special event, the Lord is mindful of her test at that very moment in life. To go or not to go is the question. If you go, then what? If you don't go, what? If you choose not to go, you'll miss the dance, and you will suffer, maybe even pain, a hurting inside at a time when friends, popularity, and acceptance are so crucial to your sense of well being. But it is a moment provided for enormous discovery about yourself, your love for the Lord, and the use of your agency at a time when it really matters.

There is no way to explain, before you make the decision, how you will feel after. Self-confidence, self-esteem, and increased faith are the rewards for obedience to the commandments. It may be easy to argue and say, "Well, if I'm almost sixteen, what difference does it make?" The matter at this point may not have as much to do with dating as it does with obedience. And obedience at one time can become a source of strength for more challenging times later on. Self-discipline in matters along the way prepares us for the very tests and purposes for this mortal life. President Kimball stated: "Any dating or pairing off in social activities should be postponed until at least the age of sixteen or older. And even then there should be much judgment used in selection, and in the seriousness. Young people should still limit their close contacts for several years since the boy will be going on his mission when he is nineteen years old." When social pressure is strong and desire is so intense, one cries out and asks, "But is it a commandment?" And then we listen again to the words of our late prophet-leader, President Kimball: "So we say to all youth, regardless of what country is your home, and regardless of the customs of your country, your Heavenly Father expects you to marry for eternity, and rear good, strong families. The Lord planned that men and women would find each other and have a happy family relationship. Be true to each other and remain clean and worthy. Now is the time for you to plan good, strong marriages, and organize your programs, and set your standards, and solidify your determination to prepare for that married period of your lives which will be beautiful and rewarding."

A custom in some areas is that of going steady. This implies a level of commitment to each other, an expectation of loyalty to one person at the exclusion of others. This arrangement is detrimental at an early age because it limits friendships, and of even greater concern is the increased seriousness of the relationship, which goes contrary to the prophet's admonition to "limit close contacts for several years." It increases the risk of developing intimacy, which threatens the loyalty to eternal covenants, to keeping the commandments, and imposes temptations, which Satan uses to get people into his net, for he desires that all men might be miserable like unto himself. Of steady dating, President Kimball said, "Dating in the early teenage years leads to early steady dating with its multiplicity of dangers and problems and frequently to early and disappointing marriage." Youthful dating is not uncommon and is often done with parental approval. Yet it is near criminal to subject a tender child to the temptations of maturity. Early marriages, which are almost certain of failure, are usually the result of steady, early dating, whereas a proper preparation for marriage is a well-timed courtship.

And so now, about the date for this week, what will your answer be? You must decide. And even after the decision has been made, the test will continue for a time, and it is usually by your closest friends, whose approval you yearn for. It comes in a form like this: "How come you are not going? Everyone else is. It's not that bad. We're not going to do anything wrong. Do you think you're better than we are? What's the big deal? Our parents are letting us go. We'll help you talk to your mom."

To the question from friends, why do you do what you do?, the answer may simply be, Because I know what I know. And while you may have to wait for the proper age or for an invitation from a member of the Church before accepting a date, you can have many friends, young and older, members and nonmembers. And into your mind will come the sweet refrain from the last lines of the song "I Walk by Faith": "And someday when God has proven me, I'll see Him face to face, but just for here and now I walk by faith."
