Ardeth Greene Kapp, I Walk by Faith ( 1987)

Who Will Take a Stand?

There were a lot of children in our neighborhood. On Sundays when they all congregated at the church, it appeared that the ratio of adults to children was ten to one in favor of the children. But in spite of the number of friends that might have been available on regular weekdays to play in the sun and never come in the house except for peanut butter sandwiches or a bathroom break, four-year-old Betsy would frequently abandon her playmates, make her way down the street, and knock on our front door.

I could always recognize Betsy's knock. It was more like the pounding of her hand three times, a brief break, and then once again and again until I could get to the door. "I'm coming, I'm coming, Betsy," I would say to myself until I could get to the door. There she would be in her well-worn sneakers, knees skinned from trying to keep up with the older kids, a scab on her sunburned nose. Her blond hair was bleached even whiter than usual, and her fair skin had gradually turned from mayonnaise white to gingerbread brown. She had purpose in her visit and immediately announced her request. "Can your daddy come out and play?" I had tried on previous occasions to explain to Betsy that my "daddy" was not my daddy at all but was my husband. That attempt was never successful, and the word husband in place of daddy was of little concern to Betsy. It wasn't the right word that held any interest for this four-year old; she simply wanted to know if my "daddy" could come out and play.

By now my "daddy" was at the door to speak for himself. Tousling her curly blond hair, he agreed that his "mommy" would let him come out for a while if they could work in the garden pulling weeds together. There was no delay. She grabbed hold of his big hand, and pulled him after her to the garden where they had been weeding the day before. Occasionally I would go out to catch a bit of their conversation, which seemed endless.

One day I had returned to my work in the kitchen, and in less than ten minutes I heard Betsy's pounding on my front door again. This time, instead of repeating the pounding until I could get to the door, she came bursting in, her eyes wide and her mouth talking so fast I could not understand what she was trying to tell me. I knew it was something about my "daddy." "What is it? What is it?" I asked, grabbing her hand and running to the garden. Finding her playmate all right, I said slowly, hoping to calm her down, "Betsy, tell me one more time, and speak slowly so I can understand." She repeated her message slowly and with great feeling, pointing at her gardening partner: "He said a naughty word." Heber, sitting on the ground with his arms wrapped around his legs, was trying to contain his laughter.

Since I had been summoned to address Betsy's accusation, I began my questioning. "What word did he say?" I knew, of course, that the word in question was only naughty in her mind. However, that in itself made it a matter of great consequence.

Betsy was prepared to give a full report. She stood close to the accused, pointed her finger directly at him and announced, "He said I was full of malarkey."

"Malarkey?" I repeated, trying to conceal my laughter as I watched the accused waiting for the verdict. "And what does that word mean?" I asked.

"I don't know," she said. Being in full control of the situation, she pointed to him and said, "You ask him."

I continued the investigation, this time addressing the offender. "And what does that word mean?" I probed.

"Well," he pondered, trying to reach back in his mind to its origin. "It's a word my grandpa used to use a lot. It means full of fun, a little mischief, and lots of love."

I had been standing between the accused and the accuser, but with the additional facts related to the case, Betsy threw her arms around her friend, forgave him, and I was dismissed.

And now, years later, when I occasionally find myself in a shopping mall or a theater, in the halls of a school, or even in private where a group of young people are talking together, I hear words that come from their lips and I feel much as Betsy did when she came bursting into my house to put a stop to "naughty words." I want to take a stand in the middle of the mall, the theater, the corridor, or wherever, and call a court into session with the same fervor Betsy exhibited in her concern for words that sound offensive and wrong, inappropriate and immoral.

"Who will take a stand and speak out loud and clear in defense of purity of the mind and clean speech?" the judge would ask. Every youth would be called to the witness stand, courageous youth that I have met throughout many parts of the world. Someone in the group would speak up, even risk persecution from peers, and offer a challenge. "Try this, if you will," he would say. "Can you think of anything without formulating the thought in your mind by the use of words? Words form our thoughts. Good words—good thoughts." There would be those who would walk away from the gathering in disgust, but I believe that most would stay.

Another youth, a young woman this time, would take the stand and raise her voice in defense of truth and righteousness. "It is unrighteous," she would say, "to speak words that are vulgar, crude, and blasphemous. It is unfair to yourself and to your friends to allow the word pictures created by vulgar language to become part of your mind and pollute the air."

With this evangelistic call for support of clean language, another young woman in the crowd would move closer and wait for her turn to lend support to this great cause. "Our thoughts are the substance that fill our minds and make us who we are," she would testify. "The scriptures remind us that as a man thinketh, so is he. We become what we think about. We are what we have programmed our minds to be. A righteous person is righteous because he or she has chosen righteous thoughts that lead to righteous actions."

Another person would quote this wise thought: "Every thought we think, every conscious or unconscious thought we say to ourselves, is translated into electrical impulses which, in turn, direct the control centers in our brains to electrically and chemically affect and control every emotion, every feeling, every action we take, every moment of every day." (What to Say When You Talk to Yourself, Scottsdale, Arizona: Grindle Press, 1986.)

The next youth to take the stand would be a little older and thoughtful in her counsel. "Can't you see," she would plead with her friends, "vulgar language is not sinful because someone thinks it should be avoided, but rather it should be avoided because it is sinful."

The next defendant for pure thoughts and clean language is a black woman, Jamie Noit. She is not part of my imaginary campaign against swearing, vulgarity, and foul language. She is a real person, speaking to all who will hear. Her words come from the Ebony Rose Newsletter. "The world knows how we are supposed to live. Instead of swearing outright, do you spell the word? (The Lord knows how to spell too!) We cannot hide from the responsibility we have to be openly on the Lord's side. If you're fortunate, you won't hear the cock crow three times to know when you're off the track. . . . Be not afraid to stand up for what is right. People who influence thousands need all the help they can get. If you don't say anything about something you don't like, it will continue to fester inside you. Silence is a form of agreement."

There will always be those who will persist, saying, "Show me where it says my language is so wrong." And there is further evidence to bring forth. In the heading to the third chapter of James in the LDS edition of the Bible we read, "By governing the tongue we gain perfection." And in verse 10 we read, "Out of the same mouth proceedeth blessing and cursing. My brethren, these things ought not so to be." (James 3:10.)

The question remains for each generation: Who will take a stand and pound against the door in a fight against "naughty words" with the same intensity as little Betsy?

Elder Dallin Oaks, an apostle of the Lord Jesus Christ, has spoken to youth and adults alike on this matter. He says: "A speaker who employs profanity or vulgarity to catch someone's attention with shock effect engages in a babyish device that is inexcusable as juvenile or adult behavior. Such language is morally bankrupt. It is also progressively self-defeating, since shock diminishes with familiarity and the user can only maintain its effects by escalating its excess. Members of the Church, young or old, should never allow profane or vulgar words to pass their lips. The language we use projects the images of our hearts, and our hearts should be pure. As the Savior taught, 'Out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaketh. A good man out of the good treasure of the heart bringeth forth good things: and an evil man out of the evil treasure bringeth forth evil things.' (Matthew 12:34-35.)" (Ensign, May 1986, pp. 49-50.)

I see young women prepared to take a stand in defense of purity in thought and word and who will pound against the door if necessary to eliminate profane or vulgar words from the language of youth in these latter days. I hear young women sing the song of the rising generation:

Ask me, "Who will take a stand? Who will live the Lord's commands And bear the standards of a world to be?" With a promise firm and clear, I proclaim for all to hear: "I will, I will, send me." (Janice Kapp Perry, "The Rising Generation")
