Ardeth Greene Kapp, I Walk by Faith ( 1987)

She's My Sister

Two sisters sat close to each other on the leather-covered sofa in the outer office, whispering words of encouragement to each other. "You can go first if you want to," Linda told her younger sister. Mary was thoughtful for a moment. "I really think you should go first. It will be better that way." Then, with intensity in her voice, she touched her sister's arm and added, "Please be first."

At that moment the door to the inner office opened and the secretary invited either of the applicants to come in for a job interview. Linda exchanged a quick glance with her sister and received the necessary encouragement to be first. With dignity and poise, but with her heart pounding a fast, unsteady rhythm, she entered, then sat on the sofa by the desk. She listened intently to the requirements, the expectations, the opportunities, and the benefits of the job.

With confidence reinforced and strengthened through Mary's encouraging whispers, Linda related her experiences and preparation that would be of particular value in the work the employer had just outlined. Her excitement at the possibility of employment was evident and continued to increase. With this part-time job on campus she would be able to continue her education, pay back her loan, and live in the dormitory with her friends and her sister. It all seemed too good to be true, and yet there was a possibility.

With a prayer in her heart, she waited. The interview apparently completed, the employer glanced out the window thoughtfully. Then, turning to face Linda, she asked, "And if I hire you for the job, what about your sister?"

Like air rapidly escaping from an inflated balloon, Linda's enthusiasm quickly slipped away. There was only one job opening! Somehow the advertisement in the university paper had given her the impression that there were many. Now she was in competition with her sister for the same job.

With great effort, she managed to hide her disappointment and regain some of her original enthusiasm. In that moment, her personal interests were set aside. With both hands outstretched to provide additional emphasis, she took up the cause for her sister. "If there is only one opening, just one job, please talk to my sister, Mary." Then she rose to leave. In one last attempt to speak for her sister, she explained, "My sister worked long, long hours while I was on my mission. She saved every penny she could so that when I returned we could both come to school. I know she sacrificed a lot just for me, just so we could be together. My little sister did that all for me." Her voice softened, and tears filled her eyes. "I wouldn't even be here if it weren't for Mary. When you meet her, you'll know what I mean."

Linda regained her composure and returned to the outer office, where Mary was waiting. She whispered, "Good luck!" and they exchanged places. Inside the employer's office the same procedures were covered and the same details presented. Mary's enthusiasm was equal to that of Linda—a fresh, unsophisticated, honest eagerness to obtain part-time employment.

Mary, sensitive to the reality of the situation, was anxious to inquire about Linda before pushing further in her own behalf. "What about my sister?" she asked. Somewhat hesitatingly, the employer confirmed what Mary had feared. "There is only one job opening at this time," was the response.

Like a faithful evangelist, Mary took up her sister's cause. "My sister is the one you want," she said. "She's a returned missionary and has the ability to meet people much better than I. Everyone loves Linda. If there is only one opening, please consider Linda."

The deep feelings of love, concern, and loyalty these young women expressed for each other interested the employer more than the immediate task of filling a job. Neither knew of the other's advocacy.

At the conclusion of the interview the employer asked Mary to remain seated, then stepped to the door and invited Linda in. The sisters sat side by side, obviously renewed by the strength of being together. The formality of the interviews had been replaced now by a spirit of expectation as each wanted most what she thought was best for the other. They listened intently while the employer carefully, and with obvious emotion, unfolded the moving details of the past hour.

When Mary heard the details of Linda's interview, her head dropped. She reached over to clasp Linda's hand, and they glanced at each other. Tears filled their eyes as Mary leaned close to Linda and murmured, "But it's no more than you would have done for me, if I'd been called on a mission."

The employer then related the details of Mary's interview while Linda learned how her sister had set aside her own personal desires. Linda's feelings of love and appreciation now demanded even further expression. "Mary has more love in her heart than anyone I've ever met. She has an unselfish quality of giving and being able to serve others so willingly. It's the spirit of Christ, and she's got it more than I have. That's what I'm striving to develop."

Mary interrupted her sister. "But you gave yourself totally on your mission. Let me tell you, you did!" Then, turning to the employer, she spoke with deep emotion. "You see, Linda is three years older than I am and she has paved the way for me through all the difficult times when I was younger. I haven't reached her height yet, but she stands by me all the way."

Linda, smiling through her tears, responded, "She's my sister. I always will."
