Ardeth Greene Kapp, I Walk by Faith ( 1987)

Tithing in Full

"Is the bishop there?" The voice on the other end of the line was breathless and anxious when I answered the phone on the first ring.

Since her tone indicated such urgency, I hesitated to explain that the bishop wasn't in just then, but she quickly interrupted my explanation. "How long before he'll be there?" she asked.

I found myself speaking rapidly as I too caught her excitement. I quickly explained that he had been called to a neighbor's home for a few minutes and should be right back. "Good," she said. "I'll come and wait."

I didn't recognize the voice, and before I could say another word, I heard the click of the receiver in my ear.

It was a beautiful May afternoon. All day I could hear the shrill voices of youth mingled occasionally with the rhythmic beating of the drums of the marching band at the high school just a few blocks away. The happy sounds had kept me moving through my housework at a steady pace. I carefully put the final touches on the living room carpet, making sure the nap all went the same way. Then, standing in the doorway to avoid leaving footprints in the carpet, I admired the sprig of apricot blossoms I had placed on the mantel.

Just then the doorbell rang. Before I could answer it, Julie, a senior at the high school, came bounding into the living room and made a direct landing on the green and white loveseat near the window. I followed right behind her with no concern for the footprints in the carpet.

She was talking excitedly as she came in, and said something about having run five blocks up the hill. She was so out of breath it was impossible to make sense of what she was trying to say. She was clutching a handful of dollar bills. Then she emptied the contents of her little bag, and one-dollar bills fell out everywhere, some blending into the green carpet as they landed on the floor.

Still excitedly bouncing up and down, she asked again, "When will the bishop be back?" Then, without waiting for an answer, she said, "Oh, I'll tell you," and she began her story in detail. Just before she finished, the bishop returned and quietly took a seat. Without pausing, Julie began again from the beginning to relate her story, but this time her excitement seemed a bit more subdued.

She explained how she had been working three jobs while going to school, in hopes of raising enough money to go to college in the fall. Because of many unexpected expenses, though, she had somehow slipped behind on her tithing. This had given her considerable concern, because she knew the importance of tithing and somehow had to make it up.

As she shifted to a different position, she told about the most exciting thing that had happened at school that day. Every member of the senior class had secretly hoped they would be selected to receive either a fifty-dollar cash award or an old car that the entire student body had been admiring. Julie explained how the very thought of fifty dollars struck a responsive chord with her, since that was the exact amount required to bring her tithing up to date. She told of having a strong feeling to say a silent prayer and to promise that if she should receive the award, she would take the money and give it to the bishop for tithing just as soon as she could.

At this point Julie's voice took on a more serious tone. Her name had been announced, and she was called up to receive the award. Then the struggle began. Immediately all of her friends gathered around to share her excitement and give counsel. Of course she should take the car, they seemed to agree. One of the boys who really mattered to her said, "You've got to take the car. You can sell it for more than fifty dollars." A chorus of friends joined in, telling her that the only right thing to do was to take the car.

It was that statement, "the only right thing to do," that set her course. For Julie, there was only one right thing to do. She had already made a promise of which her friends were not aware. She must get to the bishop with the fifty dollars.

Leaving her friends somewhat bewildered, she ran to the telephone in the school office and called the information operator for the number—that would be quicker than trying to find the name in the directory.

She paused now for the first time during the full accounting, as if to say, "And here I am." Then she took a deep breath, looked directly at the bishop, and, with eyes brimming over with tears, declared, "Here's my tithing in full."

I glanced from Julie to the bishop. With a warm, sensitive expression and tears filling his eyes, he reached for Julie's hand. Quietly I left the room, to allow for that private moment when one stands alone to give an accounting to and receive acceptance from one appointed by the power of heaven.

Half an hour passed, and I joined them again at the door as Julie was ready to leave. She was smiling now, her tear-stained face radiating an expression of victory, like one having conquered self

"Thank you, thank you so much, bishop," she said, and the bishop replied, "I thank you, Julie, and your Father in heaven thanks you too."

She was half running, half skipping, by the time she reached the end of our sidewalk and turned north. The bishop and I stood in the doorway watching her. Just before she got out of sight, she turned and waved, then went on her happy way.

The bishop quietly closed the door, meditating aloud as he said, "The Lord's way is always a happy way."
