Mark E. Petersen, Moses: Man of Miracles (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1977)

MODERN MYTHS AND ANCIENT FACTS

Archaeology has exploded many of the modern myths about ancient man. One of the great delusions has been that ancient peoples lived in deep ignorance and that their intelligence was only a little above the animal level.

It is refreshing to learn now that many of the ancients were very bright people indeed, in some respects equal or superior to many of us who live today.

Caveman stories and the pre-man tales are fast being swept under the rug where they belong as the "diggers for facts" ply their trade. Similar disrepute is likewise coming to the so-called scholarly claims that the Bible is but a collection of legends to be taken only lightly, if at all.

Archaeology is reversing much of this. Already it has blown away much conjecture and supposition and now has unveiled data about the ancient past that help us to turn from fancy to fact and from uncertainty to definite history.

As Sir Charles Marston, noted British researcher, said so effectively in his book The Bible Comes Alive:

The effect of these discoveries is to further discredit the whole process of destructive criticism. Archaeology, a strictly objective science, is disproving the subjective negations spun from the mentality of critics.

Those who have shaken popular faith in the Bible, and undermined its authority, are in turn undermined themselves by the evidence that has been brought to light, and their authority destroyed.

The spade is driving destructive criticism out of the field of questionable facts into that of recognized fiction. And it is pretty certain that the process will continue.

Because the early Hebrew scripts had not been discovered in the past, was no evidence at all that they did not exist. Now the Lachish excavations have proved that they did.

Because the background of the Mosaic legislation seemed to fit the end of the Judean monarchy, was no evidence at all that the days of Moses did not fit it even better.

The Ras Shamra tablets, the Semitic legislation of Hammurabi, the Egyptian moral code, the system of worship at Serabit in Sinai, all bear witness that they did. Such shattering discoveries must tend to disillusion those who have had confidence in the soundness of the critical system.

They will begin to recognize the extravagance of its underlying assumption, that what the critic did not know could not have been. And how the apparatus of criticism placed a premium on the critic's own ignorance! (London, Edinburgh, and New York: Fleming H. Revell, 1937, pp. 181-82. Italics in original.)

This is strong language, but it comes from a person who is one of the most respected of all the Bible archaeologists. Sir Charles has spent years in Palestinian research and was one of the leaders of the excavations at Lachish. He is well-known on both sides of the Atlantic, having made numerous trips from Britain to the United States in the interest of his diggings in the Holy Land.

On the subject of the Bible critics he continues:

It is surely time that distinguished scholars gave up the habit of representing exploded theories as historical facts. Even they cannot afford to treat Evidence advanced through the Sciences of Archaeology and Anthropology as beneath their notice.

The study of all Religion, which now has been placed on a sound basis by these discoveries, is having further light thrown upon it by other Sciences to which references have been made. (The Bible Comes Alive, p. 182.)

In this same vein Will Durant thoughtfully said:

We do not know the whole of man's history; there were probably many civilizations before the Sumerian or the Egyptian; we have just begun to dig! We must operate with partial knowledge, and be provisionally content with probabilities; in history, as in science and politics, relativity rules, and all formulas should be suspect. (The Lessons of History, New York: Simon and Schuster, 1968, p. 13.)

In other words, those ancient peoples were not living in any dark ages whether in the Old World or the New, and certainly they were not just emerging from the caveman status either, not by any means! The ancients were highly intelligent, and that includes the Bible patriarchs.

Through the discovery of Ur of the Chaldees by archaeologists, we learn that the people of Abraham's day were well educated, and that instead of living in poverty or being a tent-dwelling people, they were prosperous and had well-built and in some instances luxurious masonry homes in well-planned cities.

For a long time no one knew where Ur of the Chaldees was located; hence some even doubted its existence. Then this ancient city was found by accident and has yielded rich treasures to archaeologists.

The location of ancient Ninevah was found at about the same time, and with it a library of some 20,000 volumes, which shed similar light upon the well-civilized people in that great city. They were wicked, it is true, as is the case with many in other civilized communities, including some of our own, but God loved them enough to send Jonah the prophet to call them to repentance, and they were wise enough to respond.

Keller says that 1500 years before the time of Nebuchadnezzar, the people of Ur were living in spacious two-story homes, some of them having as many as fourteen rooms. Then can anyone say that they were a backward people? And yet they were "early men."

Sir Charles Leonard Woolley, another noted British archaeologist, suggests in his book Ur Excavations that since Abraham was born in Ur, he probably was reared in one of those patrician homes and likely grew up in sophisticated surroundings. The houses, Woolley said, reveal comfort and luxury. In them also were found copies of hymns used in temple worship, as well as mathematical tables that used both cube and square root.

Biblical critics have downgraded Abraham as a desert nomad. Did they not know that when he went to the land of Canaan he could not take a patrician two-story masonry home with him from Ur, and thus he had to live in a tent en route? Every evidence from archaeology indicates that Abraham came from a highly civilized community, and that he must have been a product of that kind of life.

Mari, another community of Abraham's day, was an ancient city of high attainment. In one palace area, 1600 cuneiform tablets have been found, detailing items of management. In another area 13,000 clay tablets were found, and in yet another, 8,000. Does that indicate illiteracy? And yet that was more than 2,000 years before the birth of Christ! These also were "early men."

The city of Mari was on the west bank of the Euphrates, some 300 miles upstream from Babylon. Some 200 miles below Babylon lay Ur of the Chaldees. Abraham was reared in an important part of the Fertile Crescent, which was well advanced in culture. But it was an idolatrous land, filled with sin, and the Lord decided to remove Abraham to Canaan.

Canaan was sinful also. However, the Lord determined to cleanse the land by destroying the people living there as he did at Sodom and Gomorrah, for the Canaanites were depraved as were the dwellers in those cities of the plains. Hence the Lord's command to Joshua to wipe them out.

Through the discovery of ancient libraries in Nineveh, Egypt, Palestine, and Mesopotamia in the Eastern Hemisphere, and the unveiling of the accomplishments of the Incas, the Mayas, and the Aztecs in the Western Hemisphere, we now discover a high degree of intelligence among ancient peoples on both sides of the Atlantic that is little short of astonishing.

Achievement in writing, engineering, medicine, astronomy, and mathematics are most noteworthy. The ancients were great builders and they had modern ideas. Is it not interesting, for example, that not only did they build great temples, but that 4,000 years ago people had the convenience of well-planned bathrooms and flush toilets, and living rooms that were spacious and well furnished? Business flourished then, also, even on an international scale. Obviously, then, two to three thousand years before Christ the Fertile Crescent and Egypt had highly developed civilizations.

Ancient Americans also were so well developed in their own day that writers now seem astonished at what they knew and what they did. For example, Dr. Alfred V. Kidder writes, in A Guide to Quirigua (page 3), an ancient Mayan city:

The great cities of the Old Maya Empire were built during the first part of the Christian era. For nearly six hundred years these gifted people were leaders in art and architecture, mathematics and astronomy. They evolved a calendar in some ways more accurate than ours.

These artistic and intellectual achievements of the Maya marked the high point in the American Indians' gradual upward progress. The growth of the Indian civilizations, although differing in detail, was strikingly like that of our own, which originated in Egypt and Mesopotamia. . . . Many other resemblances have led some to believe that American civilization was derived from overseas.

Joaquin Munoz, in his small book The Marvels of Copan, wrote:

The Maya City of Copan that we now know was not inhabited by savages as early historians thought. Nowhere have savages ever conceived such wonders. . . . Architecture, astronomy, mathematics, painting, weaving, and all the arts that embellish life, once flourished here. Glory, ambition, beauty, warriors, orators, and statesmen lived and passed away and no one knew that such things had ever been. . . .

With their calendrical system in perfect order, the Maya appear on the threshold of history 600 years before the Christian era, and among their first great cities was Copan where building in stone reached its highest development. Scientists and artists are everywhere of the opinion that the sculptures and the arts of the Maya deserve to rank among the finest in the world. Modern astronomers marvel at the progress made by this people in the measuring of time by observed movements of the heavenly bodies. (Pages 13, 14-15.)

"Six centuries before Christ, before the Persian wars and the Great Golden age of Athens, the Indians of Oaxaca had already worked out a calendar," says Helen Augur. (The Zapotecs, p. 126).

Some scholars have felt that the ancient Americans had no steel, iron, or any hard tools other than stone. We have this from A. Hyatt Verrill in his America's Ancient Civilizations:

Can anyone actually believe, as archaeologists claim, that the colossal work [of leveling off a mountain at Monte Alban] was accomplished with crude stone implements and that the broken rock was transported in baskets carried on human heads? No one with an atom of common sense and a smattering of knowledge of engineering problems can actually believe that the Zapotecs cut away hundreds of thousands of tons of rock, filled yawning ravines and deep fissures with rubble, leveled an area hundreds of acres in extent and built huge, imposing structures all with no knowledge of steel tools, no explosives, no wheeled vehicles and no beasts of burden.

Book of Mormon readers of course know that both the Jaredites and the Nephites used steel, and had common use of the wheel. Regarding the Jaredites we read:

And they did work in all manner of ore, and they did make gold, and silver, and iron, and brass, and all manner of metals; and they did dig it out of the earth; wherefore they did cast up mighty heaps of earth to get ore, of gold, and of silver, and of iron, and of copper. And they did work all manner of fine work.

And they did make all manner of tools to till the earth, both to plow and to sow, to reap and to hoe, and also to thrash.

And they did make all manner of tools with which they did work their beasts. (Ether 10:23, 25-26.)

The Nephites did likewise:

And I, Nephi, did take the sword of Laban, and after the manner of it did make many swords, lest by any means the people who were now called Lamanites should come upon us and destroy us; for I knew their hatred towards me and my children and those who were called my people.

And I did teach my people to build buildings, and to work in all manner of wood, and of iron, and of copper, and of brass, and of steel, and of gold, and of silver, and of precious ores, which were in great abundance. (2 Ne. 5:14-15.)

In The American Book of Indians we find this statement: "The Mayas attained the highest civilization known in ancient America and one of the highest known any place in the early world." (New York: American Heritage Publishing Co., p. 19.) The book then comments on the excellence of the Mayan written language.

A remarkable book is Werner Keller's The Bible As History, in which the author lifts the curtain on the ancient Fertile Crescent where "Egypt's mighty pyramids and Mesopotamia's massive temples have for centuries watched the busy life around them." This was 2500 years before Christ!

The author says that the highly developed civilizations there "jostled each other in colorful and bewildering array. . . . the art of cuneiform and hieroglyphic writing was commonly known. Poets, court officials, and civil servants practiced it. For commerce it had long been a necessity.

Literature and learning were flourishing. In Egypt the first novels and secular poetry were making their appearance. Mesopotamia was experiencing a renaissance. Philologists in Akkad, the great kingdom on the lower Euphrates, were compiling the first grammar and the first bilingual dictionary.

The story of Gilgamesh, and the old Sumerian legends of creation and flood were being woven into epics of dramatic power in the Akkadian tongue which was the language of the world. Egyptian doctors were producing their medicines in accordance with textbook methods from herbal compounds that had proved their worth. Their surgeons were no strangers to anatomical science.

By empirical means the mathematicians of the Nile reached the conclusion about the sides of a right-angled triangle which fifteen hundred years later Pythagoras in Greece embodied in the theorem which bears his name. (New York: William Morrow and Co., pp. 4, 5-6.)

He goes on to extoll the highly developed skills of the ancient construction engineers and especially the accuracy of the astronomers who made such precise calculations from their study of the stars.

About 1700 B.C. Mari was razed by Hammurabi of Babylon, and it was never rebuilt. Some of the ruins of the palace of King Zimrilim, the last ruler of Mari, have been excavated. Some walls 16 feet high, well preserved by the desert sands, were found there. Mural paintings were uncovered with their colors hardly affected by time. Archaeologists found 20,000 clay tablets with texts in Babylonian cuneiform. On some of them biblical names appear.

The New Atlas of the Bible (New York: Doubleday, 1969, p. 41) indicates that the high culture of Mari was "common property" in those days, thus illustrating still further the advanced state of those people. And Abraham was one of them.

Craftsmen were well trained and had guilds or unions even in that day. On some tablets were found the names of as many as 2,000 such craftsmen, each one listed by name and guild.

So were the people in the time of the patriarchs ignorant and illiterate, or were they mere desert nomads?

To say that men like Abraham and Moses were not able to produce the kind of writing that we now know they did produce, and to say that such men knew nothing of astronomy, into which they delved deeply, is to totally ignore the facts.

Not only were they a part of the culture in which they lived, and therefore were educated by it, but they also had further and vastly superior instruction, for Almighty God was their teacher. Who but the Creator could discuss astronomy, for example, with such complete accuracy? In literal fact, it was the Creator who taught those early men, beginning with Adam. Ignorance certainly was not a part of their lives.

The Cradle of Civilization boldly declares that "no civilization existed anywhere on the earth's surface before 3,000 B.C." (New York: Time-Life Books, Inc., 1967, p. 7.) This speculative declaration, of course, ignores scripture which shows that well before then, Adam and his family were highly civilized, having been taught by God himself.

This same book (page 12) speaks of Sumerian temples built on a grand scale and dating "from as early as 3,000 B.C." Ruins of those temples have yielded hundreds of clay tablets, while from nearby buildings and cemeteries still other tablets have come showing the high intellectual development of those people. In another chapter in the book we read that man learned to enjoy leisure and the sedentary life as early as 10,000 years ago. Isn't it interesting how writers vary in their dating efforts, even within the covers of the same book?

The New Atlas of the Bible reports that civilization emerged in the Fertile Crescent area by 4500 B.C., but adds that the art of writing did not develop for another thousand years. (New York: Doubleday, 1969, pp. 27-32.) This too is based on conjecture from what archaeologists have found there. Who knows but that new finds will change their minds again, as Sir Charles Marston so emphatically said?

Efforts to place early man as far back as 30,000 or 50,000 or 100,000 years are but bald speculation, of course. The manner in which dating methods, and particularly the C-14 method, are presently being challenged is significant in this regard.

When did civilization start?

It began with Adam, the first man, unusually well educated because the Lord was his teacher. (Moses 6.) It is admitted that there was retrogression among some of his family who apostatized and then left his well-ordered society. They were the backsliders who left the true faith and culture of Adam and the patriarchs and sank so low that they became carnal, sensual, and devilish.

"And Satan came among them, saying: I am also a son of God; and he commanded them, saying: Believe it not; and they believed it not, and they loved Satan more than God. And men began from that time forth to be carnal, sensual, and devilish." (Moses 5:13. See also D&C 20:20.)

Thus they became the cavemen and other early degenerates who some scholars now mistakenly believe were the first men.

All of this differs but little from situations found among certain aborigines who live today in some parts of the world. Both the caveman-type and the advanced man of our present culture still live today, as examples of the contrast between human retrogression on one hand and cultural advancement on the other.

Since this is happening today, can anyone say that the condition did not also exist 5,000 or 6,000 years ago?

Carleton S. Coon has written:

Many peoples were still in the Stone Age when Europeans began their voyages of exploration and discovery in the A.D. 1400s. The aborigines of Tasmania and Australia were using techniques of the Old Stone Age when white men discovered them in the 1700's. White men found the African Bushmen living in the Middle Stone Age. Islanders of the South Pacific Ocean and most American Indians had progressed to the New Stone Age. A few tribes in New Guinea and Australia are still in the Stone Age. (The World Book Encyclopedia 18:714.)

The United Press International on Wednesday, May 19, 1976, carried a dispatch from Lima, Peru, concerning so-called Stone Age natives presently living in the jungles of that country. They were described as hunchbacked men more than six feet six inches tall. "The giants have been reported only in the San Martin Province, an area of thick rain forests and wooded foothills east of the Andes," said the dispatch.

Carlos Torrealza, discoverer of the ruins of a lost Indian city in San Martin Province said he came across the giants while lost for two weeks in the jungle. Clad only in animal skins, with reddish hair, and speaking a dialect he had never heard, they fled at his approach, he said.

Days later two large circulation Lima newspapers, Ultina Hora and La Prensa quoted an Indian guide, Encarnacion Napuri, as saying that on April 26 a group of about fifteen giant aborigines armed with thick wooden clubs, stone-headed axes, and hardwood lances attacked a camp of professional hunters. . . .

He said the giants may be descended from the Chancas, a tribe that retreated into the northern jungles rather than submit to the Spanish conquistadores.

In 1971 several newspaper articles, with pictures, appeared in America telling of some Stone Age people found in the Tasaday Forest area of the Philippine Islands during March of that year. John Nance, Associated Press writer, described them as "the gentle people of this rain forest."

Concerning these people, the Deseret News of July 21, 1971, quoted a United Press International dispatch as follows: "A tribe living in Stone Age culture, in a tropical rain forest, isolated from the rest of the world for perhaps 2,000 years, has something the civilized world seems to have lost along the centuries—sound teeth."

Anthropologists and newsmen visited this tribe and said their tools and technology were more primitive than the Negritoes, who were described in the dispatch as a post-Stone Age tribe living on Luzon Island. Colonel Charles A. Lindbergh assisted in this study.

The dispatch continued: "The Tasadays are purely food-gathering and animal-trapping forest people, without agriculture or a way of slaying an animal, according to Dr. Frank Lynch, an Irish anthropologist now with the Ajeneo University in Manila. They have never known sugar, rice, tobacco or salt."

The dispatch goes on at length. But the point is that there are still living in the world peoples who are said by anthropologists to be of Stone Age culture.

The Kansas City Times on November 28, 1975, carried a New York Times News Service article by Boyce Rensberger stating that scientists have now changed their minds about the Neanderthal man, the allegedly "hulking brutish creature of 60,000 years ago." They now have decided that he was intelligent after all, and that he knew something about medicine; in fact, he knew about seven different species of medicinal herbs. Of course the dating is still subject to much revision.

In the London Daily Telegraph of June 19, 1976, is a photograph of Egyptologist Dr. Rosaline David taking fingerprints and toeprints of an Egyptian female mummy five feet tall. The prints confirmed, said the newspaper, "that she had done very little housework. The hands of many modern housewives would be in much worse condition. We guess that she was about 40 years old when she died." The mummy was believed to be that of a dancer who lived 3500 years ago. There was nothing "cave-womanish" about her!

In the London Daily Times of June 13, 1976, another archaeology story appeared on the front page. Dr. Shmed Moussa, inspector of antiquities of Saqqara, near Cairo, Egypt, had discovered the "beautiful and intact mummy of a singer named Waty who died 4,348 years ago, a full 500 years before the oldest intact mummy previously discovered. He is a unique survivor of the Old Kingdom of Egypt."

Pictures were taken "and the result is an extraordinary view of man as he was more than four millennia ago." The Times published the picture in color, and his body was not different from ours!

A musician, 4,348 years ago? A singer? Who taught him to sing? Moses also sang as he left Egypt a thousand years later.

Research constantly demonstrates that the ancients were highly intelligent, well-educated, and far from the types that certain anthropologists parade as early men.

When Professor A. H. Sayer wrote about developments in Egypt, he said:

The earliest culture and civilization to which monuments bear witness was in fact already perfect. It was full grown. The organization of the country was complete. The arts were known and practiced. Egyptian culture as far as we know at present has no beginnings. . . . The older the culture the more perfect it is found to be. (Hilbricht, Recent Researches in Bible Lands, pp. 101-2.)

Opinions on the origin of language are also changing. Otto Jesperson, in his book Language, Its Nature, Development and Origin, said:

We find that the ancient languages of our family, Sanscrit, Zend, etc., abound in very long words; the further back we go, the greater the number of sesquipedalia. We have seen also how the current theory, according to which every language started with monosyllabic roots [or grunts], fails at every point to account for actual fact, and breaks down before the established truth of linguistic history. (New York: Henry Holt and Co., 1922, p. 420.)

Although some fell away and regressed, ancient men were generally intelligent and enjoyed a high degree of civilization.

But why do we write all of this? Simply to establish that Moses and his divinely chosen predecessors—the patriarchs—were not of the caveman class by any means, but rather were fully qualified to teach great truths as they did.

Furthermore, as servants of God they had the gift of the Holy Ghost, and under the influence of that divine Spirit they were far better prepared to write historical facts and inspirational matter than were any of the Egyptians, the Sumerians, or others of those early days.

The following scripture from the Book of Moses is especially enlightening in this regard:

And a book of remembrance was kept, in the which was recorded, in the language of Adam, for it was given unto as many as called upon God to write by the spirit of inspiration;

And by them their children were taught to read and write, having a language which was pure and undefiled. (Moses 6:5-6.)

Taught as they were by the Lord himself, and having the advantage of a civilized background such as archaeology now reveals, our early prophets and patriarchs were well equipped for their work. We have every reason to have full and complete confidence in what they taught as we study their writings in the scriptures.

1977 Deseret Book Co.
