Mark E. Petersen, Moses: Man of Miracles (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1977)

MOSES WAS A REALITY

The prophet Moses was a reality.

He was one of the mightiest men who ever lived. He was a prophet of God without parallel, a man whose work had both ancient and modern significance.

With the possible exception of the Prophet Joseph Smith, Abraham, Enoch, and the brother of Jared, Moses appears to have had a closer personal relationship with the Almighty than any other man of whom we know.

He saw the Lord repeatedly, walked and talked with him frequently; for a time he experienced heavenly glory although still in mortality, and he was called—by the Deity himself—a son of God.

What though the myth-makers downgrade him, even call his work a legend! What though they attempt to rob him of the authorship of his books in the Bible and discount the inspiration of the Ten Commandments, even attributing them to other ancient peoples!

Modern revelation shows Moses to have been one of the outstanding prophets of all time, and establishes beyond question that he did write the books of the Bible credited to him, that he did receive the Decalogue from the Lord, personally, and that he did lead Israel out of Egypt under divine direction, regardless of all that the scholarly critics might say.

See at a glance what the scriptures tell of him:

He was called to the work by the personal visitation and direct voice of the Lord. (Ex. 3:4.)

At one time heavenly glory came upon him and he was able to endure it. (Moses 1:1-31.)

He walked and talked with God as did Enoch. (Moses 1:1-42.)

He was described by the Deity as being "in the similitude of [the] Only Begotten." (Moses 1:6.)

He beheld in vision the creations of God. (Moses 1:4, 8; 2:1.)

He beheld this entire world and all of its inhabitants, this too in glorious vision. (Moses 1:28.)

He battled Satan face to face—and won! (Moses 1:12-22.)

He saw in vision the bitterness of hell. (Moses 1:20.)

He delivered Israel from bondage. (Ex. 12-14.)

He received the tablets of the Decalogue from the Lord (Deut. 10), and the Book of Mormon tells us that it was Jesus Christ, as Jehovah, who gave him the law which in turn he gave to Israel. (3 Ne. 15.)

He wrote Genesis and other books of the Bible. (1 Ne. 5:11-14.)

He ministered to the Lord Jesus Christ on the Mount of Transfiguration, thus giving further testimony of the divinity of Jesus. (Matt. 17:1-3.)

He played an important part in the modern restoration of the gospel by coming to Joseph Smith in the Kirtland Temple. There he delivered to the modern prophet the keys of the gathering of Israel, that all Israel might be reassembled in the last days, which is to be one of the major events to transpire in the hour of God's judgment. (D&C 110.)

When he finished his mortal work he was taken unto God, as is indicated both in the Book of Mormon and in ancient Jewish writings.

Moses was spoken of frequently by the Savior during the Lord's earthly ministry. There was no doubt in the Savior's mind that Moses was the great lawgiver of ancient times, for it was the Savior himself who, as the God of the Old Testament, dealt with him. (3 Ne. 15.)

Testimony of the great lawgiver is provided in all the scriptures: the Bible, the Book of Mormon, the Doctrine and Covenants, and the Pearl of Great Price. It appears frequently also in the teachings of the modern prophets.

Moses indeed was a great reality, and a study of his life and labors is an inspiring experience.

He was in fact raised up by the Almighty for the express purpose of releasing Israel from Egypt whence they had gone for food more than four hundred years earlier.

It was his responsibility and honor to lead them back to their promised land of Palestine, to free them from bondage in Egypt, and to teach them obedience to the true and living God.

1977 Deseret Book Co.
