Mark E. Petersen, Moses: Man of Miracles (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1977)

ISRAEL IN EGYPT

Many scholars ridicule the story of Joseph being sold into Egypt and of Jacob and his family coming later, taking up a new home in Goshen.

They call attention to the complete silence of Egyptian records regarding the story of Israel in Egypt—silence for the 430 years during which the Bible says Jacob's descendants lived there.

If the Israelites really were in Egypt, why do not the voluminous records kept by the Egyptians give them even a casual mention?

As one competent writer said:

No country in the ancient East has handed down its history so faithfully as Egypt. Right back to about 3,000 B.C. we can trace the names of the Pharaohs practically without a break. We know the succession of dynasties in the Old, Middle, and New Kingdoms. No other people have recorded so meticulously their important events . . . the erection of temples and palaces, as well as their literature and poetry.

But this time Egypt gave the scholars no answer. As if it were not enough that they found nothing about Joseph, they discovered neither documents nor monuments out of this whole period. (Keller, The Bible As History, p. 86.)

The story of Joseph's encounter with Potipher's wife is alleged by critics to have been a purloined version of "The Tale of the Two Brothers," which was deciphered from hieroglyphics of the XIX Dynasty period and which told a somewhat similar story.

Joseph isn't mentioned in Egyptian records, the scholars say. Was his whole story but a legend, then, not worthy of being inscribed in stone as were other important events? Wasn't Joseph really the viceroy of all Egypt? Did he not in fact save the nation from starvation? Is history to be silent forever on the subject?

We know from revelation, modern and ancient, that the story of Joseph's capture and banishment into Egypt is true. Then why does not Egyptian history corroborate the Bible account, since it is so important?

The reason is clear and adequate.

The year 1730 B.C. was a fateful one for Egypt. It was then that the land was invaded by a people known as the Hyksos, a Semitic tribe from Canaan and Syria. They shattered the Middle Kingdom of the Egyptians, seized the entire country, set up their own domineering rule, made their own pharaohs, and ruled with an iron hand.

The name Hyksos was derived from the definition "rulers from foreign lands." And so they were. Their cruel treatment of the Egyptians bred a severe hatred in the hearts of the populace, so that by the time the Hyksos were driven from the country some two hundred years later, the Egyptians were anxious to forget all about them, and erased mention of them from most of their records and monuments. Hence no record of Joseph, who was contemporary with the Hyksos.

Keep in mind that the Hyksos were Semites. The Israelites also were Semites. There was no Egyptian blood in either group. Then would the Egyptian historians have extolled the Israelites or Joseph?

According to the best estimates of the Bible scholars, it was about the year 1700 B.C. that Joseph was sold into Egypt. He came into a Semite-controlled government. He himself was a Semite. Historians believe that this fact was partially responsible for the recognition he received from the Semite-Hyksos pharaoh. He was regarded in a sense as a blood brother, held captive in a foreign land.

As Keller expresses it:

Under the Pharaohs a sand-dweller [such as Joseph] could never have become viceroy. Nomads bred asses, sheep and goats and the Egyptians despised none so much as breeders of small cattle, "For every shepherd is an abomination unto the Egyptians." (Gen. 46:34.)

Only under the foreign overlords, the Hyksos, would an Asiatic have the chance to rise to the highest office in the state. Under the Hyksos we repeatedly find officials with Semitic names. On scarabs dating from the Hyksos period the name "Jacob-Her," has been clearly deciphered.

"And it is not impossible," concludes the great American Egyptologist James Henry Breasted, "that a leader of the Israelite tribe of Jacob gained control for a time in the Nile valley in this obscure period. Such an occurrence would fit in surprisingly well with the migration to Egypt of Israelite tribes which in any case must have taken place about this time." (The Bible as History, p. 93.)

It is of importance to note that Joseph married Asenath, a Semite girl of the Hyksos tribe and a daughter of Potipherah, a priest in the Hyksos regime. Therefore, she was not of Egyptian blood, but Semite. Joseph also was a Semite, so he married within his own race.

The pharaoh of this period, it will be remembered, was exceptionally kind to Jacob, the father of Joseph, and to Jacob's entire family. He gave them one of his choice agricultural areas, Goshen, where they grew and thrived.

The pharaoh's great kindness to Jacob may also be related to the fact that Jacob was a Semite in a foreign land, as of course was his son Joseph. It is therefore not to be wondered at that pharaoh would authorize an expensive funeral procession back to Semite Palestine where the Semite Jacob was to be buried. Jacob is believed to have died about 1689 B.C. This was some forty years after the invasion by the Hyksos and about ten years after the arrival of Joseph in Egypt.

The Bible speaks of one pharaoh "who knew not Joseph." This is an interesting commentary, and it is related to an important event in Egyptian history.

In 1567 B.C. one of the weak regional rulers, Ahmosis, an Egyptian vassal king who had been tolerated by the Hyksos because of his supposed weakness, began a war of liberation. So great was the hatred of the populace toward the Hyksos, and so universally did they respond to the attempt at liberation, that they united in a mighty effort that eventually drove the Hyksos out of the country.

This gave rise to the XVIII Dynasty and what is known as the New Kingdom. A revived spirit of liberation and hope swept through Egypt. All thought of further submission to any foreign power was gone. Native Egyptian pharaohs now came into power; and one of them, the great Thutmosis III, determined, as we would say in our day, that the best defense is a strong offense. He thereupon decided to conquer the world and nearly did so. His armies drove through Palestine, beyond the great bend in the Euphrates, and over-ran Syria. By the time Amenophis III came to the throne, Egypt was dominant in that entire portion of the world. It was into such an age that Moses was born.

These new pharaohs, wholly Egyptian and completely hateful toward the Semite Hyksos, and all Semites for that matter, were the pharaohs that "knew not Joseph." It was by them that the Israelites—"alien" Semites that they were—had been placed under bondage.

1977 Deseret Book Co.
