Mark E. Petersen, Moses: Man of Miracles (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1977)

THE SILENT PERIOD

Although Egyptian records are silent concerning the Egyptian residency of the Israelites, some evidences of their being there are nevertheless known.

To obtain a clear picture of the situation, of course, we must go to the scriptures, which give abundant information, with modern revelation corroborating the Bible account, thereby making the narrative fully acceptable.

It is important that we have an understanding of the probable time when these things took place. No specific dates can be found, but by fitting events together in the known time frames, it is possible to arrive at fairly close estimates.

As has been indicated, the Hyksos invaded Egypt in or about 1730 B.C.

Joseph is believed to have been sold into Egypt about 1700 B.C. His father, Jacob, died in Egypt probably about 1689 B.C.

The Bible indicates that the Israelites were in Egypt for 430 years. Counting from the time Joseph came to that land, in approximately 1700, and deducting the 430 years of their residence there, we come near to 1270 B.C. as the possible time of their liberation.

It is fairly well established that Ramses II came to the throne in 1301. Some believe he was the pharaoh of the enslavement.

Ramses' successor is believed to have been Meneptah II, and it is conjectured that this Meneptah was the pharaoh of the exodus.

Ramses was an egotistical monarch who took it upon himself to erase from public buildings and monuments all names that were distasteful to him and then to replace them with his own. Naturally any reference to the Hyksos suffered. Again, we see why there are few records of this dark period.

Ramses had a passion for building and then placing his name upon every structure he erected. He catered to his insatiable ego also, as he placed his name on monuments and buildings others had erected, in some cases hundreds of years before.

This extensive building required much work, and slave labor was cheap. The Israelites were within easy reach, so they were forced into slavery for construction purposes.

It is this that provides some evidence of Israelite residency there. For example, one of the large funeral murals found by archaeologists shows dark-skinned men driving enslaved white men in making and laying bricks.

Semites were white people. The Israelites, being Semites themselves, were also white. They were the slaves. The native dark-skinned Egyptians were the taskmasters. The mural is dated at the approximate period of the enslavement.

Keller makes an interesting comment on this point:

The painting in the rock tomb shows a scene from the building of the Temple of Amun in Thebes. The classical bond cities of the children of Israel were, however, Pithom and Raamses. Both names appear in slightly different form in Egyptian inventories.

"Pi-Tum," "House of the god Tum"—is a town which was built by Ramesses II. Pi-Ramses-Meri-Amun which has already been mentioned, is the Biblical Raamses. An inscription of the time of Ramesses II speaks of "PR, who hauled the stones for the great fortress of the city of Pi-Ramses-Meri-Amun." "PR" is Egyptian hieroglyphics for Semites. (The Bible as History, p. 118.)

So the pharaohs who "knew not Joseph," and who turned against the Israelites and enslaved them, were true Egyptians, once again on the throne, fully free from Hyksos influence. It was these pharaohs who feared the prolific Hebrews and who felt that slavery was the means by which they could control them best and thus prevent them from gaining power in the government.

The Bible Companion explains it this way:

The new pharaoh, who was not a Semite Hyksos, but a native Egyptian, took no account of the service which Joseph had done to his country and was afraid that, with the Hebrew population increasing so swiftly, it might make common cause with the invaders. For the normal route of attack on Egypt was by way of the Delta, the region in which the Hebrews lived. So he put them to hard labour to build store cities. (William Neil, ed., New York: McGraw-Hill, 1960, p. 10.)

Archaeologists point with pride to their discovery of graneries in various parts of Egypt, not unlike the silos that may be seen in rural United States and Canada today. Although smaller, they were efficient in the preservation of grain. There is little doubt that these silos go back to the Hyksos period when Joseph was viceroy of Egypt.

1977 Deseret Book Co.
