Mark E. Petersen, Moses: Man of Miracles (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1977)

A PURPOSE IN EGYPT

The Lord had a purpose in bringing Jacob and his family into Egypt, and it was far beyond merely saving them from temporary famine.

That dearth was what forced the family to go to Egypt where there was corn, and where the Lord obviously wanted them to be. The famine was his means of bringing them there. In Goshen they could develop into a populous people, which was not possible under the conditions prevailing in Palestine at that period.

We have an interesting parallel to this episode in the early life of the Prophet Joseph Smith. His father was a farmer who was beset constantly by financial reverses. Looking for better farmland, Joseph Smith, Sr., moved his family from place to place until at last he settled near Palmyra, New York.

That is where the Lord wanted him to be—near the Book of Mormon plates in the Hill Cumorah.

This move to the Palmyra area set the stage for the great work of restoration to be accomplished by Joseph Smith, Jr., chosen to be the prophet of latter days. But the Lord used adversity to bring the family to the area where he wished them to be.

So it was with Jacob's family. The Lord used adversity to persuade them to go where he wished them to be.

The fulfillment of God's promises to Abraham required that Israel should become numerous. To accomplish this, the little family, numbering only 70 persons (Gen. 46:26-27), needed sufficient time and a peaceful place in which to grow. Egypt was that place.

The opportunities for development in Palestine in those days were limited indeed. The people were almost wholly pastoral. Jacob's family kept sheep and goats for a living. Their income was small and so was their influence. Yet their destiny was ultimately to affect the entire world.

Also, Palestine was a battleground for warring nations that moved back and forth in their conquests between the Nile and the Euphrates. Israel would have found no peace there. They required stable conditions for their eventual growth and development. So what did the Lord do?

He took them out of their promised but troubled homeland and sent them into what at first was truly a place of refuge, where comparative peace and plenty awaited them. Goshen was one of the most fertile parts of the entire Nile valley, and of the whole Middle East, for that matter.

The Lord took them to this rich land, too, under the benign rule of a pharaoh who not only knew Joseph, but appreciated him and made the young Hebrew his viceroy.

Their stay in Egypt for 430 years allowed them the time to grow and flourish. It permitted them to become the mighty host that eventually left under Moses, with 600,000 men plus their families.

The Bible says concerning their departure: "And the children of Israel journeyed from Rameses to Succoth, about 600,000 on foot that were men, beside children. And a mixed multitude went up also with them; and flocks, and herds, even very much cattle." (Ex. 12:37-38.)

The modernized Jewish Torah describes it in essentially the same terms: "The Israelites journeyed from Raamses to Succoth, about six hundred thousand men on foot, aside from children. Moreover, a mixed multitude went up with them, and very much livestock, both flocks and herds." (Jewish Publication Society of America, 1962.)

It would be interesting to know the meaning of the "mixed multitude." But there is no explanation.

The 600,000 men, plus their families, would indicate that the entire host must have numbered as many as two or three million, counting wives and children. The Israelites must have numbered in the millions, for at one time they had a standing army of 400,000 "footmen that drew sword." (See Judg. 20:2, 17.) The book of Judges also speaks of a battle in which 120,000 "men that drew sword" lost their lives. (Judg. 8:10.)

Their bondage certainly was not all on the negative side. It too served a good purpose. The cruelty of the taskmasters, the hatred that existed between the Hebrews and the Egyptians, and the length of their trying servitude fused Jacob's children into a united people.

Stubborn and unbending as they were, could anything else have done it? Only in such a way could twelve independent and bickering tribes have been compelled to adopt one purpose, one hope, and one allegiance.

The hatred they felt toward the Egyptians prevented intermarriage between the Hebrews and their neighbors. To reap the benefits of the Abrahamic promises, Israel had to remain a pure race, and the Lord used this means to achieve it. They were Semites and white. Yet they lived in the midst of a populace of another hue. To reinforce his purposes in this matter, God prohibited intermarriages.

Keeping their bloodstreams unmixed, becoming a numerous people, and cementing the tribes into a single national body were positively essential to their ultimate destiny.

So it was there in Egypt that the great house of Israel really developed. There it was that the Twelve Tribes were formalized.

But other important factors existed.

Above all else, Israel must accept and preserve the worship of the one and only true God, Jehovah, YHWH! It was Israel, and Israel alone, that was to keep the faith. This could not have been done in Egypt, a land of idolatry, a land of strict monarchical government, a land of magic and wizardry.

Neither would the fires and thunders such as they later experienced on Mt. Sinai have been seen and heard in pagan Egypt. Such were reserved for a time and place when Israel would be alone—by themselves in the wilderness—where God in his majesty could speak to his people without the abrasive influence of magicians and idols. Out there, circumstances would be more conducive to building faith.

The reestablishment of a new line of living prophets was part of the Lord's plan too, and he began it now with his call to Moses. Current and continued revelation would be needed to establish a new way of life for these people who by now had become tolerant of many Egyptian customs.

The worship of Jehovah, YHWH, their Most Holy One, also required temple service that was too sacred to be exposed to the corruptions of pagan Egypt. In God's holy house he would manifest himself to his own, but he would never allow his sanctuary to be built in that land of idols and occult practices. It was to be reserved for that area which he had consecrated in his promise to Abraham. So it must be in Palestine that his chosen priesthood would build his temple in which to perform those holy rites which are so important in the worship of the true God.

Furthermore, the Savior of the world, the great Messiah, was to be born in the Abrahamic lineage. How could this be done except that lineage be preserved in purity? And how could the Savior be born in Bethlehem, the city of David, if Israel did not return to Palestine?

Constituting Israel as a distinct and numerous people in the valleys of the Nile was a great upward step on the ladder of the Almighty. Their stay in that alien land was an obvious segment in their age-long destiny of which even we today are a part.

Yes, Egypt had her role in the Lord's mighty drama, and she played it well.

At the end of 430 years, the Lord now decreed that the time had arrived for Israel to occupy her own land and there become that "peculiar people" who would await the coming of their Messiah.

1977 Deseret Book Co.
