Mark E. Petersen, Moses: Man of Miracles (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1977)

THE PROMISED LAND

What was the Promised Land like in the time of Moses?

The Palestine we know today is arid and for centuries was unproductive and desertlike. The areas now occupied by the Israelis have been made fruitful only by the ambitious irrigation program carried on by that government.

But what was it like when the Lord promised it to Abraham, and when Moses led the Twelve Tribes to the banks of the Jordan?

The scriptures say it was green and beautiful, highly productive, and literally flowing with milk and honey.

However, it was not limited to the narrow strip of land that is modern Palestine. It went far beyond that, extending from the Nile in Egypt to the Euphrates, and was the heartland of the fabled Fertile Crescent, the most productive agricultural portion of that part of the world.

The earliest mention we have of its geographical extent occurs in Genesis where the Lord made his covenant with Abraham: "In the same day the Lord made a covenant with Abram, saying, Unto thy seed have I given this land, from the river of Egypt unto the great river, the river Euphrates." (Gen. 15:18.)

When the Lord mentioned this territory to Moses he used this expression: "And I will set thy bounds from the Red Sea even unto the sea of the Philistines, and from the desert unto the river." (Ex. 23:31.) And when the Lord spoke to Joshua, who was to lead the tribes into the Promised Land, he said: "Every place that the sole of your foot shall tread upon, that have I given unto you, as I said unto Moses. From the wilderness and this Lebanon even unto the great river, the river Euphrates, all the land of the Hittites, and unto the great sea toward the going down of the sun, shall be your coast." (Josh. 1:3-4.)

The Fertile Crescent

The Land of Promise (Gen. 15:18)

The sea of the Philistines was obviously the Mediterranean, and the wilderness or desert spoken of was, of course, the Arabian desert.

In Deuteronomy eleventh chapter we read a similar description: "Every place whereon the soles of your feet shall tread shall be yours: from the wilderness and Lebanon, from the river, the river Euphrates, even unto the uttermost sea shall your coast be." (V. 24.)

The Knox Roman Catholic Bible gives this rendering of that descriptive passage: "All shall be yours, wherever your feet shall tread; the desert, and Lebanon, and the western sea and the great river Euphrates shall be your frontiers."

The Jerusalem Bible reads: "Wherever the sole of your foot treads shall be yours; your territory shall stretch from the wilderness [desert] and from Lebanon, from the river, the river Euphrates, to the western sea."

That language is almost identical to the modern rendering in the Torah.

The Complete Bible, an American Translation, by Goodspeed and Smith, reads: "Every place on which the sole of your foot treads shall be yours; the region from the desert as far as Lebanon, from the River, the river Euphrates, as far as the Western Sea shall be your domain."

The Moffatt Bible, translated in modern terms, reads: "Every foot of ground you tread shall be your own, and your frontier shall stretch from the desert to Lebanon, from the River, the river Euphrates, to the Mediterranean Sea."

There can be no doubt, then, as to the extent of the area promised to Abraham and his descendants, the Twelve Tribes. It went from the Nile to the Euphrates and from the Arabian desert to the Mediterranean Sea, and was a rich land, the best part of the Fertile Crescent.

How rich was it? Would the Lord give a dry and barren land to Abraham? Would he call it a good land if it were not so? And what about minerals, so necessary to a civilized way of life?

The scripture speaks for itself:

For the Lord thy God bringeth thee into a good land, a land of brooks of water, of fountains and depths that spring out of valleys and hills;

A land of wheat, and barley, and vines, and fig trees, and pomegranates; a land of oil olive, and honey;

A land wherein thou shalt eat bread without scarceness, and thou shalt not lack any thing in it; a land whose stones are iron, and out of whose hills thou mayest dig brass. (Deut. 8:7-9.)

What more could they ask?

The modernized Torah reads:

For the Lord your God is bringing you into a good land, a land with streams and springs and lakes issuing from plain and hill, a land of wheat and barley, of vines, figs, and pomegranates, a land of olive oil and of honey; a land where you may eat food without stint, where you will lack nothing; a land whose rocks are iron and from whose hills you can mine copper. When you have eaten your fill, give thanks to the Lord your God for the good land which He has given you. (Deut. 8:7-10.)

And the Jerusalem Bible reads:

But Yahweh your God is bringing you into a prosperous land, a land of streams and springs, of waters that well up from the deep in valleys and hills, a land of wheat and barley, of vines, of figs, of pomegranates, a land of olives, of oil, of honey, a land where you will eat bread without stint, where you will want nothing, a land where the stones are of iron, where the hills may be quarried for copper. You will eat and have all you want and you will bless Yahweh your God in the rich land he has given you.

Then it was obviously a rich land, rich in water, agriculture, copper, iron, and all else they would need. So when the Lord said it was a good land, he meant just that.

Not even irrigation was needed in Palestine at that time,

for the land, whither thou goest in to possess it, is not as the land of Egypt, from whence ye came out, where thou sowedst thy seed, and wateredst it with thy foot, as a garden of herbs:

But the land, whither ye go to possess it, is a land of hills and valleys, and drinketh water of the rain of heaven:

A land which the Lord thy God careth for: the eyes of the Lord thy God are always upon it, from the beginning of the year even unto the end of the year. (Deut. 11:10-12.)

But what about the milk and honey with which it would flow? Much has been said about the honey, but what of the milk?

When the Israelites scanned the land, "behold the place was a place for cattle." (Num. 32:1.) And when the scouts sent out by Moses returned and reported to him, they said: "We came unto the land whither thou sentest us, and surely it floweth with milk and honey; and this is the fruit of it," showing him what they had brought. (Num. 13:27. See also Deut. 1:35; 3:25.)

But as is always the case, the Lord expected the Israelites to be worthy of such a good place in which to live; and he told them frankly that if they failed to keep the commandments, he would withdraw his blessings from the land.

The Canaanites in the land were a wicked and filthy people, and the Lord decreed that they should be swept off the face of this good land, even as were the Sodomites. According to the best references available, they too were sex perverts, and were so disgusting before the Lord that he would no longer allow them to live there. (Deut. 9:4; 12:1; Lev. 18:24.)

He would not destroy them by fire as he did the Sodomites, but he would eliminate them by warfare so that his Twelve Tribes could have the land with a minimum of damage. Says the scripture:

And it shall be, when the Lord thy God shall have brought thee into the land which he sware unto thy fathers, to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob, to give thee great and goodly cities, which thou buildest not,

And houses full of all good things, which thou filledst not, and wells digged, which thou diggedst not, vineyards and olive trees, which thou plantedst not; when thou shalt have eaten and be full;

Then beware lest thou forget the Lord, which brought thee forth out of the land of Egypt, from the house of bondage. (Deut. 6:10-12.)

With this in mind the Lord again warned Israel:

Hear, O Israel: Thou art to pass over Jordan this day, to go in to possess nations greater and mightier than thyself, cities great and fenced up to heaven,

A people great and tall, the children of the Anakims, whom thou knowest, and of whom thou hast heard say, Who can stand before the children of Anak!

Understand therefore this day, that the Lord thy God is he which goeth over before thee; as a consuming fire he shall destroy them, and he shall bring them down before thy face: so shalt thou drive them out, and destroy them quickly, as the Lord hath said unto thee.

Speak not thou in thine heart, after that the Lord thy God hath cast them out from before thee, saying, For my righteousness the Lord hath brought me in to possess this land: but for the wickedness of these nations the Lord doth drive them out from before thee.

Not for thy righteousness, or for the uprightness of thine heart, dost thou go to possess their land: but for the wickedness of these nations the Lord thy God doth drive them out from before thee, and that he may perform the word which the Lord sware unto thy fathers, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob.

Understand therefore, that the Lord thy God giveth thee not this good land to possess it for thy righteousness; for thou art a stiffnecked people. (Deut. 9:1-6.)

How similar were the experiences of these Israelites to those of the Book of Mormon peoples who were blessed abundantly by the Lord while they were humble and righteous, but who forgot the Lord and became worldly when prosperity came to them.

Repeatedly the Nephites were told that if they would obey the God of the land, who was Jesus Christ, they would be prospered in the land, and they were. But also, repeatedly they were told that if they strayed from the truth and allowed their prosperity to blind their eyes to the real facts of life, they would be swept off the land, and they were.

A great lesson regarding human frailty is taught in Hel. 12:1-3 wherein it is shown how quickly even in a very short period of time men turn from righteousness to wickedness. The text reads as follows:

And thus we can behold how false, and also the unsteadiness of the hearts of the children of men; yea, we can see that the Lord in his great infinite goodness doth bless and prosper those who put their trust in him.

Yea, and we may see at the very time when he doth prosper his people, yea, in the increase of their fields, their flocks and their herds, and in gold, and in silver, and in all manner of precious things of every kind and art; sparing their lives, and delivering them out of the hands of their enemies; softening the hearts of their enemies that they should not declare wars against them; yea, and in fine, doing all things for the welfare and happiness of his people; yea, then is the time that they do harden their hearts, and do forget the Lord their God, and do trample under their feet the Holy One—yea, and this because of their ease, and their exceedingly great prosperity.

And thus we see that except the Lord doth chasten his people with many afflictions, yea, except he doth visit them with death and with terror, and with famine and with all manner of pestilence, they will not remember him.

Although many references might be cited in this regard, probably one of the most impressive occurs in 4 Nephi:

And now I, Mormon, would that ye should know that the people had multiplied, insomuch that they were spread upon all the face of the land, and that they had become exceeding rich, because of their prosperity in Christ.

And now, in this two hundred and first year there began to be among them those who were lifted up in pride, such as the wearing of costly apparel, and all manner of fine pearls, and of the fine things of the world.

And from that time forth they did have their goods and their substance no more common among them.

And they began to be divided into classes; and they began to build up churches unto themselves to get gain, and began to deny the true church of Christ.

And it came to pass that when two hundred and ten years had passed away there were many churches in the land; yea, there were many churches which professed to know the Christ, and yet they did deny the more parts of his gospel, insomuch that they did receive all manner of wickedness, and did administer that which was sacred unto him to whom it had been forbidden because of unworthiness.

And this church did multiply exceedingly because of iniquity, and because of the power of Satan who did get hold upon their hearts. (4 Ne. 23-28.)

It is a lesson the Lord has tried to teach his people from the beginning, in both hemispheres. It is a lesson that we of today must yet learn.

1977 Deseret Book Co.
