Mark E. Petersen, Moses: Man of Miracles (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1977)

WHO WAS MOSES?

The scripture tells us that Moses was the son of "a man of the house of Levi" who "took to wife a daughter of Levi. And the woman conceived, and bare a son: and when she saw him that he was a goodly child, she hid him three months." (Ex. 2:1-2.)

Then we have the familiar story of the child being left afloat in the river in a basket daubed with slime and pitch:

And the daughter of Pharaoh came down to wash herself at the river; and her maidens walked along by the river's side; and when she saw the ark among the flags, she sent her maid to fetch it.

And when she had opened it, she saw the child: and, behold, the babe wept. And she had compassion on him, and said, This is one of the Hebrews' children.

Then said his sister to Pharaoh's daughter, Shall I go and call to thee a nurse of the Hebrew women, that she may nurse the child for thee?

And Pharoah's daughter said to her, Go. And the maid went and called the child's mother.

And Pharoah's daughter said unto her, Take this child away, and nurse it for me, and I will give thee thy wages. And the woman took the child, and nursed it.

And the child grew, and she brought him unto Pharaoh's daughter, and he became her son. And she called his name Moses: and she said, Because I drew him out of the water. (Ex. 2:5-10.)

In The Bible Comes Alive, Sir Charles Marston, British archaeologist, quotes freely from Josephus who writes of Moses' life in Egypt as a young man. The Bible is silent on this portion of his career.

Josephus says that Moses was well educated in Egypt, and this is affirmed by the writer of Acts as he says: "And Moses was learned in all the wisdom of the Egyptians, and was mighty in words and deeds." (Acts 7:22.)

Moses led a military expedition up the Nile and captured Meroe at the junction of the Blue and the White Nile, according to Josephus.

Although they do not mention Moses, the Egyptian records indicate that Queen Hatshepsut sent fleets of ships up the Nile on military expeditions.

Marston says of this queen:

Thus Hatshepsut, because she was Queen Aahmes' daughter, and the descendant of those rulers who had expelled the Hyksos, enjoyed the allegiance of a strong party in Egypt which regarded the blood of her line as alone worthy of royal honours.

Partly on that account, partly because of masterful ability, her father, Thotmes I, associated her with himself in the government about the very time Moses was born. She continued to be the real ruler of Egypt during the reign of Thotmes II, and even for the first sixteen years of Thotmes III, before he became the greatest of the Egyptian conquerors.

Thus, what is known of the biography of this extraordinary woman fits accurately into the Bible references to the daughter of Pharaoh who found the infant Moses floating in the ark of bulrushes on the Nile.

Josephus says her name was Thermuthis. Herein we see an echo of the name Thotmes, which some writers prefer to render as Tahutmes. (The Bible Comes Alive, pp. 40-41.)

Marston makes an interesting side comment at this point. He speaks of the antiquity of the moral laws that Moses taught, many of which were already known among the Egyptians of his time. It is another evidence that the gospel, with its moral laws, came down from Adam, even though some became corrupted by the various races that were prominent in antiquity. Marston says:

All this testifies to primeval morality associated with the primeval Monotheism. So the Christian Church did not "invent" the Moral Laws; they were already in existence before Christ. Moses did not make them; they were already in existence before Moses. Archaeology already teaches us that they have come down from the very dawn of civilization. (The Bible Comes Alive, p. 43.)

Latter-day Saints know, of course, that this is true, since the gospel was given to Adam and his offspring. It was taught by the prophets both before and after the flood, and was handed on down through the patriarchs Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and through Jacob to his descendants.

Marston, the great archaeologist that he is, with all the thoroughness of the typical British scholar, is assured from his studies that Moses was a well-educated man. He points out also that writing and reading were common in Moses' day, and he firmly attacks the critics who say that Moses could not write.

Referring to the writings of the Egyptians, he then says:

Did it never occur to Bible critics that if Thotmes III could write such records of his life, then Moses must have been able to do the same? And it has now become evident that Moses possessed greater facilities for literary expression than did the Egyptians, although perhaps not so indestructible. (The Bible Comes Alive, p. 46.)

Marston also points to the discovery of the Ras Shamra tablets in Syria, as well as to other finds, clearly indicating that there were libraries, schools, and colleges in the period of 1400 to 1350 B.C. Similar discoveries in Babylonia testify to the widespread use of writing in remote ages in that land also.

Then who can say truthfully that Moses was illiterate and unable to write his books of scripture? The facts firmly contradict such criticisms.

Peloubet's Bible Dictionary says this regarding Moses' training: "The child was adopted by the princess. From this time for many years Moses must be considered as an Egyptian. As an Egyptian prince he must have a princely education; and he became `learned in all the wisdom of the Egyptians' (Acts 7:22), who were then unsurpassed in civilization and learning by any people in the world." (F.N. Peloubet, Bible Dictionary, Grand Rapids: Zondervan, 1967, p. 421.)

This book also indicates that the name Moses was from the Egyptian Mes or Mesu, meaning the extraction of a son. Some say it was a Coptic name, meaning saved from the water.

But in spite of all the training that Moses received in Egypt and the debt that he apparently owed to the Pharaoh's daughter, he was still determined to be Hebrew. It is significant that the apostle Paul wrote:

By faith Moses, when he was come to years, refused to be called the son of Pharaoh's daughter;

Choosing rather to suffer affliction with the people of God, than to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season;

Esteeming the reproach of Christ greater riches than the treasures in Egypt: for he had respect unto the recompence of the reward.

By faith he forsook Egypt, not fearing the wrath of the king: for he endured, as seeing him who is invisible. (Heb. 11:24-27.)

Although the Bible mentions that Moses killed an Egyptian for "smiting an Hebrew, one of his brethren," no further detail is given. (Ex. 2:11.)

However, the historian Eusebius says that the slaying was the result of a court intrigue in which certain men plotted to assassinate Moses. In the encounter it is said that Moses successfully warded off the attacker and killed him. (Eusebius IX:27.)

In the Midrash Rabbah, the traditional Jewish commentary on the Old Testament, it is asserted that Moses, with his bare fists, killed an Egyptian taskmaster who was in the act of seducing a Hebrew woman. This is confirmed in the Koran.

Certainly there must have been good reason for Moses' act, and most assuredly the Lord would not have called a murderer to the high office of prophet and liberator for his people Israel.

1977 Deseret Book Co.
