Mark E. Petersen, Moses: Man of Miracles (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1977)

THE MYTHICIZED MOSES

There is a true Moses, and there is likewise a mythicized one, made up of the legends of the past and the conjectures of the present. Let us first talk about the legendary Moses.

Says Funk and Wagnall's Jewish Encyclopedia:

Of all Biblical personages, Moses has been chosen most frequently as the subject of later legends, and his life has been recounted in full detail in the poetic Haggadah. As liberator, lawgiver and leader of a people which was transformed by him from an unorganized horde into a nation, he occupies a more important place in popular legend than the Patriarchs and all the other national heroes.

His many sided activity also offered more abundant scope for imaginative embellishment. A cycle of legends has been woven around nearly every trait of his character and every event of his life; and groups of the most different and often contradictory stories have been connected with his career. (Vol. 9, p. 48.)

One of the legends says that Noah was not really worthy to be saved from the flood, but that he was spared because Moses was destined to be one of his descendants.

The angels Jacob saw in his vision at night are alleged to have been Moses and Aaron.

One story says that the birth of Moses as the liberator of his people was foretold to Pharaoh by his soothsayers, which was the reason the king had the Israelite children destroyed.

Another of these yarns says that Moses was born already circumcised, and that as soon as he came into this world he was fully able to walk. When he was born, the story says, a heavenly light filled the home of his parents. He was also able to talk as soon as he was born. When he was three years of age he began to prophesy, the legend goes.

It was said also that when Moses was discovered in the bulrushes, he looked silently into the face of the Egyptian princess. It was necessary for the angel Gabriel to spank the baby to make him cry and thus evoke the sympathy of the princess so that she would adopt him, the tale continues.

Another story says that shortly after Moses was born, the soothsayers identified him to Pharaoh as the liberator of Israel, upon which the king revoked his order to kill all the Israelite babies. One story says that prior to this event, a half million or more Hebrew children had been cast into the river, and that now Moses is regarded as the one who had saved the lives of all who were subsequently born to the Israelites.

It is said that the princess gave Moses his name because she had saved him from the river. But between the Egyptians and the Hebrews, it is said that Moses was given ten names altogether, including Heber, Jared, Gedor, Abi Soko, Jekuthiel, Abi Zanoah, and Shemaiah.

At the age of three, it was told, Moses was a very large and precocious child. One day while sitting at the king's table in the presence of his courtiers, he took the crown off the king's head and put it upon his own head. The princes, of course, were horrified, and immediately the soothsayers predicted that this was the child who would destroy the kingdom of Pharaoh and liberate the Hebrews.

According to the book of Jubilees, he is said to have mastered the writing of the Assyrians.

The legends say that from childhood Moses knew he was a Hebrew, even while in the court of Pharaoh, and he often went out among the enslaved Israelites and showed great sympathy for them. He helped those who were too weak to bear their burdens, and appealed to Pharaoh to have mercy on them.

He is also said to have asked Pharaoh to give the Hebrews one day a week off to rest from their labors, and Pharaoh granted his request. The story claims that this was the origin of the Sabbath Day observance among the Hebrews.

One story says that Moses had many enemies in the court of Pharaoh, some of whom slandered him before the king. This raised enmity between the king and Moses, and eventually Moses had to leave Egypt.

The story relates that he then went to Ethiopia, where he married a Cushite (Ethiopian) woman, and at the age of twenty-seven years he became king of Ethiopia, where he ruled for forty years. Then it was (after these forty years) that his Cushite wife accused him before the princes of refusing to cohabitate with her, and also of refusing to worship the Ethiopian gods.

The princes liked Moses, the legend says, for he had been a good leader; but they also feared the queen. Therefore, they talked the situation over with Moses and persuaded him to leave Ethiopia in peace, which he did.

The legend says it was then that he went to Midian, to the home of Jethro. But Jethro distrusted him and placed him in a deep dungeon, where he was fed only on small portions of bread and water. However, Jethro's daughter Zipporah fell in love with Moses and secretly fed him, thus saving his life.

After ten (or seven) years of this imprisonment, Zipporah reminded her father that he had been keeping Moses in prison this long time; that if he was still alive, he must have survived by some miracle; and that, therefore, he must be a man beloved of God.

The legend says that Jethro then went to the dungeon, found Moses alive and well, and released him. Jethro had in his garden a marvelous rod engraved with the name of God in Hebrew: YHWH. It was said that he asked every man who wanted to marry one of his daughters to attempt to pull this rod out of the ground; none was able to do so until Moses came along, and he did so with little or no effort. Jethro then recognized Moses as the deliverer of Israel and gave him a magic rod. Later, using this rod, he performed the miracles before Pharaoh.

Another legend says that when Moses and Aaron went to see Pharaoh, they met two leopards at the entrance. These animals would never allow anyone to pass unless the guards quieted them. But when Moses approached, they acted like pets, and he played with them as though they were little house cats.

At the time of the exodus, it is said, Moses went to obtain Joseph's coffin and found it guarded by vicious dogs whose barking could be heard throughout Egypt. But when he came near, the dogs remained still, and he took Joseph's mummy from among the royal tombs without incident.

Many are the legends that have developed around the exodus itself, one of which pertains to the tabernacle. During the seven days of dedication of this portable structure, Moses took it down every night and reassembled it again every morning. One account says that he did this throughout the forty years of the Israelites' travels.

When the seven days of dedication were over, Moses was alleged to have asked the Lord that two offices in Israel might be handed down to his descendants: one was that of king of Israel; the other was that of high priest. The Lord allegedly denied both requests, for the kingship was to go to David through Judah, and the priestly office to Aaron and his sons.

It was rumored that Moses became a very wealthy man. One account says that it came as a dowry given to him by Jethro. Another says it was booty from Pharaoh, seized when the tribes left Egypt. Another story relates that Moses performed a great miracle in his own behalf, and thereby made himself wealthy.

Another story says that he became rich through breaking the tablets containing the words of God, for these tablets were made of sapphires that Moses kept for himself. Another story says that one day God visited Moses in his tent and revealed to the prophet that in the ground under his tent was a pit filled with precious stones.

One of the fables says that Moses' face was always surrounded by a halo of light that he acquired when he first took hold of the tablets of stone while God held them on one side with angels on the other. Still another story says that when Moses wrote the Torah he used a pen with magic ink, and that one day during his work he inadvertently touched his head with the pen, and this created the halo.

Many are the stories about the death of Moses. One says that he died on Adar 7, his own birthday, when he was 120 years old. Another story says that he died as a hero and was fittingly buried. But others say that actually he did not die at all. One legend says that while he was ascending Mount Abarim with Joshua and Eleazar and the elders of the people, suddenly a cloud enveloped him and took him into heaven.

To explain the account of his burial place, which was known only to God, one story says that "God concealed Moses, keeping him for the life in the future world, and no creature knew where he was."

In the Pseudepigrapha (2:409), there is a quotation from the Midrash Tanchuma Debarim, a Hebew apocalypse, that says that when Moses' life was over, he was transformed into "the form of a fiery angel" and ascended "through the seven heavens." This same volume also gives a legend that when Moses arrived in heaven he saw there the heavenly Jerusalem and the holy temple, both of which were to return to earth in the latter days when God had gathered all Israel from the four quarters of the earth. (R.H. Charles, ed., The Apocrypha and Pseudepigrapha of the Old Testament, Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1913.)

In this same volume (2:412) under the title "Moses' unique relation to Judaism," we read: "Pre-existence is here ascribed to Moses, but to him uniquely. In Alexandrian Judaism, it was conceived to be the prerogative of mankind generally." This view is found in the Jewish Book of Wisdom and in 2nd Enoch.

Also in this volume is a chapter entitled "The Assumption of Moses," which likewise teaches that Moses was translated and taken into heaven without tasting death. There Moses is said to be discussing his forthcoming passing with his faithful friend and servant Joshua. The text then reads in part:

And I shall go to sleep with my fathers. Wherefore, Joshua thou (son of) Nun, (be strong and) be of good courage; (for) God hath chosen (thee) to be minister in the same covenant.

And when Joshua had heard the words of Moses that were so written in his writing all that he had before said, he rent his clothes and cast himself at Moses' feet. And Moses comforted him and wept with him.

And Joshua answered him and said: "Why dost thou comfort me, (my) lord Moses? And how shall I be comforted in regard to the bitter word which thou hast spoken which has gone forth from thy mouth, which is full of tears and lamentation, in that thou departest from this people? (But now) what place shall receive thee? Or what shall be the sign that makes (thy) sepulchre? Or who shall dare to move thy body from thence as that of a mere man from place to place? For all men when they die have according to their age their sepulchres on earth; but thy sepulchre is from the rising to the setting sun, and from the south to the confines of the north: all the world is thy sepulchre.

"My Lord, thou art departing, and who shall feed this people? Or who is there that shall have compassion on them and who shall be their guide by the way? Or who shall pray for them, not omitting a single day, in order that I may lead them into the land of their forefathers? . . ." (2:423-24.)

The Assumption of Moses is believed to be a composite of two apocryphal writings, one called the Testament of Moses and the other the Assumption.

A Greek version of the entire work appeared in the first century A.D. and was used by Clement of Alexandria, Origen, and other Greek writers. It was translated into Latin by the fifth century. A large fragment of one of its early manuscripts was found in the sixth century in the Ambrosian Library in Milan. It is believed to have been written originally by some Pharisaic Quietist and was designed as a protest against the secularization of the Pharisaic party.

No one regards it as scripture.

1977 Deseret Book Co.
