Mark E. Petersen, Moses: Man of Miracles (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1977)

THE TRUE MOSES

The true Moses was one of the mightiest men of God in all time. He certainly needed no mythology to add luster to his name.

He walked and talked with God, received of divine glory while yet in mortality, was called a son of God, and was in the similitude of the Only Begotten.

He saw the mysteries of the heavens and much of creation, and received laws from God beyond any other ancient man of whom we have record.

The most impressive and convincing information we have regarding this great personage is provided in our own Book of Moses in the Pearl of Great Price. It was given by revelation to the Prophet Joseph Smith, which fact is vital and significant. It explodes forever any notion that Moses was mythological in any sense. He lived. He officiated for God. This we know for a fact because the Almighty himself gave us the correct account of his life.

If we will just keep in mind that the Book of Moses was given to Joseph Smith as modern revelation and is not some imperfect history handed down through the ages, it will solve many problems for us.

Moses is also mentioned frequently in the revelations contained in the Doctrine and Covenants, which again lifts any veil of uncertainty that might remain in our minds.

For example, D&C 84 confirms the life, the identity, and the divine appointment of Moses. It clears away the legendary mist involving his relationship with Jethro, his father-in-law. We are told that indeed Jethro possessed the holy Melchizedek Priesthood and was the individual chosen of the Lord to confer that priesthood upon Moses.

Jethro was a descendant of Midian, a son of Abraham and Keturah, and certainly was not an Ethiopian as some have claimed. The priesthood he held had been handed down through the prophets from Esaias, who received it under the hand of God himself.

This was a direct line through Gad, Jeremy, Elihu, and Caleb, and it was Caleb who ordained Jethro, following which Jethro confirmed it upon Moses. So direct was the ordination both of Jethro and Moses.

The prophet Esaias, we are told, lived in the days of Abraham and was blessed of him. Abraham received the priesthood through the lineage of his fathers "even till Noah; and from Noah till Enoch, through the lineage of their fathers; and from Enoch to Abel, who was slain by the conspiracy of his brother."

Abel "received the priesthood by the commandments of God, by the hand of his father Adam, who was the first man." This priesthood "continueth in the church of God in all generations, and is without beginning of days or end of years." (D&C 84:7-17.)

All of this information concerning the priesthood is of particular value in a study of Moses, for it gives us the only line of ordination to him that we have in existence. It tells us in no uncertain language, and this by modern revelation, that Moses was in possession of that priesthood by direct descent through the prophets. He was truly called of God.

Through the Prophet Joseph Smith the Lord tells us that Moses attempted to bring the children of Israel into the presence of God through the power of the priesthood, but they would not obey. (D&C 84:23-25.)

Obviously this effort on the part of the Lord through Moses was an attempt to bring the full gospel to the people when they came out of Egypt. But they were so apostate and so steeped in the traditions of the Egyptians that they would not listen to him.

That is why the higher priesthood was taken away and the lesser priesthood left to administer the "schoolmaster" that the Lord gave to the people as a means of bringing them back to Christ. This "schoolmaster" was the law of Moses and the "preparatory gospel." As D&C 84 explains:

And this greater priesthood administereth the gospel and holdeth the key of the mysteries of the kingdom, even the key of the knowledge of God.

Therefore, in the ordinances thereof, the power of godliness is manifest.

And without the ordinances thereof, and the authority of the priesthood, the power of godliness is not manifest unto men in the flesh;

For without this no man can see the face of God, even the Father, and live.

Now this Moses plainly taught to the children of Israel in the wilderness, and sought diligently to sanctify his people that they might behold the face of God;

But they hardened their hearts and could not endure his presence; therefore, the Lord in his wrath, for his anger was kindled against them, swore that they should not enter into his rest while in the wilderness, which rest is the fulness of his glory.

Therefore, he took Moses out of their midst, and the Holy Priesthood also;

And the lesser priesthood continued, which priesthood holdeth the key of the ministering of angels and the preparatory gospel;

Which gospel is the gospel of repentance and of baptism, and the remission of sins, and the law of carnal commandments, which the Lord in his wrath caused to continue with the house of Aaron among the children of Israel until John, whom God raised up, being filled with the Holy Ghost from his mother's womb.

For he was baptized while he was yet in his childhood, and was ordained by the angel of God at the time he was eight days old unto this power, to overthrow the kingdom of the Jews, and to make straight the way of the Lord before the face of his people, to prepare them for the coming of the Lord, in whose hand is given all power. (D&C 84:19-28. Italics added.)

Brigham Young said at one time: "If they had been sanctified and holy, the Children of Israel would not have traveled one year with Moses before they would have received their endowments and the Melchizedek Priesthood." (Discourses of Brigham Young, p. 106.)

At another time President Young said: "Moses held the keys and authority above all the rest upon the earth. He holds the keys of the Priesthood of Melchizedek, which is the Priesthood of the Son of God, which holds the keys of all these Priesthoods, dispensing the blessings and privileges of both Priesthoods to the people, as he did in the days of the Children of Israel when he led them out of Egypt." (Discourses, p. 143.)

No one reading the writings of Moses in the Pearl of Great Price can fail to be deeply impressed by them. And keep in mind that these writings were given to Joseph Smith by revelation.

When one wonders how Moses could have written all that appears there, it must be remembered that he, like Joseph Smith, wrote by revelation. He had no other way of learning the details of the creation or of the ministry of Enoch who was taken into heaven together with his city, or details in the life of Noah.

We are reminded of the scripture from Peter in this regard: "Prophecy came not in old time by the will of man: but holy men of God spake as they were moved by the Holy Ghost." (2 Pet. 1:21.)

And that is the way holy men, or prophets, wrote also.

The writings of Moses make extremely interesting, informative, and faith-promoting reading.

Think of it! Moses saw God face to face "and he talked with him, and the glory of God was upon Moses; therefore Moses could endure his presence." (Moses 1:2.)

The Lord identified himself to Moses as "the Lord God Almighty, and Endless is my name; for I am without beginning of days or end of years; and is not this endless?" (Moses 1:3.)

The Lord discussed his creations with Moses, and revealed them to him:

And behold, the glory of the Lord was upon Moses, so that Moses stood in the presence of God, and talked with him face to face. And the Lord God said unto Moses: For mine own purpose have I made these things. Here is wisdom and it remaineth in me.

And by the Word of my power, have I created them, which is mine Only Begotten Son, who is full of grace and truth.

And worlds without number have I created; and I also created them for mine own purpose; and by the Son I created them, which is mine Only Begotten. (Moses 1:31-33.)

And then the Lord said, after showing Moses the far reaches of the heavens, "But only an account of this earth, and the inhabitants thereof, give I unto you. For behold, there are many worlds that have passed away by the Word of my power. And there are many that now stand, and innumerable are they unto man; but all things are numbered unto me, for they are mine and I know them." (Moses 1:35.)

The record also reads: "And now, behold, this one thing I show unto thee, Moses, my son; for thou art in the world, and now I show it unto thee. And it came to pass that Moses looked, and beheld the world upon which he was created; and Moses beheld the world and the ends thereof, and all the children of men which are, and which were created; of the same he greatly marveled and wondered." (Moses 1:7-8.)

The Lord revealed to Moses, so that he could write it, the conversation the Almighty had with Enoch, in which again the extent of the Lord's creations were shown: "And were it possible that man could number the particles of the earth, yea, millions of earths like this, it would not be a beginning to the number of thy creations; and thy curtains are stretched out still; and yet thou art there, and thy bosom is there; and also thou art just; thou art merciful and kind forever." (Moses 7:30.)

This seems beyond the ability of mortal men to conceive.

Astronomers tell us that never yet, with their most powerful telescopes, have they seen the outer perimeters of space. Always, beyond the reach of their strongest instruments, there is more space and more creation.

The astronomers speak of the heavens that are relatively close to us, and of our Milky Way, and say that we are but a tiny part of it. The Milky Way is actually a great spiral in the heavens, containing, so the astronomers say, 100 billion suns like ours, plus all their satellites.

This spiral is part of a larger organization containing nineteen such spirals, with other billions upon billions of suns and planets. One astronomer said that if we wish to understand how vast space is, we may know that this larger body, made up of nineteen spirals like and including our Milky Way, is merely tucked away in one corner of the heavens.

Moses knew of this, because he wrote about it, including that which was made known to Enoch as well as that which was made known to him by direct observation while in the presence of God.

We mention this to call attention only to one phase of Moses' life. He knew astronomy and saw the heavens—not from some instrument made by man, but by the power of God.

Moses knew by what power he saw all these things, for he said: "But now mine own eyes have beheld God; but not my natural, but my spiritual eyes, for my natural eyes could not have beheld; for I should have withered and died in his presence; but his glory was upon me; and I beheld his face, for I was transfigured before him." (Moses 1:11.)

It should be plainly evident that Moses was no ordinary man, with ordinary skills or education. He was taught by the Lord himself. Adam had this same experience. Both were highly intelligent; both were educated as few men have been.

When the critics in their ignorance try to downgrade Moses and say that he was incapable of doing the things that the Bible says he did, we realize more than ever that the wisdom of man is as foolishness to God, and we can readily see why.

Moses' encounter with Satan—personally—is a most fascinating part of his writings. All should read it in the first chapter of the Book of Moses in the Pearl of Great Price.

He saw the devil himself. The devil tried to deceive him and presented himself as though he were the Savior. But Moses, inspired as he was, caught the devil in his lie, and by the power of God cast him out of his presence.

The creation story is given in his book in much greater detail than it is in the Bible, but it corroborates the Bible story fully and lets us know that Genesis is a correct though concise story of creation.

Our brief glimpse into the preexistent life, where Jesus was chosen as the Savior, is provided in Moses' writings. The conflict leading up to the war in heaven and the rebellion of Lucifer is explained.

The noble words of God must always be remembered as he speaks of Jehovah's voluntary sacrifice to save mankind:

And I, the Lord God, spake unto Moses, saying: That Satan, whom thou hast commanded in the name of mine Only Begotten is the same which was from the beginning, and he came before me, saying—Behold, here am I, send me, I will be thy son, and I will redeem all mankind, that one soul shall not be lost, and surely I will do it; wherefore give me thine honor.

But, behold, my Beloved Son, which was my Beloved and Chosen from the beginning, said unto me—Father, thy will be done, and the glory be thine forever.

Wherefore, because that Satan rebelled against me, and sought to destroy the agency of man, which I, the Lord God, had given him, and also, that I should give unto him mine own power; by the power of mine Only Begotten, I caused that he should be cast down;

And he became Satan, yea, even the devil, the father of all lies, to deceive and to blind men, and to lead them captive at his will, even as many as would not hearken unto my voice. (Moses 4:1-4.)

The account of the creation of Adam and Eve as the first human beings on the earth is here affirmed. Likewise, the story of the Garden of Eden, the temptation, the fall, and the expulsion into the world as we now know it. All of this is told through the writings of Moses, as revealed and confirmed in modern times by the Lord to Joseph Smith. (Moses 3, 4, and 5.)

The pact made between Cain and Satan is explained, including the murder of Abel. Moses also tells of the conversation between the Lord and Cain following the crime, and the development of the cult of the Master Mahan, in which the great secret was administered unto Cain by Satan.

Was he not a great historian? Did he not write under the dictation of the Holy Spirit, so that he would know these details, even the words of conversations of that early period? These facts were all made known to Moses by revelation, and to us through the writings of that great man.

The story of Enoch and his city and the revelation to Enoch concerning the coming of Christ are set forth:

And it came to pass that Enoch looked; and from Noah, he beheld all the families of the earth; and he cried unto the Lord, saying: When shall the day of the Lord come? When shall the blood of the Righteous be shed, that all they that mourn may be sanctified and have eternal life?

And the Lord said: It shall be in the meridian of time, in the days of wickedness and vengeance.

And behold, Enoch saw the day of the coming of the Son of Man, even in the flesh; and his soul rejoiced, saying: The Righteous is lifted up, and the Lamb is slain from the foundation of the world; and through faith I am in the bosom of the Father, and behold, Zion is with me. (Moses 7:45-47.)

Enoch saw the crucifixion in vision, and Moses described it in his book:

And the Lord said: Blessed is he through whose seed Messiah shall come; for he saith—I am Messiah, the King of Zion, the Rock of Heaven, which is broad as eternity; whoso cometh in at the gate and climbeth up by me shall never fall; wherefore, blessed are they of whom I have spoken, for they shall come forth with songs of everlasting joy.

And it came to pass that Enoch cried unto the Lord, saying: When the Son of Man cometh in the flesh, shall the earth rest? I pray thee, show me these things.

And the Lord said unto Enoch: Look, and he looked and beheld the Son of Man lifted up on the cross, after the manner of men;

And he heard a loud voice; and the heavens were veiled; and all the creations of God mourned; and the earth groaned; and the rocks were rent; and the saints arose, and were crowned at the right hand of the Son of Man, with crowns of glory;

And as many of the spirits as were in prison came forth, and stood on the right hand of God; and the remainder were reserved in chains of darkness until the judgment of the great day. (Moses 7:53-57.)

Some scholars question the flood. By revelation to Moses, and likewise to Joseph Smith, we know the truth about the flood:

And Noah was four hundred and fifty years old, and begat Japheth; and forty-two years afterward he begat Shem of her who was the mother of Japheth, and when he was five hundred years old he begat Ham.

And Noah and his sons hearkened unto the Lord, and gave heed, and they were called the sons of God.

And when these men began to multiply on the face of the earth, and daughters were born unto them, the sons of men saw that those daughters were fair, and they took them wives, even as they chose.

And the Lord said unto Noah: The daughters of thy sons have sold themselves; for behold mine anger is kindled against the sons of men, for they will not hearken to my voice.

And it came to pass that Noah prophesied, and taught the things of God, even as it was in the beginning.

And the Lord said unto Noah: My Spirit shall not always strive with man, for he shall know that all flesh shall die; yet his days shall be an hundred and twenty years; and if men do not repent, I will send in the floods upon them.

And in those days there were giants on the earth, and they sought Noah to take away his life; but the Lord was with Noah, and the power of the Lord was upon him.

And the Lord ordained Noah after his own order, and commanded him that he should go forth and declare his Gospel unto the children of men, even as it was given unto Enoch.

And it came to pass that Noah called upon the children of men that they should repent; but they hearkened not unto his words;

And also, after that they had heard him, they came up before him, saying: Behold, we are the sons of God; have we not taken unto ourselves the daughters of men? And are we not eating and drinking, and marrying and giving in marriage? And our wives bear unto us children, and the same are mighty men, which are like unto men of old, men of great renown. And they hearkened not unto the words of Noah.

And God saw that the wickedness of men had become great in the earth; and every man was lifted up in the imagination of the thoughts of his heart, being only evil continually.

And it came to pass that Noah continued his preaching unto the people, saying: Hearken, and give heed unto my words;

Believe and repent of your sins and be baptized in the name of Jesus Christ, the Son of God, even as our fathers, and ye shall receive the Holy Ghost, that ye may have all things made manifest; and if ye do not this, the floods will come in upon you; nevertheless they hearkened not.

And it repented Noah, and his heart was pained that the Lord had made man on the earth, and it grieved him at the heart.

And the Lord said: I will destroy man whom I have created, from the face of the earth, both man and beast, and the creeping things, and the fowls of the air; for it repenteth Noah that I have created them, and that I have made them; and he hath called upon me; for they have sought his life.

And thus Noah found grace in the eyes of the Lord; for Noah was a just man, and perfect in his generation; and he walked with God, as did also his three sons, Shem, Ham, and Japheth.

The earth was corrupt before God, and it was filled with violence.

And God looked upon the earth, and, behold, it was corrupt, for all flesh had corrupted its way upon the earth.

And God said unto Noah: The end of all flesh is come before me, for the earth is filled with violence, and behold I will destroy all flesh from off the earth. (Moses 8:12-30.)

Then came the flood.

What a bulwark to our faith is Moses! How close he lived to the Lord in order to receive his many blessings!

How can anyone, having the actual facts, doubt that Moses was truly one of the elect of God, a mighty prophet, the deliverer of his people?

1977 Deseret Book Co.
