Mark E. Petersen, Moses: Man of Miracles (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1977)

MOSES AND PHARAOH

The conflict of opposing forces was never more clearly defined than in the confrontation of Moses and Pharaoh.

To begin with, Moses was frightened to appear in the Egyptian royal court. There were probably many reasons. Of course he was the meekest of all men (Num. 12:3) and depreciated his own abilities.

Moses evidently also had recollections of his earlier departure from Egypt, when he was forced to flee because of his fight with the Egyptian taskmaster.

Pharaoh must have recognized Moses, who grew to manhood in the royal courts, a protege of the princess who had found him in the bulrushes. But God had a work for Moses to do, and would take no excuses. He must "set my people free."

The angel of the Lord appeared to Moses in a flame of fire out of the midst of a bush, and he turned to see this phenomenon.

And when the Lord saw that he turned aside to see, God called unto him out of the midst of the bush, and said, Moses, Moses. And he said, Here am I.

And he said, Draw not nigh hither: put off thy shoes from off thy feet, for the place whereon thou standest is holy ground.

Moreover he said, I am the God of thy father, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob. And Moses hid his face; for he was afraid to look upon God.

And the Lord said, I have surely seen the affliction of my people which are in Egypt, and have heard their cry by reason of their task-masters; for I know their sorrows;

And I am come down to deliver them out of the hand of the Egyptians, and to bring them up out of that land unto a good land and a large, unto a land flowing with milk and honey. . . .

Now therefore, behold, the cry of the children of Israel is come unto me: and I have also seen the oppression wherewith the Egyptians oppress them.

Come now therefore, and I will send thee unto Pharaoh, that thou mayest bring forth my people the children of Israel out of Egypt. (Ex. 3:4-10.)

As he did subsequently, so Moses now questioned the Lord, asking, "Who am I, that I should go unto Pharaoh, and that I should bring forth the children of Israel out of Egypt?" (Ex. 3:11.)

The story of his interview with the Lord is well known, as is the call of Aaron to assist him. But before they could confront Pharaoh they must win over the elders of Israel.

And Moses and Aaron went and gathered together all the elders of the children of Israel:

And Aaron spake all the words which the Lord had spoken unto Moses, and did the signs in the sight of the people.

And the people believed: and when they heard that the Lord had visited the children of Israel, and that he had looked upon their affliction, then they bowed their heads and worshipped. (Ex. 4:29-31.)

Any fear that Moses had of being trapped by his former enemies was removed when the Lord told him that "all the men are dead which sought thy life." (Ex. 4:19.)

So now the time came for Moses and Aaron to face Pharaoh. There is a lack of agreement among various scholars as to which of the Egyptian kings this was. Some believe that Rameses II was the pharaoh of the liberation, while others believe that he was the king who enslaved Israel. These latter scholars claim that the pharaoh of the deliverance was actually Merneptah II, who was the thirteenth son of Rameses II.

Regardless of identification, the pharaoh of the enslavement was determined to subdue the Hebrews, as was also the pharaoh of the liberation.

The Egyptians were builders and needed slave labor. They also had but shortly before that time driven the foreign Hyksos usurpers from the throne and from the country, and they feared yet another invasion. Since the Hebrews lived in an area of the Delta that would provide easy access for any invader, the Egyptians were fearful that they might join some invasion force to obtain their own liberty.

These important elements figured prominently in the confrontation between Moses and Pharaoh. Neither Pharaoh nor Moses would yield. It was a situation almost like the irresistible force meeting the immovable object.

The New Analytical Bible says:

To realize in any proper sense the nature and significance of these events we must take our stand in the Egypt of that day and watch this mighty contest.

On the one side is the greatest state of antiquity of that time having a highly developed civilization. It was this nation that lit the torch of civilization and passed it on to the West. They were a deeply religious people having a system that was replete with deities. They had their priests and magicians.

On the other side was a despised and enslaved nation, two men, Moses and Aaron, and the God of Israel. What a spectacle as these two men, armed with nothing more than a shepherd's crook, stand before the mighty Pharaoh, and in the name of Jehovah demand that he permit the people to leave the land!

When he refused, a new thing happened that transcended the natural and human.

The Nile was an Egyptian deity and it was smitten by a Power greater than Egypt's god and the latter was discredited. What a shock it must have been to the Egyptian mind that his great god [the river] was so completely subjected to the Will of a greater being whom these two messengers call Jehovah and in whose name they speak and act.

The very significant thing about these plagues is the fact that they demonstrate the presence and power of a Being above Nature and superior to the gods upon whom Egypt relied.

The fish of the Nile, one of the staple commodities of food, died. Their god [the Nile] could not save itself or the life it contained. Ra, the Sun-god, was their chief object of worship, but was powerless to give them light during the three days of midnight darkness, while in Goshen it was light.

Beasts were the representatives of some of their deities, particularly the bull, and they were destroyed by a murrain.

Thus were the plagues designed to expose to Pharaoh and his people the utter folly of their idolatry and to open their eyes to the true God. When the plague of lice spread over the land they declared this to be "the finger of God."

With what force it must have come to Pharaoh when he ascertained that in Goshen where dwelt the enslaved Hebrews there were no murrain, no darkness, no hail, no locusts and finally no destruction of their firstborn.

How profoundly and completely did the God of Israel vindicate Himself in this land steeped in the most abominable idolatry. (Chicago: John A. Dickson Publishing Co., 1947, p. 119.)

Moses was as persistent as Pharaoh was stubborn. The scripture repeatedly tells how Pharaoh hardened his heart against Moses and the prophet's proposals. Instead of yielding in any degree, Pharaoh increased the burdens of the Hebrew slaves, and this too added to Moses' discomfort when the Israelites railed against him for it. They took the position that instead of Moses bringing about their liberation, he was only making their bondage worse.

Pharaoh cried out insultingly against Moses and said, "Who is the Lord, that I should obey his voice to let Israel go? I know not the Lord, neither will I let Israel go." (Ex. 5:2.)

And when Moses and Aaron told the king that they had met with their God, who again had commanded them to liberate Israel, the king merely replied: "Get you unto your burdens."

It was then that the straw was taken from the Hebrews as they made bricks, and "let there more work be laid upon the men, that they may labor therein; and let them not regard vain words."

Now Moses complained to the Lord. "Wherefore hast thou so evil entreated this people? . . . For since I came to Pharaoh to speak in thy name, he hath done evil to this people; neither hast thou delivered thy people at all." (Ex. 5:2, 4, 9, 22-23.)

These were hard words that Moses spoke to the Lord. But God knew what he was about. There was purpose in all he did, and as he permitted Pharaoh to resist, he also was teaching the monarch that the God of Israel was mightier than the gods of Egypt. This lesson was not alone for the Egyptians, either, for the Israelites themselves had to learn that great fact, inasmuch as many of them had become worshipers of the Egyptian deities.

The Lord was under covenant to bring his people out, and he would keep his word, so he said to Moses:

Wherefore say unto the children of Israel, I am the Lord, and I will bring you out from under the burdens of the Egyptians, and I will rid you out of their bondage, and I will redeem you with a stretched out arm, and with great judgments:

And I will take you to me for a people, and I will be to you a God: and ye shall know that I am the Lord your God, which bringeth you out from under the burdens of the Egyptians.

And I will bring you in unto the land, concerning the which I did swear to give it to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob; and I will give it you for an heritage: I am the Lord. (Ex. 6:6-8.)

But when Moses carried that message to the people, "they hearkened not unto Moses for anguish of spirit, and for cruel bondage." (Ex. 6:9.)

Between the complaints of the people and the resistance of the king, Moses had a difficult time. The Lord was now ready to perform miracles, however, to harass the Egyptians into submission. Some were defiantly duplicated by the magicians. But then the plagues came. The Nile was turned to blood. The fish died. There was an invasion of frogs. Pharaoh prayed for deliverance from them. The plague of lice followed, making Pharaoh more bitter and stubborn.

The flies and murrain were next, but although the Egyptians suffered, the Israelites in the land of Goshen were free from it all. Next came the boils, which affected even the magicians, regardless of their magic.

Hail and locusts now afflicted Egypt, but none were found in Goshen. At last the king began to relent. But it wasn't enough, so darkness came upon the land except in Goshen, where there was light. Pharaoh weakened a little more, but even yet he refused to free the slaves.

And then came the final blow—the death of the firstborn of all life in Egypt, again excepting the Israelites, who were saved by the Passover.

Not only did Pharaoh permit the Israelites to leave; he commanded them to go. The Egyptian people themselves hurried the Israelites in their departure, fearing that even they themselves would die, as had their firstborn children.

And it came to pass, when Pharaoh had let the people go, that God led them not through the way of the land of the Philistines, although that was near; for God said, Lest peradventure the people repent when they see war, and they return to Egypt:

But God led the people about, through the way of the wilderness of the Red sea: and the children of Israel went up harnessed out of the land of Egypt.

And Moses took the bones of Joseph with him: for he had straitly sworn the children of Israel, saying, God will surely visit you; and ye shall carry up my bones away hence with you.

And they took their journey from Succoth, and encamped in Etham, in the edge of the wilderness.

And the Lord went before them by day in a pillar of a cloud, to lead them the way; and by night in a pillar of fire, to give them light; to go by day and night:

He took not away the pillar of the cloud by day, nor the pillar of fire by night, from before the people. (Ex. 13:17-22.)

1977 Deseret Book Co.
