Mark E. Petersen, Moses: Man of Miracles (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1977)

THE PLAGUES WERE MIRACLES

Critics of the Bible have unmercifully attacked the account of the plagues used by the Lord to persuade Pharaoh to release the Hebrew slaves. Some say the story of the plagues is but another part of Bible mythology. Others try to explain them by natural means—"if they really happened at all."

There is this constant refusal on the part of these scholars to accept anything that is miraculous, because, of course, they are not even sure that there is a God in heaven at all, and if there is none, how could there be miracles? Hence they either discard these accounts altogether or try to explain them as natural phenomena and not without precedent.

Then there are some scholars who are willing to go half way in their acceptance of the miraculous, but who still cling to their reservations. Such a one is this:

The ten plagues which facilitated the departure of the Israelites were—with the exception of the last, the slaughter of the first-born of Egypt—natural phenomena of Egypt, and the miracle of them is that they were either intensified or that they occurred at unusual times. With the tenth plague it may be that, in fact, only the first-born of the Pharaoh died. (The Bible Companion, p. 11.)

With regard to this Sir Charles Marston, British archaeologist and defender of the Bible, has written:

The Ten Plagues of Egypt followed the refusal of Pharaoh. These carry us again into the sphere of the so-called supernatural or miraculous. On the other hand, they may be described as a succession of misfortunes that befell the Egyptians, most of which at any rate may be attributed to natural causes.

It has been the custom in the past for those who disbelieved in miracles to explain the Ten Plagues on these lines. Now that so-called miracles are being recognized by Science, it is no longer necessary to overemphasize natural causes. In doing so, while we are rescuing unusual events from one form of miracle in order to satisfy superficial knowledge, yet on the other hand, we are really consigning them into a region of more profound mystery.

What is the nature of natural causes? Why do things happen as they do, and when they do?

The Bible, as the text-book of the Science of Man, teaches us that the Deity works through natural causes. And again, according to scripture, Nature itself and its Laws are God's handiwork, and He is Immanent in them.

Too much emphasis has perhaps been laid upon the uniformity of Nature. The weather, for example, is not uniform, life is not uniform, even matter itself seems to be no longer regarded as entirely uniform.

In considering the cause of such incidents as the Plagues of Egypt, it is well to bear in mind that calamities are not uniform. When we come to incidents associated with the crossing of Jordan by the Israelites under Joshua, and the fall of the walls of Jericho, it will be seen that earthquakes were the immediate cause of them.

The fact that these incidents, like the Ten Plagues of Egypt, happened when they did, constitute the real miracle and point to the Ultimate Cause. For the rest, the Plagues of Egypt for the most part have occurred in Egypt at other times, except perhaps the last and greatest, the death of the firstborn, including the death of Pharaoh's eldest son. (The Bible Comes Alive, p. 47. Italics added.)

Stephen L. Caiger, in his book Bible and Spade, mentions a monument in Egypt that seems to confirm the account of the unexpected death of Pharaoh's son. (Quoted in Marston, The Bible Comes Alive, p. 48.)

When new translations of the Bible have been undertaken, a most careful search has been made for all manuscript sources, and some of the finest scholars in the translation field have been assigned to the work. In many instances the scholarship of these translators far exceeds that of the Bible critics who make their derogatory comments largely out of personal opinion only.

The new translations of the Bible completely and in detail confirm the King James version of the entire drama of the liberation. This includes what is said concerning the plagues that preceded the deliverance, and shows that they were indeed miraculous, both in their timing and in their effectiveness.

Note a few verses from the Jerusalem Bible, one of the finest of the new versions on the market today.

Concerning the water turning to blood we read:

Yahweh the God of the Hebrews has sent me (Moses) to say (to Pharaoh): Let my people go to offer me worship in the wilderness. Now, so far you have not listened. Here is Yahweh's message: That I am Yahweh. You shall learn by this: with the staff that is in my hand I will strike the water of the river and it shall be changed into blood. The fish in the river will die, and the river will smell so foul that the Egyptians will not want to drink the water of it. (Ex. 7:16-18.)

Some of the critics who insist that all was natural phenomena claim that sediment that had been washed into the river from heavy rains upstream gave a reddish color to the water. Do they recall how little it rains in that part of the world? And would sediment in the river cause a stench?

The literalness of the description of what followed, as given in the Jerusalem Bible, shows the futility of any such argument. Says the text:

Moses and Aaron did as Yahweh commanded. He raised his staff in the sight of Pharaoh and his court [it is interesting that it was done in the presence of the royal party], he struck the waters of the river and all the water in the river changed to blood. . . . Meanwhile all the Egyptians dug holes along the banks of the river in search of drinking water; they found the water of the river impossible to drink. (Ex. 7:20-25.)

The new version of the Torah issued by the Jewish Publication Society of America, Philadelphia, reads as follows on this point:

"Let My people go that they may worship Me in the wilderness." But you have paid no heed until now. Thus says the Lord, "By this you shall know that I am the Lord." See, I shall strike the water in the Nile with the rod that is in my hand, and it will turn into blood; and the fish in the Nile will die. The Nile will stink so that the Egyptians will find it impossible to drink the water of the Nile.

And the Lord said to Moses, "Say to Aaron: Take your rod and hold out your arm over the waters of Egypt—its rivers, its canals, its ponds, all its bodies of water—that they turn to blood; there shall be blood throughout the land of Egypt, even in vessels of wood and stone."

Moses and Aaron did just as the Lord commanded: he lifted up the rod and struck the water in the Nile in the sight of Pharaoh and his courtiers, and all the water in the Nile was turned into blood and the fish in the Nile died. The Nile stank so that the Egyptians could not drink water from the Nile; and there was blood throughout the land of Egypt. . . . And all the Egyptians had to dig round about the Nile for drinking water because they could not drink the water of the Nile. (Torah, Ex. 7:16-24.)

Could this have happened from sediment washed down-stream? Moses restored the water to normal at the Lord's discretion, which was another miracle.

When the flies came, Moses specified to Pharaoh the exact time they would go away, "and Yahweh did as Moses asked; the gadflies left Pharaoh and his courtiers and his subjects; not one remained." (Jerusalem Version, Ex. 8:31-32.)

When the plague of murrain came upon the cattle, "the Egyptian livestock died, but none owned by the sons of Israel died. Pharaoh had inquiries made, but it was true; none was dead of the livestock owned by the sons of Israel. But Pharaoh became adamant again and did not let the people go." (Ibid., 9:7.)

When it came to the final plague, when the firstborn of all Egypt was taken, human and animal life were included, not just the son of Pharaoh, as some claim. Says the Jerusalem Version: "At midnight Yahweh struck down all the first-born in the land of Egypt; the first-born of Pharaoh, heir to his throne, the first-born of the prisoner in his dungeon, and the first-born of all the cattle." (Ibid., 12:29.)

The revised Torah says: "There was no house where there was not someone dead." (Ex. 12:30.)

The other new versions agree with these. The plagues were deliberate; they were timed carefully; they had definite reactions from Pharaoh. They were brought upon Egypt as Pharaoh looked on so that he knew what was going on. He was a personal witness to it all. He knew they were miracles. He knew that it was Jehovah in action. Knowing this full well, he said to Moses: "Entreat Yahweh to rid me and my subjects of the frogs, and I promise to let the people go." (Jerusalem Version, Ex. 8:1-10.)

When the three days of darkness came, we read in the Jerusalem Version: "Then Yahweh said to Moses, `Stretch out your hand towards heaven and let darkness, darkness so thick that it can be felt, cover the land of Egypt.' So Moses stretched out his hand towards heaven, and for three days there was deep darkness over the whole land of Egypt. No one could see anyone else or move about for three days, but where the sons of Israel lived there was light for them." (Ibid., 10:21-23.)

The critics try to explain this period of darkness as an eclipse. But does an eclipse last for three days? Does it cover only selected parts of an area?

This darkness is reminiscent of that which came to America during the crucifixion. Of that situation the Book of Mormon says:

And it came to pass that when the thunderings, and the lightnings, and the storm, and the tempest, and the quakings of the earth did cease—for behold, they did last for about the space of three hours; and it was said by some that the time was greater; nevertheless, all these great and terrible things were done in about the space of three hours—and then behold, there was darkness upon the face of the land.

And it came to pass that there was thick darkness upon all the face of the land, insomuch that the inhabitants thereof who had not fallen could feel the vapor of darkness;

And there could be no light, because of the darkness, neither candles, neither torches; neither could there be fire kindled with their fine and exceedingly dry wood, so that there could not be any light at all;

And there was not any light seen, neither fire, nor glimmer, neither the sun, nor the moon, nor the stars, for so great were the mists of darkness which were upon the face of the land.

And it came to pass that it did last for the space of three days that there was no light seen; and there was great mourning and howling and weeping among all the people continually; yea, great were the groanings of the people, because of the darkness and the great destruction which had come upon them. (3 Ne. 8:19-23.)

Our modern scriptures are positive in declaring that the Lord did bring Israel out of the land of Egypt (1 Ne. 17:40) and with a mighty hand. In other words, he did it miraculously.

Although the Israelites did "harden their hearts from time to time, and they did revile against Moses, and also against God; nevertheless, ye know that they were led forth by his matchless power into the land of promise." (1 Ne. 17:42.)

Nephi comments further as to the miraculous events of the exodus as he says:

And he did straiten them in the wilderness with his rod; for they hardened their hearts, even as ye have; and the Lord straitened them because of their iniquity. He sent fiery flying serpents among them; and after they were bitten he prepared a way that they might be healed; and the labor which they had to perform was to look; and because of the simpleness of the way, or the easiness of it, there were many who perished. (1 Ne. 17:41.)

When Joseph in Egypt spoke of a seer to be raised up in the latter days, he said: "And he shall be great like unto Moses, whom I have said I would raise up unto you, to deliver my people, O house of Israel. And Moses will I raise up, to deliver thy people out of the land of Egypt." (2 Ne. 3:9-10.)

The fact that God delivered Israel by the hand of Moses itself implies the miraculous.

There is similar corroboration in this:

And now, my brethren, I have spoken plainly that ye cannot err. And as the Lord God liveth that brought Israel up out of the land of Egypt, and gave unto Moses power that he should heal the nations after they had been bitten by the poisonous serpents, if they would cast their eyes unto the serpent which he did raise up before them, and also gave him power that he should smite the rock and the water should come forth; yea, behold I say unto you, that as these things are true, and as the Lord God liveth, there is none other name given under heaven save it be this Jesus Christ, of which I have spoken, whereby man can be saved. (2 Ne. 25:20.)

And still further support is given in Alma as we read:

And I know that he will raise me up at the last day, to dwell with him in glory; yea, and I will praise him forever, for he has brought our fathers out of Egypt, and he has swallowed up the Egyptians in the Red Sea; and he led them by his power into the promised land; yea, and he has delivered them out of bondage and captivity from time to time. (Alma 36:28.)

The Book of Mormon peoples obtained information concerning the exodus from the brass plates of Laban. They contained "engravings, which have the records of the holy scriptures upon them," and therefore we do not question them. (Alma 37:1-12.)

Dr. J. O. Kinnaman, writing in Digger for Facts, says this:

The climax of the whole situation was the death of the firstborn of man and beast. At this point, the adverse critics for a long time thought that they had discredited the Bible archaeologist; but God still works in a wondrous way to vindicate His Word.

From archaeological evidence [inscriptions] we know that Merneptah [who is believed to have succeeded Ramses II] was not succeeded on the throne by his oldest son. We are told that this boy died suddenly and unexpectedly while still very young. This death occurred about the time recorded in the Bible as the time of the death of the firstborn. This event took place according to the best chronology April 6-7 (midnight). (Massachusetts: Destiny Publishers, 1940, p. 103. Italics added.)

We who are interested in the date of April 6 will be pleased to note what this archaeologist says about the time of the final decision of Pharaoh to "let my people go."

April 6. Very interesting indeed!

There is wide disparity among the scholars as to the year of the exodus. The suppositions range anywhere from 1230 to 1491 B.C. Most, however, believe it took place about 1290 B.C.

1977 Deseret Book Co.
