Mark E. Petersen, Moses: Man of Miracles (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1977)

THE PASSOVER

The Almighty brought Israel out of Egypt through a series of wondrous miracles. The entire procedure was without either parallel or precedent.

As the people traveled in the daytime, the Lord led the way. At night they were guided by a luminous cloud. They were given safe passage through the Red Sea, and they saw Pharaoh's pursuing armies swallowed up in the deep. They were fed for forty years in the desert as only the Almighty could provide for such a multitude. Their clothes never wore out.

They watched Moses ascend the heights of Sinai to commune with the Lord; they saw him return with a heavenly glow upon his face, and they were awed. They saw the lightning and heard the thunder as the Lord descended upon the mount, personally announcing the Ten Commandments, and they were frightened, fearing for their lives.

The entire drama of the exodus was a constant display of heavenly compassion, determination, at times indignation, and mighty power. It is no wonder that the Israelites have been impressed by it as by few other events in their history.

But with it all, the most significant event was the introduction of the Passover.

Nothing in their entire experience so partook of the divine nature as did this great event. Nothing else was intended quite so much to teach them the meaning of their relationship to God. The paschal lamb of that day could only refer to the Lamb of God. It was a divine symbol.

As we look back upon it now, we can readily see that the Passover truly was a pattern of Christ's great sacrifice. The Israelites, however, did not seem to understand it at the time. They were too involved in the mechanics of their escape. But Moses, who wrote of Christ, must have known that the Passover was symbolic of the Savior's sacrifice on the cross. Certainly Paul in a later dispensation knew very well indeed, for he wrote that Christ is our passover.

In writing to the Corinthians, persuading them to truly worship the Lord, he said: "Purge out therefore the old leaven, that ye may be a new lump, as ye are unleavened. For even Christ our passover is sacrificed for us: Therefore let us keep the feast, not with old leaven, neither with the leaven of malice and wickedness; but with the unleavened bread of sincerity and truth." (1 Cor. 5:7-8.)

How many times is the Savior called the Lamb of God?

John the Baptist, standing with his followers, pointed to Jesus and said, "Behold the Lamb of God." (John 1:29.)

Peter spoke of him as the Paschal Lamb when he said, "Ye were not redeemed with corruptible things, as silver and gold, from your vain conversation received by tradition from your fathers; But with the precious blood of Christ as of a lamb without blemish and without spot: Who verily was fore-ordained before the foundation of the world." (1 Pet. 1:18-20. Italics added.)

Jesus of Nazareth was indeed the Lamb of God.

Did not John the Revelator in his vision see ten thousand times ten thousand say with a loud voice: "Worthy is the Lamb that was slain to receive power, and riches, and wisdom, and strength, and honour, and glory, and blessing. And every creature which is in heaven, and on the earth, and under the earth, and such as are in the sea, and all that are in them, heard I saying, Blessing, and honour, and glory, and power, be unto him that sitteth upon the throne, and unto the Lamb for ever and ever." (Rev. 5:11-13.)

When Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon looked into the heavens they saw "the holy angels, and them who are sanctified before his throne, worshiping God, and the Lamb, who worship him forever and ever." (D&C 76:21.)

They also saw the ultimate glory and triumph of the Lamb "who was slain, who was in the bosom of the Father before the worlds were made." (D&C 76:39.)

As they closed their account of this magnificent revelation, they wrote: "And to God and the Lamb be glory, and honor, and dominion forever and ever." (D&C 76:119.)

Those who say that the plague of the death of the firstborn in Egypt was an isolated natural incident or that it did not happen at all must find some explanation for the powerful and meaningful symbolism in that event. God has often taught in symbols. He has often instructed his children by showing them "types of things to come." This last plague was too symbolic and too important as a prophetic type of things to come to have been but a human invention.

Christ was the Father's Firstborn. He was the Lamb of God. The Passover was in every way symbolic of his great sacrifice.

As the Lord gave instruction to Moses concerning the paschal lamb on that first Passover, he required that the lamb must be a male without blemish of any kind. The Savior, in his sacrifice, was without blemish.

In the first paschal lamb, no bone was to be broken. In the Savior's crucifixion, no bone was broken. (Ex. 12:5, 46; John 19:36.)

The blood of the paschal lamb of Moses' day was the means by which the ancient Israelites were spared from the angel of death.

To all of us the blood of the Christ is our means of escaping the devil, who is the worst of all the angels of death and destruction. By serving the Lord, his blood rescues us—saves us—from Satan, and helps us to return to the presence of our Heavenly Father.

As the blood of the first paschal lamb meant life, not death, to ancient Israel, so is the blood of Christ to all mankind a symbol, assuring us of life, not death, eternally.

Christ is our Paschal Lamb. His passover is forever, if we will accept it, not just for a single night as it was in Egypt. It should be far more meaningful to us than was escape from the angel of death to the Hebrews.

The offering of sacrifices to the Lord began with Adam. These burnt offerings were symbolic of the coming atonement of the Christ. They continued from Adam to the days of John the Baptist. The ultimate sacrifice of the Savior on Calvary brought an end to such sacrifices and introduced the sacrament of the Lord's Supper in their place.

The burnt offerings of ancient times looked forward to the coming sacrifice of the Lamb of God; the sacrament of the Lord's Supper looks back to that sacrifice, and therefore we eat and drink of the sacred emblems in remembrance of him. Our sacramental prayers explain the sacred nature of that ordinance.

The paschal lamb of Egypt was, of course, a sacrifice, but with a greatly enlarged significance. Instead of the blood of the sacrifice being disposed of in the usual way, this time the blood was to be placed upon the door posts as a sign to the destroying angel that here lived believers. The presence of that blood would spare all their firstborn from death. It literally symbolized life and salvation for Israel in the face of death and destruction for the Egyptians.

Throughout the centuries since then, the Passover has been observed by the Jews as one of their most important holy anniversaries.

Jesus himself observed it. When he was found in the temple as a boy of twelve, his presence in Jerusalem was in observance of the Passover. (Luke 2:41-42.) As he became a man, he likewise honored that day. It was most significant to him, since he himself was the great Paschal Lamb.

As he came to Jerusalem for the last time, his disciples asked him, "Where wilt thou that we prepare for thee to eat the passover?" (Matt. 26:17.)

He said, "Go into the city to such a man, and say unto him, The Master saith, My time is at hand; I will keep the passover at thy house with my disciples." The disciples "did as Jesus had appointed them; and they made ready the passover." (Matt. 26:18-19.)

This was the most important of all passovers, that to which all previous ones looked forward. It was the time of the great sacrifice, the atonement of the Lord.

He sat down to supper with the Twelve, and—

As they did eat, he said, Verily I say unto you, that one of you shall betray me.

And they were exceeding sorrowful, and began every one of them to say unto him, Lord, is it I?

And he answered and said, He that dippeth his hand with me in the dish, the same shall betray me.

The Son of man goeth as it is written of him: but woe unto that man by whom the Son of man is betrayed! it had been good for that man if he had not been born.

Then Judas, which betrayed him, answered and said, Master, is it I? He said unto him, Thou hast said. (Matt. 26:21-25.)

Now was the time all burnt offerings should end. Now, as he was about to be sacrificed himself, he changed the ordinance and introduced the sacrament of the Lord's Supper:

And as they were eating, Jesus took bread, and blessed it, and brake it, and gave it to the disciples, and said, Take, eat; this is my body.

And he took the cup, and gave thanks, and gave it to them, saying, Drink ye all of it;

For this is my blood of the new testament, which is shed for many for the remission of sins.

But I say unto you, I will not drink henceforth of this fruit of the vine, until that day when I drink it new with you in my Father's kingdom.

And when they had sung an hymn, they went out into the mount of Olives.

Then saith Jesus unto them, All ye shall be offended because of me this night: for it is written, I will smite the shepherd, and the sheep of the flock shall be scattered abroad.

But after I am risen again, I will go before you into Galilee. (Matt. 26:26-32.)

Then came the touching scene where Peter was rebuked: "This night, before the cock crow, thou shalt deny me thrice."

And now came the prayer and suffering in Gethsemane. The Lamb indeed was to be sacrificed. He was to take upon himself the suffering of all mankind.

Then cometh Jesus with them unto a place called Gethsemane, and saith unto the disciples, Sit ye here, while I go and pray yonder.

And he took with him Peter and the two sons of Zebedee, and began to be sorrowful and very heavy.

Then saith he unto them, My soul is exceeding sorrowful, even unto death: tarry ye here, and watch with me.

And he went a little further, and fell on his face, and prayed, saying, O my Father, if it be possible, let this cup pass from me: nevertheless not as I will, but as thou wilt.

And he cometh unto the disciples, and findeth them asleep, and saith unto Peter, What, could ye not watch with me one hour?

Watch and pray, that ye enter not into temptation: the spirit indeed is willing, but the flesh is weak.

He went away again the second time, and prayed, saying, O my Father, if this cup may not pass away from me, except I drink it, thy will be done.

And he came and found them asleep again: for their eyes were heavy.

And he left them, and went away again, and prayed the third time, saying the same words.

Then cometh he to his disciples, and saith unto them, Sleep on now, and take your rest: behold, the hour is at hand, and the Son of man is betrayed into the hands of sinners.

Rise, let us be going: behold, he is at hand that doth betray me. (Matt. 26:36-46.)

On the Passover night in Egypt there was no betrayal. On this, the Great Passover, there was the following:

And while he yet spake, lo, Judas, one of the twelve, came, and with him a great multitude with swords and staves, from the chief priests and elders of the people.

Now he that betrayed him gave them a sign, saying, Whomsoever I shall kiss, that same is he: hold him fast.

And forthwith he came to Jesus, and said, Hail, master; and kissed him.

And Jesus said unto him, Friend, wherefore art thou come? Then came they, and laid hands on Jesus, and took him.

And, behold, one of them which were with Jesus stretched out his hand, and drew his sword, and struck a servant of the high priest's, and smote off his ear.

Then said Jesus unto him, Put up again thy sword into his place: for all they that take the sword shall perish with the sword.

Thinkest thou that I cannot now pray to my Father, and he shall presently give me more than twelve legions of angels?

But how then shall the scriptures be fulfilled, that thus it must be?

In that same hour said Jesus to the multitudes, Are ye come out as against a thief with swords and staves for to take me? I sat daily with you teaching in the temple, and ye laid no hold on me.

But all this was done, that the scriptures of the prophets might be fulfilled. Then all the disciples forsook him, and fled. (Matt. 26:47-56.)

The account of the crucifixion is well known. It was indeed the enactment of the Great Passover. The Lamb of God was now offered up, the Lamb "slain from the beginning of the world," the Lamb of God!

This gives added meaning to our faith as we look back at the Passover of Moses' day. Without the offering of the Lamb of God on Calvary, there would be no salvation, "for there is none other name under heaven given among men, whereby we must be saved." (Acts 4:12.)

The Jews, even today, still observe the Passover as instituted in Moses' day. In Hebrew the word is Pesach, meaning to pass over or to spare. As The Book of Jewish Knowledge describes it:

"The most beloved of all Jewish holy days is the festival of Passover. Symbolically, in its most meaningful sense, it represents a cherished traditional Jewish value—a love of freedom. That is the reason why, in the religious literature of the Jews, the festival is referred to pridefully as 'The Season of Our Freedom.'" (New York: Crown Publishers, 1964, p. 324.)

This volume, produced by Nathan Ausubel, goes on to explain that elaborate preparations are made for the festival, which lasts eight days now, although prior to the Middle Ages the duration was for only seven days.

In every home a search is made for even the smallest crumb of leavened bread, which must be banished from the house, for only matzah, unleavened bread, may be eaten at this time.

A number of symbolic foods are required, such as the shankbone of a roasted lamb, called z'roah; a beitzah, roasted egg, and bitter herbs to remind the Jews of the bitterness of the Egyptian bondage. Other significant foods are also used, and all are put on a "Passover plate" for serving. Reading the Haggadah narrative about the bondage and liberation in Egypt is an important part of the observance.

The celebration is now largely a family affair, and although the liberation is remembered solemnly, the Jews make a major point of emphasizing family love and unity and adherence to the faith of their fathers.

Much as the Passover is Jewish, Christians must recognize in it a symbol of the atonement of Christ, for it was definitely such.

Dr. James E. Talmage gives a touching description of the Lord's suffering in Gethsemane:

Christ's agony in the garden is unfathomable by the finite mind, both as to intensity and cause. The thought that He suffered through fear of death is untenable. Death to Him was preliminary to resurrection and triumphal return to the Father from whom He had come, and to a state of glory even beyond what He had before possessed; and, moreover, it was within His power to lay down His life voluntarily.

He struggled and groaned under a burden such as no other being who has lived on earth might even conceive as possible. It was not physical pain, nor mental anguish alone, that caused Him to suffer such torture as to produce an extrusion of blood from every pore; but a spiritual agony of soul such as only God was capable of experiencing.

No other man, however great his powers of physical or mental endurance, could have suffered so; for his human organism would have succumbed, and syncope would have produced unconsciousness and welcome oblivion.

In that hour of anguish Christ met and overcame all the horrors that Satan, "the prince of this world" could inflict. The frightful struggle incident to the temptations immediately following the Lord's baptism was surpassed and overshadowed by this supreme contest with the powers of evil.

In some manner, actual and terribly real though to man incomprehensible, the Savior took upon Himself the burden of the sins of mankind from Adam to the end of the world. Modern revelation assists us to partial understanding of the awful experience.

In March 1830, the glorified Lord, Jesus Christ, thus spake: "For behold, I, God, have suffered these things for all, that they might not suffer if they would repent, but if they would not repent, they must suffer even as I, which suffering caused myself, even God, the greatest of all, to tremble because of pain, and to bleed at every pore, and to suffer both body and spirit: and would that I might not drink the bitter cup and shrink—nevertheless, glory be to the Father, and I partook and finished my preparations unto the children of men."

From the terrible conflict in Gethsemane, Christ emerged a victor. Though in the dark tribulation of that fearful hour He had pleaded that the bitter cup be removed from His lips, the request, however oft repeated, was always conditional; the accomplishment of the Father's will was never lost sight of as the object of the Son's supreme desire.

The further tragedy of the night, and the cruel inflictions that awaited Him on the morrow, to culminate in the frightful tortures of the cross, could not exceed the bitter anguish through which He had successfully passed. (Jesus the Christ, pp. 613-14.)

The Savior's own description of his suffering is probably the most poignant expression we have in all our literature:

Therefore I command you to repent—repent, lest I smite you by the rod of my mouth, and by my wrath, and by my anger, and your sufferings be sore—how sore you know not, how exquisite you know not, yea, how hard to bear you know not.

For behold, I, God, have suffered these things for all, that they might not suffer if they would repent;

But if they would not repent they must suffer even as I;

Which suffering caused myself, even God, the greatest of all, to tremble because of pain, and to bleed at every pore, and to suffer both body and spirit—and would that I might not drink the bitter cup, and shrink—

Nevertheless, glory be to the Father, and I partook and finished my preparations unto the children of men.

Wherefore, I command you again to repent, lest I humble you with my almighty power; and that you confess your sins, lest you suffer these punishments of which I have spoken, of which in the smallest, yea, even in the least degree you have tasted at the time I withdrew my Spirit. (D&C 19:15-20.)

1977 Deseret Book Co.
