Mark E. Petersen, Moses: Man of Miracles (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1977)

THE EXODUS FROM EGYPT

Who can measure the magnitude of the exodus of Israel from the land of the Nile? That journey is beyond the comprehension of modern people accustomed to present-day conveniences and equipment. There is nothing known in history to compare with it.

When we think of the travels of our own pioneers from Nauvoo to the Great Basin, we are appalled at their hardships and accomplishments. But they were numbered only in the thousands, and their trek was spaced over twenty-two years. From the first company led by Brigham Young in 1847 to the coming of the railroad in 1869, a total of some 80,000 pioneers migrated to Utah.

They came in separate contingents and many were well equipped. We had our handcart pioneers, of course, all of whom walked across the plains, a number of them dying on the way. And many of those who drove ox teams also walked. With their wagons reserved to carry their heavy loads, members of families, including little children, trudged on foot the entire distance from the Missouri River to the Great Salt Lake. Their hardships were almost beyond belief.

But consider the situation faced by Moses and his people in their exodus. Once the plagues had convinced Pharaoh that he must free the Israelites, it seemed that the Egyptians could hardly wait to see the last of them, for they now feared for their own lives.

And it came to pass, that at midnight the Lord smote all the firstborn in the land of Egypt, from the firstborn of Pharaoh that sat on his throne unto the firstborn of the captive that was in the dungeon; and all the firstborn of cattle.

And Pharaoh rose up in the night, he, and all his servants, and all the Egyptians; and there was a great cry in Egypt; for there was not a house where there was not one dead.

And he called for Moses and Aaron by night, and said, Rise up, and get you forth from among my people, both ye and the children of Israel; and go, serve the Lord, as ye have said.

Also take your flocks and your herds, as ye have said, and be gone; and bless me also.

And the Egyptians were urgent upon the people, that they might send them out of the land in haste; for they said, We be all dead men. (Ex. 12:29-33.)

Their haste in leaving was such that "the people took their dough before it was leavened, their kneadingtroughs being bound up in their clothes upon their shoulders," and left. This was their fresh dough intended for baked bread. So great was their haste.

The modernized Torah records the situation as follows:

And Pharaoh arose in the night, with all his courtiers and all the Egyptians—because there was a loud cry in Egypt; for there was no house where there was not someone dead.

He summoned Moses and Aaron in the night and said, "Up, depart from among my people, you and the Israelites with you! Go, worship the Lord as you said! Take also your flocks and your herds as you said, and be gone!"

The Torah also explains that the "Egyptians urged the people on, to make them leave in haste, for they said, ‘We shall all be dead.’ So the people took their dough before it was leavened, their kneading bowls wrapped in their cloaks upon their shoulders." (Torah, Ex. 12:30-34.)

There can be no doubt that the flight was in haste. But consider the extent of it.

The scripture says there were 600,000 men and their families. If we were to estimate 600,000 men plus 600,000 women plus their numerous children (for the record says they were very prolific), there must have been at least two or three million people who hastily took what they could carry and left. By comparison, it may be remembered that the total population of Utah today is only a little more than one million, and that the present population of modern Israel in Palestine is only about three million.

The scripture refers to the total body of Israelites as being likened to the "stars of heaven for multitude." (Deut. 10:22.) A similar expression occurs in Deut. 1:10. At one time they had a standing army of 400,000 foot soldiers. (Judg. 20:2, 17.)

When a plague struck the camp and 14,700 died, it did not seem to make any discernible dent in the total number. (Num. 16:49.)

When a subsequent census was taken of persons over twenty, "these were numbered of the children of Israel 601,730." (Num. 26:4, 51.)

It seems difficult to determine with any accuracy the total number of the Twelve Tribes at the time of the exodus, but indeed they were a numerous host.

The people and animals all went in a single large company, as far as can be determined from the record. Think of driving many thousands of animals before them, to say nothing of the families caring for themselves. Think of the pregnant women, and the little children, and recall how the Savior, foretelling the destruction of Jerusalem, urged the people to pray that their flight be not in haste, for he knew the extent of the problem.

Some idea of the number of their animals may be obtained from reading Num. 31:42-46, where mention is made of 337,500 sheep and 36,000 head of cattle.

Many westerners in the United States have had experience herding cattle and sheep from one grazing area to another, and they know the difficulties involved. Animals travel slowly and they wander. They need grazing, and they need water. The Israelites had all these problems. Moses had been a herdsman himself, but at no time did he seem to have more than a small herd of sheep, and they belonged to Jethro.

Let us admit that what Moses achieved was beyond all human capabilities. The Lord was with him, and it was the Lord's doing. As the scripture teaches, nothing is too hard for the Lord. (Gen. 18:14.) Such a trek as this could not possibly have been made without constant divine assistance and direction. But such help was given. It was a tremendous miracle.

We have some excellent examples of how the Lord performs this type of miracle, as we read in the Book of Mormon.

The people of Limhi, in escaping from the Lamanites, "did depart by night into the wilderness with their flocks and their herds," and the fast-moving armies of the Lamanites tried for two days to catch up with them but could not. Consider that for a moment. The people of Limhi traveled with their flocks and herds, but even the fleet-footed Lamanite armies could not catch them, and they had only a short headstart. (Mosiah 22:10-16.)

How was it done? It is further illustrated in the escape of Alma's people from the armies of King Noah: "They gathered together their flocks, and took of their grain, and departed into the wilderness before the armies of King Noah. And the Lord did strengthen them, that the people of King Noah could not overtake them to destroy them. And they fled eight days' journey into the wilderness." (Mosiah 23:1-3. Italics added.) It was another miracle.

The Lord strengthened Alma's people further while they were captives of King Amulon so that although as slaves they were laden with heavy burdens the Lord blessed them to the point where "you cannot feel them upon your backs, even while you are in bondage." (Mosiah 24:14-15.)

The Bible Companion, a rather critical volume, considering its name, questions the exodus account but does admit that the Jews believed and accepted the story all down through the ages. Says this volume: "Legend invariably attaches itself to great events, and the supreme figures in a nation's history have their exploits magnified. With Moses, it is impossible that he should have been, or done, all that the biblical tradition credits him with."

This is the tone of most critics who are unwilling to grant anything miraculous in the Bible. Then it goes on:

But that he [Moses] was an actual person, and that he led his people from slavery, and mediated the covenant at Sinai which became their national and religious heritage, few scholars today deny.

There can be no doubt that the Israelites themselves regarded that complex of events made up of the deliverance from Egypt, the crossing of the Red Sea, the making of the covenant, the giving of the Law at Mount Sinai, and the wanderings in the wilderness, as the great constitutive factor of their history, the great beginning, which they never stopped remembering and to which they always looked back. In every strand of the Old Testament the wonder and the might of it is remembered. Prophets recall it, and so do psalmists, and preachers as well. (The Bible Companion, p. 11.)

That volume also discounts the other miracles of Moses. It even indicates that Pharaoh's son was the only one killed on the night of the Passover. But that, of course, is only poor conjecture on the part of some speculative scholars.

According to the best estimates, the total population of Egypt, not counting the Israelites, was about eleven million people at the time of the exodus. But again, there are no firm census figures available.

Frequent mention is made in the scriptures of the prolific nature of the Hebrews. This was one of the main reasons Pharaoh enslaved them. He was fearful that they might join some enemy army in taking over the government. This, of course, gives further meaning to the following: "And the children of Israel were fruitful, and increased abundantly, and multiplied, and waxed exceeding mighty; and the land was filled with them." (Ex. 1:7.)

Funk and Wagnall's Jewish Encyclopedia (5:294) reviews the biblical data, but then joins the uninspired critics and says:

That the events narrated in Exodus cannot be historical in all their details has been generally conceded. The numbers are certainly fanciful: 600,000 men would represent a total of at least two million souls. Where these could have found room and subsistence in the land of Goshen, granted even that many of them lived in Pharaoh's capital, or in the district of Rameses, and how so vast an unorganized host could have crossed the Red Sea in one night are questions that have not been explained. The exodus must have been a movement of a much smaller body of men.

That again is only poor conjecture by skeptics. All we actually have by way of facts on the subject is from the scripture itself, and the various new translations as well as the Torah and "The Holy Scriptures" according to the Masoretic text, sustain the King James Version. As has been noted, archaeology is making the scripture less and less subject to challenge.

The Jerusalem Bible, a strictly modern version, bearing the imprimatur of the Roman Catholic Church, has this to say:

And at midnight Yahweh struck down all the first-born in the land of Egypt; the first-born of Pharaoh, heir to his throne, the first-born of the prisoner in his dungeon, and the first-born of all the cattle.

Pharaoh and all his courtiers and all the Egyptians got up in the night, and there was a great cry in Egypt, for there was not a house without its dead.

And it was night when Pharaoh summoned Moses and Aaron. "Get up," he said, "you and the sons of Israel, and get away from my people. Go and offer worship to Yahweh as you have asked, and, as you have asked, take your flocks and herds, and go. And also ask a blessing on me."

The Egyptians urged the people to hurry up and leave the land, because, they said, "Otherwise we shall all be dead." So the people carried off their dough, still unleavened, on their shoulders, their kneading bowls wrapped in their cloaks. (Jerusalem Version, Ex. 12:29-34.)

This Bible is the work of both French and British scholars and was translated from the ancient texts. It is the English equivalent of the French La Bible de Jerusalem. (Doubleday, 1966.)

The Moffatt Bible gives this interesting statement: "The Egyptians pressed the people to hurry out of the land, crying, ‘We are all dead men!’ "

But all of these Bibles, and others not quoted here, hold to the 600,000 men, plus the families, as the number who escaped. Whether we wish to question those figures in the ancient manuscripts and believe the speculations of the skeptics is something each one must decide for himself.

One of the Jewish legends about the birth of Moses and the slaying of the boy babies says that Pharaoh had half a million of the Hebrew children destroyed before he ended the slaughter. If there is any shadow of truth in that story, it would suggest a population of several million to have so many babies. The fact is that revelation confirms many of the details of the exodus, although modern scripture says nothing about the total number who left.

There are a few indications of Israel's size, however, as seen from some of the census figures provided in the Bible.

The sons of Levi are listed, and likewise the children of these sons. For example, the male members of the family of Gershon, son of Levi, are listed at 7,500, not counting any girls or women. Of the children of Kohath, there were 8,600 males. Of the family of Merari, there were 6,200 men and boys.

Then we have this scripture: "All that were numbered of the Levites, which Moses and Aaron numbered at the commandment of the Lord, throughout their families, all the males from a month old and upward, were twenty and two thousand." (See Num. 3:1-39.) This, of course, relates only to the tribe of Levi.

The scripture then follows with a count of all firstborn males in all the tribes of Israel, with no others but the firstborn included:

And the Lord said unto Moses, Number all the firstborn of the males of the children of Israel from a month old and upward, and take the number of their names.

And thou shalt take the Levites for me (I am the Lord) instead of all the firstborn among the children of Israel; and the cattle of the Levites instead of all the firstlings among the cattle of the children of Israel.

And Moses numbered, as the Lord commanded him, all the firstborn among the children of Israel.

And all the firstborn males by the number of names, from a month old and upward, of those that were numbered of them, were twenty and two thousand two hundred and threescore and thirteen. (Num. 3:40-43.)

Of course there is no way of estimating the total population merely from the number of firstborn men and boys, since there is no record of the other members of the families.

As Joshua began his wars against the sinful inhabitants of the land, he "chose out thirty thousand mighty men of valour" to attack the enemy. (Josh. 8:3.)

To raise an army of 30,000 "mighty men of valour" would indicate he had a large population to draw from. But again, it is not known whether this was his total army or merely a contingent chosen for a special military task. In the battle 12,000 of the enemy "fell that day." (Josh. 8:25.)

The book of Ezra gives an interesting sidelight on the movement of large bodies of people. When the Jews returned from their Babylonian captivity, it was recorded as follows:

The whole congregation together was forty and two thousand three hundred and threescore,

Beside their servants and their maids, of whom there were seven thousand three hundred thirty and seven: and there were among them two hundred singing men and singing women.

Their horses were seven hundred thirty and six; their mules, two hundred forty and five;

Their camels, four hundred thirty and five; their asses, six thousand seven hundred and twenty. (Ezra 2:64-67.)

So we might go on. But we must remember that all the objections of the critics are conjectural. Attacks on various phases of Holy Writ have come to failure as archaeology and other research have unearthed facts that sustain the Bible.

Of course the task of removing the Israelites from Egypt under conditions of such haste was beyond human effort. But if the Lord was able to divide the Red Sea, if he could feed the hosts and provide water for them in a desert where neither of these life-giving elements was naturally available, he certainly could have—and did—otherwise expedite their flight.

If the Lord was able to transport the whole city of Enoch into heaven, would he not be able to expedite the movement of the Israelites out of Egypt?

Let us not forget that the Book of Mormon authenticates "the five books of Moses," and surely the author of those five books knew what he was talking about. (1 Ne. 5:11.)

Concerning the exodus, The Bible Companion (p. 163) says:

Tradition is emphatic that this was no mere escape story, nor the work of Moses. Moses was but the human instrument in a mighty act of deliverance wrought by Yahweh. . . .

From this moment, Israel's religion can claim to be firmly rooted, not in speculation about the nature of the Infinite, but in a series of historical events in which Yahweh takes the initiative to deliver his people. (Italics added.)

The Book of Mormon, on which we can wholly depend, is certainly not silent with respect to the exodus. The dividing of the waters of the Red Sea is mentioned repeatedly, so there certainly is no myth about that.

For example, Nephi, speaking to his brethren as they were seeking the plates of Laban, said: "Therefore let us go up; let us be strong like unto Moses; for he truly spake unto the waters of the Red Sea and they divided hither and thither, and our fathers came through, out of captivity, on dry ground, and the armies of Pharaoh did follow and were drowned in the waters of the Red Sea." (1 Ne. 4:2.)

This, to us, is revelation—from God—in these modern times, and completely destroys the position of the critics who say that Israel did not pass through the Red Sea, that the Red Sea was not even involved in the escape, and that Pharaoh's army was not destroyed in the sea.

Later in his first book, Nephi again affirms the escape of the Twelve Tribes from Egyptian bondage and declares that it was by the hand of God that it was all accomplished. Then he says:

"Now ye know that Moses was commanded of the Lord to do that great work; and ye know that by his word the waters of the Red Sea were divided hither and thither, and they passed through on dry ground. But ye know that the Egyptians were drowned in the Red Sea, who were the armies of Pharaoh."

He also confirms the account of manna being provided by the Lord for the Israelites, for he says: "And ye also know that they were fed with manna in the wilderness."

Then he authenticates the account of Moses striking the rock when there was no water in the desert: "Yea, and ye also know that Moses, by his word according to the power of God which was in him, smote the rock, and there came forth water, that the children of Israel might quench their thirst." (1 Ne. 17:22-29.)

Again, this comes to us by modern revelation through the translation and publication of the Book of Mormon. There is no room to doubt the account since it is thus confirmed. Again we see the value of the two sticks that Ezekiel saw (Ezek. 37), both in our hand today, each one confirming the other.

In the book of Helaman also, we have proof of the Red Sea crossing. A later Nephite prophet spoke: "Behold, my brethren, have ye not read that God gave power unto one man, even Moses, to smite upon the waters of the Red Sea, and they parted hither and thither, insomuch that the Israelites, who were our fathers, came through upon dry ground, and the waters closed upon the armies of the Egyptians and swallowed them up?" (Hel. 8:11. Italics added.)

Why should any Latter-day Saint doubt the story of the Red Sea crossing with this kind of corroboration? The Book of Mormon is true! It is God's word to us of today!

When the Lord talked with Moses, as is recorded in the first chapter of Moses in the Pearl of Great Price, the Lord predicted that the waters would be subject to Moses. He said: "And calling upon the name of God, he beheld his glory again, for it was upon him; and he heard a voice, saying: Blessed art thou, Moses, for I, the Almighty, have chosen thee, and thou shalt be made stronger than many waters; for they shall obey thy command as if thou wert God." (Moses 1:25.)

But not only do the Book of Mormon and the Pearl of Great Price give proof of the fact of the Red Sea crossing—so also does the Doctrine and Covenants.

The Lord, speaking to Oliver Cowdery, said: "Now, behold, this is the spirit of revelation; behold, this is the spirit by which Moses brought the children of Israel through the Red Sea on dry ground." (D&C 8:3.)

The Red Sea crossing is therefore established beyond any doubt whatever. On the word of the Lord himself, this event took place.

The miracle was repeated as the Israelites crossed over the Jordan and into the Promised Land. They went dry shod over the streambed, and when they were on the other side, the waters returned to their usual place. (See Josh. 3:15-17; 4:7; 4:18; 5:1.)

When there are doubts about the colossal nature of the undertaking, let us remember that the Book of Mormon also confirms the presence of God in that exodus, and proves that it was by his almighty power that the undertaking was accomplished, since it was far beyond human limitations. And what uninspired scholars can understand the miracles of God?

Again let us refer to Nephi: "And notwithstanding they being led, the Lord their God, their Redeemer, going before them, leading them by day and giving light unto them by night, and doing all things for them which were expedient for man to receive, they hardened their hearts and blinded their minds, and reviled against Moses and against the true and living God." (1 Ne. 17:30. Italics added.)

Here is language that no Latter-day Saint can ignore, coming as it does from the Book of Mormon.

Note that it was Jesus Christ, our Redeemer, our Lord and God, who went before them and guided them both by night and by day. It was the Savior, the Creator of all the worlds, who opened the Red Sea, which swallowed up the armies of Pharaoh; who brought forth water in the desert when Moses struck the rock; who provided the manna and the quail; and who did all other miracles so necessary to the movement of such a large body of people and their possessions.

Let us ask by way of comparison:

Since Christ, being Jehovah and Creator, brought into existence all of the universes in the heavens, including our own little earth and its oceans, was he not quite able to divide the Red Sea, which was but one of his very minor creations?

Since the Savior, as Creator, had made all the heavenly bodies and put adequate water on this earth, which is but a mere speck in space, was he not able to create a refreshing spring in the desert?

And since he is the Master of life and death, and soon was to vanquish death by his own resurrection, was he not qualified to stave off death by starvation on behalf of his wandering people?

Is anything too hard for the Lord?

He is Almighty God!

The exodus was a miraculous event!

Let us accept it as such and not try to explain it away by human means. We have revelation, and revelation is far more to be desired than the speculations of uninspired minds, no matter how well educated in worldly things they may be.

The Lord had pledged to Abraham half a millennium before that he would give the Holy Land to Israel as a home, and that meant moving Israel out of Egypt. But his people were enslaved there. They were victims of a cruel monarchical regime. They were powerless to chart their own course. Being in bondage, they literally were unable to act for themselves. Therefore the Almighty moved on their behalf.

It is admitted that the exodus was beyond the mortal powers of Moses, and the prophet himself knew that. He was even afraid to face Pharaoh, knowing his own limitations. He also feared the elders of Israel, thinking that they would not accept him as one sent of God. Moses knew his own short-comings well enough to realize that the exodus was far beyond his power to accomplish.

But with God, nothing is impossible, and it was the Lord who now undertook the task, using Moses as his humble instrument.

How many times does Holy Writ declare that it was God who brought Israel out of Egypt! It is evident throughout the scriptures. Yes, it was he who did it, and by that same power which called all creation into being in the first place.

1977 Deseret Book Co.
