Mark E. Petersen, Moses: Man of Miracles (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1977)

MOSES AND THE PRIESTHOOD

The gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ was taught to Adam and his family and to the patriarchs down to Moses’ day. The object of that dispensation of gospel truths was the same as it is today: to bring the children of God back into his presence.

Moses made a great effort to teach the Twelve Tribes those simple truths. Salvation came anciently as it does now, through the ministration of the priesthood, "which priesthood continueth in the church of God in all generations, and is without beginning of days or end of years," as the Lord says in the Doctrine and Covenants. (D&C 84:17.)

Moses received the Holy Priesthood under the hands of his father-in-law Jethro, and Jethro received it through the fathers back to the days of Abraham and Melchizedek. (D&C 84:6-14.)

The revelation then continues:

And the Lord confirmed a priesthood also upon Aaron and his seed, throughout all their generations, which priesthood also continueth and abideth forever with the priesthood which is after the holiest order of God.

And this greater priesthood administereth the gospel and holdeth the key of the mysteries of the kingdom, even the key of the knowledge of God.

Therefore, in the ordinances thereof, the power of godliness is manifest.

And without the ordinances thereof, and the authority of the priesthood, the power of godliness is not manifest unto men in the flesh;

For without this no man can see the face of God, even the Father, and live.

Now this Moses plainly taught to the children of Israel in the wilderness, and sought diligently to sanctify his people that they might behold the face of God;

But they hardened their hearts and could not endure his presence; therefore, the Lord in his wrath, for his anger was kindled against them, swore that they should not enter into his rest while in the wilderness, which rest is the fulness of his glory.

Therefore, he took Moses out of their midst, and the Holy Priesthood also;

And the lesser priesthood continued, which priesthood holdeth the key of the ministering of angels and the preparatory gospel;

Which gospel is the gospel of repentance and of baptism, and the remission of sins, and the law of carnal commandments, which the Lord in his wrath caused to continue with the house of Aaron among the children of Israel until John, whom God raised up, being filled with the Holy Ghost from his mother's womb. (D&C 84:18-27. Italics added.)

Moses obviously endeavored to have his people accept the gospel of Christ, which could bring them back into the divine presence. But when they rejected the gospel, and when Moses and the higher priesthood were taken away, they were left only with the Aaronic Priesthood and the lesser ordinances.

The Lord also gave to Israel in the wilderness a book of "Doctrine and Covenants" (Ex. 24:7, 8) which is found in Ex. 20:22 to 23:33. This was accepted by the people, by common consent, and the acceptance was solemnly ratified by sacrifice. In the 19th chapter of Exodus we read that God promised His people that if they would keep the covenant, He would make them "a peculiar treasure"; that is, His own special and private possession, "and ye shall be unto me a kingdom of priests and a holy nation." This is what Moses tried to teach the people. He tried to sanctify them through the Priesthood. See also 1 Pet. 2:9. The Saints of God are there referred to as a "holy Priesthood."

But Israel did not keep the covenant, and the result was that Moses was taken from them, and with him the greater Priesthood.

It was, as Paul calls the Law (Gal. 3:24), "our schoolmaster to bring us to Christ." It was confined to one tribe, that of Levi, and the presidency was vested in one family, that of Aaron. Hence its name, the Aaronic, or Levitic Priesthood.

"The Children of Israel were not capable of living up to all the requirements of the Higher or Holy Priesthood and the law of the Gospel, so the Lord, through Moses, gave them a new law and order of the Holy Priesthood, and another set of officers to administer to the people under the new conditions. . . .

"This new authority, or new Priesthood, or rather this new adaptation of and order of the old Priesthood, is called the ‘Lesser Priesthood.’ It is an appendage of the Higher Priesthood, because it belongs to or grows out of it." (Joseph B. Keeler, "The Lesser Priesthood," p. 8.)

The Lord had promised to Israel that if the people would obey His voice he would make of them a royal Priesthood, and He would give them the fulness of the Priesthood and the Gospel, but they hardened their hearts against him.

Through Moses he said: "Now, therefore, if ye will obey my voice indeed, and keep my covenant, then ye shall be a peculiar treasure unto me above all people: for all the earth is mine. And ye shall be unto me a kingdom of Priests (i.e. of the Melchizedek order), and an holy nation. These are the words which thou shalt speak unto the children of Israel." (Ex. 19:5-6.) "But they hardened their hearts and could not endure His presence, therefore, the Lord in his wrath, for his anger was kindled against them, swore that they should not enter into his rest while in the wilderness, which rest is the fulness of his glory." (V. 24.) This Aaronic Priesthood was to remain with them until the coming of Christ in his ministry.

The mission of the Aaronic Priesthood is here stated. It holds the key to the gospel of repentance, baptism, the remission of sins, and the Law of Carnal Commandments—the Law which was in force until John the Baptist. (Hyrum M. Smith and Janne M. Sjodahl, Doctrine and Covenants Commentary, Deseret Book Co., 1972, pp. 502-3.)

President Joseph Fielding Smith, in his Way to Perfection, says:

There have been times in the history of the world when these ordinances could not be given, for there were no authorized servants holding the Priesthood among the people. Millions of worthy souls have died without relief from their sins and without knowing of the Gospel, who would have received all these commandments if the opportunity had been extended to them. Even the children of Israel—with whom the Lord made covenants through their fathers Abraham and Israel—were left for centuries without the fulness of these blessings.

When the Lord took Moses out of their midst, he took the Melchizedek Priesthood also, and left the Aaronic Priesthood with the preparatory Gospel, and to this was attached the law. This was done because the anger of the Lord was kindled against the people for their hardness of heart. The Lord "swore that they should not enter into his rest while in the wilderness, which rest is the fulness of his glory." (D&C 84:24.)

These Israelites could not, therefore, obtain the fulness of the blessings. Just what ordinances were given them, beyond the preparatory Gospel, we do not know. That they were restricted is apparent, so they were unable to obtain the blessings which would entitle them to a "fulness of his glory." It was necessary because of this for these ancient people to wait until the time should come when others could act for them. This time came after the resurrection of our Lord. (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1975, pp. 174-75.)

1977 Deseret Book Co.
