Mark E. Petersen, Moses: Man of Miracles (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1977)

MOSES AND AARON

The appointment of Aaron and his sons to the ministry carries with it some interesting and important lessons.

It all began, of course, with the call of Moses. At first Aaron seems not to have been included in the consideration at all.

The third chapter of Exodus gives the detail of the Lord's first call to Moses when, from a burning bush, the divine voice called out: "Moses, Moses," to which he replied, "Here am I."

Telling Moses to remove his shoes because the ground there had been made holy, the Lord identified himself: "I am the God of thy father, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob. And Moses hid his face; for he was afraid to look upon God." (Ex. 3:6.)

This identification of himself by the Lord is interesting also in view of a similar statement made subsequently by the Almighty to his servant: "And God spake unto Moses, and said unto him, I am the Lord: And I appeared unto Abraham, unto Isaac, and unto Jacob, by the name of God Almighty, but by my name JEHOVAH was I not known to them." (Ex. 6:2-3.)

This is most interesting in view of the Lord's identification to Joseph Smith, as recorded in D&C 110:3-4, wherein we read: ". . . and his voice was as the sound of the rushing of great waters, even the voice of Jehovah, saying: I am the first and the last; I am he who liveth, I am he who was slain; I am your advocate with the Father."

Important also in this connection is 3 Nephi wherein the Savior himself says that he gave the law to Moses. (3 Ne. 15:2-10.)

Although Moses was told definitely that it was the Almighty speaking to him, the prophet hesitated and protested that he was not able to do the work required. "Now the man Moses was very meek, above all the men which were upon the face of the earth." (Num. 12:3.)

"Who am I, that I should go unto Pharaoh?" he asked the Lord, feeling his great inadequacy.

He argued in the same way when the Lord asked him to go to the elders of Israel about their impending release from bondage. "They will not believe me" was his argument. (Ex. 4:1.)

The Lord had said: "They shall hearken to thy voice." (Ex. 3:18.) He offered miracles as persuaders. But even this did not satisfy the timid shepherd who was now being called to be a prophet.

So "Moses said unto the Lord, O my Lord, I am not eloquent, neither heretofore, nor since thou hast spoken unto thy servant: but I am slow of speech, and of a slow tongue." (Ex. 4:10.)

This angered the Lord, who replied: "Who hath made man's mouth, or who maketh the dumb, or deaf, or the seeing, or the blind? Have not I the Lord?" (Ex. 4:11.) Then he said to Moses: "Go, and I will be with thy mouth, and teach thee what thou shalt say." (Ex. 4:12.)

Even this promise of eloquence did not satisfy Moses, who insisted on having someone else to help him.

"And the anger of the Lord was kindled against Moses, and he said, Is not Aaron the Levite thy brother? I know that he can speak well." And so Aaron was called. "And he shall be thy spokesman unto the people, and he shall be, even he shall be to thee instead of a mouth." (Ex. 4:14-16.)

So this was the first call of Aaron, and it came by revelation from God. Even in this preliminary work, prior to his call to the ministry, he was called by revelation.

The Lord would have made Moses eloquent if he had but accepted the divine word. He would have made his humble servant equal to every situation. "Is any thing too hard for the Lord?" (Gen. 18:14.)

But the Lord was patient, and he gave Moses the help of Aaron in approaching Pharaoh and releasing Israel.

However, there was still another calling awaiting Aaron. This came after the people had arrived in the wilderness and when an organization for the ministry was being considered.

It will be remembered that a portable tabernacle was required by the Lord for sacred services, as were various types of sacrifices and burnt offerings. Priestly administration was essential to this labor. Temple service has always been administered by the priesthood, and the tabernacle was but a forerunner of the temple. Sacred ordinances were performed therein.

Aaron and his sons were now called to serve in the priests' offices. We read: "And take thou unto thee Aaron thy brother, and his sons with him, from among the children of Israel, that he may minister unto me in the priest's office, even Aaron, Nadab and Abihu, Eleazar and Ithamar, Aaron's sons." (Ex. 28:1.)

Following the call, instructions were given regarding their work and their apparel, that they "may minister unto me in the priest's office."

The apostle Paul spoke of Aaron's call as he referred to the holy priesthood, and said: "And no man taketh this honour unto himself, but he that is called of God, as was Aaron." (Heb. 5:4.)

Since this is such an important point, it may be of interest to note the renderings of this scripture in some other translations of the Bible.

The New English Bible says: "And nobody arrogates this honor to himself: he is called by God, as indeed Aaron was."

The Revised Standard Version: "And one does not take the honor upon himself, but he is called by God just as Aaron was."

The Knox Catholic Bible: "His vocation comes from God, as Aaron's did; nobody can take on himself such a privilege as this."

The Moffatt Version: "It is an office which no one elects to take for himself; he is called to it by God, just as Aaron was."

The point is that God is to select his own ministers; no one assumes the call for himself. The manner in which it is made is to be like the call of Aaron; that is, by revelation from God to and through a living prophet, who in turn, with such authorization, calls a man to the ministry.

This same process was followed when Aaron was about to die and the Lord selected Eleazar, Aaron's son, to succeed him. (Num. 20:23-29.)

During his own mortal ministry the Savior made this vital principle clear: "Ye have not chosen me," he said to his disciples, "but I have chosen you, and ordained you, that ye should go and bring forth fruit. . . ." (John 15:16.)

Here is a basic principle in the ministry of Christ's church. Men must be called of God by revelation to and through a living prophet, which means that there must always be current revelation and living prophets in the Lord's true church; otherwise no ministers are called of God.

Amos said: "Surely the Lord God will do nothing, but he revealeth his secret unto his servants the prophets." (Amos 3:7.)

Therefore God would not act in his church without the services of a prophet, not even so much as to call a man to the ministry. Prophets were in the church for the work of the ministry (Eph. 4:12), and calling men to serve with divine authority most certainly is part of the ministry.

Paul asked the Romans: "How then shall they call on him in whom they have not believed? and how shall they believe in him of whom they have not heard? and how shall they hear without a preacher, and how shall they preach, except they be sent?" (Rom. 10:14-15.)

When Moses’ work was nearly finished, a successor was to be chosen to lead the Israelites over Jordan and into the Promised Land. Who should it be? The Lord solved the problem in the same manner as when Aaron was chosen. By direct revelation to the living prophet, Joshua was divinely called. Moses did not appoint him. God issued the call:

And the Lord said unto Moses, Take thee Joshua the son of Nun, a man in whom is the spirit, and lay thine hand upon him;

And set him before Eleazar the priest, and before all the congregation; and give him a charge in their sight. . . .

And Moses did as the Lord commanded him: and he took Joshua, and set him before Eleazar the priest, and before all the congregation:

And he laid his hands upon him, and gave him a charge, as the Lord commanded by the hands of Moses. (Num. 27:18-22.)

And further we read: "And Joshua the son of Nun was full of the spirit of wisdom; for Moses had laid his hands upon him: and the children of Israel hearkened unto him, and did as the Lord commanded Moses." (Deut. 34:9.)

This is an inescapable principle with reference to the ministry of Christ. It is one of the signs of the true church. Where there is no revelation, where there are no prophets, men are not called to the ministry by the Lord.

If ministers are not called of God as was Aaron, their acts are not valid. The scripture has various accounts of the punishment that God has dealt out to those who have officiated without authority. Here then is one of the great lessons to be learned from the relationship of Aaron and Moses.

Appropriate to this theme is a portion of the Sermon on the Mount. The Lord had said:

Not every one that saith unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven; but he that doeth the will of my Father which is in heaven.

Many will say to me in that day, Lord, Lord, have we not prophesied in thy name? and in thy name have cast out devils? and in thy name done many wonderful works?

And then will I profess unto them, I never knew you: depart from me, ye that work iniquity. (Matt. 7:21-23.)

When Hugh J. Schonfield made his translation known as the Authentic New Testament, he gave this rendering: "Many will say to me at that time, ‘Master, Master, have we not prophesied in your name, . . . and in your name performed many miracles?’ But then I shall tell them plainly, ‘I have never authorized you. Be off with you, you illegal practitioners!’ " (Great Britain: Dobson Books Ltd., 1956, p. 51.)

1977 Deseret Book Co.
