Mark E. Petersen, Moses: Man of Miracles (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1977)

MOSES AND THE LAW

The gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ was taught to Adam and his family and is intended for all mankind. The early patriarchs and prophets, such as Enoch and Abraham, lived it and preached it.

At times great success rewarded their efforts, as in the case of Enoch (Moses 7) and Melchizedek (Alma 13). At other times the results were not so fruitful, as Paul indicated when he said: "For unto us was the gospel preached, as well as unto them: but the word preached did not profit them, not being mixed with faith in them that heard it." (Heb. 4:2.)

Paul expressly said that the gospel was preached to Abraham. (Gal. 3:8.) Of this matter Peter also wrote:

Of which salvation the prophets have inquired and searched diligently, who prophesied of the grace that should come unto you:

Searching what, or what manner of time the Spirit of Christ which was in them did signify, when it testified beforehand the sufferings of Christ, and the glory that should follow. (1 Pet. 1:10-11.)

During their 430-year stay in Egypt the children of Israel became apostate and began to follow after the ways of that idolatrous land; hence the occurrence involving the golden calf.

Paul, writing to the Hebrews, discussed them:

Harden not your hearts, as in the provocation, in the day of temptation in the wilderness:

When your fathers tempted me, proved me, and saw my works forty years.

Wherefore I was grieved with that generation, and said, They do always err in their heart; and they have not known my ways.

So I sware in my wrath, They shall not enter into my rest.

Take heed, brethren, lest there be in any of you an evil heart of unbelief, in departing from the living God.

For some, when they had heard, did provoke: howbeit not all that came out of Egypt by Moses.

But with whom was he grieved forty years? was it not with them that had sinned, whose carcases fell in the wilderness?

And to whom sware he that they should not enter into his rest, but to them that believed not?

So we see that they could not enter in because of unbelief. (Heb. 3:8-12, 16-19.)

So, as Paul said, those who came out of Egypt could not enter the Promised Land because of their unbelief. The Lord allowed the forty years to go by to permit a new generation to arise, and it was this new generation that crossed over Jordan.

Moses had hoped that he could convert them to the gospel. He held the Melchizedek Priesthood; he was their prophet-leader, their revelator and seer. But many even of the new generation would not listen to him. They had been influenced too much by the evil examples of their parents as they had journeyed in the wilderness.

The result was that Israel, even after the screening process that went on in the wilderness, was not yet ready to accept the true God and live the beautiful truths of the gospel of Christ.

But the Lord was infinitely patient. He would keep his covenant with Abraham. He had promised the patriarch that Palestine would be the homeland of his children, and likewise that through his family all nations of the earth would be blessed. That of course meant that faith in the true God must be preserved.

The Lord then determined that he would give the tribes a preparatory course of lesser commandments as a foundation upon which they could build an acceptance of the higher laws.

The people were selfish. Evidently many of them were depraved, judging from the types of laws included in the new plan. In view of this, a stern correction of these traits was required.

To make the commandments strict, the Lord brought in the death penalty for disobedience in many cases, and in doing so he made it clear that the righteous must not feel sorry for those suffering the extreme penalty, for they had brought it upon themselves. (Deut. 19:13.)

To illustrate the manner in which this new law, known as the law of Moses, served as a schoolmaster, it will be noted that the Lord mixed in with the carnal commandments some of the most important of the higher laws.

The first and great commandment, to love the Lord with all our heart, soul, and strength, is basic in any dispensation of the gospel. As given then it read:

Hear, O Israel: the Lord our God is one Lord:

And thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thine heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy might.

And these words, which I command thee this day, shall be in thine heart:

And thou shalt teach them diligently unto thy children, and shalt talk of them when thou sittest in thine house, and when thou walkest by the way, and when thou liest down, and when thou risest up.

And thou shalt bind them for a sign upon thine hand, and they shall be as frontlets between thine eyes.

And thou shalt write them upon the posts of thy house, and on thy gates. (Deut. 6:4-9.)

Later, as Moses addressed the congregation, he said: "And now, Israel, what doth the Lord thy God require of thee, but to fear the Lord thy God, to walk in all his ways, and to love him, and to serve the Lord thy God with all thy heart and with all thy soul?" (Deut. 10:12.)

He continually emphasized the thought of one Lord and one God, the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, thus to draw their minds away from the polyglot of paganistic Egyptian practices with their gods of gold and stone and water, and of the moon and the sun.

It is interesting that at this early time he also held up to them the ultimate goal of becoming perfect like God; he said: "Thou shalt be perfect with the Lord thy God." (Deut. 18:13.)

This command came after his condemnation of all kinds of wizardry that he branded as abominations before the Lord. It was because of their false religions, as well as their depravity, that the Lord was driving the Canaanites out of the land. He would use the Israelites as his instruments in doing so, but Israel must not become contaminated by the people they were to destroy!

The Revised Version of the Bible reads as follows: "For anyone given to these practices is abominable to the Lord; indeed it is because of these abominable practices that the Lord your God is driving them out of your way. You must be absolutely true to the Lord your God; for while these nations whom you are to conquer give heed to soothsayers and diviners, the Lord your God has not intended you to do so." (Deut. 18:9-15.)

The Israelites were in this peculiar position: Behind them were the pagan gods of the Egyptians. Before them were the equally pagan gods of the Canaanites, whose practices included witchery, wizardry, and "peeping and muttering mediums" who held seances and pretended to call up the dead. It was all an abomination to the Lord.

Therefore he was stern and strict in this matter, and made it a capital offense to worship in these errant ways. Such worship was apostasy from the truth, and if handed down to other generations it could thwart the promises of the Lord to Abraham. The Lord could not be lenient on this point. And anyway, who can achieve any degree of perfection by imperfect means?

Among the higher laws mixed with the carnal commandments were also many that in detail taught the overall principle of the Golden Rule, to do unto others as we would be done by.

So the "schoolmaster" combined the lesser law with some principles of the higher law to keep their goals in proper focus, even though the Melchizedek Priesthood and Moses the prophet were removed from them.

Paul explained this to the Galatians as he attempted to show them how Christ's gospel, brought by the Savior himself, did away with the carnal commandments:

But before faith came, we were kept under the law, shut up unto the faith which should afterwards be revealed.

Wherefore the law was our schoolmaster to bring us unto Christ, that we might be justified by faith.

But after that faith is come, we are no longer under a schoolmaster.

For ye are all the children of God by faith in Christ Jesus.

For as many of you as have been baptized into Christ have put on Christ.

There is neither Jew nor Greek, there is neither bond nor free, there is neither male nor female: for ye are all one in Christ Jesus.

And if ye be Christ's, then are ye Abraham's seed, and heirs according to the promise. (Gal. 3:23-29.)

But basic to it all was a knowledge of and a firm belief in the true God. The Israelites had been so exposed to idolatry in Egypt that many wavered and quite obviously lost the true concept of God. Otherwise they would not have worshiped so willingly before Aaron's golden calf.

If the Lord was to save them, he must first teach them the truth about himself. He must allow them to know in no uncertain terms that he lives, that he is a Person, that Jehovah is his name, and that the pagan deities are nothing but dumb idols made of stone or silver or gold. (3 Ne. 15; Lev. 6.)

1977 Deseret Book Co.
