Mark E. Petersen, Moses: Man of Miracles (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1977)

THE REVELATION OF GOD

No one can worship God intelligently without an accurate understanding of the nature of the Deity. It is a lack of such knowledge that leads people into false religions and self-conceived creeds. They grope in the dark.

This was true of the ancient Israelites, contaminated as they were by idolatry and sin. It is true also today, which is one of the reasons for the proliferation of creeds and sects in the so-called Christian world.

It was the case in the early days of the Prophet Joseph Smith, when religious revivals emphasized the point to such a degree that the young prophet required divine wisdom to escape confusion.

In his day no one knew what God was like. Therefore, as a prerequisite to the restoration of the gospel, it must needs be that the correct knowledge of God be restored to provide a firm foundation upon which the restored Church could be built.

Hence the first vision of the Prophet Joseph, wherein he was permitted to see our Eternal Heavenly Father and his Son, Jesus the Christ, our Mediator and Redeemer. He discovered that indeed they were in human form, and that the scripture was correct in saying that man was made in the image and likeness of God.

He heard their voices and received their counsel. And as he gazed upon them he could see plainly two heavenly Personages, and he knew for a fact that they were as separate and distinct as any two other persons, each one an individual by himself.

At that moment, for the first time in many centuries, a mortal human being knew what God looked like, and heard his spoken words. It was only with this sure knowledge that Joseph Smith was able to proceed with his great assignment.

Knowing that God is real, the Prophet also came to know that Moroni, a man who came back from the dead as a heavenly messenger, was also real; that the Book of Mormon plates were real; and that the entire restoration procedure was factual, substantial, literal, corporeal, and physical—everything being a complete reality.

A sure knowledge of the nature of God was needed also by the ancient Israelites, who were steeped in the idolatrous ways of the Egyptians. What did they know about the true God?

For four centuries they had seen the worship of images of stone or wood that were manufactured before their own eyes, and they knew that all such were merely human creations. But because the Egyptians worshiped those articles and had such faith in them, the Israelites acquired a similar faith. Hence the golden calf episode, which so upset both the Lord and Moses.

In their ignorance the Israelites worshiped the calf. In their ignorance they were swayed toward Egyptian beliefs. And in their ignorance they doubted Moses and complained even when great miracles were performed on their behalf. No wonder the Prophet Joseph said that no one can be saved in ignorance!

Knowing about God through some personal contact would provide a firsthand understanding of him. As they were taught further about him, their knowledge would give them a purpose in life and goals for them to accomplish. This new knowledge revealed that they could even become like the true and living God, actually perfect. No pagan religion could do that for them.

The Almighty recognized this need and proceeded to make himself known to the people in general, so "the Lord came down upon mount Sinai, on the top of the mount: and the Lord called Moses up to the top of the mount; and Moses went up." (Ex. 19:20.)

The Lord explained to Moses that the people must be kept back some distance from the mount, and their priests also, because by coming too near they might be consumed by the glory of his appearance.

Then God spoke "all these words, saying, I am the Lord thy God, which have brought thee out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage. Thou shalt have no other gods before me." (Ex. 20:1-3. Italics added.)

The Lord then proceeded to give the Ten Commandments, which he also engraved on stone with his own finger. His words were accompanied by thunder and lightning, a dramatic demonstration of divine power. It frightened the people, who now were convinced of the reality of God. They feared to come close to him, and sought only to have Moses act as their intermediary.

And all the people saw the thunderings, and the lightnings, and the noise of the trumpet, and the mountain smoking: and when the people saw it, they removed, and stood afar off.

And they said unto Moses, Speak thou with us, and we will hear: but let not God speak with us, lest we die.

And Moses said unto the people, Fear not: for God is come to prove you, and that his fear may be before your faces, that ye sin not.

And the Lord said unto Moses, Thus thou shalt say unto the children of Israel, Ye have seen that I have talked with you from heaven.

Ye shall not make with me gods of silver, neither shall ye make unto you gods of gold. (Ex. 20:18-20, 22-23.)

The Lord stressed this point: "Ye have seen that I have talked with you from heaven. Ye shall not make with me gods of silver, neither shall ye make unto you gods of gold." (Ex. 20:22-23. Italics added.)

The Revised Version of the Bible puts it like this: "The Lord said to Moses, Thus shall you say to the Israelites, You have seen for yourselves that I have talked with you out of heaven. Gods of silver and gods of gold you must not make for yourselves."

The Jerusalem Bible says: "Yahweh said to Moses, ‘Tell the sons of Israel this, "You have seen for yourselves that I have spoken to you from heaven. You shall not make gods of silver or gods of gold to stand beside me. You shall not make things like this for yourselves." ’ "

To further prove his existence and to teach the people of his reality, the Lord called the seventy elders of Israel to ascend the mount with Moses and Aaron and come into the divine presence. Although the people at large were frightened and lacked sufficient faith to see God themselves, the Lord was willing that their representatives, the seventy elders of Israel, see him; they could then testify to the people of what they had seen.

Then went up Moses, and Aaron, Nadab, and Abihu, and seventy of the elders of Israel:

And they saw the God of Israel: and there was under his feet as it were a paved work of a sapphire stone, and as it were the body of heaven in his clearness.

And upon the nobles of the children of Israel he laid not his hand: also they saw God, and did eat and drink. (Ex. 24:9-11.)

What more could the Lord have done in convincing them? These elders came into his real presence. They saw him clearly, and they "did eat and drink." The reality of this whole experience was beyond any question.

With Moses the reality was even greater. He saw and visited with God personally and directly. He dwelt with him for a period of forty days and nights. During this entire time he neither ate nor drank. (Deut. 9:9-18.) Not only did he see the Lord face to face, but at another time, he saw "his back parts" (Ex. 33:11-23) when his face was not disclosed.

Moses became so companionable with the Lord that he actually argued with him, persuading the Lord at one time not to destroy the errant Israelites. This was occasioned by the worship of the golden calf, when Aaron temporarily went astray. The Lord was very angry with the people over this, and said to Moses: "Now therefore let me alone, that my wrath may wax hot against them, and that I may consume them: and I will make of thee a great nation." (Ex. 32:10.)

Since the people were so disobedient and lacking in faith, the Lord apparently considered destroying them and starting afresh to raise up a righteous people through the loins of Moses. Since the prophet was a descendant of Abraham, the promises could still be fulfilled through his lineage as effectively as through any of the other tribes.

But responding to the importunities of Moses, the Lord withdrew his wrath.

And Moses besought the Lord his God, and said, Lord, why doth thy wrath wax hot against thy people, which thou hast brought forth out of the land of Egypt with great power, and with a mighty hand?

Wherefore should the Egyptians speak, and say, For mischief did he bring them out, to slay them in the mountains, and to consume them from the face of the earth? Turn from thy fierce wrath, and repent of this evil against thy people.

Remember Abraham, Isaac, and Israel, thy servants, to whom thou swarest by thine own self, and saidst unto them, I will multiply your seed as the stars of heaven, and all this land that I have spoken of will I give unto your seed, and they shall inherit it for ever.

And the Lord repented of the evil which he thought to do unto his people. (Ex. 32:11-14.)

Moses had broken the first tablets in dismay over the golden calf incident, so now the Lord agreed to give him a new set.

And the Lord said unto Moses, Hew thee two tables of stone like unto the first: and I will write upon these tables the words that were in the first tables, which thou brakest.

And be ready in the morning, and come up in the morning unto mount Sinai, and present thyself there to me in the top of the mount.

And no man shall come up with thee, neither let any man be seen throughout all the mount; neither let the flocks nor herds feed before that mount.

And he hewed two tables of stone like unto the first; and Moses rose up early in the morning, and went up unto mount Sinai, as the Lord had commanded him, and took in his hand the two tables of stone.

And the Lord descended in the cloud, and stood with him there, and proclaimed the name of the Lord.

And the Lord passed by before him, and proclaimed, The Lord, The Lord God, merciful and gracious, longsuffering, and abundant in goodness and truth,

Keeping mercy for thousands, forgiving iniquity and transgression and sin, and that will by no means clear the guilty; visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the children, and upon the children's children, unto the third and to the fourth generation.

And Moses made haste, and bowed his head toward the earth, and worshipped.

And he said, If now I have found grace in thy sight, O Lord, let my Lord, I pray thee, go among us; for it is a stiffnecked people; and pardon our iniquity and our sin, and take us for thine inheritance. (Ex. 34:1-9.)

The Lord then covenanted with Moses to bring the people into the Promised Land, but it was stipulated that the wicked peoples already living in that land must be destroyed, together with their images. But the Lord warned:

Take heed to thyself, lest thou make a covenant with the inhabitants of the land whither thou goest, lest it be for a snare in the midst of thee:

But ye shall destroy their altars, break their images, and cut down their groves:

For thou shalt worship no other god: for the Lord, whose name is Jealous, is a jealous God:

Lest thou make a covenant with the inhabitants of the land, and they go a whoring after their gods, and do sacrifice unto their gods, and one call thee, and thou eat of his sacrifice;

And thou take of their daughters unto thy sons, and their daughters go a whoring after their gods, and make thy sons go a whoring after their gods.

Thou shalt make thee no molten gods. (Ex. 34:12-17.)

The Pearl of Great Price account of God's personal dealings with Moses further demonstrates the fact of the reality of the Lord and fully confirms the Bible in this matter.

1977 Deseret Book Co.
