Mark E. Petersen, Moses: Man of Miracles (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1977)

THE TEN COMMANDMENTS

By his own finger the Lord wrote the Ten Commandments on tablets of stone. They represent the basic law of the Almighty and have formed the underlying elements of civil and religious law ever since.

They are fundamental to our relationships with God. They are an integral part of the restored gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ and are essential to our becoming perfect as our Father in heaven is perfect. (D&C 42; D&C 59.)

Variations of these laws are given in the rules laid down in Leviticus and Deuteronomy as they are applied to specific matters, but generally they form the foundation for all proper human conduct.

As we read the Sermon on the Mount we see again many of the same important principles of human relationships expressed there. This is not surprising when it is remembered that the same God—Jesus of Nazareth, the Jehovah of the Old Testament—gave us both. Two great principles cover all aspects of these laws: one is devotion to the only true and living God; the other is the operation of the Golden Rule, that we do to others as we would be done by.

The Ten Commandments, the Sermon on the Mount, and the other teachings of Jesus all bear testimony that the gospel is unchanging, that salvation is the same for all peoples in all ages, and that they form the pattern by which we may become Christlike in our lives.

In commenting upon the Ten Commandments, President Heber J. Grant said: "No commandment was ever given to us but what God has given us the power to keep that commandment."

President Brigham Young said: "The commandments of God are given to us expressly for our benefit, and if we live in obedience to them we shall live so as to understand the mind and will of God for ourselves, and concerning ourselves as individuals." (Journal of Discourses 12:126.)

Proper observance of the Ten Commandments would eliminate crime, war, and immorality in all their forms. It would likewise build up a people so devoted to the Almighty that they could become like those in the City of Enoch. They would be fully acceptable to the Lord.

The First Commandment

"Thou shalt have no other gods before me." (Ex. 20:3.)

God will not favor us if we put him in second place in our lives and if we follow after worldly things regardless of what they may be.

The command of the Savior was: "Seek ye first the kingdom of God, and his righteousness." (Matt. 6:33.) In revelations to the Prophet Joseph Smith the Lord taught that we must have an eye single to the glory of God. (D&C 27:2; 55:1; 59:1; 88:67)

The Lord did two things in giving us this first of the Ten Commandments: he prohibited the use of images and idols in his worship, and he taught us that we must concentrate our attention on worshiping him and thereby becoming like him.

In the Sermon on the Mount the Savior made it abundantly clear that we "cannot serve God and mammon." (Matt. 6:24.) He will accept no divided allegiance from any of us. That is why the first and great commandment is both first and great: "Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind." (Matt. 22:37.)

As he gave it to the Prophet Joseph Smith in modern revelation, it was expressed in terms of service to the Lord: "O ye that embark in the service of God, see that ye serve him with all your heart, might, mind and strength, that ye may stand blameless before God at the last day." (D&C 4:2.)

The command is as binding on us of today as it was upon ancient Israel. It is possible for us to have our false gods also. They may or may not be in the shape of idols or images; they may be in the form of money or business or pleasure or sin. The command is applicable to everyone.

The Lord made abundantly clear what he expects of his people, for he said: "Ye shall be holy: for I the Lord your God am holy." (Lev. 19:2.) This applied to ancient Israel and it applies likewise to modern Israel. If we are to become like God, then it goes without saying that we must be holy as he is; and we cannot do this if we follow after the gods of this world.

The Second Commandment

"Thou shalt not make unto thee any graven image, or any likeness of any thing that is in heaven above, or that is in the earth beneath, or that is in the water under the earth:

"Thou shalt not bow down thyself to them, nor serve them: for I the Lord thy God am a jealous God, visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the children unto the third and fourth generation of them that hate me;

"And shewing mercy unto thousands of them that love me, and keep my commandments." (Ex. 20:4-6.)

Here the Lord comes to grips with the immediate problem that faced the Israelites. They had been taught idolatry by the Egyptians. They were now to enter the Promised Land, which was inhabited by another idolatrous people. They were warned against the Egyptian religions, but they must likewise be forewarned against the evils they would find in Canaan.

Every idol represented a false god. Every idol likewise represented an entirely false religion, a false philosophy, a mistaken concept of both God himself and his relationship to man. Hence they must be banished forever.

To make it clear that this related directly to the use of images in worship, the Lord specified: "Thou shalt not bow down thyself to them, nor serve them." (Lev. 20:5.)

When the Lord spoke in Leviticus he said: "Ye shall make you no idols nor graven image, neither rear you up a standing image, neither shall ye set up any image of stone in your land, to bow down unto it; for I am the Lord your God." (Lev. 26:1. Italics added.)

Some people have supposed that these commandments ruled out photographs or sculpture of any and all kinds. The Lord does not make his commandment that broad. He says we are not to make any image to bow down unto it in worship. He brands such images as idols, and of course an idol is a heathen god that is worshiped. "Thou shalt not bow down thyself to them, nor serve them."

Obviously he was making no reference to pictures we might have of old Aunt Alice or of sculpture pieces of Washington or Lincoln. He is talking of using images in worship, which is directly opposed to his law.

His reference to visiting the sins of the fathers upon the children is an interesting one. Misunderstandings have arisen over that passage, particularly when readers of the scripture have failed to note the words: "of them that hate me." He makes it plain in the verses that follow that he blesses those who keep his commandments. The penalty is for those who hate God.

President Joseph F. Smith discussed this point as follows:

Infidels will say to you: "How unjust, how unmerciful, how unGodlike it is to visit the iniquities of the parents upon the children of the third and fourth generation of them that hate God." How do you see it? This way: and it is strictly in accordance with God's law. The infidel will impart infidelity to his children if he can. The whoremonger will not raise a pure, righteous posterity. He will impart seeds of disease and misery, if not of death and destruction, upon his offspring, which will continue upon his children and descend to his children's children to the third and fourth generation.

It is perfectly natural that the children should inherit from their fathers, and if they sow the seeds of corruption, crime and loathsome disease, their children will reap the fruits thereof. Not in accordance with God's wishes, for his wish is that men will not sin and therefore will not transmit the consequences of their sin to their children, but that they will keep his commandments, and be free from sin and from entailing the effects of sin upon their offspring.

But inasmuch as men will not hearken unto the Lord, but will become a law unto themselves, and will commit sin, they will justly reap the consequences of their own iniquity, and will naturally impart its fruits to their children to the third and fourth generation.

The laws of nature are the laws of God who is just; it is not God that inflicts these penalties, they are the effects of disobedience to his law. The results of men's own acts follow them. (Gospel Doctrine, Deseret Book Co., 1975, pp. 401-2.)

Ezekiel makes the following explanation of this matter:

Yet say ye, Why? doth not the son bear the iniquity of the father? When the son hath done that which is lawful and right, and hath kept all my statutes, and hath done them, he shall surely live.

The soul that sinneth, it shall die. The son shall not bear the iniquity of the father, neither shall the father bear the iniquity of the son: the righteousness of the righteous shall be upon him, and the wickedness of the wicked shall be upon him.

But if the wicked will turn from all his sins that he hath committed, and keep all my statues, and do that which is lawful and right, he shall surely live, he shall not die.

All his transgressions that he hath committed, they shall not be mentioned unto him: in his righteousness that he hath done he shall live.

Have I any pleasure at all that the wicked should die? saith the Lord God: and not that he should return from his ways, and live?

But when the righteous turneth away from his righteousness, and committeth iniquity, and doeth according to all the abominations that the wicked man doeth, shall he live? All his righteousness that he hath done shall not be mentioned: in his trespass that he hath trespassed, and in his sin that he hath sinned, in them shall he die. (Ezek. 18:19-24.)

He expands on it further in the thirty-third chapter of Ezekiel:

As I live, saith the Lord God, I have no pleasure in the death of the wicked; but that the wicked turn from his way and live: turn ye, turn ye from your evil ways; for why will ye die, O house of Israel?

Therefore, thou son of man, say unto the children of thy people, The righteousness of the righteous shall not deliver him in the day of his transgression: as for the wickedness of the wicked, he shall not fall thereby in the day that he turneth from his wickedness; neither shall the righteous be able to live for his righteousness in the day that he sinneth.

When I shall say to the righteous, that he shall surely live; if he trust to his own righteousness, and commit iniquity, all his righteousnesses shall not be remembered; but for his iniquity that he hath committed, he shall die for it.

Again, when I say unto the wicked, Thou shalt surely die; if he turn from his sin, and do that which is lawful and right;

If the wicked restore the pledge, give again that he had robbed, walk in the statutes of life, without committing iniquity; he shall surely live, he shall not die.

None of his sins that he hath committed shall be mentioned unto him: he hath done that which is lawful and right; he shall surely live.

Yet the children of thy people say, The way of the Lord is not equal: but as for them, their way is not equal.

When the righteous turneth from his righteousness, and committeth iniquity, he shall even die thereby.

But if the wicked turn from his wickedness, and do that which is lawful and right, he shall live thereby. (Ezek. 33:11-19.)

In the Doctrine and Covenants we read: "Behold, he who has repented of his sins, the same is forgiven, and I, the Lord, remember them no more. By this ye may know if a man repenteth of his sins—behold, he will confess them and forsake them." (D&C 58:42-43.)

Amulek taught this to the Book of Mormon peoples:

Therefore, it is expedient that there should be a great and last sacrifice; and then shall there be, or it is expedient there should be, a stop to the shedding of blood; then shall the law of Moses be fulfilled; yea, it shall be all fulfilled, every jot and tittle, and none shall have passed away.

And behold, this is the whole meaning of the law, every whit pointing to that great and last sacrifice; and that great and last sacrifice will be the Son of God, yea, infinite and eternal.

And thus he shall bring salvation to all those who shall believe on his name; this being the intent of this last sacrifice, to bring about the bowels of mercy, which overpowereth justice, and bringeth about means unto men that they may have faith unto repentance.

And thus mercy can satisfy the demands of justice, and encircles them in the arms of safety, while he that exercises no faith unto repentance is exposed to the whole law of the demands of justice; therefore only unto him that has faith unto repentance is brought about the great and eternal plan of redemption. (Alma 34:13-16.)

The Third Commandment

"Thou shalt not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain; for the Lord will not hold him guiltless that taketh his name in vain." (Ex. 20:7.)

The name of the Lord should be spoken only in reverence. The ancient Jews hallowed it to the point where they did not even speak it at all. It was signified by the letters YHWH. Bible scholars use the term Yahweh.

To Latter-day Saints the name of the Lord is most sacred and significant. The names Jehovah and Jesus Christ both relate to the Savior alone. He is the divine Son of God. He is the Redeemer and the Messiah. And he was the Creator of all the worlds. Isaiah predicted that he would be called "Wonderful, Counseller, The mighty God, The everlasting Father, The Prince of Peace." (Isa. 9:6.)

In D&C 110 of the Doctrine and Covenants we have a straightforward declaration that Jesus is Jehovah. Peter made a significant statement about the Savior when he said:

Be it known unto you all, and to all the people of Israel, that by the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth, whom ye crucified, whom God raised from the dead, even by him doth this man stand here before you whole.

This is the stone which was set at nought of you builders, which is become the head of the corner.

Neither is there salvation in any other: for there is none other name under heaven given among men, whereby we must be saved. (Acts 4:10-12.)

Paul writing to Timothy said:

For there is one God, and one mediator between God and men, the man Christ Jesus;

Who gave himself a ransom for all, to be testified in due time.

Whereunto I am ordained a preacher, and an apostle, (I speak the truth in Christ, and lie not;) a teacher of the Gentiles in faith and verity. (1 Tim. 2:5-7.)

Since we receive our salvation through him and in his name, since we perform our saving ordinances in his name, since we offer all of our prayers in his name, and since he is the mighty God and Creator of all, should we not reverence him and his name? Shall we affront him and jeopardize our salvation by taking his name in vain? Can we say we are "for" him if we thus insult him? (Matt. 12:30. See also 3 Ne. 27:5-9.)

He offers us matchless blessings if we will but serve him and pray to the Father in his name. Said he: "And in that day ye shall ask me nothing. Verily, verily, I say unto you, Whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my name, he will give it you. Hitherto have ye asked nothing in my name: ask, and ye shall receive, that your joy may be full." (John 16:23-24.)

The Fourth Commandment

"Remember the sabbath day, to keep it holy.

"Six days shalt thou labour, and do all thy work:

"But the seventh day is the sabbath of the Lord thy God: in it thou shalt not do any work, thou, nor thy son, nor thy daughter, thy manservant, nor thy maidservant, nor thy cattle, nor thy stranger that is within thy gates:

"For in six days the Lord made heaven and earth, the sea, and all that in them is, and rested the seventh day: wherefore the Lord blessed the sabbath day, and hallowed it." (Ex. 20:8-11.)

Observance of the law of the Sabbath is vital to all true followers of the Lord. It is a holy day and was made so in the creation. It was likewise continued as a sacred day when its observance was changed to the first day of the week in recognition of the resurrection of the Master. (Acts 20:7; Rev. 1:10.)

The Sabbath was given to us as a heavenly sign (a) that God lives; (b) that Israel is his people; (c) that a weekly day of rest and worship is required.

Note the words of the scripture:

Speak thou also unto the children of Israel, saying, Verily my sabbaths ye shall keep: for it is a sign between me and you throughout your generations; that ye may know that I am the Lord that doth sanctify you.

Ye shall keep the sabbath therefore; for it is holy unto you: every one that defileth it shall surely be put to death: for whosoever doeth any work therein, that soul shall be cut off from among his people.

Six days may work be done; but in the seventh is the sabbath of rest, holy to the Lord: whosoever doeth any work in the sabbath day, he shall surely be put to death.

Wherefore the children of Israel shall keep the sabbath, to observe the sabbath throughout their generations, for a perpetual covenant.

It is a sign between me and the children of Israel for ever: for in six days the Lord made heaven and earth, and on the seventh day he rested, and was refreshed. (Ex. 31:13-17.)

The Lord was so thoughtful in giving us this day of rest that he even had the domesticated animals in mind. (Ex. 23:12.)

The fact that it is a day of worship also is plainly confirmed in the revelations to the Prophet Joseph Smith. We read:

And that thou mayest more fully keep thyself unspotted from the world, thou shalt go to the house of prayer and offer up thy sacraments upon my holy day;

For verily this is a day appointed unto you to rest from your labors, and to pay thy devotions unto the Most High;

Nevertheless thy vows shall be offered up in righteousness on all days and at all times;

But remember that on this, the Lord's day, thou shalt offer thine oblations and thy sacraments unto the Most High, confessing thy sins unto thy brethren, and before the Lord.

And on this day thou shalt do none other thing, only let thy food be prepared with singleness of heart that thy fasting may be perfect, or, in other words, that thy joy may be full.

Verily, this is fasting and prayer, or in other words, rejoicing and prayer. (D&C 59:9-14.)

Dare we ignore such a commandment as that? "Thou shalt do none other thing. . . ."

Isaiah condemned pleasure seeking on the Sabbath. (Isa. 58:13.)

Nehemiah condemned commercialism on that holy day. (Neh. 13:15-22.)

Anciently the Lord made violation of the Sabbath a capital offense, it was so important to him: "Six days shall work be done, but on the seventh day there shall be to you an holy day, a sabbath of rest to the Lord: whosoever doeth work therein shall be put to death." (Ex. 35:2.)

And yet today it is one of the most widely disregarded and violated of the Lord's great laws.

The Fifth Commandment

"Honour thy father and thy mother: that thy days may be long upon the land which the Lord thy God giveth thee." (Ex. 20:12.)

Some of the Israelites evidently were so unkind to their parents that the Lord invoked the death penalty for certain types of such cruelty: "And he that smiteth his father, or his mother, shall be surely put to death. And he that curseth his father, or his mother, shall surely be put to death." (Ex. 21:15, 17.)

What tremendous importance he placed upon respect for our parents! The tendency of the people to be thus unfair and unkind was in the Savior's mind when he said:

But he answered and said unto them, Why do ye also transgress the commandment of God by your tradition?

For God commanded, saying, Honour thy father and mother: and, He that curseth father or mother, let him die the death.

But ye say, Whosoever shall say to his father or his mother, It is a gift, by whatsoever thou mightest be profited by me;

And honour not his father or his mother, he shall be free. Thus have ye made the commandment of God of none effect by your tradition. (Matt. 15:3-6.)

President David O. McKay, speaking of this commandment, said at one time:

Let us cherish in our homes as we cherish the lives of our children themselves that word honor with all the synonyms—respect, reverence, veneration; honoring mother, honoring father, having them honor us as we honor and revere God our Eternal Father. Let the element of honor, devotion, reverence permeate the home life. (Gospel Ideals, Deseret Book Co., 1976, pp. 483-84.)

But President McKay also spoke of the need for parents to be worthy of such respect. Said he:

It is the duty of parents and of the Church not only to teach but also to demonstrate to young people that living a life of truth and moral purity brings joy and happiness, while violations of moral and social laws result only in dissatisfaction, sorrow, and, when carried to extreme, in degradation. (Ibid., p. 425.)

The Sixth Commandment

"Thou shalt not kill." (Ex. 20:13.)

In support of this commandment, the Lord gave us the following through the Prophet Joseph Smith: "Thou shalt not kill; and he that kills shall not have forgiveness in this world, nor in the world to come. And again, I say, thou shalt not kill; but he that killeth shall die." (D&C 42:18-19.)

He further said: "And it shall come to pass, that if any persons among you shall kill they shall be delivered up and dealt with according to the laws of the land; for remember that he hath no forgiveness; and it shall be proved according to the laws of the land." (D&C 42:79.)

Nephi said this: "And again, the Lord God hath commanded that men should not murder; that they should not lie; that they should not steal; that they should not take the name of the Lord their God in vain; that they should not envy; that they should not have malice; that they should not contend one with another; that they should not commit whoredoms; and that they should do none of these things; for whoso doeth them shall perish." (2 Ne. 26:32.)

Nephi said earlier: "Wo unto the murderer who deliberately killeth, for he shall die." (2 Ne. 9:35.)

It is clear from the scripture that the death penalty was provided to reinforce this important commandment. There are numerous references in other scriptures on this point, such as Gen. 9:6; Ex. 21:12-25; and Deut. 19:11-13.

In connection with the commandment "Thou shalt not kill," some have inquired whether this applies to abortions. We quote here the statement of the First Presidency on abortion:

The Church opposes abortion and counsels its members not to submit to, be a party to, or perform an abortion except in the rare cases where, in the opinion of competent medical counsel, the life or health of the woman is seriously endangered or where the pregnancy was caused by forcible rape and produces serious emotional trauma in the victim. Even then it should be done only after counseling with the local bishop or branch president and after receiving divine confirmation through prayer.

Abortion is one of the most revolting and sinful practices in this day, when we are witnessing the frightening evidence of permissiveness leading to sexual immorality.

Members of the Church guilty of being parties to the sin of abortion are subject to the disciplinary action of the councils of the Church as circumstances warrant. In dealing with this serious matter, it would be well to keep in mind the word of the Lord stated in the 59th Section of the Doctrine and Covenants, verse 6, "Thou shalt not steal; neither commit adultery, nor kill; nor do anything like unto it."

As far as has been revealed, the sin of abortion is one for which a person may repent and gain forgiveness.

The Seventh Commandment

"Thou shalt not commit adultery." (Ex. 20:14.)

Sex is sacred to the Lord. It was required as part of his plan for the perpetuity of life. He provided for reproduction of the human species as for all other forms of life. But it must be done in his way to receive his blessing. It must be a part of holy matrimony, and must include the responsibility of properly rearing the children thus conceived.

"Multiply and replenish the earth," the Lord commanded Adam and Eve in the Garden of Eden. Without such reproduction, life on earth would come to an end.

But the process must not be prostituted. "Be ye clean that bear the vessels of the Lord," he has said on several occasions. (D&C 38:42; 88:86; 133:5.) Parents who bear children literally bear vessels of the Lord, for we are all his offspring.

Capital punishment for adultery was required by the Lord in the days of Moses: "And the man that committeth adultery with another man's wife, even he that committeth adultery with his neighbour's wife, the adulterer and the adulteress shall surely be put to death." (Lev. 20:10.)

President Joseph F. Smith discoursed on the importance of good family life and the rearing of children in this wise:

I desire to emphasize this. I want the young men of Zion to realize that this institution of marriage is not a man-made institution. It is of God. It is honorable, and no man who is of marriageable age is living his religion who remains single. It is not simply devised for the convenience alone of man, to suit his own notions, and his own ideas; to marry and then divorce, to adopt and then to discard, just as he pleases. There are great consequences connected with it, consequences which reach beyond this present time, into all eternity, for thereby souls are begotten into the world, and men and women obtain their being in the world. Marriage is the preserver of the human race. Without it, the purposes of God would be frustrated; virtue would be destroyed to give place to vice and corruption, and the earth would be void and empty.

Neither are the relationships that exist, or should exist, between parents and children, and between children and parents, of an ephemeral nature, nor of a temporal character. They are of eternal consequence, reaching beyond the veil, in spite of all that we can do. The man, and the woman who are the agents, in the providence of God, to bring living souls into the world, are made before God and the heavens, as responsible for these acts as is God himself responsible for the works of his own hands, and for the revelation of his own wisdom. The man and the woman who engage in this ordinance of matrimony are engaging in something that is of such far-reaching character, and is of such vast importance, that thereby hangs life and death, and eternal increase. Thereupon depends eternal happiness, or eternal misery.

For this reason, God has guarded this sacred institution by the most severe penalties, and has declared that whosoever is untrue to the marriage relation, whosoever is guilty of adultery, shall be put to death. This is scriptural law, though it is not practiced today, because modern civilization does not recognize the laws of God in relation to the moral status of mankind. The Lord commanded, "Whosoever sheddeth innocent blood, by man shall his blood be shed." Thereby God has given the law. Life is an important thing. No man has any right to take life, unless God commanded it. The law of God as to violation of the marriage covenant is just as strict, and is on a parallel with law against murder notwithstanding the former is not carried out. (Gospel Doctrine, pp. 272-73.)

He said further:

And no man holding the Priesthood who is worthy and of age should remain unmarried. They should also teach that the law of chastity is one of the most vital importance, both to children, and to men and to women. It is a vitally important principle to the children of God in all their lives, from the cradle to the grave.

God has fixed dreadful penalties against the transgression of his law of chastity, of virtue, of purity. When the law of God shall be in force among men, they will be cut off who are not absolutely pure and unsoiled and spotless—both men and women. We expect the women to be pure, we expect them to be spotless and without blemish, and it is as necessary and important for man to be pure and virtuous as for woman; indeed, no woman would ever be other than pure if men were so. (Ibid., pp. 273-74.)

President Smith also said:

I believe that to a very large extent the fashions of the day, and especially the fashions of women, have a tendency to evil and not to virtue or modesty, and I deplore that evident fact, for you see it on every hand. (Ibid., p. 278.)

Sex activity among unmarried people, including the younger generation, is regarded by the Lord as deeply serious. There is no room for promiscuity among the people of God. It is corrupting, demoralizing, and debasing from every standpoint.

The Eighth Commandment

"Thou shalt not steal." (Ex. 20:15.)

Not only did the Lord give this law to ancient Israel; he also repeated it for our day in these words: "Thou shalt not steal; and he that stealeth and will not repent shall be cast out." (D&C 42:20.)

He also said: "Thou shalt not steal; neither commit adultery, nor kill, nor do anything like unto it." (D&C 59:6.)

The Ninth Commandment

"Thou shalt not bear false witness against thy neighbour." (Ex. 20:16.)

When the Lord gave us this commandment in our day, he was direct and to the point in the use of modern terms. "Thou shalt not lie," he said, adding, "he that lieth and will not repent shall be cast out"—that is, from the body of the Saints. (D&C 42:21.)

He speaks at times of those who "love and make a lie," and tells of their eventual condemnation if they do not repent. Not only are they subject to expulsion from the Church if they do not repent, but they are also condemned to go with the adulterers, the sorcerers, and other evil people in the world to come. Following their punishment they will be assigned to the telestial glory, the lowest of the three kingdoms. Of those who go to the telestial glory the revelation says:

"These are they who are thrust down to hell. These are they who shall not be redeemed from the devil until the last resurrection, until the Lord, even Christ the Lamb, shall have finished his work." (D&C 76:84-85.)

The Lord further describes those going to telestial glory in these words:

Last of all, these all are they who will not be gathered with the saints, to be caught up unto the church of the Firstborn, and received into the cloud.

These are they who are liars, and sorcerers, and adulterers, and whoremongers, and whosoever loves and makes a lie.

These are they who suffer the wrath of God on earth.

These are they who suffer the vengeance of eternal fire.

These are they who are cast down to hell and suffer the wrath of Almighty God, until the fulness of times, when Christ shall have subdued all enemies under his feet, and shall have perfected his work;

When he shall deliver up the kingdom, and present it unto the Father, spotless, saying: I have overcome and have trodden the wine-press alone, even the wine-press of the fierceness of the wrath of Almighty God. (D&C 76:102-7.)

To bear false witness is to lie. And what condemnation false witnesses shall receive! There were false witnesses at the trial of the Lord Jesus Christ. Can anyone measure the depth of their sin?

There were likewise false witnesses against the Prophet Joseph Smith, men who eventually contributed to his martyrdom and that of his brother Hyrum. Innocent blood was shed that day, and it is traced back to his enemies who also were false witnesses.

False witness is despised by the Lord. Note what we read in Proverbs:

These six things doth the Lord hate: yea, seven are an abomination unto him:

A proud look, a lying tongue, and hands that shed innocent blood,

An heart that deviseth wicked imaginations, feet that be swift in running to mischief,

A false witness that speaketh lies, and he that soweth discord among brethren. (Prov. 6:16-19.)

The Tenth Commandment

"Thou shalt not covet thy neighbour's house, thou shalt not covet thy neighbour's wife, nor his manservant, nor his maidservant, nor his ox, nor his ass, nor any thing that is thy neighbour's." (Ex. 20:17.)

Paul speaks of "thou shalt not covet" in terms of lust. (Rom. 7:7.) In many cases it is just that. The dictionary confirms this also and says that one who covets is one who lusts or has excessive desires for that which belongs to someone else.

The scripture says that we must not covet anything that is "thy neighbour's." It makes particular mention of "thy neighbour's wife," which equally includes "thy neighbour's husband."

To break up another's home and steal the father or mother of that home is indeed a despicable act. Yet it is done often these days. In fact, if we examine the divorce records we would think it is almost reaching epidemic proportions.

What does modern revelation say about it? Note the words of the Lord:

Thou shalt love thy wife with all thy heart, and shalt cleave unto her and none else.

And he that looketh upon a woman to lust after her shall deny the faith, and shall not have the Spirit; and if he repents not he shall be cast out.

Thou shalt not commit adultery; and he that committeth adultery, and repenteth not, shall be cast out.

But he that has committed adultery and repents with all his heart, and forsaketh it, and doeth it no more, thou shalt forgive;

But if he doeth it again, he shall not be forgiven, but shall be cast out. (D&C 42:22-26.)

If only the Latter-day Saints would read carefully that command, for such it is, and note especially the "none else" portion, many homes would be spared.

Every man is commanded by the Almighty to love his wife with all his heart, and to cleave unto her—and to none else! The command applies equally to the wife.

When the Lord speaks of "cleaving unto her," he is speaking of the constant courtship that President McKay said should continue all through life between husband and wife. We must all work at our marriages to make them succeed, and one of the most effective things in this regard is to live the Golden Rule. If every husband were to treat his wife as he himself would like to be treated, and if every wife were to treat her husband as she herself would like to be treated, wouldn't every marriage be made into a heavenly experience? Divorce never would be known in such cases. A large percent of broken homes result from coveting someone else's partner.

Coveting property or money is at the bottom of nearly all crime. Wars between nations arise because of coveting. Evil craving for sex is at the bottom of every case of fornication, adultery, and homosexual activity. Shoplifting, one of our most common crimes now, is born of coveting. Lying is likewise, for many covet a situation that is contrary to the right, and are willing to lie about it.

Nothing could be more specific than this command:

Thou shalt not covet—

Thy neighbor's house, to defraud him of his property.

Thy neighbor's wife, to steal her in adultery and break up a home.

Nor his manservant nor his maidservant, thinking to deprive a neighbor of his helpers whom he needs.

Nor his ox, though it be better than your own.

Nor his ass, which might be a better worker than your own.

Nor anything that is thy neighbor's.

The command "Thou shalt not covet," if observed, would solve most of the world's ills today.

1977 Deseret Book Co.
