Mark E. Petersen, Moses: Man of Miracles (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1977)

THE GREAT COMMANDMENT

The Savior told the Jews in his day about the first and great commandment. It was a quotation from Moses, who in turn had received it from Jehovah originally. As expressed in Matthew, it reads:

But when the Pharisees had heard that he had put the Sadducees to silence, they were gathered together.

Then one of them, which was a lawyer, asked him a question, tempting him, and saying,

Master, which is the great commandment in the law?

Jesus said unto him, Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind.

This is the first and great commandment.

And the second is like unto it, Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself.

On these two commandments hang all the law and the prophets. (Matt. 22:34-40.)

It was given as follows in Moses’ day:

Hear, O Israel: The Lord our God is one Lord:

And thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thine heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy might.

And these words, which I command thee this day, shall be in thine heart:

And thou shalt teach them diligently unto thy children, and shalt talk of them when thou sittest in thine house, and when thou walkest by the way, and when thou liest down, and when thou risest up.

And thou shalt bind them for a sign upon thine hand, and they shall be as frontlets between thine eyes.

And thou shalt write them upon the posts of thy house, and on thy gates. (Deut. 6:4-9.)

It was followed immediately by this forceful demand for obedience:

Then beware lest thou forget the Lord, which brought thee forth out of the land of Egypt, from the house of bondage.

Thou shalt fear the Lord thy God, and serve him, and shalt swear by his name.

Ye shall not go after other gods, of the gods of the people which are round about you;

(For the Lord thy God is a jealous God among you) lest the anger of the Lord thy God be kindled against thee, and destroy thee from off the face of the earth.

Ye shall not tempt the Lord your God, as ye tempted him in Massah.

Ye shall diligently keep the commandment of the Lord your God, and his testimonies, and his statutes, which he hath commanded thee.

And thou shalt do that which is right and good in the sight of the Lord: that it may be well with thee, and that thou mayest go in and possess the good land which the Lord sware unto thy fathers. (Deut. 6:12-18.)

Often people ask why the Lord is so strict in his insistence upon complete obedience. Only such obedience will satisfy the terms of this first and great commandment.

As we consider it, we must always remember that it is inseparably connected with that other great charge given in the Sermon on the Mount: "Be ye therefore perfect, even as your Father which is in heaven is perfect." (Matt. 5:48.)

If we seek to emulate the life of Christ, we must concentrate on it with a great and sincere effort. If we hope to become like our Father in heaven, we must give it top priority in our lives.

Who can become a great musician or a great engineer or other highly skilled person without centering full attention on that objective?

But which is more difficult, to be a great musician or to become perfect like God?

We cannot reach perfection by imperfect means. Being lax in our attention to the Lord and slovenly in our obedience to him spell nothing but imperfection and failure.

The Lord knows this. Because he wants us to become like him, he requires that we follow his formula, and that requires consistent daily obedience, the living of his kind of life, the thinking of his kind of thoughts, in order that "the works that I do shall [ye] do also," and "greater works than these shall [ye] do." (John 14:12.)

Isn't that the way we attain perfection? If we do the works of God, we shall know of his doctrine, that it is true. (John 7:17.) If we do the works of God, we shall develop Christlike traits of character. We must change our ways, repent, leave our former worldliness, and follow him. But we must serve him with enthusiasm and not with slothfulness. There is a great lesson in this revelation:

For behold, it is not meet that I should command in all things; for he that is compelled in all things, the same is a slothful and not a wise servant; wherefore he receiveth no reward.

Verily I say, men should be anxiously engaged in a good cause, and do many things of their own free will, and bring to pass much righteousness;

For the power is in them, wherein they are agents unto themselves. And inasmuch as men do good they shall in nowise lose their reward.

But he that doeth not anything until he is commanded, and receiveth a commandment with doubtful heart, and keepeth it with slothfulness, the same is damned. (D&C 58:26-29.)

He speaks here of being slothful. Could it be that the Lord in creation made the sloth as a horrible example? He mentions slothfulness so often. Again he said:

Wherefore, now let every man learn his duty, and to act in the office in which he is appointed, in all diligence.

He that is slothful shall not be counted worthy to stand, and he that learns not his duty and shows himself not approved shall not be counted worthy to stand. (D&C 107:99-100.)

We shall always remember the instruction he gave to the Twelve in the days of Joseph Smith: ". . . I say unto all the Twelve: Arise and gird up your loins, take up your cross, follow me, and feed my sheep." (D&C 112:14.) Can half-hearted effort satisfy that charge?

What kind of lesson did the Lord teach Peter on the seashore when he commanded the fisherman to "feed my sheep"? (John 21:15-17.)

What did Paul have in mind when, near the end of his life, he wrote to Timothy and said, "I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the faith"? (2 Tim. 4:7.)

What did the Prophet Joseph Smith have in mind when he said, "I am going like a lamb to the slaughter, but I am calm as a summer's morning. I have a conscience void of offense toward God and toward all men." (History of the Church 6:555.)

In every instance it was dedication, complete dedication. It was a willingness to give even life itself to and for the work. Paul gave his life both in service and in martyrdom. Joseph Smith lived intensely and never measured the cost as he sought to use every hour and every minute in building the kingdom. Thus he gave a full life of service, but also like Paul, he finished his course in martyrdom.

When the Lord said, "O ye that embark in the service of God, see that ye serve him with all your heart, might, mind and strength" (D&C 4:2), that is what he meant: dedication, from each one for us.

Slothfulness and imperfection sow the seeds of failure and never can lift anyone "unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the fulness of Christ." (Eph. 4:13.)

Love the Lord with all our hearts? Can we give him anything less? Serve him with all our might, mind, and strength? Can we turn a deaf ear to that?

And who would wish to give anything less if the facts were all understood?

We can become like him, but obedience to the gospel is the formula we must follow. There is no other way. That is why the Lord is strict with us. That is why we never can afford to serve him with hesitation or reservations. That is why we must say with Paul:

For I am not ashamed of the gospel of Christ: for it is the power of God unto salvation to every one that believeth; to the Jew first, and also to the Greek.

For therein is the righteousness of God revealed from faith to faith: as it is written, The just shall live by faith.

For the wrath of God is revealed from heaven against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of men, who hold the truth in unrighteousness. (Rom. 1:16-18.)

In discussing this general theme President David O. McKay said:

Civilization has grown too complex for the human mind to visualize or to control. Unless man comes to a speedy realization that the higher and not the baser qualities of man must be developed, then the present status of civilization is in jeopardy. Life on the animal plane has as its ideal the survival of the fittest—kill or be killed, crush or be crushed, mangle or be mangled. For man, with his intelligence, this is a sure road to anguish and death.

The spiritual road has Christ as its goal. The individual lives for something higher than self. He hears the Savior's voice saying: "I am the way, the truth, and the life. . . ." (John 14:6.) Following that voice, he soon learns that there is no one great thing which he can do to attain happiness or eternal life. He learns that "life is made up not of great sacrifices or duties, but of little things in which smiles and kindness and small obligations given habitually are what win and preserve the heart and secure comfort." (Gospel Ideals, p. 388.)

While the laws of God are strict, and while he requires that we love and serve him with all our heart, might, mind, and strength, he also recognizes that we are mortal and that we do make mistakes. Therefore, he provides repentance.

Whereas he says that he hates the sin, he nevertheless loves us all because we are his children, and he earnestly hopes that we will develop to become like himself.

That is the purpose of the gospel. It helps us to overcome our weaknesses and rebuild our lives. That is the purpose of the atonement of Christ. That is why he gives us the opportunity of repentance and readjustment in our lives.

When John the Baptist began his work it was with the cry: "Repent ye: for the kingdom of heaven is at hand." (Matt. 3:2.) The same message was voiced by the Lord himself, who offered repentance, reconciliation, readjustment, and spiritual rehabilitation to all who would give ear to his words.

The reason for baptism was "for the remission of your sins." The entire purpose of the gospel is to help us overcome our evil ways, pattern our lives after the Lord's, and become like him.

That was the point in his commandment to become perfect even as our Father in heaven is perfect. Achieving perfection is overcoming weaknesses and building strengths within us.

Ezekiel was plain in this regard. Speaking for the Lord he said: "Have I any pleasure at all that the wicked should die? saith the Lord God: and not that he should return from his ways, and live?" (Ezek. 18:23.)

He gives the assurance that if the wicked person repents, turns from his evil ways, and then "keeps all my statutes," he shall surely live, and "all his transgressions that he hath committed, they shall not be mentioned unto him: in his righteousness that he hath done he shall live." (Ezek. 18:22.)

Of course he points to the opposite situation too, and explains that the unrepentant will be condemned, and "in his trespass that he hath trespassed, and in his sin that he hath sinned, in them shall he die." (Ezek. 18:24.)

Explaining still further this principle of repentance, the Lord himself said this through Joseph Smith:

Therefore I command you to repent—repent, lest I smite you by the rod of my mouth, and by my wrath, and by my anger, and your sufferings be sore—how sore you know not, how exquisite you know not, yea, how hard to bear you know not.

For behold, I, God, have suffered these things for all, that they might not suffer if they would repent;

But if they would not repent they must suffer even as I;

Which suffering caused myself, even God, the greatest of all, to tremble because of pain, and to bleed at every pore, and to suffer both body and spirit—and would that I might not drink the bitter cup, and shrink—

Nevertheless, glory be to the Father, and I partook and finished my preparations unto the children of men. (D&C 19:15-19.)

1977 Deseret Book Co.
