Mark E. Petersen, Moses: Man of Miracles (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1977)

OTHER COMMANDMENTS

The commandments given the Israelites in Moses' day reached into every corner of their lives. They were taught indeed to perfect themselves, and become free from the sins, diseases, and conflicts of the other nations. Note a few examples.

Honesty

The Golden Rule is one of the greatest of Christian principles (Matt. 7:12), and inasmuch as the Savior gave the law to Moses (3 1 Ne. 15), it is not surprising to see so much said in it regarding honesty and doing to others as we would be done by. Said the Lord:

Ye shall not steal, neither deal falsely, neither lie one to another.

And ye shall not swear by my name falsely, neither shalt thou profane the name of thy God: I am the Lord.

Thou shalt not defraud thy neighbour, neither rob him: the wages of him that is hired shall not abide with thee all night until the morning.

Thou shalt not curse the deaf, nor put a stumblingblock before the blind, but shalt fear thy God: I am the Lord.

Ye shall do no unrighteousness in judgment: thou shalt not respect the person of the poor, nor honour the person of the mighty: but in righteousness shalt thou judge thy neighbour.

Thou shalt not go up and down as a talebearer among thy people: neither shalt thou stand against the blood of thy neighbour: I am the Lord.

Thou shalt not hate thy brother in thine heart: thou shalt in any wise rebuke thy neighbour, and not suffer sin upon him.

Thou shalt not avenge, nor bear any grudge against the children of thy people, but thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself: I am the Lord. (Lev. 19:11-18.)

This is specific also:

Thou shalt not have in thy bag divers weights, a great and a small.

Thou shalt not have in thine house divers measures, a great and a small.

But thou shalt have a perfect and just weight, a perfect and just measure shalt thou have: that thy days may be lengthened in the land which the Lord thy God giveth thee. (Deut. 25:13-15.)

Repeatedly the Lord taught that "thou shalt not oppress a stranger" (Ex. 23:9 and Lev. 19:33-34), but he was conscious also of the need to do a good turn to others. For example:

If thou meet thine enemy's ox or his ass going astray, thou shalt surely bring it back to him again.

If thou see the ass of him that hateth thee lying under his burden, and wouldest forbear to help him, thou shalt surely help with him.

Thou shalt not wrest the judgment of thy poor in his cause.

Keep thee far from a false matter; and the innocent and righteous slay thou not: for I will not justify the wicked. (Ex. 23:4-7.)

Moses also taught: "In all things that I have said unto you be circumspect." (Ex. 23:13.)

His protection of widows and orphans was almost fierce. Said he:

Ye shall not afflict any widow, or fatherless child.

If thou afflict them in any wise, and they cry at all unto me, I will surely hear their cry;

And my wrath shall wax hot, and I will kill you with the sword; and your wives shall be widows, and your children fatherless. (Ex. 22:22-24.)

Neither are we to take advantage of the poor, even in lending them money, for he said: "If thou lend money to any of my people that is poor by thee, thou shalt not be to him as an usurer, neither shalt thou lay upon him usury." (Ex. 22:25.)

And of the aged he said: "Thou shalt rise up before the hoary head, and honour the face of the old man, and fear thy God: I am the Lord." (Lev. 19:32.)

Chastity

The Ten Commandments prohibit adultery. This commandment God has repeated over and over again. Virtue had high priority in the law. The homosexual, the adulterer, and the fornicator were all condemned of the Lord.

For example:

If a man be found lying with a woman married to an husband, then they shall both of them die, both the man that lay with the woman, and the woman: so shalt thou put away evil from Israel.

If a damsel that is a virgin be betrothed unto an husband, and a man find her in the city, and lie with her;

Then ye shall bring them both out unto the gate of that city, and ye shall stone them with stones that they die; the damsel, because she cried not, being in the city; and the man, because he hath humbled his neighbour's wife: so thou shalt put away evil from among you.

But if a man find a betrothed damsel in the field, and the man force her, and lie with her: then the man only that lay with her shall die:

But unto the damsel thou shalt do nothing; there is in the damsel no sin worthy of death: for as when a man riseth against his neighbour, and slayeth him, even so is this matter:

For he found her in the field, and the betrothed damsel cried, and there was none to save her.

If a man find a damsel that is a virgin, which is not betrothed, and lay hold on her, and lie with her, and they be found;

Then the man that lay with her shall give unto the damsel's father fifty shekels of silver, and she shall be his wife; because he hath humbled her, he may not put her away all his days.

A man shall not take his father's wife, nor discover his father's skirt. (Deut. 22:22-30.)

In this same stern language the Lord gave this:

And the man that committeth adultery with another man's wife, even he that committeth adultery with his neighbour's wife, the adulterer and the adulteress shall surely be put to death.

And the man that lieth with his father's wife hath uncovered his father's nakedness: both of them shall surely be put to death; their blood shall be upon them.

And if a man lie with his daughter in law, both of them shall surely be put to death: they have wrought confusion; their blood shall be upon them.

If a man also lie with mankind, as he lieth with a woman, both of them have committed an abomination: they shall surely be put to death; their blood shall be upon them.

And if a man take a wife and her mother, it is wickedness; they shall be burnt with fire, both he and they; that there be no wickedness among you.

And if a man lie with a beast, he shall surely be put to death: and ye shall slay the beast.

And if a woman approach unto any beast, and lie down thereto, thou shalt kill the woman, and the beast: they shall surely be put to death; their blood shall be upon them.

And if a man shall take his sister, his father's daughter, or his mother's daughter, and see her nakedness, and she see his nakedness; it is a wicked thing; and they shall be cut off in the sight of their people: he hath uncovered his sister's nakedness; he shall bear his iniquity.

And if a man shall lie with a woman having her sickness, and shall uncover her nakedness; he hath discovered her fountain, and she hath uncovered the fountain of her blood: and both of them shall be cut off from among their people.

And thou shalt not uncover the nakedness of thy mother's sister, nor of thy father's sister: for he uncovereth his near kin: they shall bear their iniquity.

And if a man shall lie with his uncle's wife, he hath uncovered his uncle's nakedness: they shall bear their sin; they shall die childless.

And if a man shall take his brother's wife, it is an unclean thing: he hath uncovered his brother's nakedness; they shall be childless. (Lev. 20:10-21.)

Verse 13 above relates to the homosexual, whose crime in that day merited death.

The command is repeated in Lev. 18:22: "Thou shalt not lie with mankind, as with womankind: it is abomination."

This law was carried forward even to Paul's day, for he wrote the Romans:

For this cause God gave them up unto vile affections: for even their women did change the natural use into that which is against nature:

And likewise also the men, leaving the natural use of the woman, burned in their lust one toward another; men with men working that which is unseemly, and receiving in themselves that recompence of their error which was meet.

And even as they did not like to retain God in their knowledge, God gave them over to a reprobate mind, to do those things which are not convenient. (Rom. 1:26-28.)

In this connection we should note: "There shall be no whore of the daughters of Israel, nor a sodomite of the sons of Israel." (Deut. 23:17.)

The following may well be considered by young people who tempt each other: "And if a man entice a maid that is not betrothed, and lie with her, he shall surely endow her to be his wife. If her father utterly refuse to give her unto him, he shall pay money according to the dowry of virgins." (Ex. 22:16-17.)

Sex sin always has been one of the most reprehensible in the eyes of the Lord.

Obedience

In the day of Moses the Lord taught his people a lesson very much like that which evolved from the banishment of the Latter-day Saints from Jackson County, Missouri. The Prophet Joseph asked the Lord why the expulsion had taken place. The Lord answered:

I, the Lord, have suffered the affliction to come upon them, wherewith they have been afflicted, in consequence of their transgressions;

Yet I will own them, and they shall be mine in that day when I shall come to make up my jewels.

Therefore, they must needs be chastened and tried, even as Abraham, who was commanded to offer up his only son.

For all those who will not endure chastening, but deny me, cannot be sanctified.

Behold, I say unto you, there were jarrings, and contentions, and envyings, and strifes, and lustful and covetous desires among them; therefore by these things they polluted their inheritances.

They were slow to hearken unto the voice of the Lord their God; therefore, the Lord their God is slow to hearken unto their prayers, to answer them in the day of their trouble.

In the day of their peace they esteemed lightly my counsel; but, in the day of their trouble, of necessity they feel after me. (D&C 101:2-8.)

This same lesson was taught anciently, as we read in the first chapter of Deuteronomy. Because the people were disobedient, "The Lord would not hearken to [their] voice, nor give ear unto [them]." (Deut. 1:37-45.)

And this he stressed:

When thou hast eaten and art full, then thou shalt bless the Lord thy God for the good land which he hath given thee.

Beware that thou forget not the Lord thy God, in not keeping his commandments, and his judgments, and his statutes, which I command thee this day:

Lest when thou hast eaten and art full, and hast built goodly houses, and dwelt therein;

And when thy herds and thy flocks multiply, and thy silver and thy gold is multiplied, and all that thou hast is multiplied;

Then thine heart be lifted up, and thou forget the Lord thy God, which brought thee forth out of the land of Egypt, from the house of bondage;

Who led thee through that great and terrible wilderness, wherein were fiery serpents, and scorpions, and drought, where there was no water; who brought thee forth water out of the rock of flint;

Who fed thee in the wilderness with manna, which thy fathers knew not, that he might humble thee, and that he might prove thee, to do thee good at thy latter end;

And thou say in thine heart, My power and the might of mine hand hath gotten me this wealth.

But thou shalt remember the Lord thy God: for it is he that giveth thee power to get wealth, that he may establish his covenant which he sware unto thy fathers, as it is this day.

And it shall be, if thou do at all forget the Lord thy God, and walk after other gods, and serve them, and worship them, I testify against you this day that ye shall surely perish.

As the nations which the Lord destroyeth before your face, so shall ye perish; because ye would not be obedient unto the voice of the Lord your God. (Deut. 8:10-20.)

Marriage

The Lord was strict in requiring his people to marry within their own faith and their own race.

As the Israelites approached the Promised Land, knowing that it was then occupied by idolatrous nations, he declared:

Neither shalt thou make marriages with them; thy daughter thou shalt not give unto his son, nor his daughter shalt thou take unto thy son.

For they will turn away thy son from following me, that they may serve other gods: so will the anger of the Lord be kindled against you, and destroy thee suddenly. (Deut. 7:3-4.)

He went so far as to say this also:

This is the thing which the Lord doth command concerning the daughters of Zelophehad, saying, Let them marry to whom they think best; only to the family of the tribe of their father shall they marry.

So shall not the inheritance of the children of Israel remove from tribe to tribe: for every one of the children of Israel shall keep himself to the inheritance of the tribe of his fathers.

And every daughter, that possesseth an inheritance in any tribe of the children of Israel, shall be wife unto one of the family of the tribe of her father, that the children of Israel may enjoy every man the inheritance of his fathers. (Num. 36:6-8.)

It was most important that the faith be not diluted by intermarriages. It was all important that the faithful marry the faithful. This is also the advice of the leaders of today, who urge that we should marry in the faith and in the temple, which is the Lord's mode of marriage.

When we read revelations like D&C 131 of the Doctrine and Covenants, how can we think of doing otherwise? Thus similarly may we contemplate verses 15 to 17 in D&C 132 of that volume.

On the subject of intermarriages, President Spencer W. Kimball has said the following:

The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints encourages with all its power and strength the marriage of its people within the Church and among the faithful in that church, and generally has found it to be wise to marry within the common customs, education, wealth, and tradition, and this because it fosters the backgrounds which have a great bearing upon the happiness of the couples.

We have found that it is still quite possible to live in different countries with different languages and culture and customs and still marry within one's own race and background.

We believe that it is wise for young people to usually seek out those of their own training, language, and background so that their new marriage has every possibility of developing into a happy marriage with a happy home and family, for marriage to us is the most sacred of all obligations, and we hope that every marriage is a successful one and a happy one. (Private correspondence in the author's file. Used by permission.)

It is interesting that the Lord insisted that a marriage should not be disturbed for one year even by war. Said he: "When a man hath taken a new wife, he shall not go out to war, neither shall he be charged with any business: but he shall be free at home one year, and shall cheer up his wife which he hath taken." (Deut. 24:5.)

It is also of interest in this day to read: "The woman shall not wear that which pertaineth unto a man, neither shall a man put on a woman's garment: for all that do so are abomination unto the Lord thy God." (Deut. 22:5.)

In cases of death this law was given:

If brethren dwell together, and one of them die, and have no child, the wife of the dead shall not marry without unto a stranger: her husband's brother shall go in unto her, and take her to him to wife, and perform the duty of an husband's brother unto her.

And it shall be, that the firstborn which she beareth shall succeed in the name of his brother which is dead, that his name be not put out of Israel.

And if the man like not to take his brother's wife, then let his brother's wife go up to the gate unto the elders, and say, My husband's brother refuseth to raise up unto his brother a name in Israel, he will not perform the duty of my husband's brother.

Then the elders of his city shall call him, and speak unto him: and if he stand to it, and say, I like not to take her;

Then shall his brother's wife come unto him in the presence of the elders, and loose his shoe from off his foot, and spit in his face, and shall answer and say, So shall it be done unto that man that will not build up his brother's house.

And his name shall be called in Israel, the house of him that hath his shoe loosed. (Deut. 25:5-10.)

This was an old law going back into Genesis. It is noted in Gen. 38:8-11, as also in the story of Ruth, seen in the book of Ruth in the Bible. But of course this law is not applicable now.

Sin in Ignorance

Ignorance of the law was no excuse for disobedience to the law, and a penalty was required.

And if the whole congregation of Israel sin through ignorance, and the thing be hid from the eyes of the assembly, and they have done somewhat against any of the commandments of the Lord concerning things which should not be done, and are guilty;

And if any one of the common people sin through ignorance, while he doeth somewhat against any of the commandments of the Lord concerning things which ought not to be done, and be guilty;

Or if his sin, which he hath sinned, come to his knowledge: then he shall bring his offering, a kid of the goats, a female without blemish, for his sin which he hath sinned. (Lev. 4:13, 27-28. Italics added.)

The Lord also said this:

If a soul commit a trespass, and sin through ignorance, in the holy things of the Lord; then he shall bring for his trespass unto the Lord a ram without blemish out of the flocks, with thy estimation by shekels of silver, after the shekel of the sanctuary, for a trespass offering:

And he shall make amends for the harm that he hath done in the holy thing, and shall add the fifth part thereto, and give it unto the priest: and the priest shall make an atonement for him with the ram of the trespass offering, and it shall be forgiven him. (Lev. 5:15-16.)

Tithing

Tithing was an established principle among the Israelites. For example:

Thou shalt truly tithe all the increase of thy seed, that the field bringeth forth year by year.

And thou shalt eat before the Lord thy God, in the place which he shall choose to place his name there, the tithe of thy corn, of thy wine, and of thine oil, and the firstlings of thy herds and of thy flocks; that thou mayest learn to fear the Lord thy God always. (Deut. 14:22-23.)

In Leviticus we read:

And all the tithe of the land, whether of the seed of the land, or of the fruit of the tree, is the Lord's: it is holy unto the Lord.

And if a man will at all redeem ought of his tithes, he shall add thereto the fifth part thereof.

And concerning the tithe of the herd, or of the flock, even of whatsoever passeth under the rod, the tenth shall be holy unto the Lord.

He shall not search whether it be good or bad, neither shall he change it: and if he change it at all, then both it and the change thereof shall be holy; it shall not be redeemed.

These are the commandments, which the Lord commanded Moses for the children of Israel in mount Sinai. (Lev. 27:30-34.)

The law was handed down to the days of Malachi, who gave us this oft-quoted scripture:

Will a man rob God? Yet ye have robbed me. But ye say, Wherein have we robbed thee? In tithes and offerings.

Ye are cursed with a curse: for ye have robbed me, even this whole nation.

Bring ye all the tithes into the storehouse, that there may be meat in mine house, and prove me now herewith, saith the Lord of hosts, if I will not open you the windows of heaven, and pour you out a blessing, that there shall not be room enough to receive it. (Mal. 3:8-10.)

Capital Punishment

With the present-day disputes over capital punishment, it is interesting to note that such punishment was common among the children of Israel for various types of sins from Sabbath breaking to adultery and murder.

Particularly in regard to murder we read:

He that smiteth a man, so that he die, shall be surely put to death.

And if a man lie not in wait, but God deliver him into his hand; then I will appoint thee a place whither he shall flee.

But if a man come presumptuously upon his neighbour, to slay him with guile; thou shalt take him from mine altar, that he may die.

And he that smiteth his father, or his mother, shall be surely put to death.

And he that stealeth a man, and selleth him [as a slave], or if he be found in his hand, he shall surely be put to death.

And he that curseth his father, or his mother, shall surely be put to death.

And if men strive together, and one smite another with a stone, or with his fist, and he die not, but keepeth his bed:

If he rise again, and walk abroad upon his staff, then shall he that smote him be quit: only he shall pay for the loss of his time, and shall cause him to be thoroughly healed.

And if a man smite his servant, or his maid, with a rod, and he die under his hand; he shall be surely punished.

Notwithstanding, if he continue a day or two, he shall not be punished: for he is his money.

If men strive, and hurt a woman with child, so that her fruit depart from her, and yet no mischief follow: he shall be surely punished, according as the woman's husband will lay upon him; and he shall pay as the judges determine.

And if any mischief follow, then thou shalt give life for life.

Eye for eye, tooth for tooth, hand for hand, foot for foot.

Burning for burning, wound for wound, stripe for stripe. (Ex. 21:12-25.)

Also in Deuteronomy we have:

But if any man hate his neighbour, and lie in wait for him, and rise up against him, and smite him mortally that he die, and fleeth into one of these cities:

Then the elders of his city shall send and fetch him thence, and deliver him into the hand of the avenger of blood, that he may die.

Thine eye shall not pity him, but thou shalt put away the guilt of innocent blood from Israel, that it may go well with thee. (Deut. 19:11-13.)

Note particularly verse 13. The cry today is that it is inhuman to execute a murderer no matter how heinous the crime. Such advocates should read carefully what the Lord says about those condemned to die for murder: "Thine eye shall not pity him."

There was a responsibility to the community in these cases, as the Lord points out. The execution has as one purpose: "Thou shalt put away the guilt of innocent blood from Israel, that it may go well with thee."

In Leviticus we read: "And he that killeth any man shall surely be put to death. . . . And he that killeth a beast, he shall restore it: and he that killeth a man, he shall be put to death." (Lev. 24:17, 21.)

In Numbers we read:

And if he smite him with an instrument of iron, so that he die, he is a murderer: the murderer shall surely be put to death.

And if he smite him with throwing a stone, wherewith he may die, and he die, he is a murderer: the murderer shall surely be put to death.

Or if he smite him with an hand weapon of wood, wherewith he may die, and he die, he is a murderer: the murderer shall surely be put to death.

The revenger of blood himself shall slay the murderer: when he meeteth him, he shall slay him.

But if he thrust him of hatred, or hurl at him by laying of wait, that he die;

Or in enmity smite him with his hand, that he die: he that smote him shall surely be put to death; for he is a murderer: the revenger of blood shall slay the murderer, when he meeteth him.

Whoso killeth any person, the murderer shall be put to death by the mouth of witnesses: but one witness shall not testify against any person to cause him to die.

Moreover ye shall take no satisfaction for the life of a murderer, which is guilty of death: but he shall be surely put to death. (Num. 35:16-21, 30-31.)

Of course the Genesis pronouncement on this crime is well-known: "Whoso sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed: for in the image of God made he man." (Gen. 9:6.)

Witchcraft

In all the generations, it seems that witchcraft or some other form of devil worship appears. It is known even today, with churches of devil worshipers actually being organized in some cities. There are also fortune tellers, "table lifters," and seances of one kind or another, all of which fall into the same general class. The Lord condemned all such.

Capital punishment was allotted to the witches of Moses' day: "Thou shalt not suffer a witch to live." (Ex. 22:18.)

In Leviticus we read: "Regard not them that have familiar spirits, neither seek after wizards, to be defiled by them: I am the Lord your God." (Lev. 19:31.)

In that same book we have:

And the soul that turneth after such as have familiar spirits, and after wizards, to go a whoring after them, I will even set my face against that soul, and will cut him off from among his people.

A man also or woman that hath a familiar spirit, or that is a wizard, shall surely be put to death: they shall stone them with stones: their blood shall be upon them. (Lev. 20:6, 27.)

It is interesting to read Paul's experience with the "possessed" girl who gave readings. (Acts 16:16.)

False Prophets

False prophets have been the bane of righteous people all through the ages. It was so in Moses' day; it is so in our day. In Deuteronomy the Lord warned against false prophets, "dreamers," and those who would give a sign or profess some wonderful thing. Said the Lord about them:

Thou shalt not hearken unto the words of that prophet, or that dreamer of dreams: for the Lord your God proveth you, to know whether ye love the Lord your God with all your heart and with all your soul.

Ye shall walk after the Lord your God, and fear him, and keep his commandments, and obey his voice, and ye shall serve him, and cleave unto him.

And that prophet, or that dreamer of dreams, shall be put to death; because he hath spoken to turn you away from the Lord your God, which brought you out of the land of Egypt, and redeemed you out of the house of bondage, to thrust thee out of the way which the Lord thy God commanded thee to walk in. So shalt thou put the evil away from the midst of thee. (Deut. 13:1-5. Italics added.)

The Lord provided capital punishment for such as these, for he said:

If thy brother, the son of thy mother, or thy son, or thy daughter, or the wife of thy bosom, or thy friend, which is as thine own soul, entice thee secretly, saying, Let us go and serve other gods, which thou hast not known, thou, nor thy fathers;

Namely, of the gods of the people which are round about you, nigh unto thee, or far off from thee, from the one end of the earth even unto the other end of the earth;

Thou shalt not consent unto him, nor hearken unto him; neither shall thine eye pity him, neither shalt thou spare, neither shalt thou conceal him:

But thou shalt surely kill him; thine hand shall be first upon him to put him to death, and afterwards the hand of all the people.

And thou shalt stone him with stones, that he die; because he hath sought to thrust thee away from the Lord thy God, which brought thee out of the land of Egypt, from the house of bondage.

And all Israel shall hear, and fear, and shall do no more any such wickedness as this is among you. (Deut. 13:6-11. Italics added.)

The Unclean

Moral uncleanness was abhorrent to the Lord, and he provided many methods of cleansing for guilty ones, as is indicated in his many commands against sex perversions.

He also opposed drinking alcoholic beverages, and made it a capital offense if anyone thus unclean came into the tabernacle. Then he laid down this principle: "That ye may put difference between holy and unholy, and between unclean and clean." (Lev. 10:8-11.)

Eating Meat

Certain types of meat were forbidden to the Israelites as a matter of health, as is well-known, but the following is of particular interest:

When the Lord thy God shall enlarge thy border, as he hath promised thee, and thou shalt say, I will eat flesh, because thy soul longeth to eat flesh; thou mayest eat flesh, whatsoever thy soul lusteth after.

Only be sure that thou eat not the blood: for the blood is the life; and thou mayest not eat the life with the flesh. (Deut. 12:20, 23.)

Mob Action

Mob activities have been distasteful and harmful all through the ages. Evidently there were some in Moses' day, for the Lord prohibited them. Said he: "Thou shalt not raise a false report: put not thine hand with the wicked to be an unrighteous witness. Thou shalt not follow a multitude to do evil; neither shalt thou speak in a case to decline after many to wrest judgment." (Ex. 23:1-2.)

President Joseph F. Smith said this about mobs:

One of the greatest menaces to our country is that of the combination of men into irresponsible, reckless mobs, wild with prejudice, hatred and fanaticism, led by men of ambition, or passion, or hatred. There is no other thing in the world that I can conceive of so absolutely obnoxious to God and good men as a combination of men and women filled with the spirit of mobocracy. Men combining together to stop or shut off the food supply from the mouth of the honest laborer to starve the man that is willing to work, and the wife and the children who are dependent upon him, because he is not willing to join a mob, is one of the most infamous perils and menaces to the people of our country today. I do not care who they are, or what name they go by. They are a menace to the peace of the world. (Gospel Doctrine, pp. 414-15.)

Be Ye Perfect

The command to be perfect as our Father in heaven is perfect has been with us for a long time. The Savior gave it in the Sermon on the Mount, and Paul expanded on it in his epistle to the Ephesians. (Eph. 4.)

Moses gave it to his people as the great objective to be gained, and his law was: "Thou shalt be perfect with the Lord thy God." (Deut. 18:13.)

Many are the other laws. Only these few suggestions are given here. But as the laws are studied, it is easily seen that they make a marvelous "schoolmaster" to lead one to Christ.

1977 Deseret Book Co.
