Mark E. Petersen, Moses: Man of Miracles (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1977)

THE PENTATEUCH

Moses did write the first part of the Bible, and what he wrote is scripture in the most real sense of the word.

For years the so-called higher critics have assailed his authorship, some saying that he may have written one or two of those books, with others disavowing his authorship altogether.

One of their objections is to an occasional change in style of writing. Another is his use of the titles Jehovah and God. Still another says that Moses could not possibly have recorded the account of his own death. (Deut. 34; Josh. 1:1-2.)

It will be remembered that the first Nephi of the Book of Mormon obtained the brass plates of Laban, thus providing an invaluable record for the use of the Nephites. His father Lehi read those plates. The record says:

And after they had given thanks unto the God of Israel, my father, Lehi, took the records which were engraven upon the plates of brass, and he did search them from the beginning.

And he beheld that they did contain the five books of Moses, which gave an account of the creation of the world, and also of Adam and Eve, who were our first parents;

And also a record of the Jews from the beginning, even down to the commencement of the reign of Zedekiah, king of Judah;

And also the prophecies of the holy prophets, from the beginning, even down to the commencement of the reign of Zedekiah; and also many prophecies which have been spoken by the mouth of Jeremiah.

And it came to pass that my father, Lehi, also found upon the plates of brass a genealogy of his fathers; wherefore he knew that he was a descendant of Joseph; yea, even that Joseph who was the son of Jacob, who was sold into Egypt, and who was preserved by the hand of the Lord, that he might preserve his father, Jacob, and all his household from perishing with famine.

And they were also led out of captivity and out of the land of Egypt, by the same God who had preserved them.

And thus my father, Lehi, did discover the genealogy of his fathers. And Laban also was a descendant of Joseph, wherefore he and his fathers had kept the records.

And now when my father saw all these things, he was filled with the Spirit, and began to prophesy concerning his seed—

That these plates of brass should go forth unto all nations, kindreds, tongues, and people who were of his seed.

Wherefore, he said that these plates of brass should never perish; neither should they be dimmed any more by time. And he prophesied many things concerning his seed. (1 Ne. 5:10-19.)

Would he have called them the five books of Moses if they were not the books of Moses?

Nephi also had access to the writings of Moses, for he said:

And I did read many things unto them which were written in the book of Moses; but that I might more fully persuade them to believe in the Lord their Redeemer I did read unto them that which was written by the prophet Isaiah; for I did liken all scriptures unto us, that it might be for our profit and learning. (1 Ne. 19:23.)

Nephi gave this testimony concerning the writings of Moses:

And the Lord will surely prepare a way for his people, unto the fulfilling of the words of Moses, which he spake, saying: A prophet shall the Lord your God raise up unto you, like unto me; him shall ye hear in all things whatsoever he shall say unto you. And it shall come to pass that all those who will not hear that prophet shall be cut off from among the people.

And now I, Nephi, declare unto you, that this prophet of whom Moses spake was the Holy One of Israel; wherefore, he shall execute judgment in righteousness. (1 Ne. 22:20-21.)

Here is another evidence that Moses testified of Christ. And by what means did he give that testimony? In his writings!

And how did Nephi have access to Moses' testimony? In Moses' writings, recorded on the brass plates!

In the book of Helaman as well as elsewhere in the Book of Mormon, reference is made to the crossing of the Israelites through the Red Sea when they "came through upon dry ground." (Hel. 8:11.)

Verse 16 of this chapter is notable: "And now behold, Moses did not only testify of these things, but also all the holy prophets, from his days even to the days of Abraham."

And then note what he said:

Yea, and behold, Abraham saw of his coming, and was filled with gladness and did rejoice.

Yea, and behold I say unto you, that Abraham not only knew of these things, but there were many before the days of Abraham who were called by the order of God; yea, even after the order of his Son; and this that it should be shown unto the people, a great many thousand years before his coming, that even redemption should come unto them.

And now I would that ye should know, that even since the days of Abraham there have been many prophets that have testified these things; yea, behold, the prophet Zenos did testify boldly; for the which he was slain.

And behold, also Zenock, and also Ezias, and also Isaiah, and Jeremiah, (Jeremiah being that same prophet who testified of the destruction of Jerusalem) and now we know that Jerusalem was destroyed according to the words of Jeremiah. O then why not the Son of God come, according to his prophecy? (Hel. 8:17-20.)

Where would ancient American prophets have learned about that episode in Abraham's life if not from the books of Moses on the brass plates?

Likewise they knew much else of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and of Melchizedek, the great king of Salem. (Alma 13 and Hel. 8.) Where would they have learned of these men and the details of their activities?

Again it was from the brass plates, which recorded the books of Moses and which were read and used and apparently published among the Nephites for centuries. (Alma 14:8; 18:36; 22:12; 33:14; 37:3.)

During his stay among the Nephites the Savior spoke of the fulfillment of Moses' words. Where would the Nephites have learned of those words? Obviously they knew of them, for the Savior spoke of them rather intimately.

Again their source was Moses' work written on the brass plates and republished among them.

No one can note the importance that Lehi placed on those plates without realizing that they were intended to be a guide to the Nephites down through all their generations. (3 Ne. 15;3 1 Ne. 20:23; 3 Ne. 21:11.)

So again the Book of Mormon sustains the Bible and affirms that Moses did write extensively, most likely far more than what we have in our present Pentateuch.

1977 Deseret Book Co.
