Mark E. Petersen, Moses: Man of Miracles (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1977)

MOSES AND CHRIST

The Book of Mormon and the Bible stand as joint witnesses for both Christ the Savior and Moses his prophet.

As Jesus testified of Moses, so likewise did Moses testify of Christ, although much of his testimony is not in our present-day Bible. But obviously it was in the scriptures available to the people of Jesus' day.

It is faith-promoting indeed to note how consistent the various books of scripture are, one with another; how the revelations in the various ages all harmonize; and how the words of the prophets, no matter when or where they lived, testify of our Savior, Jesus Christ.

When critics attacked him, the Lord responded by saying to them: "Search the scriptures; for in them ye think ye have eternal life; and they are they which testify of me." (John 5:39. Italics added.)

He never would have said that if the scriptures available to the people of that day did not testify of him. He urged them to read the scriptures that they might see how the prophets whom they adored, but now long since dead, actually did foretell his coming. They testified of him—the Savior. And Moses was one of them.

As the Savior elaborated on this point he said:

I am come in my Father's name, and ye receive me not: if another shall come in his own name, him ye will receive.

How can ye believe, which receive honour one of another, and seek not the honour that cometh from God only?

Do not think that I will accuse you to the Father: there is one that accuseth you, even Moses, in whom ye trust.

For had ye believed Moses, ye would have believed me: for he wrote of me.

But if ye believe not his writings, how shall ye believe my words? (John 5:43-47. Italics added.)

The conversation the Lord had with the two disciples enroute to Emmaus, following the resurrection, is well remembered by all Bible readers.

As the disciples approached the village, "they talked together of all these things which had happened. And it came to pass, that, while they communed together and reasoned, Jesus himself drew near, and went with them." (Luke 24:14-15.)

They told the resurrected Savior, whom they as yet did not recognize, of the events pertaining to the crucifixion. They then explained about the empty sepulchre and the angels stationed at the door "which said that he was alive." They related also that some of the disciples had likewise seen the forsaken burial place, "but him they saw not." Then the Lord, still unrecognized, spoke to them and said:

"O fools, and slow of heart to believe all that the prophets have spoken:

"Ought not Christ to have suffered these things, and to enter into his glory?

"And beginning at Moses and all the prophets, he expounded unto them in all the scriptures the things concerning himself." (Luke 24:25-27. Italics added.)

Note that the Lord quoted both Moses and the other prophets expounding "in all the scriptures the things concerning himself."

This is another evidence of the incompleteness of our present-day Bible, but it likewise gives evidence that the ancients had the fuller, more complete scriptures, even though they were not all handed down to us.

Peter's address in the third chapter of Acts is enlightening on this point.

While Paul was in Rome he likewise used the scriptures to testify of Jesus. Would he not have used those also quoted by the Savior? The scripture says: "And Paul dwelt two whole years in his own hired house, and received all that came in unto him, Preaching the kingdom of God, and teaching those things which concern the Lord Jesus Christ, with all confidence, no man forbidding him." (Acts 28:30-31.)

Paul also wrote:

Paul, a servant of Jesus Christ, called to be an apostle, separated unto the gospel of God, Which he had promised afore by his prophets in the holy scriptures,

Concerning his Son Jesus Christ our Lord, which was made of the seed of David according to the flesh;

And declared to be the Son of God with power, according to the spirit of holiness, by the resurrection from the dead:

By whom we have received grace and apostleship, for obedience to the faith among all nations, for his name:

Among whom are ye also the called of Jesus Christ. (Rom. 1:1-6. Italics added.)

One of the most interesting passages indicating that Moses testified of Christ is that in which we read of Philip bringing Nathanael to visit the Lord. It will be remembered that it was this same Nathanael who said, "Can any good thing come out of Nazareth?"

The day following Jesus would go forth into Galilee, and findeth Philip, and saith unto him, Follow me.

Now Philip was of Bethsaida, the city of Andrew and Peter.

Philip findeth Nathanael, and saith unto him, We have found him, of whom Moses in the law, and the prophets, did write, Jesus of Nazareth, the son of Joseph.

And Nathanael said unto him, Can there any good thing come out of Nazareth? Philip saith unto him, Come and see.

Jesus saw Nathanael coming to him, and saith of him, Behold an Israelite indeed, in whom is no guile!

Nathanael saith unto him, Whence knowest thou me? Jesus answered and said unto him, Before that Philip called thee, when thou wast under the fig tree, I saw thee.

Nathanael answered and saith unto him, Rabbi, thou art the Son of God; thou art the King of Israel. (John 1:43-49. Italics added.)

When Peter went to Cornelius, he again spoke of Christ, but would he have failed to use Moses' testimony, since Moses was regarded as the one great authority among the people of that day? Said Peter: "To him give all the prophets witness, that through his name whosoever believeth in him shall receive remission of sins." (Acts 10:43. Italics added.)

One of the most remarkable and faith-promoting portions of the Book of Mormon is the account of Abinadi's appearance before the wicked King Noah and his equally evil priests. Not only does Abinadi reveal that Moses spoke of Christ, but he gives a most enlightening portrayal of the relationship of the law of Moses to the gospel. This relationship is vital to our understanding.

And moreover, I say unto you, that salvation doth not come by the law alone; and were it not for the atonement, which God himself shall make for the sins and iniquities of his people, that they must unavoidably perish, notwithstanding the law of Moses.

And now I say unto you that it was expedient that there should be a law given to the children of Israel, yea, even a very strict law; for they were a stiffnecked people, quick to do iniquity, and slow to remember the Lord their God;

Therefore there was a law given them, yea, a law of performances and of ordinances, a law which they were to observe strictly from day to day, to keep them in remembrance of God and their duty towards him.

But behold, I say unto you, that all these things were types of things to come.

And now, did they understand the law? I say unto you, Nay, they did not all understand the law; and this because of the hardness of their hearts; for they understood not that there could not any man be saved except it were through the redemption of God.

For behold, did not Moses prophesy unto them concerning the coming of the Messiah, and that God should redeem his people? Yea, and even all the prophets who have prophesied ever since the world began—have they not spoken more or less concerning these things?

Have they not said that God himself should come down among the children of men, and take upon him the form of man, and go forth in mighty power upon the face of the earth?

Yea, and have they not said also that he should bring to pass the resurrection of the dead, and that he, himself, should be oppressed and afflicted? (Mosiah 13:28-35. Italics added.)

Again we see how the Bible and the Book of Mormon are indeed as "one in thine hand." (Ezek. 37:17.)

It was Paul who explained to the Galatians that the law of Moses was merely a "schoolmaster" to bring the wayward Israelites back to the gospel. (Gal. 3:24-29.) Could it bring them back to Christ if the people were not told of Christ?

It was the Savior who gave the law to Moses, as we read in 3 Ne. 15:4-10.

The ancients before Moses had the gospel, including such men as Enoch, Melchizedek, Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, Jared of the Book of Mormon, and his brother and their families of the time of the tower of Babel.

The apostle Paul taught:

Know ye therefore that they which are of faith, the same are the children of Abraham.

And the scripture, foreseeing that God would justify the heathen through faith, preached before the gospel unto Abraham, saying, In thee shall all nations be blessed.

So then they which be of faith are blessed with faithful Abraham. (Gal. 3:7-9. Italics added.)

When Paul spoke of the ancients in his letter to the Hebrews, he said: "For unto us was the gospel preached, as well as unto them: but the word preached did not profit them, not being mixed with faith in them that heard it." (Heb. 4:2.)

And there is much significance also to this:

Moreover, brethren, I would not that ye should be ignorant, how that all our fathers were under the cloud, and all passed through the sea;

And were all baptized unto Moses in the cloud and in the sea;

And did all eat the same spiritual meat;

And did all drink the same spiritual drink: for they drank of that spiritual Rock that followed them: and that Rock was Christ. (1 Cor. 10:1-4.)

The Prophet Joseph Smith made an interesting comment at one time concerning Abel and his understanding of the gospel. Said the Prophet:

It is said by Paul in his letter to the Hebrew brethren, that Abel obtained witness that he was righteous, God testifying of his gifts. To whom did God testify of the gifts of Abel, was it to Paul? We have very little on this important subject in the forepart of the Bible. But it is said that Abel himself obtained witness that he was righteous.

Then certainly God spoke to him: indeed, it is said that God talked with him; and if He did, would He not, seeing that Abel was righteous deliver to him the whole plan of the Gospel? And is not the Gospel the news of the redemption?

How could Abel offer a sacrifice and look forward with faith on the Son of God for a remission of his sins, and not understand the Gospel? The mere shedding of the blood of beasts or offering anything else in sacrifice, could not procure a remission of sins, except it were performed in faith of something to come; if it could, Cain's offering must have been as good as Abel's.

And if Abel was taught of the coming of the Son of God, was he not taught also of His ordinances? We all admit that the Gospel has ordinances, and if so, had it not always ordinances, and were not its ordinances always the same? (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 59.)

The Pearl of Great Price teaches that Adam was baptized according to the rules of the gospel (Moses 6:64) and was commanded to teach the gospel to his children (Moses 6:51-58).

Christ was well known to the Book of Mormon prophets and appeared to some of them. Revelation was given to them in which Jesus Christ clearly identified himself, as for example when he spoke to Alma:

Thou art my servant; and I covenant with thee that thou shalt have eternal life; and thou shalt serve me and go forth in my name, and shalt gather together my sheep.

And he that will hear my voice shall be my sheep; and him shall ye receive into the church, and him will I also receive.

For behold, this is my church; whosoever is baptized shall be baptized unto repentance. And whomsoever ye receive shall believe in my name; and him will I freely forgive.

For it is I that taketh upon me the sins of the world; for it is I that hath created them; and it is I that granteth unto him that believeth unto the end a place at my right hand.

For behold, in my name are they called; and if they know me they shall come forth, and shall have a place eternally at my right hand.

And it shall come to pass that when the second trump shall sound then shall they that never knew me come forth and shall stand before me.

And then shall they know that I am the Lord their God, that I am their Redeemer; but they would not be redeemed.

And then I will confess unto them that I never knew them; and they shall depart into everlasting fire prepared for the devil and his angels.

Therefore I say unto you, that he that will not hear my voice, the same shall ye not receive into my church, for him I will not receive at the last day. (Mosiah 26:20-28.)

This occurred a century before the mortal birth of Jesus.

The Israelites lost much of their faith during their Egyptian bondage. Of necessity they had to be brought back to Christ by some schoolmaster, and the law of Moses was that instrument.

In all of this, Christ dealt with Moses, and Moses dealt with Christ (Jehovah of the Old Testament). The two were closely and intimately associated. The existence of Christ, the existence of the law, and the manner in which the gospel was brought back by the mortal ministry of the Savior all testify to the reality of Moses' existence and the importance of his mission.

As Christ lived, so did Moses live. As Moses was a great prophet of God, so he testified of his Lord and Master, and ours.

1977 Deseret Book Co.
