Mark E. Petersen, Moses: Man of Miracles (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1977)

MOSES AND CREATION

Moses had two missions. One was to rescue Israel from Egyptian bondage, restoring the nation to the Land of Promise. The other was to convert the tribes to the worship of the true God. In both of these missions he was constantly taught and directed by the Almighty himself; he had such a close relationship with the Lord that it even approached being a companionship.

Abraham had been called the friend of God. Moses was all of that and more. Whereas Abraham was the progenitor of the Israelites, Moses was their great teacher and liberator.

Moses knew God from close relationship. One portion of his experience is detailed in the first chapter of the Book of Moses.

What a call it was that came to Moses, and what mighty revelations!

And calling upon the name of God, he beheld his glory again, for it was upon him; and he heard a voice, saying: Blessed art thou, Moses, for I, the Almighty, have chosen thee, and thou shalt be made stronger than many waters; for they shall obey thy command as if thou wert God.

And lo, I am with thee, even unto the end of thy days; for thou shalt deliver my people from bondage, even Israel my chosen.

And it came to pass, as the voice was still speaking, Moses cast his eyes and beheld the earth, yea, even all of it; and there was not a particle of it which he did not behold, discerning it by the spirit of God.

And he beheld also the inhabitants thereof, and there was not a soul which he beheld not; and he discerned them by the Spirit of God; and their numbers were great, even numberless as the sand upon the sea shore.

And he beheld many lands; and each land was called earth, and there were inhabitants on the face thereof.

And it came to pass that Moses called upon God, saying: Tell me, I pray thee, why these things are so, and by what thou madest them?

And behold, the glory of the Lord was upon Moses, so that Moses stood in the presence of God, and talked with him face to face. And the Lord God said unto Moses: For mine own purpose have I made these things. Here is wisdom and it remaineth in me.

And by the Word of my power, have I created them, which is mine Only Begotten Son, who is full of grace and truth.

And worlds without number have I created; and I also created them for mine own purpose; and by the Son I created them, which is mine Only Begotten.

And the first man of all men have I called Adam, which is many.

But only an account of this earth, and the inhabitants thereof, give I unto you. For behold, there are many worlds that have passed away by the Word of my power. And there are many that now stand, and innumerable are they unto man; but all things are numbered unto me, for they are mine and I know them.

And it came to pass that Moses spake unto the Lord, saying: Be merciful unto thy servant, O God, and tell me concerning this earth, and the inhabitants thereof, and also the heavens, and then thy servant will be content.

And the Lord God spake unto Moses, saying: The heavens, they are many, and they cannot be numbered unto man; but they are numbered unto me, for they are mine.

And as one earth shall pass away, and the heavens thereof even so shall another come; and there is no end to my works, neither to my words.

For behold, this is my work and my glory—to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man.

And now, Moses, my son, I will speak unto thee concerning this earth upon which thou standest; and thou shalt write the things which I shall speak.

And in a day when the children of men shall esteem my words as naught and take many of them from the book which thou shalt write, behold, I will raise up another like unto thee; and they shall be had again among the children of men—among as many as shall believe.

(These words were spoken unto Moses in the mount, the name of which shall not be known among the children of men. And now they are spoken unto you. Show them not unto any except them that believe. Even so. Amen.) (Moses 1:25-42.)

One of the most illuminating, comforting, and faith-building portions of all the revelations to Moses is that which describes the primeval council in heaven—how the Savior was appointed and how Satan chose his rebellious role. This alone gives us a widely expanded view of the gospel and its purpose. (Moses 4:1-4.)

Also in these writings is direct revelation giving us the assurance that man truly is made in the image and likeness of God by reason of the fact that God is our Father and we are his children.

Was God alone in the creation? The revelation to Moses shows that the Father and the Son acted jointly in the work of creation. For example, the Lord spoke to Moses and said: "And I, God, said unto mine Only Begotten, which was with me from the beginning: Let us make man in our image, after our likeness; and it was so." (Moses 2:26.)

Many scholars have puzzled over the use of the plural form in Genesis as they have read: "And God said, Let us make man in our image, after our likeness." (Gen. 1:26. Italics added.) The Book of Moses explains fully, and the Book of Abraham confirms it.

It is remarkable that "the glory of the Lord was upon Moses, so that Moses stood in the presence of God, and talked with him face to face." (Moses 1:31.) How few, even of the prophets, have enjoyed such a blessing!

The Lord by revelation told Moses the story of creation, with what is now the beginning of the book of Genesis, and which constitutes chapters two through four of the Book of Moses.

The Lord prepared Moses for this description of creation by telling him of the extent of it, far beyond our universe. (Moses 1:31-41.)

Those who challenge Genesis, as well as Moses personally, fail to recognize the great factor of revelation. Obviously the Lord desired that his people here on earth—all of us his children—should know about our origin and learn that the earth was made for us. And he desired to have us know that we, as immortal spirits clothed in physical bodies, are his spirit children, even as he revealed it to the apostle Paul (Acts 17:28-29), and that his work and glory are to bring about the immortality and eternal life of man (Moses 1:39).

This could only have been given by revelation, and that revelation came to the prophets, Moses being one of them.

Creation came, but not by accident; life came, but not spontaneously. Both came by act of God himself, as a step toward helping us to become like him. It is only natural for children to become like their parents, and we are his off-spring.

Not only did the Lord reveal these great truths to Moses, but likewise he told him the history of the earth from the creation to the flood, all of which is recorded in the Book of Moses.

Some of the critics who discount the writings pertaining to the periods both before and after the flood ask, How could anyone know? And what is the answer?

"And these are the words which I spake unto my servant Moses, and they are true even as I will; and I have spoken them unto you [Joseph Smith]." (Moses 4:32.)

And also: "These words were spoken unto Moses in the mount, the name of which shall not be known among the children of men. And now they are spoken unto you [Joseph Smith]." (Moses 1:42.)

How did Moses know? By revelation!

1977 Deseret Book Co.
