Mark E. Petersen, Moses: Man of Miracles (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1977)

APOSTASY FROM THE LAW

By the time of the Savior's mortal ministry, the Israelites in Palestine had apostatized very largely from the law of Moses.

In America the law was kept among the Book of Mormon peoples even until the time of Christ, although they lived other principles of the gospel as well.

But among the residents of Palestine, a general falling away took place. So extensive was that apostasy that Jesus said at one time: "Did not Moses give you the law, and yet none of you keepeth the law? Why go ye about to kill me?" (John 7:19.)

His persecutors had in fact become murderous in their intentions, and time and again they sought to kill him, even from the early part of his ministry.

The immediate cause of Jesus' eventual crucifixion was this same religious bigotry. His true doctrines were so at variance with the teachings of the day, and so strikingly did they expose the error of the creeds then taught, that his enemies became incensed and sought his life.

When the scribes and Pharisees came to him and complained, "Why do thy disciples transgress the tradition of the elders? for they wash not their hands when they eat bread," he countered with "Why do ye also transgress the commandment of God by your tradition?" (Matt. 15:2-3.)

He told his disciples to beware of the doctrines of the Pharisees and the Sadducees (Matt. 16:1-12), calling them a wicked and adulterous generation that sought for signs. He denounced their man-made creeds and said, "In vain do they worship me, teaching for doctrines the commandments of men." (Matt. 15:9.)

The Jerusalem Bible gives this rendering of the Savior's denunciation:

"This people honours me only with lip-service, while their hearts are far from me. The worship they offer me is worthless, the doctrines they teach are only human regulations.

"You put aside the commandment of God to cling to human traditions." And he said to them, "How ingeniously you get around the commandment of God in order to preserve your own tradition! . . . you make God's word null and void for the sake of your tradition which you have handed down. And you do many other things like this." (Jerusalem Bible, Mark 7:6-13.)

The Roman Catholic adaptation of the Protestant Revised Version of the Bible, published in England in 1965, gives this for Matt. 15:3-6: "And why do you transgress the commandment of God for the sake of your tradition? . . . So for the sake of your tradition you have made void the word of God."

Jesus scathingly denounced the scribes, Pharisees, Sadducees, and other false teachers. The whole of Matt. 23 should be read in this regard. Particularly he said:

Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! for ye compass sea and land to make one proselyte, and when he is made, ye make him twofold more the child of hell than yourselves.

Woe unto you, ye blind guides, which say, Whosoever shall swear by the temple, it is nothing; but whosoever shall swear by the gold of the temple, he is a debtor!

Ye fools and blind: for whether is greater, the gold, or the temple that sanctifieth the gold?

Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! for ye pay tithe of mint and anise and cummin, and have omitted the weightier matters of the law, judgment, mercy, and faith: these ought ye to have done, and not to leave the other undone.

Ye blind guides, which strain at a gnat, and swallow a camel.

Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! for ye make clean the outside of the cup and of the platter, but within they are full of extortion and excess.

Thou blind Pharisee, cleanse first that which is within the cup and platter, that the outside of them may be clean also.

Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! for ye are like unto whited sepulchres, which indeed appear beautiful outward, but are within full of dead men's bones, and of all uncleanness.

Even so ye also outwardly appear righteous unto men, but within ye are full of hypocrisy and iniquity. (Matt. 23:15-17, 23-28.)

We see their scheming methods as we read:

And the chief priests and the scribes the same hour sought to lay hands on him; and they feared the people: for they perceived that he had spoken this parable against them.

And they watched him, and sent forth spies, which should feign themselves just men, that they might take hold of his words, that so they might deliver him unto the power and authority of the governor. (Luke 20:19-20.)

But then, out of the greatness of his heart, he said: "O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that killest the prophets, and stonest them which are sent unto thee, how often would I have gathered thy children together, even as a hen gathereth her chickens under her wings, and ye would not!" (Matt. 23:37.)

The people of Palestine at that day, apostate as they were, hypocritical and posing as though they were devout, yet being murderous in their hearts, were divided into various factions or religious denominations.

The Pharisees and Sadducees are best known. The Pharisees had developed into a sect prior to the time of the Maccabees when an effort was made to force the Jews to adopt Greek customs and philosophies. They had built upon the traditions of the elders who preceded them and used them in their violent opposition to Hellenistic influences. They carried their self-written creeds to ridiculous extremes, which were exposed by the Savior. Hence they bitterly fought Jesus and became anti-Christ.

The Sadducees were organized by a man named Zadok or Sadok about 300 B.C., and were at times called Zadokites. They denied both the immortality of the soul and the resurrection, and rejected the traditions of the elders on which the Pharisees so much depended.

There were also the Essenes, who are believed to have written the Dead Sea scrolls. They were a sect of men only who believed in celibacy and taught that to be saved one must withdraw from society and live the ascetic life. They had all things in common and spent their time in meditation. They developed mystical tendencies.

There were also the Zealots, a religious-political group who opposed Roman rule in Palestine, but who objected to many of the teachings of the Pharisees and the Sadducees.

Then there were the Hellenists, who were a residue of the Greek attempt to Hellenize the world following the conquests of Alexander the Great.

Alexander and his successors, in order to solidify their empire, sent groups of Greeks as colonists to various parts of their new domain, including Palestine. These Greeks introduced many of their cultural activities, including the Greek games, wherever they were thus transplanted by their emperors.

As they endeavored to Hellenize the Jews in this way, they met great resistance, which culminated in the wars of the Maccabees. The Hellenist party attempted to dilute the Mosaic teachings with Greek philosophy, and to a considerable extent they were successful among certain groups. King Herod the Great encouraged them.

So influential upon Jewry was Greek culture in those days, and so extensively was it adopted by the Romans when they came into power, that the Old Testament was translated into Greek. This work was known as the Septuagint and was done in Alexandria between 280 and 130 B.C. It was this same Greek influence in early Christian times that made it necessary for the New Testament also to be made available in Greek.

The Hellenist party, as it was known, invaded Christianity also. It was a minority group until the Roman conquest of Jerusalem in A.D. 70. Since Hellenism was encouraged by the Romans, who dearly loved Greek culture, believing it was better than their own, the Hellenists were not scattered at the fall of Jerusalem as were most of the other Christian sects. Thus they became the dominant though splintered cult of early Christianity. Eventually this was the sect that was sponsored by Constantine the Great.

Many Christian sects arose immediately after Christ. Some historians say that as many as thirty appeared within the first century. These included the Judeo-Christians, who tried to Judaize Christian teachings; the Millenarianists; the Encratites; the Ebionites; the Gnostics; the Elkasaites (known as baptists); the Archontics; the Coptics, who still survive in Egypt; the Mandaeans; the Manichaeans; and the Quartodecimans.

It is readily seen that it is a great mistake to suppose there was only one united Christian church until the rupture that formed the Greek Orthodox Church a thousand years after Christ.

There was no unity in early Christianity; the church was splintered time and again, thus making it impossible truthfully or accurately to trace any one denomination back to either Peter or Christ. The original church was lost in the splintering process that took place, beginning even in the days of the apostles. See the first chapter of 1 Corinthians, for example, where four factions were mentioned in that one city.

Do we remember how Paul wrote to the Galatians and marveled that they had so soon left the true faith (Gal. 1:6-9) and how he called them "O foolish Galatians . . . . that ye should not obey the truth" (Gal. 3:1)? This was but typical of the ruptures that began in the days of the apostles.

But to return to the situation during the life of Christ: It should be remembered that the various cults that existed then, all of them apostate, all with their own separate creeds, wrote voluminous instructions on how to live various portions of the law of Moses. These rules became traditions of the elders and even found their way into such works as the Talmud.

In the old Jerusalem Talmud alone there were sixty-five printed columns explaining how to observe the Sabbath. Among a few of them were:

A man may not go out on the Sabbath with sandals shod with nails. The nails constitute a burden and to carry a burden on the Sabbath is a violation of the law.

A man might not cut his finger nails on the Sabbath, nor pull a hair out of his beard or head.

If one extinguished a lamp on the Sabbath he broke the law.

It was forbidden to ask a doctor to assist one on the Sabbath. To set a broken bone was against the law. If a hand or foot were dislocated it was against the law to do anything but bathe it in the usual way.

To tie a knot on the Sabbath was work and therefore forbidden, unless to tie or untie the knot could be accomplished with only one hand. If it could be done with one hand it did not violate the law.

These are but typical of the false man-made creeds of that day. And yet those people, apparently so pious, were willing to commit murder and slay the Savior because he healed on the Sabbath! (John 5:16.) So apostate were they.

Nephi wrote of them:

Wherefore, as I said unto you, it must needs be expedient that Christ—for in the last night the angel spake unto me that this should be his name—should come among the Jews, among those who are the more wicked part of the world; and they shall crucify him—for thus it behooveth our God, and there is none other nation on earth that would crucify their God.

For should the mighty miracles be wrought among other nations they would repent, and know that he be their God.

But because of priestcrafts and iniquities, they at Jerusalem will stiffen their necks against him, that he be crucified. (2 Ne. 10:3-5.)

This is even more significant when we read what the Lord said to Enoch: "Wherefore, I can stretch forth mine hands and hold all the creations which I have made; and mine eye can pierce them also, and among all the workmanship of mine hands there has not been so great wickedness as among thy brethren." (Moses 7:36.)

There is much room for contemplation when we realize that the faithless of Enoch's day were the most wicked of all the people in God's creations and that those in Palestine in the time of Christ were the most wicked on this earth, none other being so bad that they would crucify their King.

There are many earths that are inhabited, and upon them live other sons and daughters of God. (D&C 76:24.)

1977 Deseret Book Co.
