Mark E. Petersen, Moses: Man of Miracles (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1977)

THE LOST OPPORTUNITY

The Lord promised the Twelve Tribes that if they would keep his commandments, he would make them the greatest nation on earth.

What an opportunity was theirs! How history would have been changed if only they had kept the faith!

In addressing the congregation Moses said: "And it shall come to pass, if thou shalt hearken diligently unto the voice of the Lord thy God, to observe and to do all his commandments which I command thee this day, that the Lord thy God will set thee on high above all nations of the earth." (Deut. 28:1. Italics added.)

Earlier the prophet had said:

Thou shalt therefore keep the commandments, and the statutes, and the judgments, which I command thee this day, to do them.

Wherefore it shall come to pass, if ye hearken to these judgments, and keep, and do them, that the Lord thy God shall keep unto thee the covenant and the mercy which he sware unto thy fathers:

And he will love thee, and bless thee, and multiply thee: he will also bless the fruit of thy womb, and the fruit of thy land, thy corn, and thy wine, and thine oil, the increase of thy kine, and the flocks of thy sheep, in the land which he sware unto thy fathers to give thee.

Thou shalt be blessed above all people: there shall not be male or female barren among you, or among your cattle.

And the Lord will take away from thee all sickness, and will put none of the evil diseases of Egypt, which thou knowest, upon thee; but will lay them upon all them that hate thee.

And thou shalt consume all the people which the Lord thy God shall deliver thee; thine eye shall have no pity upon them: neither shalt thou serve their gods; for that will be a snare unto thee.

If thou shalt say in thine heart, These nations are more than I; how can I dispossess them?

Thou shalt not be afraid of them: but shalt well remember what the Lord thy God did unto Pharaoh, and unto all Egypt;

The great temptations which thine eyes saw, and the signs, and the wonders, and the mighty hand, and the stretched out arm, whereby the Lord thy God brought thee out: so shall the Lord thy God do unto all the people of whom thou art afraid.

Moreover the Lord thy God will send the hornet among them, until they that are left, and hide themselves from thee, be destroyed.

Thou shalt not be afrighted at them: for the Lord thy God is among you, a mighty God and terrible.

And the Lord thy God will put out those nations before thee by little and little: thou mayest not consume them at once, lest the beasts of the field increase upon thee.

But the Lord thy God shall deliver them unto thee, and shall destroy them with a mighty destruction, until they be destroyed.

And he shall deliver their kings into thine hand, and thou shalt destroy their name from under heaven: there shall no man be able to stand before thee, until thou have destroyed them. (Deut. 7:11-24. Italics added.)

Clearly setting forth what the Lord had in mind for Israel are these verses:

This day the Lord thy God hath commanded thee to do these statutes and judgments: thou shalt therefore keep and do them with all thine heart, and with all thy soul.

Thou hast avouched the Lord this day to be thy God, and to walk in his ways, and to keep his statutes, and his commandments, and his judgments, and to hearken unto his voice:

And the Lord hath avouched thee this day to be his peculiar people, as he hath promised thee, and that thou shouldest keep all his commandments;

And to make thee high above all nations which he hath made, in praise, and in name, and in honour; and that thou mayest be an holy people unto the Lord thy God, as he hath spoken. (Deut. 26:16-19. Italics added.)

There were great nations in those times, and some of them continued on down until as late as 600 B.C. Sargon I created one of the greatest of the ancient nations (2300 B.C.) in Mesopotamia. He conquered all the nearby lands and then extended his empire as far as present-day Syria and Turkey. About a dozen kings paid him tribute.

He built his capital at Agade, regarded as one of the most magnificent cities of antiquity, with its great temples and spectacular royal palace, resplendent with treasures from all parts of his empire.

Under one of his successors, Ur-Nammu, who ruled about 2100 B.C., the nation prospered and developed remarkably. "Agriculture and commerce . . . enjoyed a dramatic upswing, and in all branches of the arts there occurred a sudden renaissance." (Cradle of Civilization, p. 39.)

Ur-Nammu is considered by historians to be the first known law-giver in history. "His law code, parts of which have been found inscribed on cuneiform tablets, preceded the celebrated code of Hammurabi by more than three centuries and the laws of Moses by over a millennium." (Ibid., p. 40.)

And consider Hammurabi himself. He ascended the throne of Babylon about 1750 B.C., but a few short years before Joseph was sold into Egypt. His nation had been great for two hundred years prior to the time of Abraham.

The art and architecture of those people were kept on a high plane for five hundred years. The Babylonians were truly a great nation. Hammurabi's Code of Laws is regarded as one of the marvels of that ancient time.

One of the truly remarkable civilizations of ancient times was that of the Minoans on the island of Crete. They had a well-advanced culture, which has been appreciated fully only recently, since more archaeological discoveries have been made.

The Egyptians remained outstanding all through the centuries, beginning at about 3000 B.C. The Elamites, spoken of in the Bible, were no insignificant power either.

The Assyrians appeared about 1800 B.C. shortly after Abraham's time, only about a century before Joseph was sold into Egypt. They continued to be a power to be reckoned with for twelve hundred years. The Hittites too reached considerable heights for about four hundred years beginning about 1700 B.C.

Should we not mention the Jaredites in America, who lived during these same periods? Their records certainly show them to have been advanced. The book of Ether gives testimony to this.

One of the greatest of the ancient nations, but more recent than some of these, was Greece, whose influence is still with us.

Through archaeology it has been discovered that these nations were of far greater importance than previously realized. Most of them were strong military powers, but with all their skills in war, they also had cultural activities without which no nation can be great.

And the Israelites could have been greater than them all! If they had lived up to their opportunity, the entire course of history could have been changed. The Lord's miracles in their behalf, and the prosperity with which he would have blessed them, would have more than guaranteed their complete superiority.

In Leviticus (26:6) they were promised peace and safety and "neither shall the sword go through your land."

This was a notable promise, for history shows that Palestine became the battleground not only for the Israelites, but also for other warring nations, north and south, which trampled over the area in repeated campaigns. If only the sword had not gone through their land!

It is true that in the days of Solomon the tribes became a great and rich nation, attracting even the Queen of Sheba to Palestine. But although the nation reached a partial peak at that time, it did not even approach what the Lord had in mind. By disobedience it was all lost to internal conflict, civil war, and invasion.

The Ten Tribes were lost in exile. The remaining two tribes suffered their Babylonian captivity and were later sifted over the earth.

In calling them to repentance, the Lord said that unless they turned from their wickedness, "I will walk contrary unto you also in fury; . . . And I will bring the land into desolation. . . . And I will scatter you among the heathen, and will draw out a sword after you: and your land shall be desolate, and your cities waste." (Lev. 26:28, 32-33.)

The price of disobedience is stupendous.

The Lord also said to them:

But it shall come to pass, if thou wilt not hearken unto the voice of the Lord thy God, to observe to do all his commandments and his statutes which I command thee this day; that all these curses shall come upon thee, and overtake thee:

Cursed shalt thou be in the city, and cursed shalt thou be in the field.

Cursed shall be thy basket and thy store.

Cursed shall be the fruit of thy body, and the fruit of thy land, the increase of thy kine, and the flocks of thy sheep.

Cursed shalt thou be when thou comest in, and cursed shalt thou be when thou goest out.

The Lord shall send upon thee cursing, vexation, and rebuke, in all that thou settest thine hand unto for to do, until thou be destroyed, and until thou perish quickly; because of the wickedness of thy doings, whereby thou hast forsaken me.

The Lord shall make the pestilence cleave unto thee, until he have consumed thee from off the land, whither thou goest to possess it.

The Lord shall smite thee with a consumption, and with a fever, and with an inflammation, and with an extreme burning, and with the sword, and with blasting, and with mildew; and they shall pursue thee until thou perish.

And thy heaven that is over thy head shall be brass, and the earth that is under thee shall be iron.

The Lord shall make the rain of thy land powder and dust: from heaven shall it come down upon thee, until thou be destroyed.

The Lord shall cause thee to be smitten before thine enemies: thou shalt go out one way against them, and flee seven ways before them: and shalt be removed into all the kingdoms of the earth.

And thy carcase shall be meat unto all fowls of the air, and unto the beasts of the earth, and no man shall fray them away.

The Lord will smite thee with the botch of Egypt, and with the emerods, and with the scab, and with the itch, whereof thou canst not be healed.

The Lord shall smite thee with madness, and blindness, and astonishment of heart:

And thou shalt grope at noonday, as the blind gropeth in darkness, and thou shalt not prosper in thy ways: and thou shalt be only oppressed and spoiled evermore, and no man shall save thee.

Thou shalt betroth a wife, and another man shall lie with her: thou shalt build an house, and thou shalt not dwell therein: thou shalt plant a vineyard, and shalt not gather the grapes thereof.

Thine ox shall be slain before thine eyes, and thou shalt not eat thereof: thine ass shall be violently taken away from before thy face, and shall not be restored to thee: thy sheep shall be given unto thine enemies, and thou shalt have none to rescue them.

Thy sons and thy daughters shall be given unto another people, and thine eyes shall look, and fail with longing for them all the day long: and there shall be no might in thine hand.

The fruit of thy land, and all thy labours, shall a nation which thou knowest not eat up; and thou shalt be only oppressed and crushed alway:

So that thou shalt be mad for the sight of thine eyes which thou shalt see.

The Lord shall smite thee in the knees, and in the legs, with a sore botch that cannot be healed, from the sole of thy foot unto the top of thy head.

The Lord shall bring thee, and thy king which thou shalt set over thee, unto a nation which neither thou nor thy fathers have known; and there shalt thou serve other gods, wood and stone.

And thou shalt become an astonishment, a proverb, and a byword, among all nations whither the Lord shall lead thee.

Thou shalt carry much seed out into the field, and shalt gather but little in; for the locust shall consume it.

Thou shalt plant vineyards, and dress them, but shalt neither drink of the wine, nor gather the grapes; for the worms shall eat them.

Thou shalt have olive trees throughout all thy coasts, but thou shalt not anoint thyself with the oil; for thine olive shall cast his fruit.

Thou shalt beget sons and daughters, but thou shalt not enjoy them; for they shall go into captivity.

All thy trees and fruit of thy land shall the locust consume.

The stranger that is within thee shall get up above thee very high; and thou shalt come down very low.

He shall lend to thee, and thou shalt not lend to him: he shall be the head, and thou shalt be the tail.

Moreover all these curses shall come upon thee, and shall pursue thee, and overtake thee, til thou be destroyed; because thou hearkenedst not unto the voice of the Lord thy God, to keep his commandments and his statutes which he commanded thee:

And they shall be upon thee for a sign and for a wonder, and upon thy seed for ever.

Because thou servedst not the Lord thy God with joyfulness, and with gladness of heart, for the abundance of all things;

Therefore shalt thou serve thine enemies which the Lord shall send against thee, in hunger, and in thirst, and in nakedness, and in want of all things: and he shall put a yoke of iron upon thy neck, until he have destroyed thee.

The Lord shall bring a nation against thee from far, from the end of the earth, as swift as the eagle flieth; a nation whose tongue thou shalt not understand;

A nation of fierce countenance, which shall not regard the person of the old, nor shew favour to the young:

And he shall eat the fruit of thy cattle, and the fruit of thy land, until thou be destroyed: which also shall not leave thee either corn, wine, or oil, or the increase of thy kine, or flocks of thy sheep, until he have destroyed thee.

And he shall besiege thee in all thy gates, until thy high and fenced walls come down, wherein thou trustedst, throughout all thy land: and he shall besiege thee in all thy gates throughout all thy land, which the Lord thy God hath given thee. (Deut. 28:15-52.)

The curse went on still further, as may be seen by reading to the end of Deut. 28.

The basic problem was that the Israelites, although the covenant people, really had little or no genuine faith in God. The Lord had tried so hard to demonstrate his own reality and his love for them; he had reminded them over and over of his covenant with Abraham, and his obligation, under that covenant, to bless them and prosper them—and his great desire to do so—if only they would obey him. But they did not believe and did not repent; they killed the prophets who warned them of impending doom, and indulged in the sins of the world. Their sins loomed greater in the eyes of God because they were so blatantly violating their sacred covenants.

They wanted so much to be like other nations, and not become the peculiar people the Lord had in mind. This "peculiar" status would have made them happy, clean, upright, prosperous, and spiritual in the true sense; the greatest nation on earth.

A notable expression of the same philosophy that lost them their privileged inheritance was observed when they clamored to the prophet Samuel for a king "like the other nations." They had been told repeatedly how wicked those nations were, and yet they wanted to be like them.

The entire drama of ancient Israel was a tragedy of tremendous proportions, a bitter lesson in disobedience. And how similar it was to the history of the Nephites in America, and their eventual destruction!

And why? Because the Lord cannot look upon sin with the least degree of allowance.

1977 Deseret Book Co.
