Mark E. Petersen, Moses: Man of Miracles (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1977)

MOSES AND JOSEPH SMITH

Moses was given the keys of the gathering of Israel inasmuch as he was to bring the Twelve Tribes out of Egypt and settle them in their Promised Land.

A gathering of Israel was to be an important part of the Church in these last days also, but to accomplish this the authority to do so was required.

As the Lord sent John the Baptist to restore the Aaronic Priesthood in our day, and Peter, James, and John to restore the Melchizedek Priesthood, so he also sent others with particular keys in the priesthood.

The Prophet Joseph wrote about the bestowal of these various keys in D&C 128 of the Doctrine and Covenants. Among other things he said: "And the voice of Michael, the archangel; the voice of Gabriel, and of Raphael, and of divers angels, from Michael or Adam down to the present time, all declaring their dispensation, their rights, their keys, their honors, their majesty and glory, and the power of their priesthood; giving line upon line, precept upon precept. . . ." (V. 21.)

In D&C 110, we read of Elijah, Elias, and Moses coming to the Prophet Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery, bestowing the powers of their ministry for our use in this the dispensation of the fulness of times.

It is remembered that Peter had said concerning the restoration of the gospel: "And he shall send Jesus Christ, which before was preached unto you: Whom the heaven must receive until the times of restitution of all things, which God had spoken by the mouth of all his holy prophets since the world began." (Acts 3:20-21.)

Hence, all things spoken of by all the holy prophets from the beginning of the world were destined to be restored as part of this last dispensation.

Concerning the coming of Moses the Prophet Joseph said: "After this vision closed, the heavens were again opened unto us; and Moses appeared before us, and committed unto us the keys of the gathering of Israel from the four parts of the earth, and the leading of the ten tribes from the land of the north." (D&C 110:11.)

There was a notable gathering of the Saints early in the history of the Church. As converts were made, they gathered together to bolster their faith and advance the new work.

They gathered to build the temple in Kirtland, which was commanded of God. They likewise gathered to Jackson County, Missouri, in preparation for the establishment of Zion at that time. They expected to build temples at both Independence and Far West, but were driven away by their enemies.

They were gathered at Nauvoo next, primarily to build a temple of the Lord. With this in mind, the Prophet Joseph said:

The main object [of the gathering] was to build unto the Lord a house whereby He could reveal unto His people the ordinances of his house and the glories of His kingdom, and teach the people the way of salvation; for there are certain ordinances and principles that, when they are taught and practiced, must be done in a place or house built for that purpose.

It was the design of the councils of heaven before the world was, that the principles and laws of the priesthood should be predicated upon the gathering of the people in every age of the world.

Jesus did everything to gather the people, and they would not be gathered, and He therefore poured out curses upon them. Ordinances instituted in the heavens before the foundation of the world, in the priesthood, for the salvation of men, are not to be altered or changed. All must be saved on the same principles.

It is for the same purpose that God gathers together His people in the last days, to build unto the Lord a house to prepare them for the ordinances and endowments, washings and anointings, etc. (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 308.)

One of the greatest gathering movements was that to the Great Basin with headquarters on the shores of the Great Salt Lake. From 1847 to 1869, when the railroad was completed, 80,000 pioneers came to Utah. From there they spread throughout the American West.

In Utah they immediately began construction of four temples for these same sacred ordinances.

Judah must be gathered to Palestine, where a holy temple will be built in the due time of the Lord. (Teachings, p. 286.)

Now that temples are being built in various parts of the world, these sacred structures become points of gathering for people in their respective lands in the sense in which the Prophet said:

The Saints have not too much time to save and redeem their dead, and gather together their living relatives, that they may be saved also, before the earth will be smitten, and the consumption decreed falls upon the world.

I would advise all the Saints to go to with their might and gather together all their living relatives to this place [where the temple is located], that they may be sealed and saved. (Teachings, p. 330.)

The construction of temples in various parts of the world is a great blessing to the Saints, who may find it convenient to gather their families in temple excursions to the temples to which they are assigned and perform the sacred work the Prophet describes.

There probably will be still other gatherings of the Saints for special purposes, such as the building of the New Jerusalem when that time comes. But all gathering will be done under the powers that Moses transmitted to the presidency of the Church, so that everything will be in proper order.

The keys of gathering were transmitted to the Prophet Joseph by Moses, and by him to his successors as each has come into the First Presidency of the Church.

It is all a part of the dispensation of the fulness of times.

1977 Deseret Book Co.
