Mark E. Petersen, Moses: Man of Miracles (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1977)

MAN OF MIRACLES

The greatest miracle of Moses’ life was the fact of his intimate relationship with God. He enjoyed an actual companionship with the Almighty, and out of that close association, he gave us his unreserved testimony concerning Deity.

He knew God lives, because he saw him, talked with him, argued with him, was rebuked of him, and was sustained by him. He stood in the presence of the Lord. He received revelations and commandments without parallel.

Modern scripture gives to Moses the status that belongs to him:

A friend of God.

A companion to God.

A revelator for God.

An inspired leader of the people of God.

A writer of sacred history testifying of God.

Moses’ life is a study in obedience to the divine will. The meekest of all men, he was completely dedicated to the Lord. But even so, at least on one occasion he forgot his humility as he struck the rock and commanded the water to come forth.

God taught him a great lesson in that experience, and as a result forbade him admittance to the Promised Land. What a disappointment it must have been to Moses! But how vital it was for him, and for all mankind, to learn that "without me ye can do nothing"! (John 15:5.)

In all things, as Moses obeyed, God not only blessed him but also honored him, magnified him before the people, upheld him before Pharaoh, and allowed him to be the instrument through whom he performed miracle after miracle, a seemingly endless display of divine power.

Under the leadership of Moses, the Lord fed the people, blessed them that their clothing did not wear out in forty years, gave them irresistible testimonies of his presence, and laid down laws of successful behavior which, if followed, would have made Israel the greatest nation on earth.

Modern scripture is our great reservoir of sustaining knowledge concerning Moses, but now even the scholars are beginning to credit him for what he did.

For example, Dr. Robert Young, author of the Analytical Concordance to the Bible, gives Moses his proper dues in this way:

He was skilled in all the wisdom of the Egyptians. His patriotic desire for his brethren at last compelled him to leave Egypt when forty years of age, to which he returned after an interval of forty years’ sojourn in Midian only at the repeated command of God.

His successive interviews with his brethren, and with the king of Egypt, his wonderful miracles and the admirable patience, faith, and skill he evinced throughout his whole career, are graphically depicted in his works that remain. . . .

His authorship of Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers, and Deuteronomy are attested by every possible mark of an internal and of an external kind. These books bear incontestable evidence that they were composed in a wilderness state, yet with an express view to a speedy settlement in a fruitful land. . . .

As a historian, an orator, a leader, a statesman, a legislator, a patriot, and a man, Moses stands pre-eminent. But no mere genius could have made him the originator of sound jurisprudence—the great teacher of monotheism and sound morality—except he had also been a prophet of the Most High, supernaturally guided and aided in his work. (New York: Funk & Wagnall, 1911, p. 670.)

As was said of the Prophet Joseph Smith, the head of our dispensation, so it may be said appropriately of Moses, the head of his dispensation: "He lived great, and he died great in the eyes of God and his people." (D&C 135:3.) His memory will endure as it has in the past, throughout the ages.

The Savior testified of Moses, and Moses testified of the Savior. The Savior was God, and Moses was one of his greatest prophets.

1977 Deseret Book Co.
