Randy L. Bott, Serve with Honor: Helps for Missionaries ( 1995)

1

Introduction

Many wonderful books have been written about missionary work. Some focus on the scriptures; others contain advice from modern-day prophets. Both sources are necessary and informative. This book is the result of nearly a lifetime of involvement in missionary-related activities: serving as a full-time missionary, teaching young people who are preparing to serve missions, and serving as a mission president. In this book I have quoted lightly from the scriptures and the teachings of modern-day prophets. I have taken a rather broad approach. My hope is to offer practical, down-to-earth advice on matters essential to serving a successful mission.

I have tried diligently not only to identify different aspects of mission life that pose the greatest challenges but also to offer suggestions to help missionaries cope with these difficulties. This book is not a comprehensive handbook designed to cover all situations that you might encounter on your mission. Rather, it gives examples of circumstances generally found in all missions. The advice in this book is strictly my own; if any of it contradicts rules set down by your mission president, follow his counsel.

This book will not attempt to reiterate what is contained in officially printed Church materials. Topics like how to find investigators, friendship, teach, baptize, and fellowship are masterfully covered in the Missionary Guide (Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1988). Techniques used effectively in your particular mission will be taught at zone conferences and in other mission training sessions. The gospel study guide you will receive at the Missionary Training Center (often called the MTC) will provide an excellent curriculum for broadening your understanding of gospel doctrine and the scriptures.

My intent in writing is to help make your transition into missionary life as painless and enjoyable as possible by identifying potential challenges. Being forewarned, missionaries can avoid the surprise factor—facing a new, possibly unnerving situation for which you may not be adequately prepared—a circumstance that, if it discourages you unduly, can be turned into one of the adversary's most effective weapons. Not every situation will apply to every mission. Not every missionary will face every problem. If reading this book helps you in any way to be a more effective missionary, then my purpose in writing has been served. A mission is neither the greatest time of your life nor the worst time. It all depends on how you serve. This book will not make you a good missionary any more than wearing a suit will make you an honorable priesthood bearer or wearing a dress and name tag will make you a diligent sister. The choice is yours. At this time in your life you have only one mission to serve, so do it up right. Serve with honor.
