Randy L. Bott, Serve with Honor: Helps for Missionaries ( 1995)

2

The Day You Arrive

The first day! A blur, a headache, a time of possible anxiety but certain excitement, a time to make history. You will have only one first day in your mission area. This day will be the first of many other firsts. You spend your first night in your mission area. You meet your first mission president. You meet your first companion. You eat your first meal of your actual mission. You are assigned to your first area of labor. You may teach your first discussion. You may commit your first investigator to baptism. You may perform your first priesthood ordinance. The list of firsts is endless.

It makes but little difference what happens to you. It makes all the difference in the world how you react to what happens. Everything happens so fast. At the airport you may get a headache from the normal anxieties and pressures associated with saying good-bye to your family and friends, and getting your bags checked through to the correct destination. Don't be surprised. Because of the anticipation of leaving the MTC, you may not have slept much the night before. Fatigue is common among newly arriving missionaries. Un-fortunately, you probably won't have much time to rest when you first arrive at the mission home. If your mission president holds an orientation meeting, you may find it difficult to concentrate because of your fatigue. But even though the president is very excited to have you there, he surely is mindful of how physically taxing the trip has been for you.

At the orientation meeting, the president may ask if you have any questions. Don't be embarrassed if the answer is no. You haven't had enough experience to know what to ask! As time passes, you will have questions. Don't be afraid to ask them. The sooner you can develop confidence in the president, the easier it will be to allow him to help you adjust. Some missionaries, not really believing or understanding that one man can know and be interested in so many missionaries, remain somewhat aloof from the mission president. A special endowment comes with the office, enabling each president to meet the needs of those missionaries who serve with him. That is just one of the miracles of being a mission president. Trust him.

From the day of your arrival, keep a record of your mission. Many feelings you experience will prompt thoughts and ideas that will be lost forever unless you record them. If you start this habit early in your mission, it will be easy to keep writing. But if you start out on the wrong foot, it can be very difficult to correct your course later. According to your president's direction, you should immediately write a letter home informing your parents of your new address and letting them know you have arrived safely. Express your love for your family; it will begin a process that will result in great blessings or even miracles for them.

Although you may be so keyed up that you can hardly sleep, try to get a good night's sleep that first night. If there is anything more exciting and challenging than the first day, it is the second day. Every new thing you can imagine, plus many unexpected things, will happen to you on the second day. And you will only live one second day—so take full advantage of it. Don't panic. If you miss a bus or forget to get off in the right place, it may cause some concern (especially if you don't speak or understand the language!), but it will not result in death. Learn to laugh at yourself when you make honest mistakes! You may feel like you are in total control of the situation, but after a few months into your mission, you will realize you were a total space case. You may laugh at how "in charge" you thought you were.

Don't trust your memory. Write on a piece of paper your trainer's name, address, and phone number. Even if you become temporarily lost, you can usually show the note to a native and receive some help. If you miss a connection, a phone call to the president and to your companion will put a lot of worried minds at ease. When an elder or sister is missing, a 2:00 a.m. phone call is much more relaxing than anxiety producing. Almost everybody is willing to help when they know you are in trouble. You will make many good friends for yourself and for the Church when you allow others to exercise their Christianity by helping you.

Don't make any judgments based on the first few weeks. Missionaries who decide after a few weeks that the mission just isn't for them make a terrible mistake. Naturally, almost any new environment will seem foreign to you. The urge is to run. The wise missionary realizes that these feelings are normal and doesn't take them too seriously. If you experience feelings of not belonging and these feelings last for more than a week or two, call the mission president. This doesn't necessarily mean something is wrong with you; it might just mean you haven't learned how to relax and adjust. You will learn important lessons as you serve, and they will greatly benefit you in the future.

Sometimes, when trying to fit in, you may be tempted to be a bit silly. It is difficult to know exactly how to act when you suddenly find yourself in a new environment and are getting acquainted with new friends. Remember, all the missionaries you meet in those first few days have experienced what you are going through and know exactly how you feel. They survived, and so will you. If you are going to make a mistake in the way you act, err on the side of being too conservative. Try being a little more quiet than normal. Stand back and watch how things operate. Don't try on the first day to fix everything you see wrong. Chances are, there are reasons why things are done the way they are. If not, you will have plenty of time later to suggest changes.

As quickly as your head stops spinning and your feet are on the ground, find out what is expected of you. Each mission will have a training program that will walk you through those requirements step by step. Some requirements may seem a little strange. Until you have had a chance to see the rationale behind the rules, follow them; learn the "why" later. You may be overwhelmed by how much memorization, reading, and studying are required. If you try to tackle the entire process at once, you will surely become frustrated. If you sit down with your trainer and break the requirements down into manageable pieces, you will do fine. The first and normal reaction is to want to throw both hands in the air and quit. Thankfully, very few missionaries actually do that. Probably a quiet laughing session will help reduce the stress level. As you learn to turn to your Heavenly Father, you will begin to develop a nurturing relationship that will enable you to tackle large assignments in the future and will make your present problems seem like child's play.

Don't make any snap judgments about the missionaries you live or serve with. They may not know quite how to act toward you either. Give them the benefit of the doubt. If they make some social mistakes, forgive them. If they are not very sensitive to your needs, kindly inform them. If you get the impression that they are trying to take advantage of your newness, let them know what you perceive; usually they are not trying to bully you or give you a hard time. There should never be any initiation or hazing in the mission. If there is, inform the mission president immediately. Sometimes, innocent games become cruel experiences if they are not stopped.

From the first moment, establish a habit of sincere prayer—a good way to put life into an eternal perspective. When no one else around understands how you are feeling, the Lord does understand. He has descended below all things, so he knows exactly how to help you through the rough spots. He is always there and has promised he will not leave you alone and comfortless. If you can establish or improve your personal relationship with the Lord from the very first day of your mission, your feelings of loneliness will be scarce. Be positive, focused, and motivated from the day you enter the mission field until the day you leave. That will establish a pattern that will help you become a good missionary and will bless you for the rest of your life. 3
