Randy L. Bott, Serve with Honor: Helps for Missionaries ( 1995)

3

Being a Greeny

When you arrive in your mission area, you will be one of the least experienced missionaries in the entire world! That sounds pretty scary until you realize that several hundred of you left the MTC on the same day. No matter what the term is in your mission (according to the language you speak), the meaning is the same: You are a "greeny!"

I remember a wise General Authority who many years ago recounted his experience of when he was first called as a General Authority. He felt that his abilities paled in comparison to the wisdom and confidence of the other Brethren. He sought the counsel of his father, a wise sheepherder. After explaining his fears, he waited for his father's reply. This father offered his General Authority son timely advice that has in turn helped me a great deal: "Son, just graze around the edges for a while!"

Very often, young missionaries from the MTC think they know more about running a mission than the mission president does. They almost always think they know more about being an assistant to the president, a zone leader, or a district leader than elders who are called to those offices. Not infrequently, new missionaries may know more about missionary work than their trainers. My advice is the same as that of the General Authority's father: "Graze around the edges for a while." Don't try to quickly right every wrong you think you see, because there may be reasons why things are done a certain way. Weighty decisions are easy to make when you are not burdened with the facts!

Don't take this counsel too personally. You are a valuable person, and your opinion does count. The counsel to withhold judgment will help you see things in perspective. Perhaps you do have better ideas than your trainer or your leaders, but until you have established yourself as a credible missionary, nobody will take you seriously. You must learn to be a good follower before you can be a good leader.

As a greeny, you will be given a grace period. During this time, your trainer will carry the burden of planning the day, leading the teaching of investigators, orchestrating your training, and providing you with opportunities to learn and grow. The extra time created by your trainer's willingness to help you should be used to learn the language, master the discussions, study the gospel, and familiarize yourself with the mission routine.

As soon as you are ready (usually before you think), the trainer will start to shift more of the load onto your shoulders. Your first reaction will probably be to complain that you are not quite ready. Be brave and accept responsibility. If you seem to fail, maintain a keen sense of humor.

Those who are learning languages will have ample opportunity to laugh at themselves. While you were growing up, it probably was not "cool" to be laughed at. Most people who speak a foreign language laugh at you because they are amused by your willingness to try a new and difficult language. Most people you serve would like to be like you but don't have the courage to try. Before long, they will stand in awe as you teach a lesson or talk in church or perform a sacred, saving ordinance. Enjoy your time as a greeny.

If you are uncomfortable with not knowing everything, you're not alone. Even your trainer won't know all the answers. If you ask good questions, you can cut your training time by more than half. Unfortunately, your trainer may have forgotten how it was to be brand-new; he may take for granted that you know how to work the daily planner, how to make dinner appointments, or how to read the scriptures and learn from them. Your constant questioning will remind him how much you do or don't know. If your questions irritate him, ask him how he expects you to learn these things. You might even suggest that if he anticipates your needs and volunteers his insights, you won't need to ask so many questions.

Your goal should be to experience all the trials you will face when you become a senior companion. If you shy away from new and bigger tasks, you only postpone the time when you will be able to take over an area and train a junior companion. Your own creative strategies of doing missionary work will remain largely dormant while you are a junior companion.

If you are going to make mistakes in technique, make them in your first area, because after you leave your first area, people will assume you are a seasoned missionary. Mistakes you were reluctant to correct in your training area will haunt you in your second area.

If your trainer is disobedient or lazy, you must have a plan of action firmly in mind. Decide on the first day how you want to serve. Don't feel discouraged or believe you are the only diligent missionary in the field. That obviously is not the case. If your trainer does not hold regular compan ionship study sessions with you, encourage him to start. If he refuses, study on your own during that time. It is not "narking" or tattling to tell the mission president in an interview that the training is not going as planned. You deserve a strong start; if you don't get it, you have the right to at least ask for help on how to compensate for your trainer's failure. Don't be quick to ask for another trainer, though—your next companion may be even more casual. You will want to learn to get along with and motivate all kinds of companions during your mission, and you may as well start with your trainer.

Do not follow your trainer in breaking mission rules. Establish on your first day in the field that you plan to obey all the rules given in the Missionary Handbook (the little white rule book that missionaries carry) and by the mission president. Let your trainer know from the beginning that you expect him to give you the kind of start that he wished he had received. In the very unlikely event that your trainer is grossly disobedient, don't hesitate to call the president for advice. Remember, if he leaves you and gets into trouble that could threaten his membership, his worthiness to continue his mission may be questioned. Save him from himself if necessary.

More likely, your trainer will become your best friend. As he works with you, trust him. Do as he directs as long as it's within mission rules. Be willing to consider his suggested changes and improvements. You will not yet have discovered the best teaching techniques and skills, so learn from your trainer and make the most of your time as a greeny.
