Randy L. Bott, Serve with Honor: Helps for Missionaries ( 1995)

5

Your Trainer

Either the day you arrive in the mission field or the next day, you will be assigned to work with the most important person (to that point) in your mission—your trainer. His or her size, color, appearance, and time in the mission will be of little significance. Your ideals and expectations of mission life will result largely from the teachings of your trainer.

Your trainer must take you from your present state and mold you into a polished missionary. That will require change on your part. In spite of the enthusiasm you brought from the MTC, you definitely lack experience. You are not in the mission to compete with your trainer or anyone else, but are to work together to master as quickly as possible those skills that will make you an effective missionary. Learn to work as companions rather than as two individuals.

The mission president has tried to find the right person to train you. Your trainer may not be what you expected, but trust that your Heavenly Father really does know and love you. He will inspire the president to put you with someone who will provide the training and experiences that will help prepare you to fulfill callings you will have on your mission and later in your life. You can learn from negative experiences as well as from positive ones. From my own expe-rience, I did not always know why certain missionaries were put with certain trainers, but usually it became evident as time passed.

On the day you arrive to your first area, try to establish a good working relationship with your trainer, who will have been given instructions on how to train you. Usually a packet will be sent with you with forms to help guide your trainer through the training process. Training is not easy. It will require substantial sacrifice on the trainer's part to properly prepare you. He will have to give up personal study time and carry most of the load of proselyting for the first few weeks until you start to become effective.

If you have questions (and you'll probably have a bunch of them!), don't be afraid to ask them. The only stupid question is the one that is not asked. But before asking, see if you can figure out the answers on your own. It is frustrating to the trainer to be asked over and over questions that could be mastered if you would only concentrate a little more. If your trainer shows signs of irritation, check to see if you are being as attentive as you should be.

Learn how to deal with every phase of mission life. Some tricks of the trade will make the administrative requirements of a mission much easier. Something as simple as a monthly dinner calendar can eliminate trying to remember who signed up to feed you and when. It will help you avoid embarrassing mistakes and forgotten appointments. Keep your eyes open, and you will learn most of what you need to streamline your routine affairs.

Your trainer will be invaluable in helping you learn how to study the gospel on a regular, consistent basis. In seminary or church you may have learned how to cram for an assignment or a talk, but learning to organize your study time effectively is a real talent. Your trainer will have had much more experience than you in this area, but if your trainer isn't very good at it, check with other missionaries who seem to have mastered the skill. Make sure your trainer keeps you on a regular study schedule until the habit is so deeply ingrained that it becomes an unconscious, daily practice.

Companionship study will teach you many new skills. This may be the first time you and another person will talk seriously about Church doctrine, scripture, personality characteristics, and interpersonal skills. It may be awkward at first, but keep at it until it becomes something you look forward to every day. Because study requires effort and discipline, some choose to avoid it—a major mistake. This ability to plan and communicate will bless your marriage as you and your spouse discuss problems when you begin your own family.

It would be unusual if a trainer hesitated to hold companionship study, but should this happen, you have the right to insist it be held. If it doesn't happen, you should contact your leaders immediately. You can't afford to miss out on this valuable skill that will serve you faithfully for the rest of your life. You can make study easier by establishing a set time every morning. If you seem eager and willing, your trainer may be more enthusiastic about companionship study. Suggest ways that you think the companionship study sessions could be more effective. Let your trainer know how you learn best. It may take awhile before you know how you prefer to be taught.

Be creative in your approach. Some missionaries have a difficult time studying the Missionary Guide daily. A reward may provide the necessary motivation to study every day. When language study is part of your companionship study, make it a game to learn how to say things properly and to increase your vocabulary. When I trained one new missionary during my first mission, we discovered he was quite a master of the English language. He would give me an English word, and I would try to define it. In return I would give him a Samoan word that he would try to define. During one eight-mile walk between villages, I failed to correctly define one word he gave me in English, and he never got one of my words in Samoan. Before we finished our time together, I had greatly benefitted from his English skills, and he had become a more polished speaker of Samoan. We relished those sessions when we could challenge each other not only in language but also in matters of doctrine, scripture, customs, and philosophies of life. After twenty-five years, I still love and respect him.

Work to develop a positive relationship with your companion. When everything you do is to strengthen the other, you will soon find that you can mutually benefit from your togetherness. You may have numerous differences, but don't be quick to request someone new. You will learn many refining lessons of life while you serve with companions whose personalities differ from yours. Generally you will have only one trainer. In the process of learning all you can from your trainer, take good notes. Chances are that before long you will be asked to train a missionary fresh from the MTC. Do this by using the strong points you learned from your trainer, and make sure you cover areas that your trainer overlooked. From the day you arrive, your mind should be storing information that will make you a better person, missionary, leader, follower, and son or daughter of God.

Your success in learning from your trainer will be reflected not only as you train in the mission but also as you rear your children in years to come. If you become irritated and uncooperative when things don't go as planned, then chances are that you will in effect be tested again until you can teach and lead imperfect followers. You may steadfastly maintain that you will never marry a person who remotely resembles your trainer. True, you can select your mate, but remember that you cannot choose your children. One or more of your children may in some ways be exactly like your trainer! Learn how to work together with your trainer even though you both may be as different as night and day.
