Randy L. Bott, Serve with Honor: Helps for Missionaries ( 1995)

6

"You Only Pass This Way Once"

For thousands of years and probably much longer, you have waited to serve your mission. This is your time to be an "angel of the Lord." Elder Heber C. Kimball, a tremendously successful missionary as an apostle of the Lord, said: "While in the act of ministering the Gospel, the servants of God may be considered angels. . . . The servants of God are angels in one sense, sent forth to gather the house of Israel from the four corners of the earth" (in Journal of Discourses, 10:103).

When you stop to think that in the Lord's time one day for him equals one thousand years on earth (see Abraham 3:4), we don't have long to serve. In fact, one year for man would be equal to one minute and twenty-six seconds for the Lord. A sister's eighteen-month mission would be two minutes and nine seconds long in the Lord's time. An elder's two-year mission is equivalent to two minutes and fifty-two seconds in the Lord's time. Think of it—less than three minutes to serve an entire mission! At that rate, you'd better get moving. There isn't a minute to waste.

If you keep in mind that sense of urgency all the time, you will not waste time and will thus be able to look back on your mission without regret. Keep in mind that nobody gets a second chance to serve a mission. You might say, "What about when I'm old? Can't I come and serve with my spouse?" Yes, but the circumstances will be entirely different. Now you are young and full of energy. Then you will be old and full of aches and pains. Now you have little or no family responsibility resting on your shoulders. Then you will have not only children but also grandchildren. Now you can enjoy being transferred from place to place with one companion after another. Then you will probably serve in only one area and will definitely keep the same companion for the entire time. Now you are young and can learn the language, scriptures, and discussions easily. Then you will be older, and although you'll have much more experience, the language will sound like garbled noise, the scriptures will be harder to memorize, and the discussions will seem to change every time you open the books to learn them. Now is the time for you to serve.

What difference does it make to you that you will not pass this way again? A big one! You need not be concerned about being shy when talking to people—you will probably never see them again in mortality. If you were to make a total fool of yourself (which you won't), you will never see them again anyway. You may be inspired to visit a struggling member, to help a widow, or to encourage a struggling elders quorum president. If you wait, the opportunity may never be reclaimed. If you wait too long to try new ideas with ward members, you will surely never find out whether those ideas will work. You will not pass this way again.

Opportunities to serve are fleeting. There seem to be windows of time on missions, just as there are in life. For example, the window for serving a mission for most young men is between the ages of nineteen and twenty-six. Unless there are special arrangements, you cannot go earlier and would not be called later. So it goes with life. There is indeed a "season, and a time to every purpose under the heaven" (Ecclesiastes 3:1).

Wandering into your mission without definite goals is the first step toward wasted time. Take time before or soon after you arrive to set some definite, attainable goals. However, one pitfall that entraps many missionaries is trying to live the entire mission on the first day. Take one day at a time.

For those missionaries who feel overwhelmed at the thought of serving for two whole years, just serve today as faithfully as you can. If you want to goof off, plan to do it tomorrow. Of course, when you get up tomorrow it will be today again. But you can still say the same thing: Tomorrow I will kick back and take it easy, but just for today I will be totally diligent. If you live one day at a time, the time will pass quickly and you will still look forward to playtime tomorrow, which will come when the time is right: after your mission.

The Savior, knowing how difficult the great tests of life would be and how overwhelming it would be to try to achieve all goals at once, counseled: "Take therefore no thought for the morrow: for the morrow shall take thought for the things of itself. Sufficient unto the day is the evil thereof" (Matthew 6:34).

It was almost humorous to see new elders and sisters at the mission home on the day they arrived to begin their missions. You could tell they thought that the end of their missions would never come. We counseled them to use every moment efficiently because "tomorrow" they would be going home. They would respond with looks of disbelief. But on their last day, as they sat in the mission home and we reviewed their missions, I would remind them of my challenge and note their changed perspective on the duration of their missions. I would say, "Elders and sisters, literally speaking, tomorrow you will be going home! Did you serve as diligently as I challenged you to do on your first day?" What joy came to the hearts of those who could honestly answer yes, and what disappointment came to those who regretfully had to answer no.

Each morning, recommit yourself to serve diligently. Every night before you retire, make plans for the next day. Just do it one day at a time. At first your mission may seem like it will never end, but the longer you have served, the faster the days go by. When the end is finally in sight, you start praying that the time will slow down. Unfortunately, it will not. The last six months are ten times faster than the first six months. You won't fully understand what this means until you experience it.

Some missionaries think that if they are really enjoying themselves and are doing a good job at the end of their missions, the mission president will extend their missions. Don't count on it. The maximum time he can extend your mission (without direct permission from the missionary committee of the Church) is only thirty days.

To help motivate them to make the most of their missions, some missionaries make pacts with friends in other missions that they will be diligent every single day. Others make the same promise to those missionaries who came with them to the same mission—an arrangement that sets an automatic time for them to check up on each other. Five of us elders flew to Samoa together. Four of us finished in Samoa and the fifth finished in Hawaii, but we all checked up on each other at zone conferences. We kept up a little friendly competition—who could memorize the discussions first, who could memorize the most words and scriptures, and who could speak the best. But the real help came every time we met together, because we pumped each other up, encouraged each other, and urged continued diligence. It didn't matter who was "best" or who was called to leadership positions soonest; we only cared about helping the others succeed.

Now is the day of your mission. Perhaps you should mark the joyous invitation that the Lord gave to Thomas B. Marsh in Doctrine and Covenants 31:3: "Lift up your heart and rejoice, for the hour of your mission is come; and your tongue shall be loosed, and you shall declare glad tidings of great joy unto this generation" (emphasis added). The saddest missionaries I ever saw were those waiting to board the plane for their return trip who realized they had not served diligently. They thought they were too wise to take counsel from someone as old as a mission president. I saw in those missionaries' faces some of the regret of those who do not live up to their potential in mortality. Now is the time for you to serve! Do it right from the first day to the last.
