Randy L. Bott, Serve with Honor: Helps for Missionaries ( 1995)

9

Kindergarten Decisions

It seems a bit strange to talk about making "kindergarten decisions" on a mission. Don't get the wrong impression of the content of this chapter. What is a kindergarten decision? The words alone suggest simple basic decisions that are easy to make and easy to follow. The decisions we discuss in this chapter are indeed simple to make, but they are much more challenging to follow. The advantage of making a kindergarten decision once and then never having to make it again is that you free up all your energy to live your commitment. Perhaps an example would explain this more clearly.

Before you ever left the MTC, you decided to obey all mission rules. The first rule you face every morning is to get up at the designated time. It sounds so simple to honor that rule, but many missionaries struggle every day in that area. Make up your mind only once that you will be up on time, whether you feel well or sick or tired or discouraged or anything else.

You'll find that without this resolve to be obedient something interesting happens five minutes before the alarm clock goes off. That soft, comfortable mattress that has cuddled you all night suddenly turns vicious. It weighs about five hundred pounds and somehow is on top of you, pinning you to the box springs! Try as you may, it continues to smother you until fifteen or twenty minutes past the designated wake-up time.

Another revelation that hopefully you will not have to learn the hard way is that the difference between 6:30 a.m. and 6:45 a.m. is a lot more than just fifteen minutes. At 6:30 a.m. you can arise with confidence and ask for the blessings of heaven on your day. At 6:45 a.m. you feel like you have cheated the Lord and would be acting hypocritically to ask for blessings, because you haven't fulfilled your promise to get up on time. I have listened to elders and sisters lament over an entirely ruined day because they slept through the alarm.

Of course, you will encounter those who scoff at your decision to get up on time, but those who scoff are not getting up on time themselves. One of the true ironies of the mission is that those who break the rules always jeer the loudest at those who try to fulfill the promises that scoffers too have made. Let me broaden that concept just a little: the only ones who mock you for serving a mission are those who have never served. Those who play down the importance of temple marriage are those who have not sacrificed to be married there. People who poke fun at those who are trying to live a celestial life in this world are those who have quit trying.

If you think it will be easy to get up on time every morning, you're mistaken! There will be times when extenuating circumstances will keep you up past bedtime; for example, if you have been out late administering to an investigator or member and didn't get to bed until 2:00 a.m. You may be tempted to rationalize your sleeping in in order to make up for a few hours of lost sleep. There may be days when you feel sick and know you'll just be back in bed anyway. The challenge is to be true to your kindergarten decision. Get up and take a shower, study for a while, and then if you need to go back to bed because of sickness, you will not feel guilty about letting the Lord down or going back on your commitment to yourself.

Anytime you decide to do something worthwhile, the devil is aware of it. He redoubles his efforts to try to make you fail. Even responsibilities that were not a problem before become real challenges during the mission. Many missionaries who served with us came from farming areas where getting up at 6:30 a.m. seemed like sleeping in; they were accustomed to arising as early as 4:00 a.m. But as the months rolled by, they would find it was just as difficult to get up at 6:30 a.m. as it used to be at 4:00 a.m. Indeed, making the decision is the easy part. Following through on the commitment requires all the dedication you can muster.

What other decisions fall into this category? You may come up with a whole list of them, but I will list a few that missionaries have shared with me.

Getting out of the apartment on time every day. On P. days there is no problem, nor on Sundays—it's the regular day that seems so taxing. There is always a last-minute phone call to make, a last entry on the daily planner, dishes to do, a letter to the president to finish. The list is endless, and the result is always the same if you give in—you're late getting out.

Not staying longer than an hour at a dinner appointment. Members love to have you in their homes and are willing to incur the additional expense of feeding two missionaries with bottomless stomachs. They like the spirit they feel when you are around. They like to talk to you, have you sing with the family, enjoy a casual conversation—they have a thousand other reasons for detaining you. Although they mean well, they must realize that the sharp, spiritual cutting edge of your mission will be dulled if you stay longer than allowed. The wife doesn't mean to delay you, but the meal is late and dinner doesn't start until the hour is almost over. But if you have made the right kindergarten decision, you will excuse yourself and go "knock on a few doors" for another half hour before the meal is served. It will be impressive and instructive to the family when they see your dedication and diligence. Try to have an appointment set for an hour and fifteen minutes after the start of the meal. That will help you leave on time.

Deciding to finish the day's work on time—not early, not late. It is always difficult to gauge when a discussion will end, but coming in late by an hour or more should be a rare exception. One of the finest elders who ever served with us was one who always made excuses about why he couldn't get in on time. I worked with him for his entire mission. At one critical point I told him that although I wanted to make him a leader, I couldn't hold him up as an example if he continued to come in late. He agreed to change and did for a month or so. I called him to be a zone leader, and he was doing well until reports started coming from his zone members and also from his companion that he was coming in late again.

I called him in and discussed the problem with him. He vowed to do better. He did for a few days, then was back to the habit. An opening came for another assistant to the president. By all rights he should have been the pick, but I chose another elder who was more diligent in keeping the rules. The offending elder and I had a good discussion, during which he said he understood why I couldn't choose him. He again vowed to change, but he didn't.

At the end of his mission, I drove him to the airport. We rode along in silence for a few miles, and then he said to me, "President, I've been thinking. I don't think my staying out late was such a bad thing. I know a lot of elders who do a lot worse than that!" I prayed hard for the right answer to help this elder understand. Like a bolt of lightning from the great beyond, the answer came. I said, "Elder, what you say is true. The rule you continuously broke was not a big one. But answer me one question. How many rules do you think Jesus could have broken before he disqualified himself from being the Savior?" The effect was dramatic and immediate. Of course, we are not perfect like the Savior, but he has asked us to be perfect (see 3 Nephi 12:48)—a state we will not attain until we learn to be perfectly obedient, among other things. We may repent of our disobedience and make it to the celestial kingdom, but what blessings and growth opportunities will we have forfeited because we were unwilling to obey the little rules? Maybe that will be part of our punishment on the other side of the veil—seeing what we could have enjoyed had we been a bit more diligent. Don't excuse your disobedience!

Writing a weekly letter to the president every P day. It is easy to believe that the president won't miss your letter, since probably two hundred other missionaries also write every week. If you want the mission president to receive inspiration for you, then provide him with information. It is true: "Inspiration works better on information than on perspiration." Let the president use his limited time and energy to find solutions to your stated problems rather than try to figure out what your problems are. It always amused me to talk to elders and sisters who thought I could see into their lives as through a crystal ball and identify their problems. Yes, sometimes the Spirit would let me know what the problems were, but often the Lord seemed to say, "If they want help, let them ask. Then I'll inspire you to help them solve their problems." Even if you are the only one in the apartment who takes a few minutes to report your stewardship to your priesthood leader, you will receive the blessings.

Writing a weekly letter to your parents. Just decide once, and then "do it." You will discover, like all diligent missionaries, that there just isn't enough time on P day to write everybody who wants to hear from you. Unfortunately, even girlfriends and boyfriends take a back seat after you have been out for a few months. Whether you are close to your parents or not, you owe them a letter. Your letters will bless their lives and also provide an excellent record of your mission. You may rationalize however you want, but to be totally obedient requires that you make this kindergarten decision once and follow through on that decision every week.

Holding daily companionship study. This is yet another decision that is easy to make and difficult to follow. During the early months of your mission, you will have a trainer who will try hard to get you started right. After you have been out awhile, it is easy to rationalize that you learn more from individual study than you do with your companion as a study partner. Perhaps you should remember the Lord's promise in Doctrine and Covenants 6:32: "Where two or three are gathered together in my name, as touching one thing, behold, there will I be in the midst of them—even so am I in the midst of you." As spiritual as you are and as laid back as your companion may be, you alone do not qualify as "two or three." Why deprive yourself of the promised presence of the Lord because you may impulsively believe it is a "pain" to study with your companion? Just decide to be obedient, and then use the rest of your energy in following through on your commitment. The results will surprise you and your companion as you increase your gospel knowledge as well as become more unified in spirit and testimony with your companion.

I could go on page after page about decisions that are easy to make, difficult to start, and worthwhile to keep. These decisions make the difference between being an excellent missionary or just being an ordinary or mediocre missionary. And with a little imagination, you readily can see how this kind of experience—sharing ideas, working together toward a common goal, and getting along with others—will prepare you for marriage and a career.
