Randy L. Bott, Serve with Honor: Helps for Missionaries ( 1995)

10

Keeping Your Eye Single to God's Glory

For the fair portion of the first nineteen or twenty-one years of your life, you likely have focused at different times on things such as school, dating, cars, sports, fun, jobs, and yourself. Yet now, almost overnight, you are expected to focus on God, scriptures, service, missionary work, helping members, sharing the gospel, and striving for eternal life. Sometimes the shock seems almost too much to handle.

It is by far the "easy route" to just talk about whatever you want to talk about while you are in your apartment or between appointments. While that may be the easy thing to do, it certainly is not the most spiritually productive or obedient thing to do.

If you continually bring up worldly things, it is much more difficult to concentrate on spiritual things. Unless you are really on the ball, you could spend two years away from home and never receive the blessings of serving a mission. When missionaries try to keep one foot in Babylon and the other foot in the mission field, they become frustrated, and will never be completely happy in either. One can't serve two masters!

Because it can be difficult to focus on the mission all the time, some missionaries give up trying to do that. Those who willingly pay the price find that the rewards far outweigh the costs. How do you do it? Begin on the first day of your companionship. Sit down with your companion and decide that you want to experience the positive effects of 100 percent focus on the work. As you have extra time between teaching appointments, pick a topic and discuss it. You will find the Topical Guide in your English version of the King James Bible to be a great source of discussion subjects. Pick a doctrine of the week and encourage everyone in the apartment to learn all they can about it. Review the questions that people ask about the subject. Investigate the subject from every direction you can think of. Prepare talks or thoughts about it. Defend it from the scriptures. Outline your thoughts. As you begin to use your free time efficiently, your hunger to study the word of God will increase dramatically. You can hardly wait to get home and study or meet with other missionaries to see what they have learned. Rapidly you will gain the reputation of being the "mission scholar." You will humbly discover that although you have learned many new things in your mission, there remains an infinite amount that you do not know. Your desire to learn will grow and grow until you become immersed in the gospel. That is when insights come and answers to prayers become more distinct.

The time will pass so quickly that you'll sense the urgency of the work and will labor tirelessly to spread the gospel to everyone you can. Lest you think that I am a dreamer and that such commitment never happens, know that I am painfully aware of how few missionaries take the challenge. However, those who do focus on the gospel will testify that everything I've said here is correct.

Perhaps you need to start off more slowly than the pace I've indicated. If that is the case, attack one portion of your "free time." Maybe you and your companion choose to focus during the day between meetings on doctrines of the gospel. After doing that for a few weeks, you can suggest that you expand your efforts to include time spent in the apartment. Once your companion tastes the meat, he will never again be satisfied with the milk.

Unfortunately, one of the real challenges is the members with good intentions who want to know about your premission past and your postmission plans. They want a detailed account of how your girlfriend or boyfriend is doing. They want to know about your interests, your hobbies, your college major, your family, and on and on. Perhaps they bring these things up because they are not very comfortable discussing the gospel with you. That is where you need to take the lead. Offer to lead a discussion on a topic you are currently studying. Give the members an opportunity to ask and answer questions about the gospel. The Spirit will come into the discussion, and before long they will want you to come all the time because they love the feeling that comes when you discuss spiritual things with them.

A few members are far enough away from the Spirit that they will feel uncomfortable if you constantly want to share a spiritual experience or thought with them. Keep working with them as long as you can to try to help them improve, but keep your guard up. If you see no progress with the members, try to have the home teachers perform more of that fellowshipping role, while you move on to more productive work.

In building relationships of trust with members and nonmembers, a certain amount of sharing of backgrounds is essential. You must be sensitive to the Spirit to know when enough common ground has been laid and it is time to help them take the next spiritual step forward. The Spirit is there when you talk about spiritual things, read the scriptures, and discuss the gospel.

You will discover a need to grow into the principle of discussing the gospel nearly all the time—as often as is appropriate and helpful. Once your reputation is established, you will find that others will try to help you focus, even if they are not willing to do so themselves. Avoid the temptation to show off your newfound knowledge; no one likes a know-it-all. If you come across that way, people will turn away from you, and then what good is your knowledge? Once you have established yourself as a serious gospel scholar, others will seek opportunities to discuss the gospel with you. When they ask you questions, you can bet that they are sincerely interested in what you have to say. Only when you find yourself continually volunteering information will you find others turning away from you. Give others a chance to share their ideas.

It happens naturally and doesn't take very long that those who like intensified learning seek each other out. That shouldn't surprise you, since the scriptures clearly teach that "likes attract" (see D&C 88:40). Make sure you don't exclude those who are just starting to catch the study bug—everyone has to start somewhere. Also, if your learning becomes too specialized, you will find that you know more and more about less and less until you are no good to anyone but yourself. Avoid "gospel hobbyhorses," those topics that seem of themselves to become "the Gospel" for the unwise. Some of those topics are the Word of Wisdom, making your calling and election sure, and the Second Comforter. Yes, they are all part of the true doctrine of Christ, but they are only part. Do not allow yourself to become involved in gospel study groups with overly enthusiastic members. That is not your calling.

Stick with basic doctrine. Faith is the most profound and least understood doctrine of the gospel, and a close second is repentance. If you want to define what should be your first eight topics for study, look at 3 Nephi 27:13-22, where the Savior defines what he refers to as "my gospel." To make it somewhat easier to get started in your study, those eight foundational doctrines are (1) atonement, (2) resurrection, (3) judgment, (4) faith in Christ, (5) repentance, (6) baptism, (7) Holy Ghost, and (8) enduring to the end.

As you enlarge and broaden your understanding of those eight doctrines, you will find that the gospel is one beautifully intertwined whole—every part inseparably connected with the others. My experience suggests that a careful investigation of those eight doctrines could easily occupy more of your free time than you have during an eighteen-month or two-year mission. So don't be so anxious to delve into the thick of thin topics.

As you meet with others who are also determined to increase their understanding of the gospel, quiz each other. Instead of just using the lazy way of referring constantly to the "hearsay gospel," require a reference on each point you make. If you are not familiar with the "hearsay gospel," it goes something like this: "I heard that Elder McConkie said . . ." Someone then asks: "Where did he say that?" To which the lazy scholar will say, "I don't know, but I'm sure he said it!" Discount as hearsay everything that cannot be documented. Even now, as a full-time teacher, if I don't know the reference for a statement, I will say, "Just count it as hearsay until I can document it." It is very helpful to use the living prophets and the scriptures as a guide. If they say little or nothing about a topic, be wise to do the same. Using them as a guide will keep you on safe ground doctrinally not only while you are serving a mission but for the rest of your life.

Finally, take the advice of your mission president. Even though you may be having the time of your life, if he thinks you are going too far in study, back off. He is there to keep Satan from taking advantage of your youthful enthusiasm. The only missionaries who get into trouble are those who will not heed warnings. Keep the president informed about what you are doing. He will encourage you and give you the necessary guidelines to be especially effective.
