Randy L. Bott, Serve with Honor: Helps for Missionaries ( 1995)

11

Using Your Finances Wisely

For some missionaries, the monthly living allowance will be more money than they have ever had to spend; for others it will seem like poverty. Whether you fit on one end of the continuum or the other or somewhere in between, the money you receive each month comes from the consecrated funds of the Church. You may say, "No, my parents pay the money to the ward every month, and the clerk forwards it to me." Not so. Your parents or others may donate a certain amount of money every month into the missionary account of the ward, but once that donation is made, both you and your parents lose control of where it goes, because it is a free-will offering. From the missionary account in the ward, the Church deducts a certain amount for each missionary serving from that ward. The Church in turn distributes from its central missionary fund enough money to cover the expenses of each missionary according to where he or she is serving. If you are serving in the South Pacific, the expenses may be fairly low. If you are serving in England, Japan, or Alaska, the monthly requirement may be much larger. No matter where you serve, you will receive according to your needs, as determined by the mission president working with the individual missionaries.

If you have been blessed to learn early in life how to use your money wisely, you will find mission finances to be a rather pleasant experience. If, however, you did not learn to discipline yourself during adolescence, then mission finances can be a painful learning experience. The one curveball thrown to even the best-prepared missionary is a companion who is not wise in the use of his or her funds.

Usually the normal operating expenses (housing, utilities, phone) are taken out of your allotment before you even see it. That makes it much easier for you, because the mission president is able to equalize those costs among all the missionaries. If that isn't the case, you may have a real shock. If you happen to serve in an area where the housing is ex-pensive, you will find that the amount you can spend on food will decrease because of the higher rent you pay. Although you are expected to be conservative in your spending habits, you are not expected to go without food, shelter, clothing or other essentials. If the amount you receive just does not cover the costs, what do you do?

First, talk to the other missionaries and find out how they are making it. It may be that you must now learn some of the painful but necessary money-management lessons of life. Eventually (in marriage) you will appreciate this type of training, but while you are going through it, it is not very pleasant. Look at where you spend your money; for a couple of months, keep a detailed account of everything you spend. Then sit down and see where the holes are in your budget. Are you buying a lot of junk food? Are you eating out at fast-food restaurants too often? Are you spending money on nonessentials like souvenirs, cameras, or luxury items? Since you will probably be asked to pay for all unauthorized long-distance phone calls, are you making calls that could be (and should be) eliminated? Are you buying things and sending packages home for family or special friends, thereby using consecrated funds for things for which those funds were not intended? Even in Book of Mormon days, Jacob counseled the people: "Do not spend money for that which is of no worth, nor your labor for that which cannot satisfy" (2 Nephi 9:51). That was good advice then, and it is good advice now.

How do you learn to spend wisely? Put first things first. Make a list of the essentials, those things you must pay for whether you like it or not: housing, utilities, telephone expenses, fast offerings, bus passes—any expense (unless already taken out by the mission office) that occurs every month. Then set aside a little money for emergencies. If you don't budget, you stand a good chance of always being in the hole. Life is full of emergencies. A bike tire blows out, a dog tears your suit pants, your scriptures are lost or stolen, or an unexpected transfer (midmonth) requires transportation costs. Just plan for emergencies. Keep a reserve on hand. How much? Ask direction from your mission president, because each mission will be different. An Australian mission that extends 2,500 miles from one end to the other will require more than a California mission that is sandwiched between four freeways and can be crossed in forty-five minutes.

Plan for other necessities that are not readily used up but in time must be replaced. Cleaners for the apartment, dishwashing soap, laundry detergent, stamps, stationery, toiletries, replacement clothing—all must figure into this fund. You must determine how much it will cost in an average month and then stick to that figure. Don't be so shortsighted that you figure you have the money to spend just because it is sitting in your bank account.

Finally, you must plan for food. It is critical to plan for the entire month. One method is to divide the remaining money (after deducting all of the above items) into four parts. If you have ready access to the money in your bank account, leave most of it there. Take out only enough food money for that week. If you don't have ready access to a bank account, put the money into four separate envelopes. Label one for each of the four weeks in the month, and then don't touch it before that week. It is sad when a missionary calls up early in the month and says that he is completely out of money. Short-term loans from the mission are possible, but they still must be paid back within a couple of months—it isn't free money.

As the weeks go on, you will get a feel for how you are spending your money. Perhaps you buy a lot of food right after transfers because you know you will not move for at least another month. If everyone in the apartment is buying together, make sure everyone pays his or her fair share. It causes harsh feelings when someone freeloads on the rest. If you all decide to do the bulk of your buying right after transfers, you may find that you spend more than one-fourth of your allotment for food during that first week. It is unwise to spend the entire monthly amount at one time, no matter how you plan it out. Why? Because milk, vegetables, bread, and other perishables will not keep for the entire month! Sour milk doesn't taste very good on cold cereal.

If you happen to be in an apartment with someone who is very conservative about spending money, it may be wise to buy your food separately and prepare your own food, thereby keeping the peace by eliminating that possible area of conflict. If you happen to be the conservative one, don't try to impose your thrifty attitudes on everyone else. The conflict will come when everyone in the apartment decides to go out to eat and one person is unwilling because of his or her attitude toward thrift. Those are problems to resolve during a companionship inventory. The solution is not for the more generous companion to "always" avoid eating out, or for the conservative companion to "always" have to eat out with the others. Compromise is possible and desirable.

For those of you serving in foreign lands, it is very possible that your native companions will be much more careful about spending money than you are accustomed to. Sometimes it requires some creativity to solve the problems. For example, if cleared by the mission leadership and agreeable to all concerned, you might team up with a different companion on a P day so that the two of you who want (maybe need) to eat out can do that, while those who see no value in it can do some other fun activity with someone who shares a similar philosophy. Be careful not to give the impression that your companion is cheap. It is not worth bad feelings just because you differ in spending philosophies. Paul gave some timely advice to the Romans (who must have liked to eat out a lot):

Let not him that eateth despise him that eateth not; and let not him which eateth not judge him that eateth: for God hath received him. . . .

But if thy brother be grieved with thy meat, now walkest thou not charitably. Destroy not him with thy meat, for whom Christ died. . . .

For the kingdom of God is not meat and drink; but righteousness, and peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost . . .

It is good neither to eat flesh, nor to drink wine, nor anything whereby thy brother stumbleth, or is of-fended, or is made weak. . . .

Let every one of us please his neighbor for his good to edification (Romans 14:3, 15, 17, 21; 15:2).

Follow the white handbook in not lending money to or borrowing money from other missionaries, members, or nonmembers. If you have budgeted, kept a close record, and been wise in your spending and still find that you do not have sufficient for your needs, contact the mission president. The Lord does not expect you to starve or jeopardize your health while you serve your mission. Funds are available to assure safe, sanitary housing and sufficient food.

It is a temptation to write home for extra funds if you run short. Don't do it. The Church has asked each mission to determine a fair and equitable amount necessary to support each missionary. When you receive extra money from home (on a regular basis), it becomes impossible to determine what is needed to survive. Look beyond yourself. Your family may be able to afford a few extra dollars a month, but what about those families who cannot? By writing home for extra money, you place an unfair burden on those who serve with and follow you. When the equalized funding program was initiated, we were asked to establish a base and try to live on it for a year. The next year we reevaluated the costs to see if we needed to increase or decrease the allotment. We were able to do that with few problems, because the missionaries had caught the vision of what Church leaders were trying to do and had diligently tried to live within the allotted amount. Our needed increase was easily justified because of diligent bookkeeping on the part of the missionaries. You will be asked to participate in the same process because of the changing nature of economics around the world. Don't let down those who follow you.

What about gifts of money from home? Be grateful for such generous people. You are not at present asked to return surplus funds to the mission, but someday that may be requested. For now, be sensitive not to flaunt your extra money before those who don't have it. Don't make money a central issue during your mission, because you only need to take care of the basic needs. Gifts sent to you while you are serving your mission are increase and should be tithed through your home ward.

Make sure you do not use the consecrated funds (that which you receive from the mission) to lend to members or investigators. There are other channels (the welfare system administered by the bishop) set up to take care of those needs. You cannot expect the Lord to bless your efforts if you choose to handle problems in a way other than how he has revealed. If you find someone with a genuine need, channel that person to the bishop. You must not leave your ministry to try to magnify the bishop's call to meet the temporal needs of the people. You may face frustrations, because the bishop may not move as quickly as you think he should. Remember, welfare is one of his responsibilities, and he will be inspired to magnify his office the same as you will be inspired to magnify yours.

Learn your financial lessons well. So much time and worry can be saved when missionaries work together to make financial matters contribute to their primary work (saving souls) rather than become a point of conflict between companions.
