Randy L. Bott, Serve with Honor: Helps for Missionaries ( 1995)

14

Calling Home

When a missionary leaves home, there are a lot of mixed emotions. Almost everyone has a struggle adjusting to missionary life. Everything familiar is absent. Feelings of loneliness are normal and can be expected. Usually those feelings are overcome by burying yourself in the work.

Some mission rules vary from mission to mission. Those serving in remote and isolated areas may not have the option of calling home, even if the mission president allows it. Those who serve in countries where telephones are available must decide, "Am I willing to obey the mission rule concerning calling home or not?" If you decide to obey it so you can enjoy the fulness of the Spirit and earn the promised rewards for diligent service, some guidelines here may prove helpful.

Don't guess what the mission's rule for calling home is. Other missionaries may have their own interpretation of what the president expects, based on how diligent they are in following his counsel. Ask the mission president yourself. Usually in the initial orientation, either the mission president or his wife will cover the rules of their mission. There will almost always be a time to ask questions. If the calling-home rule is not covered, ask for clarification.

If the policy allows you to call home, find out when you are allowed to call. Our mission designated three calls a year: Christmas, Mother's Day, and one other discretionary time. If you are allowed to call home on Mother's Day, find out if the rule permits you to phone your father also if your parents are divorced. Usually common sense is the deciding factor. Remember, the mission president is just there to help, not to make you choose between Mom and Dad.

You may wonder why a calling-home policy even exists. We observed that those who broke the rule never really learned how to trust and rely on their Heavenly Father, because the communication lines were still active between them and their earthly parents. The more you are required to seek your Heavenly Father's help in solving difficult problems, the faster your ability to receive answers to prayers will mature. The more you call Mom or Dad for advice, the less you depend on heavenly counsel. From the time you were separated from your mother at birth, you have been developing your ability to exercise free agency. Learn how to stand without your parents' constant direction.

If you are allowed to call home, use common sense. Your budget will not permit lengthy calls. This does not refer to your financial budget (Mom and Dad may have enough money to handle whatever bill you incur), but your time budget. Remember that you committed to serve the Lord with "all your heart, might, mind and strength" and that you would keep your "eye single to the glory of God." If you are honest with yourself, you will discover that a twenty-minute conversation home takes a lot longer than twenty minutes. You may want to plan your call in advance, making a list of what to ask, whom to talk to, and which directions you want to give regarding your return and your future. You may also become anxious about whether your boyfriend or girlfriend will be there to talk with you and how you should talk to her or him with the family standing around.

The phone call will pass rather quickly. For the next week or so, you will recall often what was said. If you sensed problems at home, you may find yourself worrying about how everyone is really doing. You may find that your little brother's voice has changed or your little sister sounds so grown-up. Concerns about fitting back into the family will also crop up. But problems, changes, and concerns are all natural facts of life. Unless you are disciplined and focused on the work, days, weeks, or months may elapse with only a minimal amount of time focused on missionary work. Your time budget cannot afford that.

Some parents may even suggest that you call more often than the rules permit. The most beneficial thing you can do is explain the rules to them and request their assistance in helping you be obedient. Just about the only way they can call you, unless they call the mission office, is if you give them your telephone number. Do yourself a favor—don't send the number home. In the event of an emergency, they can call the mission president, who will either contact you immediately or give them your number.

When you do call home, keep the conversation focused on missionary work. What a wonderful opportunity it is to let them feel the Spirit through your voice and what you talk about. Miracles happen in the families of missionaries who use their phone calls to reinforce and strengthen their families. If you find it a bit uncomfortable talking with your family, use the skills you have learned from the Missionary Guide to put them at ease and build on common ground. Usually it is difficult to help them understand that although you love them dearly, you really can't talk all day.

One of the most spiritually destructive phone calls you could make as a missionary would be to your boyfriend or girlfriend. I don't know of any mission president in the world that permits or encourages his missionaries to call "significant others." The effect is devastating. Old romantic feelings are renewed. Satan takes full advantage, encouraging you to daydream, fantasize, and otherwise divert your attention from missionary work. Occasionally, unwise missionaries send their phone numbers home to special friends. They may not realize that these calls will rob them of the Spirit for longer than they can afford to be without it. If you have already made the mistake, write your friend a letter and ask that the number be destroyed and to please not call. When-ever we put our boyfriend or girlfriend before the mission rules, we have actually positioned them before our devotion to God. Following the persuasions of our friends or families rather than the mission rules is a form of idolatry, which is hardly a characteristic of a candidate for the celestial kingdom's highest degree of glory.

It isn't usually the membership-threatening rules that cause the spiritual downfall that some missionaries experience. Little rationalizations begin to grow and increase with time until total disobedience can be readily justified. Either you are obedient or you are not. Eventually there will be no middle ground.

For those who would rather make a tape recording than write letters, stop and reconsider. It usually takes longer to record a tape than to write a letter. It is your P day that you are using, but it is also your companion's P day. The time you spend talking into a microphone will bring fruits less permanent than those resulting from time spent writing a letter. Why? It is rather simple. Two of our daughters served mis sions while we were on our mission. When they would make an occasional tape, we found that they would try to include their companions or other missionaries in the district or zone. Usually everyone became childishly silly, probably because they were uncomfortable and didn't know what to say or how to react. They talked about objects visible to them at the moment. Their thoughts were not as organized as they would be in a letter. We would only listen to the tape once. On the other hand, we would read their letters over and over. We could use parts of them in talks or zone conferences. We also used them in family home evenings, visits from friends, counseling missionaries, and uplifting ourselves when needed. The difference in the comparative value of tapes and letters was so great that we encouraged them not to send tapes unless there was an imperative reason.

Of course, my counsel on tapes is a personal observation. Making tapes is not against mission rules. But after our personal experience and that of the elders and sisters I have counseled, I believe the counsel is sound. In general, you will keep letters for the rest of your life, but you may never listen to tapes again. Let your communication time with the home front be more lasting than a single experience.
