Randy L. Bott, Serve with Honor: Helps for Missionaries ( 1995)

16

Communication Skills

Effective communication is the key to successful companionships, working with members, and teaching investigators. Too often we think that communication is just telling another person how we feel. Sometimes we say things that are intended to inform a companion of our feelings, but instead they only cause more tension. Perhaps a review of communication principles would help avoid those painful experiences that leave us feeling like a total failure.

During the first week or so of your companionship decide on a specific time each week when you and your companion will sit down and evaluate your work. If you establish a time and a place from the very beginning, it will be easy for one or both of you to remember these meetings, which are called companionship inventories. It isn't a time to rip on your companion and point out all his or her faults and weaknesses. Among other things, it can be a time when you express your love for each other, congratulating each other on work well done.

Timing is critical. If you try to hold the inventory when one of you is tired, hungry, irritable, too hot or cold, or sick or otherwise uncomfortable, you are destined to fail. Choose a time when you both feel fresh, relaxed, and talkative. You might decide to use companionship study time on your P day to hold the inventory. Be alert enough to recognize when the inventory is starting to deteriorate and should be postponed. But avoid getting in the habit of postponing the session. Sometimes you just have to force yourself to sit and talk things out. Here are some suggestions that can help you make companionship inventories pleasantly productive.

The next part of avoiding miscommunications is so obvious that many overlook it. If you want to know what your companion is thinking, ask. After you have served together for a number of weeks or months, you begin to believe that you know what he or she is thinking. This is when problems begin in companionships (as in marriages). You and your companion do not think exactly alike. Perhaps my wife will pardon one example that illustrates that point. Every night, schedules permitting, we would go for a walk around the subdivision where the mission home was located. We would hold our companionship inventories during those walks and discuss problems facing the mission. We never lacked topics to talk about. The course was a little more than one and a half miles long. If we were having a challenging day, we would walk twice around the course. One particular day we were on our fourth trip around the course. As we walked, enjoying the warm, moonlit summer night, Sister Bott became silent. I immediately reviewed in my mind what I had said that could have upset her. I couldn't identify anything. As the adversary tempts us to do, I started thinking of all the possible reasons for her silence. Finally, I decided to apply the principle of "ask if you want to know." I asked, and her answer taught me a great lesson. She said, "Have you noticed how the moonlight through those trees casts a shadow on the road that looks like venetian blinds?" I could never have guessed that she was pondering moonlight and shadows. We've often laughed about that statement, but the lesson is one that, if applied, could save countless arguments in the mission (and in marriage)—if you want to know something, ask!

A word of caution. There may be times when you or your companion is just in a bad mood. This is not a good time to talk. It seems advisable to have a sign to warn that it would be better to postpone any problem-solving sessions. We suggested that our missionaries use the athletic time-out signal (a "T" made by holding one hand horizontal, palm down, with the other hand vertical under and touching the palm of the horizontal hand). This sign means: "I'm upset. Leave me alone. I'm having a difficult time controlling myself. If I'm forced to talk, I might just lose control. Let me work it out for an hour or so, and I'll be back to talk things out later." If you use this sign, immediately start praying, talk yourself out of your mental state, and get ready to work out the problems so the work is not interrupted. If your companion gives you the time-out sign, immediately start trying to figure out what you have done wrong that has caused the problem. It shouldn't be too difficult to identify the problem. Then, in the spirit of humility and prayer, try to find possible solutions before he or she returns to talk things out.

Other times, you may be in a sober mood, thinking about the scriptures, life, gospel doctrine, family, or whatever. You are not mad, but just need some time alone with your thoughts. When your companion approaches you because you are so quiet, you may want to have a different sign. Since you aren't really mad, the time-out signal would send the wrong message. We use a tug on the right earlobe, which means: "I'm not mad. I'm just thinking. I need a little time by myself without interruption. Give me awhile, and if it is appropriate, I'll share what I'm thinking about." This sign sends an entirely different message than the time-out signal.

Be honest in using these signals. If you are angry, don't tug on your earlobe. If you are not angry, don't give the time-out signal. Because you are required to be with your companion twenty-four hours a day, seven days a week, your companion has a better chance to react in an acceptable manner to you if he or she understands your thoughts or your mood. A companion who is unwilling to communicate is a pain to everyone. Many mission presidents won't let missionaries sulk or remain silent for long periods of time. Certainly sulking is not a Godlike attribute. You must learn to control those feelings sooner or later, so why not sooner?
