Randy L. Bott, Serve with Honor: Helps for Missionaries ( 1995)

17

"Attitude Determines Altitude"

Is there such a thing as an easy mission or a hard mission? Every mission in the world presents its own challenges. My first mission in Samoa was a physically difficult but socially easy mission. The wonderful Polynesian people invited us into their homes and shared with us their last morsel. We were never denied entrance into their homes—a stark contrast to many missions in the world! I served for ten of the thirty months under famine conditions brought on by three major hurricanes. It was a physically tough mission.

Only you can determine how tough your mission will be. As a mission president, I remember hearing missionaries complain that they only got five DAs (dinner appointments) a week, while other missionaries were grateful if they had one or two. Some missionaries complained because they had to eat a certain dish more than once a week, while others humbly ate whatever was served.

If you enter the mission with the attitude that people are supposed to serve you, it will be a long eighteen months or two years. On the other hand, if you go to serve and teach, you will be humbly grateful for anything and everything people do for you. It would be wonderful if all members were missionary-minded and had unlimited funds to satisfy the physical wants of missionaries. Unfortunately, many members are still developing their abilities to apply the gospel. Equally as unfortunate from our perspective is the severity of life's trials—many Saints are barely surviving financially. In that case, anything they do for you is a great personal sacrifice.

I remember that during a famine in Samoa people would give us the fish head to eat. This part symbolized respect and was given because of their high esteem for us. Before I understood their reasoning, I complained to my companion that I would like a little less respect and a lot more fish. How selfish I was.

As you are invited into the homes of members and nonmembers for dinners, remember to write a thank-you note on the back of one of your name cards. Leave it in an inconspicuous place where they will find it after you are gone. You are much more likely to be invited back again if you express your appreciation. What do you write? It doesn't have to be lengthy, profound, or intellectual, but it must be sincere. "Thank you for a wonderful meal and great company. You will certainly be mentioned in our journals tonight. Love, Elders Smith and Brown." Or "You are so thoughtful to share your family dinner hour with us. May the Lord bless you abundantly because of your Christlike charity. Love, Sisters Jones and Anderson." You can think of a thousand short notes that express your appreciation. Reading the Topical Guide entries on service, gratitude, and thankfulness might also help you.

You can and must control your attitude. Too many missionaries wait around complaining because somebody needs to do something for them. What a destructive attitude. If you really want a helping hand you can rely on in every time of need, look on the end of your own arm. On the far end of our mission was a little town that was either "feast or famine." Missionary after missionary went there and all pleaded in their letter to the president that he close the town and pull out the missionaries. Finally, two optimistic elders were sent there with the express charge to "find the Lord's elect" (see D&C 29:7). They were told that although it would be tough at first, the Saints who lived there were wonderful. The elders believed it and went to work. For the first month, it was tough going. People were reluctant to trust these missionaries because previous missionaries had not built up a strong relationship with them.

These creative elders started putting little thoughts or scriptures in the hymn books on the page of the opening song. Eyebrows were raised, smiles exchanged, and hearts softened. Support for the missionaries soon followed. In the second month there were five baptisms. Within the following three months, twenty-five people were baptized. That town became the most desirable place to serve in the entire mission. What made the difference? The attitude of the missionaries.

Whoever said, "If you think you can or you can't, you're right" was right on target. It may not be easy to keep a positive attitude when everything seems to be going wrong, but it is possible. The day I arrived in Samoa, I was met by a little missionary named Filipo. He must have noticed us drooping in the 98 F temperature with humidity to match. The leis around our necks only added to our discomfort. He grabbed me by the shirt and said, "Elder Bott, I challenge you never to spend a discouraged day in Samoa." I looked down at him and thought, If he can, I can. Little did I know then that I would spend ten months living on coconuts and raw fish, or have yellow jaundice, or be marooned on a hostile island—a situation requiring the mission president to request that the U.S. Coast Guard rescue us. I didn't know then that I would have a tropical ulcer that would threaten the amputation of my foot, or that I would suffer from salt hunger to the point that I would drink sea water and lick the perspiration off my arms in an attempt to satisfy that hunger. If I could have found Filipo, I'd have taken back my promise. But I decided to be true to my word. I can truthfully say that I never had an entirely discouraging day for thirty months in Samoa, nor have I in the twenty-six years since then. I will be eternally grateful for Filipo.

Some days will indeed be tough. However, when you are discouraged, you can't help yourself, your companion, the work, the members, or the Lord. In order to get on the right track, stop where you are and figure out how to rebound. In the islands, it was dressing in our lava lavas and running at top speed up and down the beach until we were exhausted, then lying down and watching the seagulls take pot shots at us. Physical exercise always seemed to help us put things in better perspective.

You must know yourself well enough to know what can bring you out of a slump. These ten suggestions might help you deal with discouragement.

Very few missionaries will have to call when they follow these suggestions. You may have others that really work for you to add to this list.

If you work with a companion who tends to look at the negative side, you may have to help train him or her. You will soon learn that negativism and constant complaining quickly drag your spirits down. It is not easy to train a person to look for the good in everything.

A number of years ago, I taught an institute class at Duke University in Durham, North Carolina. Adjacent to the divinity school where I taught is a beautiful Gothic chapel. Its floors are covered with slate so that even the sound of a pin dropped on the floor would echo through the building. The chapel is built in the shape of a huge cross, the ceiling is probably sixty feet high, and each wall is adorned with beautiful stained-glass windows depicting scenes from the Old and New Testaments. Each week before teaching the class, I would go there and sit for an hour or more admiring the windows. As visitors would enter the building, they would instinctively cease talking and marvel at the beauty of the chapel.

One day as I studied the window depicting Adam and Eve, an elderly couple came in rather noisily. As they gazed at the same window I was looking at, the woman said obnoxiously, "Look at that hole in the lower left-hand corner of the window!" Until that very moment, I hadn't noticed it. The couple moved on, but the negativism lingered. Every time I went to the chapel, I always looked for the hole. I was tempted to borrow a ladder, climb up and stick a wad of bubble gum in the hole to block the light from shining through. Surely the gum would have gone unnoticed, and I would again be able to enjoy the glory of the window.

So it is with our lives. If we really look, we can find fault in everything. The Sadducees and Pharisees found fault in Christ, even though there wasn't any fault in him. You may be tempted to look at your local leaders and find fault in them. Don't. You may be inclined to compare members in another area to those where you now serve. Don't. You may have a district leader or a zone leader who is still struggling to learn correct leadership skills. It would be so easy to point out the flaws in his approach or personality. Don't. Remember, you will be judged with the same judgment that you use. I can afford to be very liberal in my praise and very stingy in my criticism, since I will need all the mercy I can get from my Heavenly Father.

How do you handle a companion who has developed a critical attitude? Make a pact with each other during your first week together that you will concentrate on the good in everything. Remind each other when you slip. Reward yourselves when you succeed. Solicit the help of other missionaries, members, and leaders. Once you break the negative habits, you will be able to achieve anything by using your positive attitude.

If your companion does not want to participate, it will be more difficult to do it alone—but it is not impossible. Once he or she sees the benefits of your positive attitude, your companion will likely reconsider and join you. You will not be able to change the whole world from negative to positive, but you will make a difference.
