Randy L. Bott, Serve with Honor: Helps for Missionaries ( 1995)

18

Leadership: Don't Let It Go to Your Head

One of the truly inspired programs of the mission is leadership. Unfortunately, for some it is also the most challenging area if either they are so timid that leadership scares them to death or are so confident that others view them as arrogant.

After I had called one young man to be a district leader, he immediately called an investigator and announced over the phone, "Now I'm the Big Cheese around here!" This statement represents the exact opposite of leadership. The Savior gave one small verse that forever silences the debate on what constitutes greatness in leadership: "But he that is greatest among you shall be your servant" (Matthew 23:11).

Perhaps a more accurate way of describing the job of a leader would be "servant leadership." When a leader really gets the vision of the calling, there comes a change in the style of leadership that makes others naturally want to follow. There are (and probably always will be) those who aspire to leadership positions because they want to be seen of men, sit and stand up front, give the talks, receive the glory. A true leader enters the leadership arena knowing that his or her needs will sometimes be the last to be met.

Your first task as a newly called leader is to acquaint yourself with those you serve. Remember, a steward is not the owner, but works under the direction of the owner in controlling resources and personnel. How do you get to know those you will serve? It will never happen until you associate and spend time with them. It may be difficult to get together if your mission is large. Phone calls, district or zone P-day activities, district and zone development meetings, and zone conferences all provide opportunities to observe and associate with your fellow missionaries. Your mission president may have a program of "team-ups" during which you proselyte with another set of elders for a day. As a leader, you will need those days to help you earn another person's trust as well as get to know each missionary's strengths and weaknesses. Almost anyone can put on a facade for a couple of hours, but not for the entire day. Hopefully, before you leave for your own area that night or the next morning, you will have a better idea of what their companionship is really like.

Once you get to know the other missionaries, try to find ways to bless their lives. As a leader, your objective is to help them to be more successful. Determining what and how to teach your district or zone may require endless hours of study, meditation, and prayer. Rather than struggle on your own to become "the Big Cheese," be humble and let the Lord inspire you and mold you into a true leader.

Another vital lesson you will learn is that you can't lead from the rear! You must set the example in every aspect of your missionary life. Prepare to be analyzed and criticized (even misunderstood and condemned) in some things you do. The more closely you live the mission rules and fulfill what is expected of the ideal missionary, the easier it will be to lead by example. Don't allow criticism to get you down or convince you to quit trying.

There are three phases in dealing with criticism. First, ask yourself if the criticism against you is true. Be honest! If you flaunt your position or authority as a leader, then you need to change. Some of the most valuable and most painful mission experiences may come from a new missionary's observation of your attitude or behavior. Be humble enough to accept criticism from anyone. If you believe that the only person who can correct you is the mission president, you drastically limit opportunities for improvement. The president can only see you on rare occasions. If the criticism has grounds, change. Remember to thank the person who offers a suggestion. Don't worry about whether the person's motives are sincere or whether he or she is living better than you. Since our goal is to become like our Savior and our Heavenly Father, we should glory in constructive criticism. Positive feedback will help you identify and overcome those things that impede your progress.

Second, in listening to the criticism, you may discover that the analysis is way off target. Instead of getting angry or reproving, you might profit by stopping and asking yourself, "What am I doing or saying that gives this mistaken impression?" See if you can identify some unconscious gesture or action you are using that sends the wrong message. One of my assistants was a tall, handsome, athletic young man, very self-confident in front of a group. He was well prepared and very competent as a speaker and leader. Not too long after our first round of zone conferences, a number of elders and sisters complained in their letters to me that this assistant seemed conceited. I chose not to protect him from the comments. He was crestfallen when he learned of the criticism. He wanted to know if he should let someone else serve as assistant to the president. What a humble approach to the problem! We talked seriously in an effort to try to identify the problem. The only thing we could think of was that he had a good physique, was handsome, and was confident when he spoke.

At this point you might be inclined to say, "If the missionaries have a problem with him, that is their problem." Not so. We are called to bring people to Christ, not to drive them away. Together my assistant and I determined that the criticism was without grounds, since he was a humble and faithful elder. We decided on a simple tactic to disarm those who were looking for fault. When he stood at the next zone conference, he was to clear his throat, shuffle his papers a little, and glance quickly from one part of the room to the other—all symptoms of nervousness in a speaker. Then he was to give his talk without any other changes. The response was exactly what we had expected. Those who had been so harsh in their criticism wrote in their next letter how humble he had become. Each in turn pledged their support to this "servant-leader." What had changed? Only their perception of what they thought he was thinking. By the time he returned home, he was one of our most powerful missionaries.

Third, if the criticism is unfounded and you can't think of a way to change the mistaken perception, then you must develop a thicker skin and ignore it. Until the Millennium begins, there will always be people who will be offended when no offense is intended. As a missionary, you will often hear people tell you to "go home and get a real job." Criti-cisms of your character, family, beliefs, intelligence, looks, and anything else they can think of will be more abundant than you want. Do not antagonize the critic, but also do not hold back from fulfilling your calling.

When other missionaries recognize your sincere desire to bless their lives, your task as a leader will be greatly simplified. They will begin to support you and try to make you look good. Because you are trying to help them be successful, they will want you to be successful. Truly, it is a "cast your bread on the water" situation. Your positive messages of needed encouragement will always return to bless you many times over.

Identify someone in the mission who you think is a real leader. Try to discover what makes him or her great. It may be a bishop or stake president, a Relief Society president, or a stake Young Women leader in an area in which you serve. It may be a ward mission leader or an elders quorum president with whom you have worked closely. It may be someone in business or politics whom you have observed. Don't limit your search simply to other missionaries, although your example may indeed come from that group. Try incorporating into your character those leadership qualities that you most admire in your heroes. If a trait is difficult to master, try some refining. Don't be afraid to ask for feedback from your companion, apartment mates, or others who observe you daily. Be thick-skinned enough not to take offense at their comments yet teachable enough to try some of their suggestions.

One of the most difficult facts of leadership is that you can never please everybody all the time. If you try too hard to be a "people pleaser," you will become frustrated, discouraged, and ready to resign. Remember, leadership in the Church is not based on democracy. You can and should solicit input from those who will be influenced by your decisions , but the final decisions are yours. Generally speaking, when people feel they have had a chance to express their ideas and they know the leader has considered their input, they are more willing to support the leader's decision—even if it isn't what they suggested. The dictator's use of force only results in resistance and rebellion. Take a few minutes and reread Doctrine and Covenants 121:34-46, inserting "leader" in the appropriate places. This scripture teaches one of the greatest lessons on leadership you can possibly learn. Control, dominion, or compulsion are forbidden. Attaining qualities such as persuasion, long-suffering, gentleness, meekness, love unfeigned, kindness, pure knowledge, charity, and virtue and shunning hypocrisy and guile should be the goals of a good leader. Remember, however, that being called by the mission president to lead means that you are accountable. If something goes wrong, you must answer for it.

There are only a limited number of leadership positions in the mission. Not everyone who is qualified to be an assistant or zone leader will have the opportunity. You can be totally successful as a missionary without ever serving as a leader—look at the sisters! If you are called to serve, give it your best shot. Learn all you can as a servant-leader. Then when the mission president releases you so some other elder can have an opportunity, step down graciously and do not take it personally. Put yourself in the mission president's shoes. It isn't easy to call every qualified missionary to a leadership position, especially if those being released sulk and complain. You are a leader whether or not you are given a position. Too many missionaries fail to realize that just serving a mission is a leadership role. Setting a good or bad example will lead people to choose and act accordingly.

Some people aspire to certain offices even though they may be the least qualified for the position. Whether they are called or not is really not your concern. The mission president is responsible for calling young men to fill positions. Let him magnify his own office. If you know something about a missionary that would morally disqualify him from serving, it is your responsibility to inform the mission president. However, if he still chooses to call the elder, you have done everything required of you. So sustain the elder and make him look as good as you can. Your support should never be based on whether you like a person; the Lord has called that missionary to serve. Also, the president will never know whether he can count on your support if you pick and choose whom you will sustain.

Leadership is difficult but rewarding. Lessons learned from serving in leadership positions in your mission will help you be more effective for the rest of your life. Allow the Lord to mold you into the person he knows you must be to fulfill those positions to which he has foreordained you.
