Randy L. Bott, Serve with Honor: Helps for Missionaries ( 1995)

19

The Threefold Record of Your Mission

You are probably like many other missionaries who have looked forward to serving a mission with great anticipation. You have often heard from returned missionaries comments like, "That was the greatest two years of my life." You may think you could never forget some of your mission experiences. However, you are human, and time will dull even the sharpest memory. How do you preserve a record of your mission?

Every week you are required to write two letters, the first to the mission president, the second to your parents. What is a president's letter? It is a weekly opportunity to report on your stewardship to your presiding priesthood leader. At the beginning of your mission, you might ask the president if he eventually returns the letters to the missionaries who wrote them. If he does not, you have two options: make a photocopy of your letters before you send them, or ask if his personal secretary would file your letters and return them at the end of your mission. I suspect that most presidents would return them.

What kind of a report do you make to the mission president? Some missionaries just write to fill up the space. Others give a detailed account of how they are doing, what the relationship is with their companion, how supportive local members and priesthood leaders are, and how the work is progressing with investigators. Responding to all of these situations will take several minutes or more, but the time is well worth your effort. Some missionaries decide not to write at all, saying that the president never writes back. Don't be silly! The president receives more than two hundred letters every week—this in addition to the various other problems he must face. You should not expect him to respond to each letter. But this certainly does not mean he doesn't read your letters.

I remember when one elder wrote in the middle of his letter that he didn't think I would really read his letter. I called him on the phone to ask why he thought I wouldn't read it. He was very surprised and flattered that the mission president would read his letter. Another missionary, not believing that I read every letter, quoted part of a nursery rhyme in the middle of his letter. When I called him and read it to him over the phone, he was embarrassed. He vowed not to waste any more of my time with nonsense, and he didn't. Many missionaries would seek advice and ask questions in their letters. I tried to respond to their concerns during the week as my schedule would permit.

If you are faithful in your writing, you will have a week- by-week record of your entire mission, a stewardship report that you could give to the Savior. Make your letters worthwhile, rather than just space fillers. On the more mundane level, write so that the president can read it without using the Urim and Thummim! Although you may be in a hurry or your penmanship isn't that great, take a little extra time to write legibly. One young man had such poor handwriting that I would always read his letter last. Then I would call him on the phone and ask him to tell me what he had said. He would laugh and then rehearse the letter's content. After he had explained what he had written, I would go back and try to read the letter. But rarely could I decipher the scribbling.

The second required letter goes to your family. Too many missionaries come from homes that have suffered a painful divorce. Write to both parents, although you may not like the parent who has moved out. For your parents' benefit as well as yours, write to them both.

The record to your family should be a record of your high points, spiritual experiences, and lessons learned. Some parents want to know everything going on in their missionary's life. You must decide what to share. After three years of experience with more than six hundred elders and sisters writing home, I have learned one thing: if you write a graphic description of your more dangerous situations, the mission president will probably get a phone call from your parents. In fact, one concerned mother wanted to know if she should visit her son, who had been threatened at knife-point by a gang member. I assured her that I had talked with her son and that he was fine. Incidentally, this threatening incident occurred only once during the full two years he served.

I am not suggesting that you lie to your parents or even that you shouldn't tell them the whole truth. It would be wise to report what you are going through in a calm and positive manner. One of our good friends had a son in a rather tough mission. He wrote home from his hospital bed in a matter-of-fact manner that he would be released before the letter arrived home and that the stitches from the knife wound were holding well. This was the only communication the parents had about the incident. A call to the mission president assured them that he was all right and that they shouldn't worry too much.

As you write home to express your love for your family and share missionary experiences, you will have a profound effect on your younger brothers and sisters. Those who may be wavering in their commitment to serve a mission will be strengthened as they see you change, grow, and develop into a real son or daughter of God. Be careful what you write. Your letters will likely be the focal point of conversations more often than you would ever imagine, and moms love to read missionary letters in Relief Society and sacrament meetings. The Lord blesses the letters sent home from the mission field. You probably won't even be chastised for poor penmanship. But again, you should write as neatly as you can; remember, if your family keeps your letters (which you should ask them to do), you will want to read them yourself someday.

Some missionaries have found it helpful to take a supply of journal paper and write their letters home on that. If you take a matching journal for the third record of your mission, you will have a matching set when you get home. Be sure to date each letter and write only what you want your children and grandchildren to read. If you write to your boyfriend or girlfriend, ask him or her to save your letters for you.

As mentioned, the third record of your mission is your journal. Here is where you write to yourself about your progress. In years to come, these personal records will show your children what a mission is and how to prepare properly. Write in your journal about your difficult, frightening, and successful experiences.

Also, write the things of the Spirit, such as impressions, dreams, insights, or spiritual experiences. You can even bring your journal to general conferences or stake conferences and take notes. Many of our missionaries recorded their impressions and the doctrine we discussed at zone conferences. Since paper is cheap, it is better to write too much rather than not enough. As I look back on my first mission, I wish I had written more. Those things that I did record are priceless. But those feelings and experiences that I thought I would never forget but did not write are gone.

Should you keep a daily diary? That is up to you. Many missionaries found that it was too time-consuming to write every night. Others faithfully set aside fifteen minutes every night to record what had happened during the day. Write in your journal at least once a week. If you wait longer than a week, you will forget important details, emotions, and the spirit of the events. If I had to do it all over again, I would try to write daily.

For those who have girlfriends or boyfriends waiting, be careful about writing romantic feelings in your missionary journal. If you do decide to write about them, record it in your new language (if you are learning a language). Then most people who want to read your journal will not be able to understand what you wrote, unless you choose to translate for them. Remember that the scriptures are our best example of keeping appropriate personal records, and romantic entries there are minimal. Although the Song of Solomon is considered romantic in nature, the Prophet Joseph Smith wrote as he retranslated the Bible: "The Songs of Solomon are not inspired writings" (see footnote at the beginning of the Song of Solomon in the LDS edition of the Bible).

When you put all three records of your mission together, the so-called best eighteen months or two years of your life will be preserved in writing. President Spencer W. Kimball suggested that even the angels will quote from them. What a powerful record for you, your family, and your friends. Don't shortchange yourself by not maintaining a personal record of your mission.
