Randy L. Bott, Serve with Honor: Helps for Missionaries ( 1995)

21

The Blessings of 100 Percent Obedience

I, the Lord, am bound when ye do what I say; but when ye do not what I say, ye have no promise" (D&C 82:10). What a breath of fresh air to meet a new missionary who does not have his or her own rule book. When you signed your acceptance letter, you told the prophet in effect, "I will go where you want me to go," and "I will do what you want me to do." Don't go back on your commitment!

Every missionary who got off the plane seemed to be 100 percent committed to keeping the commandments and the mission rules. During their first day in the mission, they committed to continue to be "MTC obedient." The excitement level was high, and we felt that these were the ones who would conquer the world. During their first round of zone conferences, I interviewed each of them. They would express their commitment to total obedience. I would commend and encourage them.

By the second month, they had discovered how difficult it is to obey all the rules, especially if their trainers or fellow missionaries were more relaxed than they had committed to be. Many were still determined to set a record for obedience. By the third month, they had experienced their share of hard times: difficult areas, challenging companions, frustrating news from home, rejection by investigators, and the pressure of learning all they were required to learn.

At this point the men were separated from the boys, and the women from the girls. The true missionaries of Christ were determined enough and strong enough to reach their goal of 100 percent obedience in spite of the difficulty of the task. The others started making excuses why they couldn't keep all the mission rules. "Nobody else is totally obedient" was one of the most frequently used rebuttals. "My companion and others tease me because I'm trying to obey all the rules, which bothers me. And I just don't understand why this stupid rule is here. I'm not going to live dumb rules"—these are two other weak attempts to justify disobedience. I would remind these missionaries that the Lord never said, "I the Lord am bound if ye do 80 percent of what I say"! If faithful missionaries want the Lord to bless them as promised, they need to be 100 percent obedient.

When these missionaries attempted to rationalize that "nobody keeps all the rules," I would ask them to identify any rule they felt was impossible to keep. I would then promise them that I would excuse them from following those rules. Never once in three years did a missionary suggest a rule that could not be kept. Obedience is a matter of deciding you will just do it—no excuses, no arguments, no rationalization, just plain obedience.

Many years ago, the Sunday School class I was in had gained a reputation for being rowdy. One particular Sunday we were really on a roll. We had gone through three teachers before the class was half over. The fourth teacher was a kind, Christlike grandma we all knew well. I guess our destructive momentum was just too great—she left in tears within a few minutes. We were all pleased with our accomplishment until the bishop walked in. There was dead silence. He scanned our semicircle of chairs, starting on the opposite end from me. He stopped in front of every child and stared into his or her eyes. When he got to me, he stared into my eyes and asked, "Randy, why do you act like that?" I used the typical excuse, "Why are you picking on me? Everybody else was doing it too!" He then shocked us all by responding, "Shut up! You know better than that. Don't ever use that excuse as long as you live!" I knew I was in trouble. I knew that he was telling the truth. Misbehavior on the part of everyone else in the world was no excuse for me. I am grateful for the courage of that bishop.

Mission president Alma taught the same truth in chastising his wayward missionary son, Corianton: "Yea, she did steal away the hearts of many; but this was no excuse for thee, my son" (Alma 39:4). Joseph Smith was bluntly taught the same lesson by the Lord, who said: "Behold, you should not have feared man more than God. Although men set at naught the counsels of God, and despise his words—yet you should have been faithful; and he would have extended his arm and supported you against all the fiery darts of the adversary; and he would have been with you in every time of trouble" (D&C 3:7-8). If you want to maintain static-free communication between you and the Lord, you must not compromise your commitment to total obedience.

What if you don't understand the "whys" behind a mission rule? Live it until you can get an answer from the mission president. Remember the response of our faithful father Adam when the angel asked him why he offered sacrifices: "I know not, save the Lord commanded me" (Moses 5:6). An explanation followed that put everything in proper perspective. But remember that Adam obeyed until he understood because he had explicit faith in the Lord.

What do you do if your companion or fellow missionaries are breaking the rules? Try to reason with them. Explain how they are not only hurting themselves but also slowing down the work. Although they have made the same commitments you have, their reactions may surprise you. They may mock you, tease you, try to persuade you to join them, or ignore you. But rest assured that they know, deep down inside, that you are right and that they should be obedient. It is rather ironic that others will mock you for doing the very thing to which they committed themselves. Being obedient is never easy or even popular. But "strait is the gate, and narrow is the way, which leadeth unto life, and few there be that find it" (Matthew 7:14).

It is funny how quickly we excuse our shortcomings when nobody else is living the way they should. In the long run, those who are led back to the right path will thank you for setting a good example. In the Old Testament, Ezekiel suggests that you actually have a responsibility to warn others:

Again, when a righteous man doth turn from his righteousness, and commit iniquity, and I lay a stumbling block before him, he shall die: because thou hast not given him warning, he shall die in his sin, and his righteousness which he hath done shall not be remembered; but his blood will I require at thine hand.

Nevertheless if thou warn the righteous man, that the righteous sin not, and he doth not sin, he shall surely live, because he is warned; also thou hast delivered thy soul (Ezekiel 3:20-21).
