Randy L. Bott, Serve with Honor: Helps for Missionaries ( 1995)

24

Working with Members

One of the true joys of missionary work is learning to work with members. The significance of the work goes far beyond just being enjoyable. President Ezra Taft Benson said, "We need to understand that member-missionary work is literally the key to the future growth of the Church and that we have covenanted with our Father in Heaven to do this work" (Ezra Taft Benson, "President Kimball's Vision of Missionary Work," Ensign, July 1985, p. 11).

"We must emphasize the need for more member-missionary work. Experience has proven this is the most fruitful missionary work. Member-missionary work is one of the great keys to the individual growth of our members. It is my conviction that member-missionary work will raise the spirituality in any ward where applied" ("Strengthen the Stakes of Zion," El Paso Regional Conference, 25 January 1986; quoted in The Teachings of Ezra Taft Benson, Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, pp. 208-9).

These words are from a modern-day prophet. The most effective missionary work is that which includes members. However, working with members can be challenging and frustrating. No active members of the Church get up each morning and say to themselves, "I wonder what I can do to avoid doing missionary work today." If you assume that each member wants to be good and faithful, you are much more likely to have success.

Whenever investigators don't understand something, you are to teach them the correct doctrine until they understand. Why should it be any different with members? If members don't know how to do missionary work, teach them. You may assume that they already know how and just don't want to be involved, but that is usually not the case. Yes, they may be returned missionaries or bishops or hold some other responsible Church position. That does not automatically guarantee that they know how to share the gospel with their neighbors. Remember, the same opposition you feel from the adversary that tempts you not to be valiant in your missionary work is also working on the members.

How do you work with members? Start by earning their trust. It would be wonderful if the image of missionaries among the members was positive. In many areas that may be true. However, some missionaries have unfortunately given the rest a bad reputation. As a result, you will repeatedly have to prove by your actions that you are sincere and hardworking. Never step out of character—be diligent, friendly, warm, approachable, directed, sober, humble, and committed. As you radiate these qualities, members will see they can trust their close friends and family with you. On the other hand, if you are hotheaded, cold, unstable in Church doctrine, unlearned in the scriptures, lazy, or insincere, that too shows, and no one can in good conscience entrust their family and friends to your care. You must earn support from members.

You will rapidly discover that some members are justifiably tired of new member-missionary programs. Unless new programs are promoted through the mission, try to use existing programs to increase member participation in missionary work. New, short-lived programs are frustrating to members. Be careful that the methods you use to involve members do not require so much time that even the faithful see no way to complete your training sessions.

Teach the "hows" as well as the "whats" of missionary work. We are pretty good at telling people what to do. Don't do that unless you immediately follow up with an explanation of how to accomplish what you have asked. Because it seems obvious and simple to you, do not assume that everyone has the same vision. Be realistic! If what you ask members to do is so time-consuming that to be successful at it would require them to quit their jobs, you may well expect your approach to fail. For you, missionary work is a full-time commitment. They still have to worry about work, church, family, and their social lives.

Make member-missionary work fun. Avoid making members feel guilty for not being more diligent. Whenever you use guilt, threats, or negative reinforcement to achieve member involvement, everybody loses. Missionary work has built-in, positive rewards.

Set realistic time goals. It takes time to teach members how to overcome fears. Missionaries often want everything to happen immediately, but it doesn't work that way. It may take a month or longer to help a family get over their fear of asking their neighbors over for a family home evening. If you are not too concerned about who gets the "credit" for bringing people into the Church, you can do a lot of good. The true fruits of your service may be realized by missionaries who come after you. What an eternal reward you will receive for building a solid base of member-missionary activities. One of the true signs of spiritual maturity is to continue working diligently even when it is apparent that you will not be in the area long enough to reap the benefits of your hard work.

Don't try to move people faster than they are willing and able to move. The gauge is not when the missionaries are ready, but when the members are ready. You will discover that trying to move too quickly will have negative and long-lasting effects. It is better to move more slowly and make sure everyone is comfortable.

Trying to work with too many people at one time is not very effective either. Select five or six families who show the most promise for member involvement. Get them actively working, and then they in turn can involve two or three more families by training them to do member-missionary work. The work, like a snowball rolling down a slope, will start small and slowly. As time passes it will increase in size and speed. Be patient.

Work closely with the ward mission leader. Remember that the bishop is in charge of all three parts of the Church's mission: perfecting the Saints, redeeming the dead, and proclaiming the gospel. The ward mission leader is the bishop's right-hand man in ensuring that proclaiming the gospel receives proper attention. Not every ward mission leader has an expansive vision of his calling, just as not every missionary knows why he or she is serving a mission. If there is a lack of vision on the part of the bishop and ward mission leader, teach them. It is easy to criticize everything that isn't done exactly to your liking. A more spiritually mature approach is to help everyone approach the ideal by teaching and showing them the way.

The weekly correlation meeting with the ward mission leader can be a valuable time to make sure you are all on the same team. If you don't get along with the ward mission leader, you will probably not be very successful in the ward. If the weekly correlation meetings are not being held, gently suggest that you really need them. Ask for the ward mission leader's help. Make him feel important—he is! If you let him suggest a convenient time to meet, he will more likely attend the meetings. If he is reluctant to hold formal meetings, a five-minute meeting after sacrament meeting in the hallway is better than no meeting.

Let the ward mission leader know whom you are working with, and suggest that he ask for help from auxiliaries in friendshipping your investigators. In other words, provide him with some agenda items for PEC and WCC meetings. The ward mission leader is your liaison with your investi-gators and the ward organization and its resources. You can't possibly host enough socials, homemaking meetings, Primary programs, and Young Men and Young Women outings to meet the needs of your investigators. Without the help of the ward, your effectiveness is diminished.

Let the ward mission leader coordinate the ward's resources. Let him know how vital he is to the success of the missionary effort in the ward. A close working relationship with him makes your work more enjoyable and productive, while an adversarial relationship renders you ineffective and may cause you to be discouraged with the work. In the unlikely event that the ward mission leader will not cooperate at all, ask for an interview with the bishop. Explain what you have tried to do to work with the ward mission leader. Ask the bishop for suggestions. If that doesn't work, have your zone leader talk to the stake mission president, who can work through the proper priesthood channels and remedy the problem. Generally, the problem does not lie with the ward mission leader, but with missionaries who have treated him poorly in the past. He could be a little hesitant, and you may have to win his confidence just as you need to do with the members. He too wants to magnify his calling. It requires patience and perseverance to teach him how to do that.

Nothing will draw you closer to the members and the Lord than working together to "bring to pass the immortality and eternal life" of our Father's other children (Moses 1:39). Because of the potential for good when we are united, expect some opposition from the adversary and learn how to overcome it. The rewards will outweigh the challenges as you work with members.
