Randy L. Bott, Serve with Honor: Helps for Missionaries ( 1995)

25

Answering Questions without Bashing

Most of the people you teach will be honestly seeking the truth. Their questions will be sincere, and they will accept your explanations. However, a few, some of whom may have taken debate in high school, are prepared to argue every comma and period. The tendency is to engage them to "prove the gospel." That never has worked and likely never will. Must you silently accept criticism? Not at all. You have the truth, and the truth will never change in spite of the arguments of the less informed. The following methods of responding may help you satisfy their immediate query so you can continue to teach the great saving truths of the Restoration.

After making sure you understand the objection, you might say something like, "That sounds like anything added after that scripture is not approved of God. Is that what you mean?" The answer is usually yes, because the person honestly believes he or she is correct and is helping you to see the light. The cross-reference to Revelation 22:18 (see note 18a) suggests you turn to Deuteronomy 4:2, where you read something very similar to what is written in Revelation 22. After reading Deuteronomy 4:2, you might take all the pages between there and Revelation 22 in your hand and suggest that according to your critic's interpretation, what you are holding is not scripture and should be torn out and discarded. Of course the person will not agree. Most people either attempt no explanation at all, or they suggest an alternative meaning for Deuteronomy. This alternative suggestion is what you are looking for. Suggest that there is an explanation that makes Revelation and Deuteronomy noncontradictory. Then you can explain the sequential writing of the Bible and present those other arguments. You must lay the foundation before you try to put up the rafters and the roof.

It helps to recognize that intelligent people may struggle with that question. Acknowledge that the question is not a sign of inferior intelligence or lack of ability to reason. The answer simply requires more light and knowledge than the person presently has.

Therefore repent, and be baptized in the name of Jesus, and lay hold upon the gospel of Christ, which shall be set before you, not only in this record but also in the record which shall come unto the Gentiles from the Jews, which record shall come from the Gentiles unto you.

For behold, this [the Book of Mormon] is written for the intent that ye may believe that [the Bible]; and if ye believe that [the Bible] ye will believe this [the Book of Mormon] also; and if ye believe this [the Book of Mormon] ye will know concerning your fathers, and also the marvelous works which were wrought by the power of God among them.

Mormon provides the key to answering difficult questions. First find the answer in modern-day scripture. Then read the Bible and see what a difference it makes. For ex-ample, one of the most misunderstood but vital doctrines is the nature of God. Indeed, the Savior said it is "life eternal, that they might know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom thou hast sent" (John 17:3). The problem arises when we testify that God has a tangible body, because John 4:24 says that "God is a Spirit."

It takes some study, but your search is rewarded as you discover Doctrine and Covenants 130:22, which says in part: "The Father has a body of flesh and bones as tangible as man's." That is the true doctrine. Now to solve the apparent problem. John 4:24 states in full, "God is a Spirit: and they that worship him must worship him in spirit and in truth." Does the fact that God has a body prevent him from also having a spirit? Of course not. A thorough search reveals that "man is spirit. The elements are eternal, and spirit and element, inseparably connected, receive a fulness of joy" (D&C 93:33). Our spirits communicate with God's spirit: we do not have to rely solely on our physical eyes and ears. Man certainly does not have to lay aside his body so that his spirit can communicate with God. Likewise, God's ability to communicate with man's spirit does not require that he not have a body. Physically, God can only be in one place at one time, so it would be restrictive if he were limited to a physical means of communication. The Savior, in teaching the woman at the well in Samaria, said, "Ye worship ye know not what: we know what we worship" (John 4:22). If we wanted to continue our explanation from the Bible using our understanding gained from Doctrine and Covenants 130, we could use Luke 24:36-39 to show that the resurrected Christ had a body of flesh and bone that he invited the disciples to handle. Also, in Hebrews 1:1-3, Paul informs us that the Son is in the "express image" of the Father—meaning that he does not vary in any way. Together these scriptures clearly confirm what God has chosen to reveal about himself through modern-day prophets. You would miss a golden opportunity if you did not bear your testimony and express your thankfulness to the Lord for revealing such clear and unmistakable truths through modern prophets. The more you realize how blessed we are by doctrine that we tend to take for granted, the more powerful your witness will become.

In the early days of the Church, the Lord cautioned the missionaries not to try to debate with people by using our understanding of the Bible alone: "And my servant Leman shall be ordained unto this work, that he may reason with them, not according to that which he has received of them, but according to that which shall be taught him by you my servants; and by so doing I will bless him, otherwise he shall not prosper" (D&C 49:4). Debating doctrine using only the Bible will not cause us to prosper; using restoration scriptures will.
