Randy L. Bott, Serve with Honor: Helps for Missionaries ( 1995)

26

Transfers

It is one of the sad facts of mission life that sooner or later you will be transferred from an area you have grown to love to a new area. The people in the old area have become like your own family. You know them well, and they know you well. You probably feel sure that the new area will never measure up to the one you just left. There will undoubtedly be people who have had a major impact on you and with whom you will want to keep in touch for the rest of your life.

First let's examine the positive factors in being transferred. If you are normal, you probably have a few faults that you are still trying to overcome. When you move to a new area, you start with a clean slate. No one knows how much experience you have had, or what you do well in, or where you fall short. Now is a good time for you to change. For example, in your first area you are known as "the greeny." Everyone knows you just arrived from the MTC, and consciously or not, they tend to treat you as if you don't know very much (probably because you don't!). As the months pass and you become more experienced, your confidence grows and you begin to mature as a missionary. However, certain members may always consider you to be the same as when you arrived. They are not confident in your ability to teach their family or friends. Although it isn't right, sometimes that's the way it is. There isn't any difference between the last day in your previous area and the first day in your current area. However, in the new area people consider you a full-fledged missionary with all the talents necessary to teach anyone they find. For that reason you'll be glad to move.

You may have developed some ties in the former area that were not necessarily unhealthy but that in time could develop into problems. Girls and guys tend to be attracted to the elders and to the sister missionaries. They actually love the spirit you radiate if you honor your calling. Because of a lack of understanding, these feelings may be misinterpreted as romantic love. Also, some of the older couples may have "adopted" you as their son or daughter. They may be so comfortable with you that they offer you the use of their home and everything in it. It is wise not to accept such offers. Too much familiarity lessens your effectiveness as a missionary. Frequent transfers keep these relationships on a more professional level.

Some individuals in the former area may have personality conflicts with you. Instead of approaching you personally and working things out, they may have taken the easy route and talked to others about you behind your back. A transfer gives you a fresh start. If you know what you were doing that caused them to dislike you, then you can avoid making the same mistakes in your next area.

If you were serving in a rather small geographic area, it may be that you have contacted everyone several times. Your personality will click with certain investigators and members and not with others. When you transfer to a new area, you can positively affect a new group of people. Let the mission president decide by inspiration when you have served long enough in an area. In your weekly letter to your president, tell him how you are doing and describe your relationships with companions and ward members, but don't tell him when you need a transfer. Before you leave that area, you may need to learn some valuable lessons that will help you for the rest of your life.

Usually you will love your current area and will not want to be transferred. When you get the transfer call, you will want to say farewell to your friends and investigators. Don't make your departure a theatrical affair. Sometimes people want to throw a farewell party for you. If you happen to be serving among people who have very limited resources (which includes most of the world!), they may spend all they have on a feast or present. Be cautious and sensitive about allowing them to do that. If you suspect they may react that way, wait until the morning of the transfer before informing them. Then graciously decline the invitation to let them spend all their money on you. Some people may be heartbroken to see you go. They may want you to stay, and some may even want to call the mission president to try to change his mind. Many times I received desperate calls from branch members pleading with me to leave an elder or sister in a particular area. They claimed the branch would fall apart if the missionary were transferred. I assured them that another equally fine missionary would be replacing their missionary and that everything would be all right. Several months later, when it was time to transfer the replacement missionary, I would again receive phone calls from members pleading that I would let the missionary stay. Let the Lord run the mission, and you will find that the Church moves forward, not backward.

Occasionally an elder or a sister would call and explain that unusual circumstances required their continued service in an area. I learned early that no one is indispensable. The missionaries would be transferred as planned, and at the end of their mission, they would be amazed at how the branch or area had progressed in their absence.

People will almost always want to keep in touch with you. However, the white handbook clearly explains (for a very good reason) that you are not to write letters to, receive letters from, or have any unnecessary telephone communications with members residing within the boundaries of your mission. You must kindly and gently explain the rules. The problem will come when they inform you that other missionaries gave their new address and phone number. You might explain that your success on a mission is determined by how closely you follow the rules. If they really love you, they will not ask you to break the rules, because doing so deprives you of a portion of the Lord's Spirit. Most of them will readily understand and be more than willing to help you be obedient. It would be wonderful if every missionary would live the rules so that the members wouldn't be confused about whether they could or could not correspond with missionaries during their missions. Tell people you will contact them at the end of your mission. Give them your home address.

To know the wisdom of the rules, you will only have to serve in one area in which former missionaries violated the rules. Of course, members will be closer to someone who has served in their area six months than they will with you when you first arrive. If the members correspond with a former missionary who is willing to indulge them in their criticism that "the missionary who is here now doesn't love us like you did," you will find it nearly impossible to gain their confidence and trust as quickly as you otherwise could. As a mission president, I occasionally had to call local Church leaders and ask them to request that their members not call, write, or visit missionaries who had formerly served there, because those members were hindering the work.

Such members are not bad—it is only natural to want to stay close to those we love. But when they don't understand the rules, it is difficult to gain their support. Do yourself and those who follow you a favor: explain before you go what the rule is and why it is so important. Some missionaries are so insecure that they welcome affection from members in former areas. These missionaries don't quit until they see how detrimental their continued correspondence (phone calls, letters, or visits from members of the former area) is to the progress of the work. I would be afraid to stand before the Savior and try to explain why I accepted inappropriate affections at the expense of the progress of his work. Remember why you are serving a mission—it is to bring honor to him and not to yourself.

If a member writes to you from a former area, ask your mission president how to handle the problem. In our mission the missionary would explain the rules on a postcard and then send it to me at the mission office. I would forward it to the person along with a cover letter asking that person to help our missionaries be obedient. For the overwhelming majority of the time, this was effective. If it didn't work, I would request that the missionary mark "Refused, return to sender" on the letter and put it back into the mailbox. That always worked. That may seem a bit harsh, but your allegiance needs to be to your Heavenly Father and not to individual members.

If you are so irresistible that those of the opposite sex can't leave you alone, you have a special problem. If you receive an unexpected and unwanted visit from someone in your area, call the mission president immediately and let him know what has happened. If there are romantic feelings between you and the other person, let the mission president know. It is far better for you to finish an honorable mission somewhere else than to return home without honor, and possibly without your membership, to the disgrace of yourself and your family. These instances are rare, but they do happen. The adversary will take advantage of every natural emotion to disrupt your mission and destroy you. Keep your guard up.

Finally, don't pine away for the area you just left. Close that chapter of your mission. Glory in the Lord that you have been privileged to meet so many neat people and enjoy such wonderful experiences. But go on with your life. In addition, when you get to your new area, don't compare it to your former area. No one likes to hear, "Well, this is the way we did it in my last area!" or "You people are not as faithful as the people in my last area!" If you want to destroy a potential relationship with the people in your new area, compare them to members in your former area. Enjoy each area for its own sake. Sure, second grade math was different from first grade math. One wasn't necessarily better than the other—just different. There will be new lessons to learn in this area, just as there were lessons to learn in your former area. They may be different lessons altogether. That doesn't make one area bad and the other good. They are just different.

You will find this to be good counsel when you return home and start to compare your mission with the missions of your friends. They will be as different as can be. Not better or worse—just different.
