Randy L. Bott, Serve with Honor: Helps for Missionaries ( 1995)

29

Your Past Sins

Long before your birth, God contemplated your role on earth. He knew when you would live, how far you would travel, and how you would fit into his eternal plan (see Deuteronomy 32:8; Acts 17:26). It is no surprise to the Almighty that you are ready to serve a mission at this very hour. He knows the mistakes you have made and the lessons you have learned the hard way. It would have been wonderful had each of us listened to and obeyed the Savior's counsel as recorded in the Sermon on the Mount: "Be ye therefore perfect, even as your Father which is in heaven is perfect" (Matthew 5:48). But we aren't perfect yet, so God provided a Savior for us. When we have repented of our past mistakes, the incomprehensible gift of the atonement of Jesus Christ makes forgiveness possible.

If you have been wise, you have learned many valuable lessons from the mistakes you made as a youth. How can you use those valuable lessons to bless others? At first you may think, "Well, I'll just tell them the pain and agony I experienced as a result of my sins, and that will help them avoid the same mistakes." That sounds good, but it is not the correct way.

Let's briefly review the repentance process and how we are to react to our past mistakes. In the Doctrine and Covenants, the Lord presents a formula for forgiveness. "Behold, he who has repented of his sins, the same is forgiven, and I, the Lord, remember them no more. By this ye may know if a man repenteth of his sins—behold, he will confess them and forsake them" (D&C 58:42-43). Now for the formula: Confess + Forsake = God will forgive sins, and he will remember them no more.

To confess means to make a full and complete disclosure to your presiding priesthood officer if your transgression would affect your standing in the Church or your right to serve a mission. Too many missionaries attempt to cover their sins by not confessing them, only to find they cannot get the Spirit on their mission until they are clean. Remem-ber the Lord's counsel to the early brethren in the Church: "Be ye clean that bear the vessels of the Lord" (D&C 38:42). What a surge of the Spirit comes to the burdened missionary as he allows his mission president to exercise his priesthood and lift the burden of guilt. What a blessing to yourself to become clean and receive that unmistakable witness that God has forgiven you. If you haven't completed the repentance process yet, do yourself a favor and do it now.

To forsake means to stop committing the sin both physically and mentally! It also means resolving never to commit the sin again. When one completes the repentance process by confessing and forsaking, the Lord will forgive. He also promises that he will remember the sin no more. That does not mean that you and I will forget. It doesn't even mean that our consciences won't prick us a little when we hear a discourse against that which we may have been guilty of. Why can't we completely forget? Perhaps someday we will, but for right now, one reason we remember could be to keep us from repeating the mistake. If we completely forgot the pain and embarrassment caused by our sins, what would keep us from repeating the sin in a moment of weakness?

Now an important lesson: If, after our complete repentance, God chooses to remember our sins no more, why should we insist on repeatedly bringing them up? Some unwise missionaries discuss with companions and others their past transgressions. I wonder if reminding God about our sins could possibly reinstate our guilt. I certainly am not going to take the chance! Solemnly promise not to mention again that which God has chosen to forget.

How do you use the valuable lessons you have learned to help others avoid the same mistakes? If you were to use yourself as an example, the people you are teaching (especially young people) could easily say to themselves, "Look at Elder Brown. He is such a neat guy. I want to be just like him when I grow up. If he sinned and still is as neat as he is, then it must not be too serious to commit major sins!" Can you see that they may take license from your example because they cannot see the pain and anguish you have experienced before you received a remission of your sins?

Clearly, then, you are not to recount your past sins in an effort to teach others what not to do. Instead, in teaching the principle of repentance, do as Church leaders do—illustrate your points by referring to the powerful stories of Enos (see Enos 1) and Alma the Younger (see Mosiah 27; Alma 36). Through the inspiration of the Lord, these poignant testimonials were recorded and selected for use as scripture and as such they are altogether approved of the Lord and suitable for our instruction and edification. You can best add your witness of the truth of Enos's and Alma's words not by detailing you own past sins, but by simply saying that you too know of the great inner peace and joy that are available to all through repentance. The Spirit will help your testimony find place in the hearts of your investigators.

I have watched and learned a lot from our beloved General Authorities over the years. I don't ever remember them discussing their past sins. We would do well to follow their example.

The Savior showed us how to teach without drawing negative attention to ourselves. Luke chapter 10 gives the parable of the good Samaritan. A man on the road to Jericho was attacked, beat up, robbed, and left to die by a gang of thieves. A priest and a Levite (both religious men) refused to help, but the loathsome Samaritan helped the man. The Savior got a lot of miles out of the story.

Let's see how to use the "road to Jericho" principle. Let's say the person you were before your mission was the sin-laden man on the road to Jericho. Since that time you have cleaned up your life—you have actually crucified the old man of sin and put on the new man in Christ (see Romans 6). It is the new you that people love and want to be like. Do you still remember the "old man of sin"? Sure. Can you remember how he felt, what he thought, how he suffered for his sins? Yes. Then in a teaching setting you might say, "There was once a person who made some rather serious mistakes." Without naming him, you describe the old you before you repented. More than likely those you are teaching will say to themselves, "I sure want to be like Sister Smith, but Idon't want to make the stupid mistakes that other person made!" In this way you can teach others the lessons you have learned without giving your investigators license to follow your example of sin.

Far too many people have laughed with the missionaries as the missionaries recounted their past sins, only to decide they are not interested in continuing their investigation of the Church. We are to "stand as witnesses of God at all times and in all things, and in all places that [we] may be in, even until death" (Mosiah 18:9, emphasis added). Sharing the sinful side of your premission past diminishes you, your companion, and missionaries in general in the eyes of those who otherwise hold the missionaries in high esteem. If you have been guilty of a great sin in the past, now is a great time to resolve never to do it again either physically or mentally. Perhaps tonight in your prayers it would be appropriate to ask the Lord to forgive you again and to reinstate his promise to remember your past sins no more.
