Randy L. Bott, Serve with Honor: Helps for Missionaries ( 1995)

31

Cleanliness—Living in an Untidy Apartment

This chapter may deal more directly with you than with your companions! Let's hope you are the neat, tidy one rather than the one who is environmentally challenged. Is it important to keep your apartment clean? That seems like a fundamental question, but in the minds of many, it may not have been answered correctly.

If everyone agrees it is okay to leave clothes lying around, or dishes in the sink, or books strewn about, isn't it okay? You may have complete agreement among those living in the apartment, but you have omitted the single most important person—the Holy Ghost. When the Lord says, "Behold, mine house is a house of order, saith the Lord God, and not a house of confusion" (D&C 132:8), he means just that. A part of the Word of Wisdom that we sometimes choose to ignore because it isn't in Doctrine and Covenants 89 states, "Cease to be idle; cease to be unclean" (D&C 88:124). Assuming that you are convinced that "cleanliness is next to godliness," let's talk about some ideas of bringing order out of the chaos so common in missionary apartments.

Remember, the "honeymoon" of a companionship is the first week or so when everyone is on their best behavior. This is a critical time for establishing the rules for keeping your apartment clean. As part of your first session with your new companion, talk openly and frankly about how you want to live in the apartment. One of the biggest temptations is to treat secondary things with primary importance. By that I mean that basketball or an outing on P day is often positioned before housecleaning and laundry. In part, your success in life depends on being able to keep things in proper order. A well-planned schedule does not have to signal drudgery. If everyone agrees to spend just five minutes a day straightening up, the entire apartment can be kept orderly and odor-free.

Start with the basics: dirty clothes stink! Unless properly dried, clothes quickly mildew and give the apartment an offensive odor. Don't let moldy clothes get ahead of you. Air drying sweaty clothes will eliminate the need to do wash before the next P day. If you get hopelessly behind, get permission to wash clothes while you do some companionship study. If the clothes hamper begins to smell musty or moldy, wash it out with disinfectant.

Garments are sacred—treat them as such. It is not only poor housekeeping but poor spiritual etiquette to leave the holy garment lying around. Make sure you have a hamper or box where soiled garments can be kept until P day. After you wash them, put them in the drawer or dresser. Never compromise on handling sacred things. The Lord declared, "Trifle not with sacred things" (D&C 6:12). The word trifle means to treat lightly or jokingly. We cannot expect to treat disrespectfully that which God has given us and then ask for his divine help during the day.

Muddy or wet shoes should be cleaned before being put away. If left unattended, the leather will dry and crack, and your shoes will wear out faster. An inexpensive shoe tree fits inside shoes and helps them dry in the proper shape. If you have two pairs of shoes, place the shoe tree in the pair you are not using. If you rotate your shoes regularly, they will last longer and look nicer. Normal perspiration during the day will cause the leather to wear, age, and crack unless shoes are taken care of.

Suit coats and ties maintain their shape longer and look much nicer when taken off and properly hung up immediately after you return to the apartment. Nothing looks worse than a tie that has been dragged through the last three or four dinner appointments. Ties may occasionally require dry cleaning to look presentable. Dry-cleaning suit coats will prolong their usefulness. If dry cleaning is not available, you will probably not be required to wear suit coats, or you may be instructed to take those that can be washed in water. Don't wash your coat or dress if the tag specifically says to dry clean only. It will ruin the garment.

Shirts last longer if laundered weekly and kept hanging neatly in the closet when not being worn. If the collars are excessively soiled, some liquid detergent applied directly on them as you put the shirts into the washing machine helps remove stains. Recognize when your shirt has served its useful life. Use it for a rag or get rid of it. Save a few buttons before you throw the shirt away to make sure you have enough to replace missing or broken buttons on your other shirts. Consider using dental floss to sew on missing buttons—it holds much better than normal thread.

If everyone in the apartment is on the same cleanup schedule, no one will feel overly oppressed by having to do his or her job. If you agree from the start to keep a clean apartment, you can reinforce each other when you start to slip a little. Have a set time for cleaning up. The five minutes just before group prayer before you leave for the day often works well. Don't wait until five minutes before bedtime, or it won't get done. The key is to establish a routine; then follow through to make sure it happens. Left to chance, it will never work.

Doing the dishes seems to be a more difficult problem than it needs to be. If you can agree that the meal is not over until the table is cleared and the dishes done, there is no problem. Too often, as youth, we expected good old Mom to clean up after us. The trouble was, good old Mom usually did clean up after us! But she isn't here to clean up after you! One missionary put notes, scriptures, and reminders around the apartment to catch the eye and jog the memory of the others. Over the sink, for example, was a note that read, "It doesn't stop here! Kindly put it away!" Another clever elder wrote, "We are not here to provide a year's supply of food for the cockroaches—throw it away!" Humor is good for reminding the slothful. One note we saw on apartment inspections read, "Remember, Sister Bott will inspect tomorrow. She might be little, but she's tough!"

Clean out the refrigerator at least monthly. During one inspection, Sister Bott asked about the green stuff on the inside of the fridge. The sister said that it was probably part of the design in the porcelain. It was mold! We all laughed; a little disinfectant destroyed the design and made the place much more sanitary. If you are suffering from athlete's foot, try a little bleach in the shower to get rid of the infection. It isn't just a matter of cleanliness—your health depends on it. If you or your companion becomes ill, you both stay in the apartment, and the work doesn't get done. You cannot afford to exercise your agency in uncleanliness and hope the Lord will compensate by keeping you healthy.

Cleaning the carpet every three or four months makes the entire apartment smell better. If you wait for the next missionaries to do it, and if everybody has the same attitude, the grime and dirt will make your apartment look more like a cave or a pit than an apartment. It doesn't cost very much to rent a carpet shampoo machine from the local grocery store. If all missionaries in a district or zone shampoo their carpets on a given day, it will only cost a couple of dollars apiece, and all the apartments will be cleaned in a few hours' time. If you are called as a zone leader, you should make sure the carpets are clean in each of the apartments in the zone.

Washing the walls may not be a glorious pastime, but it sure spruces up the apartment. With just a little cleaner in a gallon of water and a couple of rags, the two of you can wash the entire apartment in a matter of minutes. The dividends are amazing. Your apartment will actually smell like home! Because not many missionaries (especially elders!) clean regularly, it may have been months or even years since the walls were washed. When the apartment looks and smells bad, it is discouraging. Do yourselves a favor and clean. If repairs need to be made, see the landlord, who is responsible to keep things working. Contact the landlord if the stove is bro-ken, the refrigerator doesn't work, the drains are clogged, windows are broken, carpets are worn-out, or walls need painting. Normal wear and tear should not be the missionaries' responsibility. Your apartment should be clean, a fitting abode for servants of the Most High. It doesn't have to be a palace, but it shouldn't be a dump.

There is no need to live in unsanitary conditions. Doing so is hardly fitting for an ambassador of the Lord. If there needs to be an attitude adjustment, do everything within your power to help make the change. If everything else fails, ask for some suggestions from the mission president. Remember, ignoring unacceptable behavior only postpones the lesson that must be learned. Eventually we must learn to be clean enough to be welcomed into the presence of God. We aren't doing anyone a favor if we hope someone else will help our companion learn to be clean. Some future spouse will be thankful that his or her mate has learned the skills of cleanliness.
