Randy L. Bott, Serve with Honor: Helps for Missionaries ( 1995)

32

If Your Companion Is Disobedient

One of the great challenges you may face as a missionary is dealing with companions or other missionaries who are selectively obedient. They probably had the burning desire to be perfect missionaries when they first arrived, but found it more difficult than they had anticipated. It may have been that everyone else in their apartment was sleeping in a little when they first arrived, so rather than fight it, they just joined. At first it didn't seem like such a big deal; nobody apostatized over it. Then maybe their companions didn't make it out of their apartments on time or stayed out a little late a few times. It isn't that serious, they rationalize. Everyone else is doing it. Before long, obedience to any rule becomes less and less important, and it becomes easier and easier to rationalize. When you arrive on the scene, things may be way out of hand. What can you do? Perhaps a short story will give you some ideas.

When I was a teenager, all the guys would congregate on the large lawn—a perfect football field—alongside my house. My mother, however, had planted fruit trees along each side and down the middle of the lawn. An orchard had serious drawbacks as far as a football field was concerned, so we systematically disposed of the row of trees in the middle of our football field. Through careful neglect, all of them died except one. It was about on the twenty-yard line. We tried everything we could think of to kill the tree without being too conspicuous. We kept the water from getting to it, we broke off several limbs, and we even tried to ring the bark so it would die a "normal" death. Nothing worked. From pure meanness, the tree grew to about shoulder height. Then the main trunk took a ninety-degree angle, grew for about eighteen inches, then continued to grow upwards. We called it "the Devil Tree."

Over the years we had learned to play around the Devil Tree, so it wasn't that big of a deal. One evening a rather large group of us were playing football. My brother was the best quarterback, so everybody wanted to play on his team. I was usually on the opposing team, but not this evening. It was nearing the time we needed to quit for the evening, but because we were tied, we decided that whoever scored next would be the winner.

After a short huddle we decided on a pass play. The more likely pass receivers were to run crisscross patterns, and I was to break straight down the field for the bomb. As I approached the Devil Tree, I was to look over my shoulder, catch the ball, duck under the horizontal branch, and race for the goal line. The Devil Tree was to act as pass interference for those would-be tacklers.

Everything went according to plan. The crisscross pattern confused our opponents. No one really believed I would be the primary receiver, so I went unguarded down the field. I looked over my shoulder and caught the perfect spiral pass. Then came the problem: the devil had moved the tree ten yards closer than I had calculated. As I turned around to head down the field, the horizontal branch caught me right in the throat. I fell to the ground, waiting for the death I knew was going to come any moment. I couldn't breathe or swallow. The entire group gathered around me. When I didn't die, they did the only thing a manly football team could do—they dragged me off the field so they could continue the game. I finally decided I would go into the house and see if I would ever be able to swallow again or whether I would slowly starve to death. To my amazement I could swallow. I decided to return to the game.

When I went outside I was shocked. It was pitch black. The guys on the field called for me to join them. I argued that it was too dark; we'd have to finish the game the next day. They again gathered around me, everyone arguing at the top of their lungs that there was plenty of light to finish the game.

For once I had a bright idea. I agreed to play but invited them to take a short break to have some punch. They agreed. We raced for the house. When we came back outside, to everyone's utter amazement it was totally dark! So they agreed we should quit for the night and continue the game the next night. So goes the story; now for its application.

The sunlight had dimmed so slowly that no one on the field realized it was getting darker. It was not until they were brought into the light that they realized how "in the dark" they had been. You should be way ahead of me by this time.

If you give into the temptation to join the other missionaries in their disobedience, you will slowly lose the light of the Holy Ghost, just as they have. If you can get them into the light, convincing them they are in the dark is easy. How do you get a person into the light? Think of the times when you enjoy the greatest amount of the Spirit—when you are teaching a discussion, studying the scriptures, praying, discussing a gospel subject, serving other people, or maybe sitting in a zone conference.

First determine if there is anyone to help you get the Spirit back. Often others feel uncomfortable with how things are going, but they are not bold enough to stand up. These individuals will gladly join you. If you can get just one other person to join with you in obedience, the rest will start to sense the condition they are in and slowly join you. I have witnessed over and over again the power of the one. Maybe you can't change the entire world—but maybe you can! It usually doesn't do any good to point the finger of condemnation at others. A more effective way to help others change is to turn up the light in your own life and let them see how dark their light has become.

You may think you are going to take some flak. You might. But again, the promise of the Lord is sure: "You should not have feared man more than God. Although men set at naught the counsels of God, and despise his words—yet you should have been faithful; and he would have extended his arm and supported you against all the fiery darts of the adversary; and he would have been with you in every time of trouble" (D&C 3:7-8). Remember, your companion has made the same commitment to obey that you did. You are not trying to get your companion to do something he or she hasn't already promised the Lord. You are just trying to help your companion stand without shame before the Eternal Judge. Reread the chapter on using the "honeymoon" of your companionship to establish your game plan. But remember the way your companion serves his or her mission has a direct impact on how successful you are in serving your mission. You cannot afford to ignore the attitude and hope the president will soon transfer one of you. It may be three or four months before you are separated. That could mean a waste of an eighth to a sixth or more of your mission. Three companions like that could destroy half of your mission. You must determine to get things going with your very first companion.

If you have tried everything you can think of to motivate the disobedient companion and nothing has worked, try involving your leaders—the district leader, the zone leader, the assistants. If that doesn't work, call the mission president. Explain the problem and what you have done to remedy it. Ask if he has additional suggestions. Generally, if your companion is having a problem that severe, he or she has had it for a long time. Very seldom does a missionary go from being involved, dedicated, and enthusiastic to being lazy and disobedient. The president may know tactics that have worked with other missionaries.

After you have consulted with the president, don't be too insistent that one of you be transferred. The Lord may have some valuable lessons in mind for you. If you insist on being transferred, you may not have learned the necessary lessons to succeed in future callings. I thought the Lord had abandoned me when I received a companion who was less than motivated. I was there to work and couldn't see the value of being saddled with a lazy companion. We didn't have phones, so I couldn't call the president and demand a transfer. I tried to make the best of the situation and actually became good friends with this elder. After a few months he was transferred. From then on I was in the driver's seat. The missionaries worked at my pace because I was the senior companion. Years later, when I was called to preside over a mission myself, I realized how valuable the lessons in motivating people were that I had learned from my lazy companion. Now I thank the Lord for teaching me those lessons that I would use repeatedly a quarter of a century later.

Now for some advice on what not to do. Don't join your companion in disobedience. You may be called a "nark" or a "rat" or be made to feel guilty for informing the mission president that your companion is disobedient. Sometimes it is worthwhile to save your companion from himself, such as when he tells you, "Elder, I'm going out alone for a couple of hours. You stay here and answer the phone." Nine times out of ten he will be planning to meet a girl. Your answer should be definite and in the form of a promise rather than a threat. "The minute you walk out that door alone, I will call the president," or "Why don't I call the president. You can tell him what your plans are so I won't get in trouble for letting you out of my sight." That is always a show-stopper! If he threatens to beat you up or whatever, so be it. Better that he beat you up and you save his soul than you cower in the shadows while he commits spiritual suicide.

Your companion needs to know right up front that you plan to be obedient and that you expect him also to honor his commitment to obey the mission rules. Of course, not every companion will be disobedient. Most of your companions will be great, obedient people. But if you should get one who is not yet converted, it is nice to know what to do.

The adversary is very powerful and constantly tries to destroy you and your companion, so you must be very definite about how you plan to thwart Satan's plans. In every case in which serious transgressions occur, the transgressor's companion was either asleep or too timid to say anything about the obviously wrong behavior. In every case when the disobedient companion was sent home, the companion who stayed behind felt terrible for not speaking out earlier. Don't find yourself looking at your mission with regret. With a little humor and a lot of seriousness, you can ensure that Satan never makes any inroads into your companionship.
