Randy L. Bott, Serve with Honor: Helps for Missionaries ( 1995)

33

Practicing Skills for a Successful Marriage

Everything you do in life prepares you for what is coming next. You can get a running head start on marriage if you will identify and master the principles that are common to both missions and marriage. In the mission the two "M" words go hand in hand—mission and marriage. Missions and marriage share many characteristics.

There are two of you in the companionship. You are called on to live together for a set amount of time. You are required to communicate, solve problems, negotiate, compromise, exercise self-control, and work toward common goals. Your ways of thinking will be different. Your backgrounds will be different. You may both be hardheaded or unassertive. You will both have habits that will annoy the other. You will have to work to be on the same team and not to compete against each other. You will have good days and dog days. You will be tempted to point out your companion's faults. You will become attached to each other and probably shed tears when you are to be separated.

You will probably pray to be blessed with super companions. Every once in a while the president will give you one, just to show you how great it is to be equally yoked to some one who is willing and able to match strides with you. But more commonly you'll get a companion you have to motivate. If you remember how tiring it is to always have to mo-tivate someone, it will be easier as you begin to look for an eternal companion. You may have a companion who has more energy than you. Think how it would be to be married to someone who is constantly pulling you along and trying to get you more involved. It isn't that one energy level is better than another—you just need to realize what can happen if you are not careful in choosing a marriage partner. Being equally yoked in marriage leads to peace, harmony, and mutual progress. Being unequally yoked results in frustration, tension, and disharmony.

If you are a clean person, then you will be frustrated by those who are more casual in their approach to housework. Note where you are when it comes to cleanliness. One time we went to inspect the apartment of two elders who were both pretty casual about housecleaning. The clothes were stacked up on the bed, on the floor, and on the table—anywhere there was a little space. But they were both proud; in their eyes they had done a good job in getting ready for the inspection. After we left, we looked at each other and wondered aloud what kind of women would tolerate those two characters. They were good missionaries but definitely not very tidy.

Learning to deal with differences will make your transition into marriage a lot easier. If you don't learn how to compromise, you will have a difficult time in marriage. It is easy to call the president and demand a change when you get a challenging companion. But that would probably be one of the worst mistakes you could make. In working with missionaries who differ greatly from their companions, I have noticed a definite lack of creativity in solving problems. Given a particular problem (like unwashed dishes), I asked missionaries to list as many solutions to the problem as they could. At first they would come up with one or two solutions; almost always the first solution was to have the companion change. When I refused to accept that, they would usually come up with four or five other possibilities. When we brainstormed together, we could usually come up with ten or twelve solutions. Get in the habit of finding creative solutions. When problem solving becomes a game, it is fun and exciting. If you look at problems as indications of failure or fault, then problem solving is drudgery.

As I met with missionaries who were struggling with companions, areas, members, nonmembers, or life in general, I found that they were reluctant to look for the positive. If you think of the thousands of dollars and countless hours you spend to obtain a college education, doesn't it seem reasonable that something as important as eternal marriage and eternal families would require at least as much effort? It is possible to make the celestial kingdom without a college education, but it is not possible to make the highest degree of the celestial kingdom without a successful marriage and family life. Now is definitely the time to learn.

If you think everything you learn must be positive, you will limit yourself. You can learn from some companions those things that you do not ever want to have in your marriage! Identifying the traits you don't want can be as important as identifying those you do want. For example, you may have a companion who is never on time. That could drive you up the wall. So in selecting an eternal companion, you will prefer someone who, in addition to having other good qualities, is as punctual as you are. The opposite is also true. If you are more casual in your approach to punctuality, being married to a time-conscious fanatic will give you fits until you change, because the likelihood that your spouse will change is not very good.

If I had my first mission to do over again, I would begin by making two lists in the very back of my journal. One list would be entitled "Traits that are a must in my marriage partner." The second list would be entitled "Traits to avoid in selecting my eternal companion." If you can approach each companionship as a blessing to help you prepare for marriage, you will be better able to endure certain companions and situations. Of course, you don't have to learn the lessons of life with these companions who are expendable. You can wait and learn them with your nonexpendable eternal companion. The price you pay if you wait to learn crucial lessons is much higher than you would pay while on your mission. In the mission, you're only with each companion for a few short months, but it is hoped that in marriage you will not be changing eternal companions.

It is equally important to identify how people react to you. You may have been rather insensitive as a youth, not really caring whether you were obnoxious. Your awareness of the feelings of others may not have been one of your strengths. Now is the time to work on this. It is painful to realize how far you have to go when some of these things begin to dawn on you.

How do you become more sensitive? Start watching the reactions of those around you. When you act a certain way, they may raise their eyebrows. They may furrow their brows at some of your actions. Listen to what people are saying about you, not to you. They will usually speak just loud enough for you to hear even if they're speaking to someone else. Unfortunately, only a few people are both honest and bold enough to tell you directly how you come across. It would be well to find at least one person like this. However, it isn't helpful to always ask someone else how you can improve. That becomes old. It is far better to develop that kind of relationship with your Heavenly Father. He can inspire you to change those characteristics that are counterproductive in your personality.

As you are blessed with leadership and other responsibilities, you may find that your opinion becomes very valuable—in your own eyes. Resist the urge to fix every problem or to counsel others on how to solve their problems. As you focus more on being an example, you may find that the need to expound the eternal truths you have learned diminishes. Ask yourself a serious question: "If I were the only standard works others had read and they were to follow my example perfectly, how Christlike would they be?" The closer we come to living up to our potential, the easier it is to see the good in others and overlook their weaknesses. People respond much more readily to positive reinforcement than to criticism. If you can put that concept into practice, you will be much better prepared for marriage.

As you lose yourself in helping and building others, you will find that your whole soul enlarges. As you come unto Christ and help others do the same, everyone is uplifted. When you become selfish and demanding, you begin to shrivel and atrophy. Love and helpfulness are strange commodities: the more you give them away, the more you have! That's what marriages and families thrive on—losing yourself to help your spouse and children. If you demand an equal relationship, you will be setting the stage for conflict and problems in marriage. If your only desire is to make your companion successful, you will find that he or she will do the same for you. What a fabulous key for marriage. If you expect a fifty-fifty relationship and one of you falls just one point short, there will be a gap in your marriage. However, if you give 100 percent for your spouse and he or she does the same for you, if either or both of you fall a little short, no problem—you are still adequately covered. A mission is a great opportunity to perfect this kind of unselfish behavior.

Although you should not focus on or daydream about your future marriage, you will be wise to begin a list of qualities that you desire in a companion. You will never have another opportunity to be welcomed into so many different homes to observe firsthand how marriage and family life works. Be an observer. Take mental notes in every home you enter. Watch for the positive and note the negative. Determine what you would do differently if you were in the same position, but do not try to tell others how to be successful in marriage. When I was a missionary, I heard a wise man say, "Before I was married, I was an expert in both marriage and child rearing. Then I got married and was only an expert in child rearing. Once the children came, I joined the rest of the married couples—parents who were trying to do the best they knew how!" I liked that counsel then, and I am convinced that it was correct; my wife and I are now just trying to do the best we know how in raising our kids.
