Randy L. Bott, Serve with Honor: Helps for Missionaries ( 1995)

37

Earning the Promised Rewards

Some marvelous rewards have been promised by the Lord to those who "fail not to continue faithful in all things" (D&C 84:80). These rewards are available to every missionary who is willing to pay the price; they are not automatic.

Far too many young men and women have the mistaken idea that just being in the mission field for eighteen or twenty-four months constitutes serving an honorable mission. Anyone can be away from home for two years, but only the diligent can serve an honorable mission. This entire book has been dedicated to offering advice to help you diligently serve a mission. If you distinguish yourself as an outstanding missionary, what is in it for you?

The great missionary section, Doctrine and Covenants 4, promises that whosoever "thrusteth in his sickle with his might, the same layeth up in store that he perisheth not, but bringeth salvation to his soul" (D&C 4:4). Not bad for starters: you will not perish, and you will bring salvation to your soul. If you have served with the Christlike characteristics listed in Doctrine and Covenants 4, you are well on your way to making those characteristics part of you. You have developed faith—for without faith it is impossible to please God (see Hebrews 11:6). You have learned to have hope in Christ and his infinite atonement and hope in your ability to live the gospel well enough to qualify to participate in the great events incident to the Second Coming. You have also developed a hope that through continued obedience, you can qualify for exaltation in the celestial kingdom. As you have forgotten yourself, you find yourself loving more intensely those you are serving. All thoughts of personal comfort and convenience are gone. You focus on helping your beloved investigators, even if it costs you a great deal personally. This unselfish love is charity. The overwhelming gratitude you feel for having been chosen to aid the Savior in "bring[ing] to pass the immortality and eternal life of man" (Moses 1:39) helps you realize that your love of God increases as you serve him. That love enriches everyone you meet. You no longer have a self-serving attitude or a desire to embarrass or hurt anyone; your whole life and attitude have changed as you have learned to love. You have learned how to focus on spiritual things. Bringing souls to Christ is more important to you than food and drink. A sense of urgency has helped you through the tough times. Time becomes a valuable commodity that just seems to slip away. These five characteristics were necessary just to qualify you for the work.

The characteristics that separate the outstanding missionaries from those who are just "there" are found in Doctrine and Covenants 4:6. The Lord urges us to constantly remember faith, virtue, knowledge, temperance, patience, brotherly kindness, godliness, charity, humility, and diligence. As you focus on these qualities during your eighteen months or two years of your mission, you will notice that it is easier to get answers to prayers, to feel the Spirit with you constantly, to be more tolerant of those who are struggling, and to be more positive in the face of overwhelming odds. In fact, the characteristics listed in Doctrine and Covenants 4:6 sound very much like those outlined by Peter in 2 Peter 1:1-10 as prerequisite to making your calling and election sure. I don't think that the similarities in the lists are coincidental. You will be doing for eighteen months or two years what Christ did during his ministry. His reward was exaltation. Why should yours be any less?

You may feel that your past has caused you to start a mission with two strikes against you. Maybe that is why the Lord revealed through the Prophet Joseph Smith that "nevertheless, ye are blessed, for the testimony which ye have borne is recorded in heaven for the angels to look upon; and they rejoice over you, and your sins are forgiven you" (D&C 62:3; emphasis added). What a reward for faithfully bearing your testimony to members, nonmembers, and other missionaries.

Thomas B. Marsh, an early missionary for the Church, experienced his share of problems with his family, as the Lord indicated: "Behold, you have had many afflictions because of your family" (D&C 31:2). Later in that same section the Lord gives a promise that is applicable to us as well: "Therefore, thrust in your sickle with all your soul, and your sins are forgiven you, and you shall be laden with sheaves upon your back, for the laborer is worthy of his hire. Wherefore, your family shall live" (verse 5). Put the Lord to the test and see if he does not bless and prosper your family for your diligent service. Let him bless them in his own time and in his own way and according to his own will (see D&C 88:68).

You may serve under less-than-ideal circumstances. In fact, just getting a good meal or a decent shower or place to sleep may be a near impossibility. At times you may think a mission is too great of a sacrifice to make. Again, you should remember what the Lord revealed through the Prophet: "Behold, I have seen your sacrifices, and will forgive all your sins; I have seen your sacrifices in obedience to that which I have told you. Go, therefore, and I make a way for your escape, as I accepted the offering of Abraham of his son Isaac" (D&C 132:50). What are you willing to do to ensure that past transgressions are eternally erased from your record?

The Lord promised faithful missionaries: "Any man that shall go and preach this gospel of the kingdom, and fail not to continue faithful in all things, shall not be weary in mind, neither darkened, neither in body, limb, nor joint; and a hair of his head shall not fall to the ground unnoticed. And they shall not go hungry, neither athirst" (D&C 84:80). Think of it! If you serve faithfully, you will not be weary in mind—you may be dog tired, but your mind will be clear and alert. You will not be darkened in mind, body, limb, or joint. Satan will not have control over your mind or body. He may work you over a little, but he will not have power to permanently slow you down. For some of you elders, the next part may have a great amount of appeal: "a hair of his head shall not fall to the ground unnoticed." Because missions come at a critical time when some young men lose a lot of hair, you can be comforted that heaven has given you a great deal of notice! I presume the intent of this phrase is to show how closely attended we are by unseen beings who are eager and willing to help whenever needed. In fact, a little later in the same section, the Lord promises: "Whoso receiveth you, there I will be also, for I will go before your face. I will be on your right hand and on your left, and my Spirit shall be in your hearts, and mine angels round about you, to bear you up" (D&C 84:88). Think of having the Savior constantly near you and angels around to bear you up and keep you going. Not bad company for the diligent missionary!

The opposition you will face as a diligent servant of the Lord would make the normal young man or woman cower in fear. You will have a notable absence of fear because the Lord has promised, "Verily, thus saith the Lord unto you—there is no weapon that is formed against you shall prosper" (D&C 71:9). Of course, that does not excuse you from using common sense and avoiding dangerous situations. But it does mean that when you have done all you can do, divine help will protect you until your work on the earth is finished.

Promises made to faithful missionaries are not limited to the Doctrine and Covenants. In Mark 10:28-30, the Apostle Peter asks what's in it for missionaries who have given up everything for missionary service. The Savior's answer is sure and unwavering: "Verily I say unto you, There is no man that hath left house, or brethren, or sisters, or father, or mother, or wife, or children, or lands, for my sake, and the gospel's, but he shall receive an hundredfold now in this time, houses, and brethren, and sisters, and mothers, and children, and lands, with persecutions; and in the world to come eternal life." You can see what tremendous blessings are promised to those who serve the Lord faithfully not only for eighteen months or two years but also ever after—they receive the divine promise that their lives will be enriched one hundred times over.

On your mission you will learn the great lessons of life. That is a given. But the price tag for learning is much lower in the mission than when you are actually married. Since, according to some, a well-served mission is equivalent to fifty years of normal service in the Church, as a young father or mother you will be as prepared for marriage as you would have been if you were an aged grandmother or grandfather. I am very glad that I learned about interpersonal relationships from my experiences with missionary companions before our children arrived. It has made marriage and family life very enjoyable.

As the second coming of Christ approaches, we tend to worry about how we will fare. Doctrine and Covenants 75:16 promises missionaries, "He who is faithful shall overcome all things, and shall be lifted up at the last day." We shall overcome all things—what a marvelous blessing! Those nagging problems we are still struggling with will eventually be overcome. In addition to being "lifted up" at the Second Coming, the Lord further promises that we will participate with him in those sacred events: "You shall be filled with joy and gladness; and know this, that in the day of judgment you shall be judges of that house, and condemn them" (verse 21). He speaks specifically of those people who have rejected the missionaries' message.

The problem with beginning a chapter like this one is that on almost every page of the scriptures is another promise that the Lord makes to those who are willing to forsake the world and live the gospel. To those who forsake family and loved ones to aid him in saving souls, the Lord says:

I, the Lord, am merciful and gracious unto those who fear me, and delight to honor those who serve me in righteousness and in truth unto the end.

Great shall be their reward and eternal shall be their glory.

And to them will I reveal all mysteries, yea, all the hidden mysteries of my kingdom from days of old and for ages to come, will I make known unto them the good pleasure of my will concerning all things pertaining to my kingdom.

Yea, even the wonders of eternity shall they know, and things to come will I show them, even the things of many generations.

And their wisdom shall be great, and their understanding reach to heaven; and before them the wisdom of the wise shall perish, and the understanding of the prudent shall come to naught (D&C 76:5-9).

Missionaries who take the time to ponder the lessons they learned in their missions and who strive to apply those lessons in their lives will realize that they have been enriched in countless ways. When you add the eternal perspective, nothing you can do in time or eternity will bring a higher return on your time investment than a well-served mission. How shortsighted and foolish are those who decide they can't afford to take time out of work or schooling to serve a mission. They will learn, probably too late, how wrong they were. Maybe we can help a few realize their mistake before it is too late.

What a thrilling experience you will have. You have waited for thousands, if not millions, of years for this very hour. Your preparation period, which extends far into the premortal past, is over. "Lift up your heart and rejoice, for the hour of your mission is come" (D&C 31:3). You are earning for yourself and your descendants eternal glory. Now is your time to serve. Serve with honor!

These maidens were ravished by these Christian soldiers as were the wives of the Inca and his lords, and then they stripped the walls of the palace of its gold, for these Indians, though they had gold in abundance, used it only as a means of adornment. Then they went to the temple of the sun and stripped seven hundred gold shields from the walls of this great temple, walls that are yet standing,

and I have not seen more beautiful masonry work anywhere in the world than the walls of this temple. It had no windows except openings immediately under the roof where the first rays of the sun were admitted and reflected back from the gold shields hung on the opposite side until the last rays of the sun lingered to illuminate the interior of that great structure. When the Inca saw their thirst for gold, he offered to fill a room estimated to be twenty feet long and twelve feet wide and as high as he could reach with gold, to purchase his freedom.

It was agreed upon. Some five months passed, and runners went out all over the empire bringing their burdens of gold and stacked it in the room until it nearly reached the point agreed upon. Seeing the vast treasure and fearing that some mischief would rob this little handful of Spanish soldiers of it, they forced Pizarro to violate his pledge, and he condemned the Inca to death, to be burned at the stake, and the gold was seized and divided among Pizarro's soldiers.

THE morning of the execution of the Inca, Father Luque attempted again his conversion through bribery. He offered to have his execution changed from being burned at the stake to being strangled to death if he would become a Christian, for that was a pleasanter death than being burned at the stake. The old Indian declared that he would not become a Christian and worship a God who would justify men in misleading a people as Pizarro had done, betraying them and ravishing their wives and daughters. He could not worship such a God. But if being strangled to death was a pleasanter death than being burned at the stake, he was willing to be a Christian for that, so he was taken out and strangled to death. Prior to this he was sprinkled with water and probably became the first Catholic convert of South America.

It is marvelous to contemplate the facts as I have had opportunity to observe them, having read every edition of the Book of Mormon that has ever been published. I see almost no modification except in punctuation or orthography and that is not Joseph Smith's fault. Oliver Cowdery was a good schoolteacher for those times, but he was not learned in the art of punctuation or orthography. Pages of the original manuscript as well as the printer's copy have been examined, and I say that there is almost no change at all. Now, when one produces a book, he will write a page and rewrite. He will reconstruct a paragraph and mark it out. I have seen the originals, copies of many books that have been ultimately published. But this is not the way the Book of Mormon was produced. It stands as it fell from the lips of the prophet with almost no modification except in punctuation and spelling. Could one from his own mind dictate as rapidly and have it fall into sense and reason as the Book of Mormon is and to introduce the numerous characters and have them all agree on various points and doctrine, and have the entire volume agree with the Bible itself? It would be humanly impossible for the most learned man that has ever lived, to do all that and carry it in his mind, but it was possible for an inspired youth, by the gift and power of God to translate what many others required a thousand years to produce.

THE story is rational. It is reasonable, and it is going to live. I said the evidences are already supporting it gloriously. They will continue to support it until there will not be a skeptic left, and here is going to be one of the outstanding evidences. This record declares that it is to go to the descendants of Father Lehi, the American Indian of either Central America or of South America. There are as you know in Mexico more than 12,000,000 of them who have Indian blood in their veins, and then in South America there are more than 20,000,000 of them. The joy that I had in my contact with these people has thrilled my soul because, if there ever has been a people in bondage in the history of this world, they are the Indians of South America, Central America, and Mexico. They have been for four hundred years in both political and religious bondage. The great warfare that has been waged in Mexico to separate the Church and State, is the battle that is being waged for the liberation of the people from that very bondage. Thank God that in the several revolutions in South America, I see the evidences of the same thing going forward in the liberation of the people from that bondage and the return of their rights and privileges. All this must come before the day of their redemption arrives.

I had the privilege of visiting the branches of the Church that have been five years without missionaries in the valley of Mexico. It was delightful to me to find that though the people had been there alone, they had not forgotten the gospel, that it had taken root in their hearts. I had never received such a reception in my life as I did near the shadow of Mount Popocatepetl, the highest mountain in North America, where four branches of the Church meet together. As I entered with President Ivins, the women all standing on one side and the men on the other, the children all dressed in white, across the stand with arms full of flowers they shouted a welcome to us and began to sing, and we were literally showered with flowers. Their tears of joy, their burning testimonies, and the evidences of their faith and zeal in baptizing more people one year than all of our missionaries in the Mexican mission on this side of the border, thrilled my soul. I found them pure-blooded Indians. They built their own churches without aid from the Church here at home, so that I saw the beginning of their day of redemption, and I bear witness to you Latter-day Saints that the hour for the rest of the House of Israel dawns. God is preparing for it. This record will go to those millions. They will receive it and the scales of darkness will fall, not only from their bodies, but also from their minds, and their day of redemption will come. When that comes, it will be an evidence of the truthfulness of this record, the history of their fathers that will overwhelm the world. God is preparing to vindicate his work. This book is true. I know it, and I bear witness of it before all the world. Joseph Smith is a Prophet of God, and being a prophet of God, this is God's work, and it will stand.

Its glorious mission is to bring the remnants of Israel to the light of knowledge of truth, to bring men unto God.

God help us to prepare ourselves to play our part gloriously in this mighty movement, I pray in the name of Jesus Christ. Amen.

MOTHER'S DAY

Delivered at the Salt Lake Tabernacle

THERE is a passage in our Scriptures which the Latter-day Saints accept as divine: "This is the glory of God—to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man." Likewise we could say that this is the glory of men and women—to bring to pass the mortality of the sons and daughters of God, to give earth-life to the waiting children of our Father. We desire not only to speak words of praise for the mothers of the past, but we also desire to glorify motherhood itself, and to draw such lessons from the worthy mothers of the past as shall inspire the mothers of the present and plant deep in the hearts of the mothers of the future an abiding faith in the great mission of woman in the world. The greatest mission of woman is to give life, earth-life, through honorable marriage, to the waiting spirits, our Father's spirit children who anxiously desire to come to dwell here in this mortal state. All the honor and glory that can come to men or women by the development of their talents, the homage and the praise they may receive from an applauding world, worshipping at their shrine of genius, is but a dim thing whose luster shall fade in comparison to the high honor, the eternal glory, the ever-enduring happiness that shall come to the woman who fulfils the first great duty and mission that devolves upon her to become the mother of the sons and daughters of God. The jewels in her crown, the stars that shall glisten in her diadem, in time and in eternity, shall be the sons and the daughters to whom, through the blessing of the Lord, she has been instrumental in not only giving earth-life, but in bringing them, through care and devotion and faithfulness, into the paths that God has appointed for his children to follow.

We do not mean to imply that the whole burden and responsibility is performed when earth-life is provided. This is but the beginning of the responsibility of mothers. I grant you that there are many who approach the great responsibility of motherhood with fear and timidity, because of its dangers to the physical life of the mother, because of its pain, its sorrow and its distress; but in the very nature of things, if God should lighten the burdens, the sorrow, and the pain of child-bearing, he would endanger the enduring love of the mother for her children. There is nothing worth while we obtain unless we pay the price for it. That which is given to us freely, we consider of little value, and so, because a mother goes into the valley of death, lays her life upon the altar to bring life into the world, and because through the rearing of the children who come to her, she spends many sleepless nights, denies herself the personal pleasures of life, devotes herself with patience and care and strength almost more than she has, to the welfare of her children—this is what makes her love them. For where her treasure is, there her heart is, and the greatest treasure a woman has she gives in her service, her life itself. All that she has, she gives for her children, beginning with the great ordeal of bringing them into this life. That is why her heart goes out toward them. That is why she loves them with an enduring love that never fails. That is why she is one exemplification in the world of the love of God for men. Someone has said that he could not come, and so he sent mothers. It is also stated in the Scriptures that a woman may forget her nursing child, and yet the Lord cannot forget us. He therefore likens his love for us unto the love of the mother for her nursing child. So the sorrow, the pain, and the price that mothers have to pay to bring children into the world and to care for them are all essential that the love of mother may survive.

I AM grateful that so far as the mothers of the past are concerned they have not been afraid to pay the price. I pray that the mothers of the present shall also be willing to pay the price for the reward of children, the blessing they bring to us here and now, and the knowledge which we have that they are but the beginning of the dominion, the kingdom over which faithful men and women shall preside through the endless ages of eternity, by reason of the continuation of the marriage relations, husband and wife, parents and children. This little group whom God has blessed us with, here and now, become just the beginning of the glory that will be ours, if we are faithful.

I think the revelations which Jesus Christ gave through the Prophet Joseph Smith concerning motherhood are the greatest contribution the world has ever received on this subject; for it was, so far as I know, never taught before in the history of the world that not only have we a Father in heaven, but we have a Mother there also. No matter to what heights God has attained or may attain, he does not stand alone; for side by side with him, in all her glory, a glory like unto his, stands a companion, the Mother of his children. For as we have a Father in heaven, so also we have a Mother there, a glorified, exalted, ennobled Mother. That is a startling doctrine, I recognize, to some folk, and yet we ought to be governed by reason in giving consideration to this doctrine which is a revelation from God.

Then let me say to you, if we shall examine all the forms of life that we are acquainted with, from the highest to the lowest, we shall not find an existent form without a mother, not one. There is no life, not only in this world, without a mother; there is no life in the realms that are above and beyond us, unless there also is a mother. Motherhood is eternal with Godhood, and there is no such thing as eternal or endless life without the eternal and endless continuation of motherhood. So we believe that the bonds by which we are united here as husband and wife—by and through the authority of the Holy Priesthood by which men and women are sealed for time and all eternity—will be perpetuated and will endure throughout the ages that are to come. Those who thus attain unto this glorious state and come into the celestial kingdom of God shall have it made possible that unto them and their posterity, there shall be no end but endless increase, eternal motherhood; and then, not that degree of pain and sorrow and distress that we know here and now, for we shall have learned much. We shall have come to a broader understanding, greater appreciation, and increased capability by which we shall be able to perform that great service and mission for intelligences, that has made God what he is, and makes his glory.

As I have said, no matter what the glories of women are, the universal testimony of those women who have attained fame is that it is as nothing after all, compared to the joy of motherhood, the blessing of children. Many of them have expressed this after having partaken fully of all the glories and joys and homage of the world, that they would gladly exchange it all for the glory and blessing of motherhood. God bless those mothers who are not yet permitted through no fault of their own to be mothers in very deed, but who are nevertheless mothers at heart. The Lord looks upon the hearts of men and women, and their intent, and they shall be judged according to their will and their desires. Such mothers shall not go through eternity childless. There are born into the world countless thousands of children who die in their infancy whose mothers unfortunately shall not be worthy to go where these children shall be when, as little infants, they come up in the resurrection from the dead in their infant state to be, of necessity, under the care and direction of a loving mother until they grow to maturity; and no doubt worthy women who have not been granted the privilege of motherhood, shall have their hearts satisfied in the adoption and in the eternal right and possession of these motherless children. So there is hope for all men and women who are unfortunate in this respect. But woe to the woman who, having the opportunity and privilege, repudiates the obligation of holy matrimony, the great responsibility that rests upon her, who violates a promise and an agreement which undoubtedly we made to our Father before we left the courts of glory, that we would do our best, would perform our part. One of the great obligations that was upon us was to keep the first great commandment that God gave to man—to multiply and replenish the earth. We who slight that obligation, who wilfully, maliciously, and premeditatively debauch these glorious bodies endowed with their wonderful creative powers, and make them mere harps of pleasure, shall come to reap distress and sorrow in this life, and condemnation when we meet the accusing finger of those whom we might have given the glorious opportunity of coming into this life. About the throne of our Father are his children whose numbers are fixed and have not been changed or altered from the beginning, so far as those who were to come to this earth are concerned; for they were seen, even from the days of Adam, the host of the unborn. They have cried around the throne of the Father night and day for the privilege of coming into earth life, and they seek that opportunity today. May none of the mothers of this Church slight nor neglect those anxious ones, but open the door and give to those worthy sons and daughters of our Father the glorious privilege of coming to earth to obtain glory, honor, blessing, immortality, and eternal life in the presence of the Father, with the sanctified and the redeemed. Let not the mothers of the present nor those of the future, be swerved from the right path by any environment or circumstance that seems to mitigate against the performance of this duty. Let not poverty bar the way, for if poverty had been a consideration on the part of the mothers of the past, many of us would not be here. Such mothers as those who have borne us were not afraid of poverty; my own dear little mother came from England, trudged all the way across the plains, a girl thirteen years of age, the eldest in the family, and carried her little brother on her back. In early life she united her fortunes with an English boy who had preceded her, with very little of this world's goods, and yet with a firm resolve to serve God and keep his commandments. They were not afraid to pay the price. I think of her sacrifices, inasmuch as she became the mother of ten children; I was her youngest son. How I have appreciated her! I honor and esteem her today, that she did not forget me, that she was willing to pay the price again, that she was willing to come for me, that she remembered me and gave me, too, the chance for earthlife. She has enshrined herself in my heart until I almost worship that mother who with faith in God gave herself in loving sacrifice for her children to care for them and guard them during their young lives, until they reached maturity. Poverty is no bar, and never shall be.

I STOOD, a few days ago, in the Hall of Fame in the city of Washington. I observed the statues of those illustrious sons of the several states, which had been placed there by the approval of the states as the most worthy examples among their citizenship. As I studied them, one after another, I was impressed with one thing about those illustrious sons of America—the great majority of them had come from the homes of the poor, where poverty was no hurt or detriment, but became the very ladder, the steppingstone by which, through struggles to overcome it, they mounted the ladder of fame. God put into the hearts of the mothers of the present and of the future the courage to perform their part and to reap the approval and blessing and favor of the Almighty in time. Then their reward and their glory are sure in eternity.

May the blessing of the Lord be upon the mothers of the past who are yet with us, the aged who have, now, not the care of little children but who, perhaps, because of our neglect, sometimes lack that love and that word of consideration and sympathy which they long for. Let us, their children, who may be so fortunate as to have them still with us, do a little more to make their lives pleasant and agreeable, and bring to them some sense of our appreciation of their service and labor for us. By honoring the mothers of the past, by being good to the mothers of the present, helping them to bear their burdens, we may make the pathway of the mothers of the future clear and plain. May we persuade our mothers of the future to uphold the glorious standard of the mothers of the past, I pray in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ. Amen.

THE LORD'S PLAN FOR REDEMPTION

Given at Ogden Tabernacle

MY soul rejoices in the scope of this great latter-day work.

It is still in the vanguard of human thought, and certainly far beyond the schemes of man to provide for the salvation and the exaltation of our Father's children. And yet there are those who are inclined to charge us with being narrow.

I remember, on my first mission in the city of St. Louis, a minister saying that we were narrow because we asserted that no man could be saved who had not accepted the restored gospel, according to the teachings of the elders of this Church. His conception of our position was that all those who did not receive this message and accept the ordinances of the gospel at the hands of the missionaries of this Church were lost or damned. I informed him that he was sadly mistaken and that the doctrine of this Church teaches us that all men and women will be saved except a few Latter-day Saints. They are the only ones of this generation who are likely to be lost, and we hope that most of these Latter-day Saints will not only be saved, but that most of them will also be exalted. I told him that our plan contemplates God's plan, the salvation of all of his children except the sons of perdition. The only ones who will become sons of perdition are those, who have received the testimony of the Holy Spirit, by and through which they have been made to know that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of the living God, and then deny it. Jesus taught that whosoever should sin against the Father, it would be forgiven him, but whosoever should sin against the Holy Ghost should not have forgiveness in this world or in the world to come. The reason is that unto the Holy Ghost, the third personage in the Godhead, has been given the privilege of extending to honest, baptized, converted souls greater light, greater knowledge than that which may come from any other personage in heaven or on earth, and when he makes a man see, and feel, and know a thing, he will never know it better. Therefore whosoever sins against that light has sinned against the greatest light and knowledge there is, and commits the greatest sin, and becomes a son of perdition, and whosoever sheds innocent blood in that he takes the life of an innocent person, he, too, is a candidate to become a son of perdition. Now, the only people in all the world who enjoy tonight the gift of the Holy Ghost are those who have received this right and privilege under the hands of God's authorized servants, and they are the only ones who can commit this sin. I do not deny that with all of our Father's children does his spirit labor. There is spirit in man, and the Spirit of God giveth him understanding, said the friend who visited Job in his affliction, and he was right, because they are our Father's children. He extends to them the presence and the help of his spirit, the spirit that emanates from his personality. It is that conscience that prompts them to do right, rebukes them when they do wrong, leads them toward the truth, and labors with them, and they are all entitled to enjoy that influence and power that come from him. But unto those who receive the gospel there is another privilege. Christ offered to send it when he had returned to the Father, and unless he did so, the Holy Ghost, the other comforter, would not come, and the world could not receive it. This gift is the special privilege of converted, baptized believers. Members of the Church are therefore, I repeat, the only ones who can commit that unpardonable sin, and the only ones, consequently, who will not be saved in some one of our Father's kingdoms. I remember a good old Methodist sister worrying very much about her condition, who asked me if I thought she had committed the unpardonable sin and had become a son of perdition. I told her that I had not yet learned of there being any daughters of perdition. But I was sure that she never knew enough to become a daughter of perdition. It is one thing to be saved, and it is quite another thing to be exalted. I would like to have the spirit of the Lord help me to help Latter-day Saints see the grand and glorious privileges that are ours alone.

I was in St. Louis on one occasion, and saw upon a gospel tent a sign that read something like this: "Come and be healed and saved in fifteen minutes." That minister was one of the new kind of faith healers. It seemed ridiculous that one could be saved in fifteen minutes. I was in a revival meeting on one occasion, and the minister asked all those who were saved to stand, and I did not stand. It looked ridiculous. Here was a Mormon missionary, the only one of the whole audience seated; all of the rest of the folk were standing. A good old sister came to me and said, "Why, brother, are you not saved?" I said to her: "If I should die tonight, I am sure that I have complied not only with all of the terms of salvation, but also with those that would lead me to exaltation in the presence of God, but I do not know what I am going to do tomorrow, and the race is not to the swift nor the the battle to the strong; but to him that endureth to the end, the same shall be saved."

THE Latter-day Saint conception of salvation is not like the conception of the world. I remember a shocking incident that occurred in that first missionary experience. Coming one morning to the home of a woman in mourning, I learned that during the night her little girl, not yet a year old, had died. She, herself, was a member of the Roman Catholic Church, but she had neglected to have her child christened or baptized, as she called it, and had sent for the priest, but he came too late. It was her intention to have this ordinance performed before the death of the child, but he had arrived too late, and now burial in her own Church, by the minister of her Church, was denied, and burial in the Christian cemetery was denied because this was an unbaptized one. She was in great distress and wanted to know, since I was a minister, if I could throw any light upon her problem and give her any comfort. I showed her the plan of Christ that contemplated the salvation of little children without the ordinance of baptism, for it was for the remission of sin, and this innocent child was without sin, for of such was the kingdom of heaven. I explained that it was a mockery, a thing abominable in the sight of God, to baptize little children. She was much comforted through our long conversation and explanation, and asked me if I would conduct the funeral. I cheerfully consented; I remember that afternoon, by a little open grave under a cedar tree, outside of the cemetery, with the rain pouring down, my companion held the umbrella over me while I conducted the services, and again tried to comfort the heart of this sorrow-stricken mother. The thing that shocked me was that two weeks afterwards the same minister was called to the cell of a condemned man who had never been a Christian at all, but who had debauched himself, had lived a riotous life, and now had taken the life of a fellow man and had been condemned to death. His execution was to take place in a few days, and he wanted now to set himself right with God and sent for the priest who heard his confession, administered the sacrament of baptism by the sprinkling of a few drops of water upon him, pronounced him a Christian, and allowed his remains to come into the church denied to the little innocent child, and he was buried in the cemetery denied to her also. It deeply stirred me, as I am sure it would any other honest-thinking man or woman. I said to the people of that community, on another occasion, referring to this incident, that if the innocent child by any means had to be condemned to hell, it would be heaven wherever innocent children are, for the Master, himself, said, "Of such are the kingdom of heaven." And if this criminal who was condemned had been suddenly brought into the presence of God, it would be hell to him to have to look upon the face of the pure and the innocent, and he would be uncomfortable and would like to get away from that situation as soon as possible.

It has been the common error of the ages for man to conceive the notion that by some sacrifice or some act of goodness man may solve the question of the status of salvation and thus dispose of it. The young man who came to the Savior wanted to know what he must do to be saved, and there were many things named to him, and with elation of soul he said, "Well, all of these things have I done. These things have I kept from my youth upward. Is it possible that I have gained the goal and did not know it?" "If thou wouldst be perfect, go sell that which thou hast and give it to the poor, and come and follow me in my ministry, in my sacrifices, in my labors." When this sacrifice which Christ required of the members of the Church, seemed to be increasing, some began to chafe under it. Many had been accustomed to the old Jewish rituals, their hearts were not pure. But the spirit of many, even in that day, was that by some one act or some one service they might obtain the coveted goal of salvation or exaltation, and when Jesus made his requirements which seemed to be rather burdensome, some began to fall away. He looked upon them sorrowingly one day when they no longer followed after him but began to leave him, and he looked upon his own Twelve, the disciples, and he said to them, "Are you going also? Is it too strong for you? Are the requirements too great?" We do not know what was in Peter's heart from his answer but think he might have said, "It is pretty hard what you are asking, but whither shall we go? Thou sayest the words of eternal life." And then one of them asked him, "Lord, are there few then, that shall be saved?" and he answered them, "Wide is the gate, and broad is the way that leadeth to destruction (to loss of life in the presence of God, that is what he meant), and many there be which go in thereat. Strait is the gate, and narrow is the way which leadeth unto life, and few there be that find it." (Matt. 7:13-14) He was talking about these two things then, for in that marvelous revelation which Paul talks about from which Joseph Smith received such information and knowledge, he, our Father, had planned for all of his children. Yes, even for the sons of perdition! But he had planned a salvation for all except them in one of his kingdoms. I remember a sectarian minister saying that it does not make much difference which way you travel. You may travel as a Mormon, a Presbyterian, or a Catholic. If you will just keep going, you will finally get to the same goal, for all roads lead to the same place. And then he called attention to the fact that there were many roads leading to the city of St. Louis, and whichever road you started out on, if one kept going, one would ultimately get to the city, and therefore it did not make much difference which road one traveled. What is our answer? It is true, for our doctrine clearly sets it forth that whoever does good is on the road to God. A man may not belong to any church at all, but if he is an honest man, he is taking a step toward the goal, if he is a good father, a good husband, a good citizen, he certainly is on the way, but will he reach the end of the journey by merely being a good father and a good citizen? No. Whosoever shall reach the end of the journey must subscribe to every law and every requirement; honesty is one of them; virtue is one of them; and being a good father is one of them. Everything specified in the law must be subscribed to if men would walk the straight and narrow road through the gate that leads to the presence of God, and that is exaltation. That is what we are after. We do not send our missionaries into the world to preach salvation. Salvation will come to those who reach the lower degrees of glory. They who enter into the least, the telestial, shall be saved in one of God's kingdoms, for that is his kingdom, and the glories of it are beyond the power of mortal man to comprehend it. But, of course, no man will come into that kingdom who does not subscribe to the laws governing that kingdom. And, we do not know what those laws are governing the telestial or terrestrial kingdoms. The Lord has not revealed them. I presume that when you brethren go into the other world, where the mighty hosts are that are heirs to these kingdoms, you will be fully instructed as to what these men must do if they have failed to be able to keep the higher law or to become perfect. But they will be admitted into a kingdom whose laws they can subscribe to, one of God's kingdoms, and it brings them into a degree of salvation. We send our missionaries to the ends of the earth to do what? To preach the gospel of salvation? No. More than that. The Salvation Army, bringing men and women out of the gutter, is engaged in the work of salvation. And we come along and help them, through obedience to the fulness of the everlasting gospel, from the status they are in into an exaltation, that they may walk through the straight gate and in the narrow way in the presence of God. That is quite another thing. Every ordinance of this gospel is to prepare men and women for exaltation, and not salvation alone. Exaltation cannot come to men and women by merely administering the ordinances as in the incident I referred to of the murderer receiving this ordinance of sprinkling. No man or woman can come to exaltation unless he has subscribed to every requirement.

Peter clearly set it forth when he said to those who had already become members of the Church that they must add knowledge, virtue, faith, temperance, patience, godliness, brotherly kindness, and charity. And unto the Prophet Joseph Smith the Lord added humility and diligence. If these things are not in men, they are blind and cannot see far off, even though they have subscribed to the ordinance of baptism. They must go farther than that. They must add these Christian virtues in order to enable them to come into the presence of God. He that is enjoying these things or has incorporated them into his life has made his calling and election sure. The ordinances of the gospel are given to man as a reward of service rendered and of response to the appeals to repent. One might baptize an unrepentant soul, but it would do him no good at all. One might lay his hands upon a man's head and confer the Holy Ghost upon him, and if he was not worthy of it, he would not get the Holy Ghost. John explained this very well when he refused baptism to some, saying, "Bring forth fruits meet for repentance." This same ordinance is that which we administer in the house of God, for the salvation of the living and the dead, but which will never exalt men and women unless they are worthy of it. These ordinances come as the reward of merit for men and women who have proved themselves worthy of these great privileges and blessings and now are entitled to receive the ceremonies and the ordinances without which no man can walk the straight and the narrow way. Those who attempt to come otherwise shall be counted as thieves and robbers.

I LISTENED to high mass over an eminent citizen who had passed away and heard the explanation of what high mass means by the priest who had performed the service. The theory of it was, briefly, that we have summoned this man's spirit before the presence of God. We have wished and obtained an audience with him. We have pleaded this man's case and have won the favor of God; his pardon has been granted; and this man has now passed to his salvation. Of course, that seemed to me so inconsistent that the great eternal Father could be summoned by a mortal man to give heed and attention to the plea, and that by that plea, no matter what the state or condition of the man is, his sins or his crimes could all be wiped away by one token, by one word. This is not God's way. He has clearly set it forth that no man can be saved in ignorance. No man can be saved or exalted in his sins. It is utterly impossible for Christ to save men unless they repent, and unless they prepare themselves for that salvation. He wept over Jerusalem. He offered the means of salvation to his people, the Jews, and they rejected it. And Christ said to them, "O Jerusalem,... how often would I have gathered thy children together, even as a hen gathereth her chickens under her wings, and ye would not!" (Matt. 23:37.)

GOD cannot extend to this man forgiveness and condemn that one who is in the same situation. Any earthly father is anxious over his own children. I am sure that the feeling of an earthly father toward his sons and daughters is the same kind of feeling that our Heavenly Father has for his children. No earthly father could look with indifference upon the sins or transgressions of a son or daughter. He would warn them of the dangers or would threaten them if they persisted in that course. There are only two things, however, that an earthly father can do for his children. One is to teach them the way of life by setting forth the plan that leads to happiness, human happiness, and eternal exaltation, and the other is to show the way of life by living it, by precept and example, as we call it. And the Lord has said that parents having children and failing to teach them, if their children go wrong, the sins of the children shall be upon the heads of the parents; but if the parents set an example before their children and teach them the way of life and the children ignore it, then the parents are absolved. They are not under condemnation, and the children bear their own sins. And, all of the love and all of the anxiety of a father for the wayward son or daughter cannot set aside the edict of the court.

I was in Los Angeles during the closing days of the trial of a young man, who, not yet twenty years of age, had been tried and condemned to death for an atrocious murder. How much of the responsibility of his sins will be upon the heads of his parents, the Lord himself will have to judge, but they had separated years before. He had neither precept nor example. He was left to raise himself very largely. Conscience-stricken, however, that they, these separated parents, had not done their duty by the boy, they came from different parts of the country to try to do something for him, but it was now too late. The example ought to have been given long before. The edict had been passed; they were helpless. And yet, I am told that they each offered to stand in the place of their condemned son, and die for him, that he might live and redeem himself, but that would not satisfy the court. The love of a father cannot set aside the edict of the court and turn a loved one free. The majesty of the law cannot thus be violated. Punishment must be administered. So it is with God, our Father. He does not look upon the distress and the sins of his children without being concerned. He has given them warning through his prophets throughout all ages, and the means of escape, together with the warning of danger that threatens. The Lord has done that for all of his children in all ages, and there has never been a danger threaten them but what he has extended warning and help and relief, and that in ample time to save men and women if they would listen. Suppose they do not. Can he save them? No. He loves them, but he cannot save them in their sins. He cannot save them by the gift of someone else. He cannot save them by the sacrifices and devotions of another. The old conception of the monks of the dark ages that they could torture the flesh and thus create a form of sanctity that could be applied to someone else, is a monstrous thing, without a shade of truth in it. There is not one word in all of the scriptures that would justify us in believing that the righteousness of one man can be bought or sold to the aid or help of another. It is one's own righteousness that must avail. Thinkest thou that the gifts of God can be purchased with money, that salvation can be purchased with money, or that men can live to be sinners and have ceremonies and ordinances performed in their behalf and gain salvation? That is no part of the gospel plan. In the Doctrine and Covenants this doctrine is set forth as follows:

"Now, verily I say unto you, that through the redemption which is made for you is brought to pass the resurrection from the dead.

And the spirit and the body are the soul of man.

And the resurrection from the dead is the redemption of the soul.

And the redemption of the soul is through him that quickeneth all things, in whose bosom it is decreed that the poor and the meek of the earth shall inherit it.

Therefore, it must needs be sanctified from all unrighteousness, that it may be prepared for the celestial glory;

For after it hath filled the measure of its creation, it shall be crowned with glory, even with the presence of God the Father;

That bodies who are of the celestial kingdom may possess it for ever and ever; for, for this intent was it made and created, and for this intent are they sanctified.

And they who are not sanctified through the law which I have given unto you, even the law of Christ, must inherit another kingdom, even that of a terrestrial kingdom, or that of a telestial kingdom.

For he who is not able to abide the law of a celestial kingdom, cannot abide a celestial glory.

And he who cannot abide the law of a terrestrial kingdom, cannot abide a terrestrial glory.

And he who cannot abide the law of a telestial kingdom, cannot abide a telestial glory; therefore he is not meet for a kingdom of glory. Therefore he must abide a kingdom which is not a kingdom of glory.

And again, verily I say unto you, the earth abideth the law of a celestial kingdom, for it filleth the measure of its creation, and transgresseth not the law—

Wherefore, it shall be sanctified; yea, notwithstanding it shall die, it shall be quickened again, and shall abide the power by which it is quickened, and the righteous shall inherit it;

For notwithstanding they die, they also shall rise again, a spiritual body.

They who are of a celestial spirit shall receive the same body which was a natural body; even ye shall receive your bodies, and your glory shall be that glory by which your bodies are quickened.

Ye who are quickened by a portion of the celestial glory shall then receive of the same, even a fulness.

And they who are quickened by a portion of the terrestrial glory shall then receive of the same, even a fulness.

And also they who are quickened by a portion of the telestial glory shall then receive of the same, even a fulness.

And they who remain shall also be quickened; nevertheless, they shall return again to their own place, to enjoy that which they are willing to receive, because they were not willing to enjoy that which they might have received.

For what doth it profit a man if a gift is bestowed upon him, and he receiveth not the gift? Behold, he rejoiceth not in that which is given unto him, neither rejoices in him who is the giver of the gift.

And again, verily I say unto you, that which is governed by law is also preserved by law and perfected and sanctified by the same.

That which breaketh a law, and abideth not by law, but seeketh to become a law unto itself, and willeth to abide in sin, and altogether abideth in sin, cannot be sanctified by law, neither by mercy, justice, nor judgment. Therefore, they must remain filthy still." (D. & C. 88:14-35.)

God would cease to be God if he could sweep aside a man's record who is unrepentant and extend to him salvation or exaltation. He would violate the eternal law. He is bound by law, and he can only come to the aid and help of men and women who have conformed to the eternal law by which these same blessings and privileges may be extended.

I am quite sure that the difficulty with many religionists is that they do not comprehend the meaning or the purpose of life, why man is here, and what the Lord's plan for his salvation and his exaltation implies. I was recently greatly interested in the written debate between a modernist and fundamentalist of the same church, discussing the question, "Why man, and what is the probable future of man?" I am overjoyed, as I come in contact with the latest thought of the age, and read after the most learned,

to find how little men have of the real purpose of life, to turn to these marvelous revelations of truth that God has given in this age, that are scientific and that are broad as the universe, and yet make provision for man's salvation and his exaltation. The great purpose of life, the first primary object of life is to give the spirit that was longing for this opportunity the privilege of earth life, a mortal tabernacle, the union of spirit with matter. In the spirit world we had progressed to the point where we learned the lessons of that spirit life. We longed for the experiences of mortality. No doubt others of our Father's children in other worlds passed through this same experience that we are now passing through. They met death and passed through the resurrection. They had ascended on the great program of our Father, toward other exaltation in other universes. And we longed for our opportunity, and we shouted for joy when, at last, an earth was ready, and we were permitted to come to it. Did we know that it meant pain and sorrow and ultimately death? We knew all of that. But there was no power or influence to deter us from coming. We were eager to come. Those who have been denied the privilege of coming to obtain earth life, those who rebelled and went with the evil one have so longed for earth bodies that when cast out of those they have unlawfully taken possession of, they desired the bodies of swine rather than to have no body at all. We cannot grasp nor comprehend in our present situation how marvelous and how wonderful are the Lord's provisions in giving us this union of spirit with matter, this mortal life.

IN the Book of Abraham, there is a flood of light thrown upon the Lord's plan and purpose of life which no one else enjoys knowledge of except Latter-day Saints. Let me read a few verses to you.

"Now the Lord had shown unto me, Abraham, the intelligences that were organized before the world was;

and among all these there were many of the noble and great ones;

"And God saw these souls that they were good, and he stood in the midst of them, and he said: These I will make my rulers; for he stood among those that were spirits, and he saw that they were good; and he said unto me: Abraham, thou art one of them; thou wast chosen before thou wast born.

"And there stood one among them that was like unto God, and he said unto those who were with him: We will go down, for there is space there, and we will take of these materials, and we will make an earth whereon these may dwell;

"And we will prove them herewith, to see if they will do all things whatsoever the Lord their God shall command them;

"And they who keep their first estate shall be added upon; and they who keep not their first estate shall not have glory in the same kingdom with those who keep their first estate; and they who keep their second estate shall have glory added upon their heads for ever and ever." (Pearl of Great Price, Abraham 3:22-26.)

I said the primary purpose of life is to obtain an earth body, and I declare to you that all who have been born to breathe the breath of life have accomplished the greatest purpose of life. If they die the next minute, they have accomplished the primary purpose for which God gave men life in the earth, the union of spirit with matter. They will have claim upon that matter. It shall be resurrected, coming forth as the prophet has said, just as it was laid down, in the same form and size. And every experience that your children would have had had they lived is only postponed, and it will be theirs in the resurrection from the dead. They who die are deprived of nothing. Every privilege will be theirs. They will be tested and proved, just as we are in mortality, and just as those will be who are born during the millennium, when Satan is bound and will not have power to try souls on the earth. He will be loosed for a season to try them, and he will try those who have died in their infancy without the test; and there will come to them every blessing, every privilege, every exaltation that they would have enjoyed had they lived if they prove themselves worthy of it. That great blessing and privilege that they received through entering into mortality, that is the prime purpose of life. The second purpose is experience—experience in mortality, and they who die without it will have experience in the union of spirit and body in and after the resurrection from the dead, just as though they had lived. "And we will prove them herewith, to see if they will do all things whatsoever the Lord their God shall command them.

"And they who keep their first estate shall be added upon; and they who keep not their first estate, who fall with the devil and his angels, shall not have glory in the same kingdom with those who keep their first estate; and they who keep their second estate." (Idem.) And what does it mean to keep your second estate? It means to subscribe to all of the laws of the gospel of the Son of God. That is what it means to keep your second estate, to make your calling and election sure. And they who keep their second estate shall have glory added upon their heads forever and forever.

AND how beautiful and how consistent it is that the Lord would give to those who die in their infancy, and to those who died when truth was not upon the earth, the same privilege he gives to those who reach maturity and who enjoy the opportunities, the power, and the blessed privileges of the gospel. And to say that little children who die without baptism are lost! Roger Williams, that very fine Christian general who introduced the Baptist Church in America, a victim of the spirit of his times, had this misconception of God's mercy and judgment and justice when he declared that all who die without baptism were lost, and that the streets of hell would be paved with the skulls of infants not a span long, because they had died without ever having become baptized or made Christians or members of the Church. Such misconceptions of God's justice and mercy and truth have been the plague of Christianity for ages. But thank God that the light of truth has made his justice and his mercy manifest, yet requiring absolute and perfect obedience.

If one would be perfect, these are the things he must subscribe to, and if he cannot attain to them, then he must go where Jesus has provided for him. The notion is false that men would go to heaven by being good, honest persons, and when they failed by the smallest iota, they were lost, were forever lost, and were victims of eternal punishment. They never understood eternal punishment. Eternal justice forever will reign, and eternal mercy will forever reign, as well as eternal punishment, but it is not to be eternal punishment upon men and women after they have paid the price. The Lord's mercy contemplates more than that. It contemplates that every man and every woman, living or dead, shall have a chance, one opportunity to learn the law of God. The opportunity is given, the invitation to accept it, and if it is presented to them in the flesh or in the spirit world, and they have rejected it, they have lost the opportunity to that exaltation; but there may still remain for them a salvation in one of the lower kingdoms. The children of Israel had the law of the gospel, but they could not live up to it, and so the law of Moses was given. That was all they could live by. That was a small part of the law of Christ. So it will be with men today. Every man and every woman who has ever lived will be given one opportunity to walk the straight and narrow path that leads to exaltation. And if, in the spirit world they receive it, having never had the chance on earth, what then? The power of the gospel can reach into the spirit world and bring men to repentance. And then we can become saviours on Mount Zion. We can administer to them sacred ordinances in their behalf, vicariously performed for them and in their stead. Ceremonies and ordinances that belong to this earth are to be performed for and in behalf of all that have ever lived upon the earth who are worthy of it. And the whole scheme of Christ's salvation is vicarious. He died for us. He gave himself for us when we could do nothing for ourselves. We were helpless. How marvelous is his gift!

Jesus Christ knew how we would thrill with joy, not only in the satisfaction of receiving this body, but in the actual link of body and spirit. He knew that that was the step that was going to lead us into the Father's realms. He knew that we would never have experience, the joys of mortality without the body to bring us joy. For men are that they might have joy. This body was given, and yet it was known that we were to lose it, that death would come, for the mortgage of death was upon every soul that entered a mortal body.

PRESIDENT JOSEPH F. SMITH, in his vision of the redemption of the dead saw the righteous spirit out of the body in a state of bondage, not misery; bondage means limitations, handicaps; in a state of bondage because the spirit was separated from the body and longed for the union of the spirit with the body again, looking to that resurrection. But how can we have this union? All of the wishes and desires that we may have cannot accomplish it. One has the key. One holds the power. One alone, notwithstanding there have been many who have endeavored to do what Jesus Christ did, was resurrected. When Mary Baker Eddy died, certain of her followers expected her to be resurrected. Guards were placed at the tomb for days and weeks, anticipating that each day would see her resurrection. But the silence of the grave has held them all except One. And One only had the power to break the bands of death, and he, the Son of God, holds the power to break the bonds of death not only for himself,

but for everyone that has been born into the world. He purchased the prize, acquired the prize, by giving his own sinless life; and his death was the death of a God, and by it he acquired us. He went to death and bartered and traded and purchased the mortgage, for it is written, and truly, that he hath purchased us. Our bodies would lie forever, crumbling in the tomb, were it not for the crucifixion and the death and the resurrection of Christ, and Christ's offer to return us these bodies which we long for. How grateful we shall be for them when we have once lost them. They will be returned to us on easy terms. The men that can subscribe to every principle of Christ's gospel and become perfect, who remain true and faithful in all things, are assured a glorious body in lieu of the one we lay down, to be resurrected, celestialized, prepared for exaltation in the presence of God, to endure that presence. Such is the privilege given to every man who will pay the price.

Failing in that, there is still a privilege, that they may have bodies of the terrestrial glory, according to the law they have lived, and still telestial bodies for those who cannot subscribe to the laws of the terrestrial or celestial glory. But all of these marvelous gifts are on condition of our righteousness and our worthiness. And those who are prepared to enter into this exaltation, before they can pass by the angels to their glory and their exaltation, must subscribe to every gospel principle, not only live it in the spirit world, but be judged according to men in the flesh. They cannot ignore baptism. The Master, himself, could not, even though he was perfect, for when he came for his own baptism, John resisted and said, "I have need to be baptized of thee, and comest thou to me?" But Christ said, "Suffer it to be so now: for thus it becometh us to fulfil all righteousness." (Matt. 3:14-15.) He was saying that the soul never has lived and never will live that can ignore the ordinance of baptism, for he, the perfect one, could not ignore it.

When he was in the Garden of Gethsemane, asking his Father to let this cup pass if it were possible, he was not referring so much to his crucifixion as he was to bearing upon his shoulders the weight and the load of the sins of the world. As evidence that it was not fear of the cross, I refer you to his behavior upon the cross. No one suffered more keenly the anguish of the driving of the nails through his hands and feet than Christ did, and yet he murmured not. Behold these men at his side, under the same torture, writhing in anguish, cursing and swearing even at him, but he was silent. All that he said has been recorded, and it was but very little. Once he said, "I thirst." Once he called one of his disciples to him and asked him to care for his mother. And those who had caused his death reviled him, but he said, "Father, forgive them. They know not what they do." And then, in the last moment, feeling his utter loneliness with all of his friends gone, and God himself, apparently absent, withdrawing from that Son, with head bowed and his heart broken, cried to his Father in heaven for release.

Think of all of the sorrows that have oppressed human hearts. Think of the anguish that men have felt. Combine it all into one great anguish and one great sorrow and put it on the shoulders of one. And he took upon him the sins of the world, and he died with the sins of the world upon him, and he purchased forgiveness of the sins of men, provided men shall comply with the terms under which that forgiveness may be had, which are repentance and obedience to the gospel.

And there it stands to every man's credit, no matter how long ago the sacrifice was, it still stands to the credit of every man that is now born and shall be to every man and woman that will be born to the ends of the world, and yet never available to any man or woman until they comply with the terms of that law. So you are saviors upon Mount Zion who also perform vicarious work for and in behalf of those who are helpless to do anything for themselves because they have passed from the scene of action where ceremonies and ordinances are performed. Suppose they do not receive it when the work is done. That work stands to their credit for a thousand or ten thousand or a million years and never will have to be done again, and like the sacrifice of Christ, stands to the credit of every man and woman who lives, and yet like his sacrifice, is never available to any man or woman until he has complied with the law. So let us not worry about whether our dead shall receive the work we are doing for them. Let us do it and leave the matter with them and the Lord. The Son of God did not hesitate to die for all men.

We are limited to do the work for our own direct line, and that is right and proper, because out of the branch of the House of Israel, the lineage through which we came, will be found those who are receivers of this gospel. They were faithful before they were born. They will be found faithfully responding. Not all of our progenitors will be worthy, and while the prophet instructed the loyal workers that they were privileged to be baptized for their dead who had died without the knowledge of the gospel, it has gone beyond that now, because we do not know the feelings, the character or the disposition of our great-great-grandfathers who died long, long ago, and yet the privilege is given that we may be baptized for and have their work done for all of our ancestors, and the majority of them will be waiting for you. I declare to you that there are those in the spirit world of your ancestors who died during the dark ages, whose blood is in your veins, who had not the knowledge of the truth, that would have responded, would have been as willing and obedient as you are. And yet they never had the privilege. I declare unto you that when a man and woman are dead, they will not know the truth any more than we do. They will not be given a flood of light that will make them see everything. You will see in the spirit world every phase of religion. They will be free to do as they please, each following his will o' the wisp. And along comes the authority of God, and here is an honest soul that hears that and declares that it is the truth. "My sheep" know the Savior's voice in the spirit world or upon the earth, and men in the spirit world will be tested in exactly the same conditions as if here upon the earth. They will have to manifest the same courage and the same faith. And there are thousands of them, hundreds of thousands and millions of them in the spirit world who long to receive this gospel and have been waiting hundreds of years for their deliverance. They are waiting on you. They are praying that the Lord will awaken your hearts in their interest. They know where their records are, and I testify to you that the spirit and influence of your dead will guide those who are interested in finding those records. If there is anywhere on the earth anything concerning them, you will find it. That is my promise to you. But you must begin to work. You must begin to inquire after your dead. And the spirit of your heart turning towards them will come upon you, and the way will be opened in a marvelous manner, and if there is a scrap of evidence concerning them upon the earth, you will find it. When we have done all that we can do ourselves, the Lord will come to our rescue. But the Lord never came to the miraculous aid of Israel until Israel had done its best. They did all they could, and then when the Lord only could save them he came to their deliverance. So it will be in behalf of those of his children in the spirit world, whose records are not known, do not exist anywhere. If we have done our best and have searched and have discovered all that is available, then the day will come when God will open and part the veil, and the records of the faithful men and women of our line, who have received this gospel and have not had the privilege and opportunity of having this work done for them, will be revealed, and their work will be done. When we have done our best and have reached the limit and can go no further, God will intervene, and the way will be opened that the work of their redemption and their salvation shall go on.

And so I encourage you, my brothers and sisters, to look with anxiety and interest towards your loved ones who have passed away, and be concerned over your living relations who have not enjoyed these sacred privileges. I think that some of us, when we meet our dead, will be asked the question, "You did this fine work for me, but, oh, how sorrowful I am to know that your brother lived right in a time when all of those privileges were yours, and did not embrace it." How humiliated we will be if we have done nothing to help redeem the living, as well as the dead. Let us see to it that we give them their opportunity. And if they have this opportunity and privilege, and it is explained to them thoroughly and they reject it, their chance for that exaltation has passed. They must look for their status in some of the other kingdoms, that will extend salvation to them, but not exaltation.

Let us work while the sun shines and while it is still day, for the night cometh when no man can work. These privileges and blessings will bring eternal happiness, the union of the family, husband and wife, parent and children. Those who do not comprehend this are scoffing at our suggestion of the eternal union of the family. They do not understand concerning the question that was propounded to Christ concerning the law in ancient Israel that when a man died and left a wife, his brother was to raise up a family for him. The answer was, "They do err, not understanding the scripture and the power of God." Where did they err in not understanding the scripture? It provided that if a man died and left a wife, his brother was to marry her and raise up children to the dead brother. If there is no such thing as father and children in the next life, why such a law that the man that was dead would have claim upon the children, the family union, in that everything is clearly set forth, and they did not understand. And if the children went to the man to whom they were sealed, where would the woman go? Naturally she would go with her children, and go to the man to whom she was sealed.

In the resurrection there is neither marriage nor giving in marriage, for this Church teaches the doctrine that every ceremony, marriage or baptism, must be fulfilled upon this earth, and that any man or woman who is entitled to these ceremonies will have the privilege of either receiving them or rejecting them before the resurrection. That is why it is going to take one thousand years after the first resurrection until the last can happen. If any of them prove themselves worthy of baptism or worthy of sealing to husband or wife, it will all take place before the resurrection, for after the resurrection, or at the time of the resurrection, every man or woman's status is fixed. It all has to be done here. They are privileged to be experienced before the resurrection. It will be preached to them in the spirit world, and if they are worthy, these same blessings will be administered to them, for the power to bind and to seal is here. It will be with this Church forever and forever, for every soul that will receive the blessed privileges of the gospel and be entitled to them, and when they have done their work and proven their worthiness, they will come forth in the celestial, the terrestrial, or the telestial kingdom. That is the order of things, and they will stay there until they learn the law and subscribe to it.

Oh, how glorious it will be to meet our loved ones who have been waiting and longing for these privileges. God's plan and purpose is to bring joy and happiness to men and women. The conception, that we have of it is complete, so far as this life is concerned, but this is just a taste of that which is to come eternally. Your greatest joy and happiness has been in the companionship of your loved ones, your dear ones. I am not concerned where that kingdom is going to be or whether it is any better than this earth. If it is a world just like this, and it gives us our loved ones, it will be heaven enough for me. I will ask for no more. And all of the beautiful halls, all of the gold and silver, and all of the pleasures you can imagine, will never satisfy my heart unless I have my loved ones, who alone will make heaven.

Now, God bless us that we may build for ourselves a glorious heaven and be worthy to go where our loved ones are, our fathers and mothers, and take with us our children, that we may have joy with them and have them and hold them, and enjoy their happiness and their felicity together through the endless ages of time, forever and forever. It is in our hands for us to build for ourselves the joy and the happiness that surpasseth understanding. The Lord will provide a good enough place for us. I am not worrying about that. The only thing I am worrying about is my status and condition in that resurrection. And it is in my hands. It is in your hands. It is in the hands of every man and woman, living or dead.

God help us to do all that we can for ourselves, but we have to work, and work while it is today, that when we have finished our labors in life, we may receive a glorious welcome from those whose eyes are turned toward us, who will be full of blessings upon our heads. If you want to have a glorious end to your life, to robe immortality about you, and to lie down to sweet rest with a hope, with joy in your heart, do something for your kindred dead, and I promise you that you will take the sting of death out of your hearts. You will fill the last days of your life with joy and happiness, and you will be building for your eternal joy and happiness.

God bless the workers in this city, in these stakes of Zion, who have shown such fine spirit in this labor. Do not get discouraged. Labor with those who are still indifferent. I declare to you that there is no principle of this gospel that will awaken love for the gospel in the soul of the indifferent like genealogical work. If you want to get the interest of those who have lost interest in God's work, get them interested in genealogical work, and many of them will be saved, not only for their dead, but also for themselves.

God help you to make it a piece of missionary work among those whose hearts have not yet been touched, I pray in the name of Jesus Christ. Amen.

THE THREE DEGREES OF GLORY

Delivered at the Ogden Tabernacle

This is an inspiring sight, a convincing testimony of your interest in this great and important feature of the latter-day work. I rejoice with you to live in this wonderful day, the most glorious and splendid that has ever dawned in the history of man. I am exceedingly happy to be here tonight in your presence to rejoice with you on this ninety-ninth anniversary of the appearance of the Angel Moroni to the Prophet Joseph Smith, for it was just ninety-nine years ago tonight that Moroni spent the entire night unfolding to the prophet the greatness of this latter-day dispensation and explaining to him for the first time, in this dispensation at least, the meaning of the promise that Elijah, the prophet, should come again to turn the hearts of the fathers to the children and those of the children to the fathers lest the whole earth should be smitten with a curse. I know of no more fitting way to celebrate that wonderful event in this dispensation than to be here discussing this subject. I rejoice because to us has been given the most splendid revelations God has ever given to man, and this is not discrediting anything of the past. It is full of glory, full of inspiration and grandeur, full of majesty and of truth!

The greatest revelation the Lord, Jesus Christ, has ever given to man, so far as a record is made, was given to the Prophet Joseph Smith on the 16th of April, 1832, known as the 76th section of the book of Doctrine & Covenants,

commonly called for years and still known as "The Vision." This to my mind is the climax of all wonderful revelations that have come from the Lord from the days of Father Adam until the present moment.

Men have been groping in darkness on some subjects, even in gospel dispensations of the past. They have not known the fulness of God's plan and purpose for the salvation of his sons and daughters, but surely this is a glorious time, for this is the Dispensation of the Fulness of Times, and all that men have ever had in all former dispensations has been given at once in this dispensation, and much that was not had in other dispensations. How wonderful it is to live now, when we are not in doubt concerning not only ourselves, but the whole scheme and plan of salvation, not only for the living, but also for the dead.

Men have been speculating as to God's provisions for the salvation of his children. There have been those in the past and some still remain who teach that if by the smallest margin one fails to meet the conditions of the gospel they lose eternal salvation and are eternally damned; and on the other hand, there are those who believe that certain individuals are marked and designated, predestined, to come into this life to be saved no matter what they do, and others to be eternally lost. There are those who are so narrow as to believe that if in this life men have not found the Way, the Light, and Truth, there is no hope for them beyond the grave. I rejoice to live—when the fulness of truth has been given and when an answer has been made clearly and definitely in the word of the Lord to all queries on this subject.

Your minds and hearts are set upon knowing what you must do to obtain the greatest thing the Lord has offered. I want to talk about that more than anything else because I do not discover many of you who would be satisfied with second-hand things, and you are not contented or happy by having second best or third best. So we will begin by reading a description of the terms and conditions that we must comply with to obtain the celestial glory. I think it will be worth every sacrifice required and a hundred times more if need be. Personally, I would give it to attain that which God has offered to men and women who enter into the celestial glory.

WE read in the Doctrine & Covenants: "They are they who received the testimony of Jesus, and believed on his name and were baptized after the manner of his burial, being buried in the water in his name, and this according to the commandment which he has given." (D. & C. 76:51.)

I now say to all the world that no man, no woman, ever shall see the celestial kingdom of God who is not baptized of the water and of the spirit. The Lord has specified it. He made it so binding and complete when after announcing the law he complied with every term himself, though perfect, so that no man who imagines himself to be perfect here can excuse himself or herself from obedience to the law of baptism. It is the door, the gate to Celestial Glory.

"That by keeping the commandments they might be washed and cleansed from all their sins, and receive the Holy Spirit by the laying on of the hands of him who is ordained and sealed unto this power;

"And who overcome by faith, and are sealed by the Holy Spirit of promise, which the Father sheds forth upon all those who are just and true."(Ibid.: 52-53.)

I would like to pause and emphasize that passage, because, while we receive eternal blessings at the hands of the priesthood which has the right to seal on earth and it shall be sealed in heaven, this revelation clearly states it must be sealed by the holy spirit of promise also.

A man and woman may by fraud and deception obtain admittance to the house of the Lord and may receive the pronouncement of the Holy Priesthood, giving to them, so far as lies in their power, these blessings. We may deceive men, but we cannot deceive the Holy Ghost, and our blessings will not be eternal unless they are also sealed by the holy spirit of promise, the Holy Ghost, one who reads the thoughts and hearts of men and gives his sealing approval to the blessings pronounced upon their heads. Then it is binding, efficacious, and of full force.

I thank the Lord that there is this provision, so that even though men are able to deceive their brethren, they are not able to deceive the Holy Ghost and thus come into possession of their blessings unless they prove in word, in thought, and in deed their worthiness and righteousness.

Reading again from the 53rd verse:

"And who overcome by faith, and are sealed by the Holy Spirit of promise, which the Father sheds forth upon all those who are just and true.

"They are they who are the church of the Firstborn.

"They are they into whose hands the Father has given all things—"(Ibid. 53-55.)

Is there anything that you have ever dreamed of that you wanted, that you longed for? Into the hands of those who attain this glory shall all things be given.

What a world of meaning! You can ponder over that all the rest of your lives and every thought and aspiration of the human heart in righteousness that it is possible for men to conceive will be but a fraction of that which is comprehended in this statement, that "Unto them shall be given all things," because it is not possible for mortals to think of a thousandth part of what this means.

Reading again:

"They are they who are priests and kings, who have received of his fulness, and of his glory.

"And are priests of the Most High, after the order of Melchizedek, which was after the order of Enoch, which was after the order of the Only Begotten Son.

"Wherefore, as it is written, they are gods, even the sons of God—" (Ibid. 57-58.)

WE HAVE frequently said that perhaps the grandest thought that has ever been brought forth to the children of men is the Mormon truism, namely: "As man is, God once was, and as God is, man may become." The foundation of that truism is in this revelation and these words we have just read. Let me read them again:

"Wherefore, as it is written, they are gods, even the sons of God—"

Now, I would like to say a word or two about that Mormon truism, namely: "As man is, God once was, and as God is, man may become."

Note that it is not to the effect that man will become, but man may become, and I wish to say that few men will become what God is. And yet, all men may become what he is if they will pay the price.

Now, I wish to say to you that the only possible candidates to become what God is are those who attain celestial glory, and those who fail in that will never, worlds without end, be possible candidates to become what God is. Then I wish to say to you that there are three degrees of glory in the celestial kingdom and only those who attain the highest degree of celestial glory will be candidates to become what God is, and graduate.

So you see, it is within the reach of every man and woman who lives, but only attainable by those who pay the price, who stand the test, who prove themselves, who comply with the terms and conditions that make their calling and election sure.

I wish now just a moment to diverge and turn to the 131st section of the book of Doctrine & Convenants. It is very brief and is upon the point I am just discussing. It is a revelation which was given May 16th and May 17th, 1843.

In the celestial glory there are three heavens or degrees:

"And in order to obtain the highest, a man must enter into this order of the priesthood, (meaning the new and everlasting covenant of marriage);

"And if he does not, he cannot obtain it.

"He may enter into the other, but that is the end of his kingdom; he cannot have an increase." (Ibid. 131:1-4.)

Those who are denied endless increase cannot be what God is because that, in connection with other things, makes him God. The eternity of the marriage convenant ought to be understood by Latter-day Saints clearly to be the sealing of at least one woman to one man for time and for all eternity. Then do not get confused on that point and imagine that it necessarily means more than one woman. It may be, certainly, but it does mean at least that one man and one woman are sealed together by the power of the Holy Priesthood and by the sealing approval of the Holy Ghost for time and for all eternity, and then that they keep their convenants, before they will be candidates for the highest degree of celestial glory, and unto them only of all these groups of our Father's children is the promise made of endless or eternal increase.

What do we mean by endless or eternal increase? We mean that through the righteousness and faithfulness of men and women who keep the commandments of God they will come forth with celestial bodies, fitted and prepared to enter into their great, high and eternal glory in the celestial kingdom of God; and unto them, through their preparation, there will come children, who will be spirit children. I don't think that is very difficult to comprehend and understand. The nature of the offspring is determined by the nature of the substance that flows in the veins of the being. When blood flows in the veins of the being, the offspring will be what blood produces, which is tangible flesh and bone, but when that which flows in the veins is spirit matter, a substance which is more refined and pure and glorious than blood, the offspring of such beings will be spirit children. By that I mean they will be in the image of the parents. They will have a spirit body and have a spark of the eternal or divine that always did exist in them.

Unto such parentage will this glorious privilege come, for it is written in our scriptures that "the glory of God is to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man." So, it will be the glory of men and women that will make their glory like unto his. When the power of endless increase shall come to them, and their offspring, growing and multiplying through ages that shall come, they will be in due time, as we have been, provided with an earth like this, wherein they too may obtain earthly bodies and pass through all the experiences through which we have passed, and then we shall hold our relationship to them, the fulness and completeness of which has not been revealed to us, but we shall stand in our relationship to them as God, our Eternal Father, does to us, and thereby is this the most glorious and wonderful privilege that ever will come to any of the sons and daughters of God.

Now I wish to return to the 76th section: "Wherefore, all things are theirs, whether life or death, or things present, or things to come, all are theirs and they are Christ's and Christ is God's.

"And they shall overcome all things." (Ibid. 59-60.)

Here is a significant statement. I have said that in addition to one's baptism of the water and of the spirit, which is essential for admission to the kingdom of God, we are to add to our faith virtue, to virtue knowledge, to knowledge temperance, patience, brotherly kindness, godliness, humility, and diligence. If these things be not in us, we are blind and cannot see afar, but if they are in us, they will make us so that we will be able to make our calling and election sure.

A man may receive the priesthood and all its privileges and blessings, but until he learns to overcome the flesh, his temper, his tongue, his disposition to indulge in the things God has forbidden, he cannot come into the celestial kingdom of God—he must overcome either in this life or in the life to come. But this life is the time in which men are to repent. Do not let any of us imagine that we can go down to the grave not having overcome the corruptions of the flesh and then lose in the grave all our sins and evil tendencies. They will be with us. They will be with the spirit when separated from the body.

It is my judgment that any man or woman can do more to conform to the laws of God in one year in this life than they could in ten years when they are dead. The spirit only can repent and change, and then the battle has to go forward with the flesh afterwards. It is much easier to overcome and serve the Lord when both flesh and spirit are combined as one. This is the time when men are more pliable and susceptible. When clay is pliable, it is much easier to change than when it gets hard and sets.

This life is the time to repent. That is why I presume it will take a thousand years after the first resurrection until the last group will be prepared to come forth. It will take them a thousand years to do what it would have taken, but three score years and ten to accomplish in this life.

You remember the vision of the redemption of the dead as given to the Church through the late President Joseph F. Smith. President Smith saw the spirits of the righteous dead after their resurrection, and the language is the same as the one of the Prophet Joseph's revelations—that they, the righteous dead, looked upon the absence of their spirits from their bodies as a bondage.

I grant you that the righteous dead will be at peace, but I tell you that when we go out of this life, leave this body, we will desire to do many things that we cannot do at all without the body. We will be seriously handicapped, and we will long for the body; we will pray for that early reunion with our bodies. We will know then what advantage it is to have a body.

Then every man and woman who is putting off until the next life the task of correcting and overcoming the weakness of the flesh are sentencing themselves to years of bondage, for no man or woman will come forth in the resurrection until he has completed his work, until he has overcome, until he has done as much as he can do. That is why Jesus said in the resurrection there is neither marriage or giving in marriage, for all such contracts—agreements—will be provided for those who are worthy of it before men and women come forth in the resurrection, and those who are complying in this life with these conditions are shortening their sentences, for every one of us will have a matter of years in that spirit state to complete and finish our salvation. And some may attain, by reason of their righteousness in this life, the right to do postgraduate work, to be admitted into the celestial kingdom, but others will lose absolutely the right to that glory, all they can do will not avail after death to bring them into the celestial kingdom.

The point I have in mind is that we are sentencing ourselves to long periods of bondage, separating our spirits from our bodies, or we are shortening that period, according to the way in which we overcome and master ourselves.

"Wherefore, let no man glory in man, but rather let him glory in God, who shall subdue all enemies under his feet.

"These shall dwell in the presence of God and his Christ forever and ever." (Ibid. 61-62.)

Do you comprehend it, you who gain celestial glory, the privilege of dwelling in the presence of God and his Christ forever and ever? What did it mean to have in the world, during his ministry, for three brief years the Lord Jesus Christ—not the Father, just the Son? It was the most wonderful privilege the world has ever had. What would you give tonight for the privilege of standing in the presence of the Son for five minutes? You would give all your earthly possessions for that privilege. Then can you comprehend the full meaning and significance of the statement that those who gain celestial glory will have the privilege of dwelling in the presence of the Father and the Son forever and ever? That, in itself, will be reward enough for the struggle to obtain the prize. Yea, it is beyond price and earthly possessions. Even the giving of life itself would be a trifle for the privilege to dwell forever and ever in the presence of the Father and the Son.

NOW I want to make an explanation that you may comprehend and understand God's plan, which allows us to dwell in his presence. The Lord has created by and through his Son, Jesus Christ, according to the book of Moses, worlds without number, and numerous are they as the sands upon the seashore. In each one, undoubtedly, dwells a group of his children. Then how can he dwell in the presence of all these several groups at one and the same time? If you will read the 88th section of Doctrine & Covenants, toward the latter part of that section the Lord undertakes to explain it.

The Lord told Joseph Smith how he looks upon these, his kingdoms, worlds without number, and he said, "I know them. I count them." And Moses wondered and wanted to know about them. But the Lord said unto Moses, "Only an account of this earth give I unto you."

There is something else to learn after we leave this earth, and I rejoice in the anticipation of further and greater knowledge concerning the things I do not now understand and comprehend. The Lord touched Joseph's understanding when he said, Behold, these are known to me. They are like a man having a field, and he sent a group of workers to this part of the field and gave them instructions what to do and told them he would visit them in their hour and in their time. He sent out the second group into another part of the field, and another group, and unto each of them he made the promise that he would visit them in their hour and in their time and season until they all would be made glad by the joy of his countenance. He would visit them from the first to the last and from the last to the first in one eternal round, each in his time, in his hour and in his season.

I presume that is the reason that the promise is made that Christ will dwell with men on this earth for a thousand years and that will be our day, our time, and then I presume he will do as suggested in this 88th section; he will visit other places and kingdoms; but while absent from this group we will, nevertheless, be in his presence, in communication with him.

Every man and woman who enters the celestial kingdom will find themselves living on this earth, which shall be a celestial world, and we will identify it as the earth upon which we have lived. Each man and woman who enters that kingdom will find the earth a Urim and Thummim, looking into which one may learn about all conditions and kingdoms that are beneath and the kingdom in which we live, so that all depths are revealed to us.

The revelations referred to inform us that whosoever enters the celestial kingdom shall receive a white stone, a Urim and Thummim of greatest purity. Through the gift and power of God it will enable the possessor to read the universe and obtain knowledge from all kingdoms, not only the one in which we dwell, so that we will comprehend all heights and all depths. Those who gain celestial glory, to them only comes this privilege, and though absent it is possible for the Father and the Son to commune and converse with all who are entitled to enjoy that companionship, the other Comforter, just as the Holy Ghost now has the right and power to operate and converse at once with ten thousand or ten million souls who have complied with baptism and have been brought within the circle in tune that they may receive the communication. Every man and woman will hear at once and dwell in his presence to be constantly instructed.

I ought not to spend any time trying to persuade you that this is possible when you know that in this day the human voice has been magnified a hundred thousand times by the skill of man, so that it is said the human voice may be increased one hundred thousand times and encircle the globe. If we can do that, and we do it every day, what does God know about it? So much more than we know and comprehend that our advances are just a feeble opening of the great eternal truths of science and knowledge which God has.

I understand now something about that wonderful appearance of the Redeemer to the Nephites. They heard a voice, and though it was not a loud voice and came from the clouds, yet it was a keen and penetrating voice so that it entered every heart and made their very frames quake. Now I understand that God knows how. Though absent, he may speak, and all the groups of his children who are entitled to hear him, shall hear, and in their hour and in their time and season enjoy his personal presence and forever and always his companionship, the companionship of his spirit and his personal ministry through his means of communication with such souls.

I cannot begin this night to tell you what that means—to enjoy the blessings and privileges of dwelling in Christ's presence forever and ever. I know how the soul is thrilled; I know the feeling that comes by being in his presence for but a moment. I would give all that I am, all that I hope to be, to have the joy of his presence, to dwell in his love and his affection and to be in favor with the Master of all things forever and ever.

I wish now to call your attention to other revelations which the Lord has given in this dispensation relative to those who have died without law.

You will recall how the Prophet Joseph was greatly concerned over his own Brother Alvin. Alvin Smith was a devout believer in Joseph's vision, but prior to the restoration of the priesthood and the restoration of the doctrine of baptism, he died. Joseph was deeply concerned over his death, and the Lord gave Joseph Smith a revelation, wherein he said he saw Alvin in the celestial kingdom. Alvin was not really there; it was Alvin's right and privilege to be there; but he could not go there without baptism. The Lord said all who would have received the gospel had they heard it, they too will be candidates for the celestial glory. Who are they? How can they be determined?

Some folk get the notion that the problems of life will at once clear up, and they will know that this is the gospel of Christ when they die. I have heard people say they believe when they die, they will see Peter and that he will clear it all up. I said, "You never will see Peter until you accept the gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ, at the hands of the elders of the Church, living or dead. They will meet these men to whom this right and authority has been given, for this generation shall receive it at the hands of those who have been honored with the priesthood of this dispensation. Living or dead, they shall not hear it from anyone else."

So, men won't know any more when they are dead than when they are living, only they will have passed through the change called death. They will not understand the truths of the gospel only by the same process as they understand and comprehend them here. So when they hear the gospel preached in the spirit world, they will respond just as our fathers and mothers have, with a glad heart. They will love it and embrace it. It will then be easy to know who they are. They who have died without the knowledge of the truth, they who will receive it with glad hearts, they also will be candidates for celestial glory. When you die and go to the spirit world, you will labor for years, trying to convert individuals who will be taking their own course. Some of them will repent; some of them will listen. Another group will be rebellious, following their own will and notion, and that group will get smaller and smaller until every knee shall humbly bow and every tongue confess.

It may take us thousands of years to do that. But those who are of the blood of Israel, who had they been living, would have received the gospel and are not participators in the blessings, will in a similar manner receive it in the spirit world.

Now I want to go a little further and identify us and our posterity and our ancestors, to be able to tell you why it is that there is a great proportion of our Father's children who die without law and why you and I came into possession of the knowledge of the law. The Prophet Joseph Smith said—you will find these words in the fourth volume of Church History, page 231. This was at the time of the completion of the baptismal font in the Nauvoo Temple. The Prophet said:

"The Saints have the privilege of being baptized for those of their own relatives who are dead whom they believe would have embraced the gospel if they had lived, if they had had the privilege of hearing it, and who have received the gospel in the spirit world through the instrumentality of those who have been commissioned to preach to them while in prison."

The limitation given to Latter-day Saints at that time was, baptism for their dead whom they believe would have received the gospel. That is all. Now since we are not prepared to pass judgment on our dead ancestors whom we did not know, the Church has gone further and has permitted members of the Church to do the work for all their immediate ancestors unless they are murderers. There can be no work done for those who have committed murder.

Now, my brothers and sisters, I would like you to understand that long before we were born into this earth we were tested and tried in our pre-existence, and the fact that of the thousands of children born today, a certain proportion of them went to the Hottentots of South Africa; thousands went to the Chinese mothers; thousands went to Negro mothers; thousands to beautiful white Latter-day Saint mothers: You cannot tell me that the entire group was just designated, marked, to go where they did, that they were men and women of equal opportunities. There are no infant spirits born. They had a being ages before they came into this life. They appear in infant bodies, but they were tested, proven souls. Therefore, I say to you that long before we came into this life all groups and races of men existed as they exist today. Like attracts like.

Why is it in this Church we do not grant the priesthood to the Negroes? It is alleged that the Prophet Joseph said—and I have no reason to dispute it—that it is because of some act committed by them before they came into this life. It is alleged that they were neutral, standing neither for Christ nor the devil. But, I am convinced it is because of some things they did before they came into this life that they have been denied the privilege. The races of today are very largely reaping the consequence of a previous life.

That is why the Lord in giving Daniel the interpretation of that wonderful dream of Nebuchadnezzar was able to tell very clearly, long before they were born, when the various people should rise and bear rule upon the earth. There was a group of tested, tried, and proven souls before they were born into the world, and the Lord provided a lineage for them. That lineage is the house of Israel, the lineage of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and their posterity. Through this lineage were to come the true and tried souls that had demonstrated their righteousness in the spirit world before they came here. We came through that lineage. Our particular branch is the house of Joseph through his son Ephraim. That is the group whence shall come the majority of the candidates for celestial glory. That is why we are doing the work for our ancestors and not for others.

LET us not imagine that in this dispensation we shall do the work for the dead Chinese or Hindus. I expect it will take one thousand years to complete in our temples the ordinances looking to the salvation of the house of Israel. It will take all Latter-day Saints and all that we can do to take care of our own branch—of our own house. While we do the work for our dead ancestors, we will reach a limit after a while. That limit will be after we have gone as far as records are kept. I have said that when any man or woman goes into this work earnestly, the Lord will provide ways and means for him to obtain the information he seeks. Our understanding will be opened and sources of knowledge will be made manifest. Why? Because the dead know a great deal more than we do about existing records.

Why is it that sometimes only one of a city or household receives the gospel? It was made known to me that it is because of the righteous dead who had received the gospel in the spirit world exercising themselves, and in answer to their prayers elders of the Church were sent to the homes of their posterity that the gospel might be taught to them, and through their righteousness they might be privileged to have a descendant in the flesh do the work for their dead kindred. I want to say to you that it is with greater intensity that the hearts of the fathers and mothers in the spirit world are turned to their children than that our hearts are turned to them.

And so it is that the Lord will open the way for those who seek information and knowledge.

I recall an incident in my own father's experience. How we looked forward to the completion of the Logan Temple! It was about to be dedicated. My father had labored on that house from its very beginning, and my earliest recollection was carrying his dinner each day as he brought the rock down from the quarry. How we looked forward to that great event! I remember how in the meantime Father made every effort to obtain all the data and information he could concerning his relatives. It was the theme of his prayer night and morning that the Lord would open the way whereby he could get information concerning his dead.

The day before the dedication while writing recommends to the members of his ward who were to be present at the first service, two elderly gentlemen walked down the streets of Logan, approached my two younger sisters, and, coming to the elder one of the two placed in her hands a newspaper and said:

"Take this to your father. Give it to no one else. Go quickly with it. Don't lose it."

The child responded and when she met her mother, her mother wanted the paper. The child said, "No, I must give it to Father and no one else."

She was admitted into the room and told her story. We looked in vain for these travelers. They were not to be seen. No one else saw them. Then we turned to the paper. The newspaper, The Newbury Weekly News, was printed in my father's old English home, Thursday, May 15th, 1884, and reached our hands May 18th, 1884, three days after its publication. We were astonished, for by no earthly means could it have reached us, so that our curiosity increased as we examined it. Then we discovered one page devoted to the writings of a reporter of the paper, who had gone on his vacation, and among other places had visited an old cemetery. The curious inscriptions led him to write what he found on the tombstones, including the verses. He also added the names, date of birth, death, etc., filling nearly an entire page.

It was the old cemetery where the Ballard family had been buried for generations, and very many of my father's immediate relatives and other intimate friends were mentioned.

When the matter was presented to President Merrill of the Logan Temple, he said, "You are authorized to do the work for those because you received it through messengers of the Lord."

There is no doubt that the dead who had received the gospel in the spirit world had put it into the heart of that reporter to write these things, and thus the way was prepared for my father to obtain the information he sought, and so with you who are earnest in this work, the way shall be opened and you will be able to gather data far beyond your expectations. I will tell you what will happen. When you have gone as far as you can go, the names of your righteous dead who have embraced the gospel in the spirit world will be given you through the instrumentality of your dead kindred. But only the names of those who have received the gospel will be revealed.

Now, I wish to say to you that those who died without law, meaning the pagan nations, for lack of faithfulness, for lack of devotion, in the former life, are obtaining all that they are entitled to. I don't mean to say that all of them will be barred from entrance into the highest glory. Any one of them who repents and complies with the conditions might also obtain celestial glory, but the great bulk of them will only obtain terrestrial glory.

Any man or woman, not only those in the days of Noah, who heard the gospel and rejected it, but in this day any man or woman who has had a good chance to have heard the gospel, to receive it and embrace it and enjoy its blessings and privileges, who lived during their life in absolute indifference to these things, ignoring it, and neglected it, need not hope or anticipate that when he is dead the work can be done for him and he gain celestial glory. Don't you Latter-day Saints get the notion that a man or woman can live in defiance or total indifference, having had a good chance—not a casual chance or opportunity—and when they die, you can go and do the work for that individual and have them receive every blessing that the faithful ones are entitled to. If that becomes the doctrine of the Church we will be worse than the Catholics, who believe that you can pray a man out of purgatory. But they charge for it, and we don't, so we would be more foolish than they.

I say this to stimulate you to try and make your lives conform to the commandments of the Master, that you may work while the day lasts, for the night cometh when it will not profit a man to work. That applies to those who had a chance to receive the gospel but rejected it. I want to say this: It applies also to men and women who neglect going to the house of God, who think, "Oh, well, if I don't do the work, my wife will fix it up." I tell you they are treading on dangerous ground. They may wake up and find that their day and opportunity have gone. They had the chance; they died without accepting it. They neglected it and may lose it.

I am not judging their case: the Lord will judge every case on its merits.

"These are they who are honorable men of the earth, who were blinded by the craftiness of men.

"These are they who receive of his glory, but not of his fulness.

"These are they who receive of the presence of the Son, but not of the fulnes of the Father.

"Wherefore, they are bodies terrestrial and not bodies celestial, and differ in glory as the moon differs from the sun.

"These are they who are not valiant in the testimony of Jesus; wherefore, they obtain not the crown over the kingdom of our God." (Ibid. 75-79.)

There are Latter-day Saints, many of them, who are not valiant in the testimony of Jesus, though they have entered into these covenants have not kept them. They have broken their pledges and may come forth in the resurrection and find themselves wholly unworthy to be candidates for the celestial glory. They will come up in the terrestrial world. It is for us to make our calling and election sure. We can do it in this life.

Now let me pass to the third and last of these groups, the telestial.

"And again, we saw the glory of the telestial, which glory is that of the lesser, even as the glory of the stars differ from that of the glory of the moon in the firmament.

"These are they who received not the gospel of Christ, neither the testimony of Jesus.

"These are they who deny the Holy Spirit.

"These are they who are thrust down to hell.

"These are they who shall not be redeemed from the devil until the last resurrection, until the Lord, even Christ the Lamb, shall have finished his work.

"These are they who receive not of his fulness in the eternal world, but of the Holy Spirit through the ministration of the terrestrial;

"And the terrestrial through the ministration of the celestial.

"And also the telestial receive it of the administering of angels who are appointed to minister for them, or who are appointed to be ministering spirits for them; for they shall be heirs of salvation.

"And thus we saw, in the heavenly vision, the glory of the telestial, which surpasses all understanding;

"And no man knows it except him to whom God has revealed it.

"And thus we saw the glory of the terrestrial, which excels in all things the glory of the telestial, even in glory, and in power, and might, and in dominion.

"And thus we saw the glory of the celestial, which excels in all things—where God, even the Father, reigns upon his throne forever and ever;

"Before whose throne all things bow in humble reverence and give him glory forever and ever.

"They who dwell in his presence are the church of the Firstborn, and they see as they are seen, and know as they are known, having received of his fulness and of his grace;

"And he makes them equal in power, and in might, and in dominion.

"And the glory of the celestial is one, even as the glory of the sun is one.

"And the glory of the terrestrial is one, even as the glory of the moon is one.

"And the glory of the telestial is one, even as the glory of the stars is one; for as one star differs from another star in glory, even so differs one from another in glory in the telestial world;

"For these are they who are of Paul, and of Apollos, and of Cephas.

"These are they who say they are some of one and some of another—some of Christ and some of John, and some of Moses, and some of Elias, and some of Esaias, and some of Isaiah, and some of Enoch;

"But received not the gospel, neither the testimony of Jesus, neither the prophets, neither the everlasting covenant.

"Last of all, these are they who will not be gathered with the saints, to be caught up unto the church of the Firstborn, and received into the cloud.

"These are they who are liars, and sorcerers, and adulterers, and whoremongers, and whosoever loves and makes a lie.

"These are they who suffer the wrath of God on the earth.

"These are they who suffer the vengeance of eternal fire.

"These are they who are cast down to hell and suffer the wrath of Almighty God, until the fulness of times when Christ shall have subdued all enemies under his feet, and shall have perfected his work;

"When he shall deliver up the kingdom, and present it unto the father, spotless, saying: I have overcome and have trodden the wine-press alone, even the wine-press of the fierceness of the wrath of Almighty God.

"Then shall he be crowned with the crown of his glory, to sit on the throne of his power to reign forever and ever.

"But behold, and lo, we saw the glory and the inhabitants of the telestial world, that they were as innumerable as the stars in the firmament of heaven, or as the sand upon the seashore,

"And heard the voice of the Lord, saying: These all shall bow the knee, and every tongue shall confess to him who sits upon the throne forever and ever;

"For they shall be judged according to their works, and every man shall receive according to his own works, his own dominion, in the mansions which are prepared;

"And they shall be servants of the Most High; but where God and Christ dwell they cannot come, worlds without end." (Ibid. 81-112.)

NOW I wish to answer one or two queries that undoubtedly have arisen in your minds, and in doing so I wish to read some more scripture. The question is often asked, "Is it possible for one who attains telestial glory in time in the eternal world to live so well that he may graduate from the telestial and pass into the terrestrial, and then after a season that he may progress from that and be ultimately worthy of the celestial glory?" That is the query that has been asked. I have just read the answer, so far as the telestial group is concerned. "Where God and Christ dwell they cannot come, worlds without end." I take it upon the same basis, the same argument likewise applies to the terrestrial world. Those whose lives have entitled them to terrestrial glory can never gain celestial glory. One who gains possession of the lowest degree of the telestial glory may ultimately arise to the highest degree of that glory, but no provision has been made for promotion from one glory to another. Let us be reasonable about it.

I wish to say in illustrating the subject that if three men were starting out on an endless race, one having an advantage of one mile, the other of two miles, and each one could run as fast as the other, when would the last ever catch up to the first? If you can tell me that, I can tell you when candidates for the telestial glory will get into the celestial glory. Each will grow, but his development will be prescribed by his environment, and there is a reason for it.

Applying this illustration to those who are entitled to the different degrees of glory: He who enters the celestial glory has the advantage over all others. He dwells in the presence of the Father and the Son. His teachers are the highest. The others will receive all they learn from the celestial to the terrestrial, from the terrestrial to the telestial. They get it second hand and third hand, and how can they ever hope to grow as fast as those who drink from the fountainhead? Again those who come forth in the celestial glory with celestial bodies have a body that is more refined. It is different. The very fibre and texture of the celestial body is more pure and holy than a telestial or terrestrial body, and a celestial body alone can endure celestial glory. I am impressed with this because I recall when a child at school I learned that if an icicle a mile square were dropped into the sun it would melt in an instant, and when I learned how intense the heat of that orb is and that our sun is a celestial world, I did not know whether I wanted to live in a celestial world or not if it was that hot. But when I come to understand, if I have a body suitable to dwell in eternal burnings, then I think I would like it. Fish can live in the water and have bodies suited to that element but entirely unsuitable to a life outside of the water. When we have a celestial body, it will be suited to the celestial conditions, and a telestial body could not endure celestial glory. It would be torment and affliction to them. I have not read in the scripture where there will be another resurrection where we can obtain a celestial body for a terrestrial body.

What we receive in the resurrection will be ours forever and forever.

I have several times been asked, how is it possible for those who attain celestial glory ever to feel fully happy and satisfied to know that their children are in the telestial world, and never would have the privilege of coming up with their parents in the celestial kingdom.

We must not overlook the fact that those who attain to the higher glories may minister unto and visit and associate with those of the lesser kingdoms. While the lesser may not come up, they may still enjoy the companionship of their loved ones who are in higher stations. Also we must not forget that even the least degree of glory, as the Lord has expressed it, is beyond all our present understanding. So that they are in the presence of glorious conditions, even though they attain unto the least place, and we must not forget either that these, our sons, are our Father's sons and daughters; and he has other sons and daughters who do not even attain unto the telestial kingdom. They are sons of perdition out with the devil and his angels, and though the Father has grieved over them, he still has not the power to rescue and save them because he gave them free agency, and they used that in such a manner that they have shut themselves out from his presence. But he is justified. He has performed his full duty by them and that is the condition which we ought to be in to feel justified, though we may be so unfortunate as to have some of our own children in the lesser kingdoms, if we have done our full duty by them. We may be sad at the thought of their not being with us, but we will not have the sting or remorse of conscience. If we have failed, however, to do our duty, then naturally we will feel to regret their situation and censure ourselves in part for the same.

Let me read to you from the 88th section, commencing with the 17th verse:

"And the redemption of the soul is through him who quickeneth all things, in whose bosom it is decreed that the poor and the meek of the earth shall inherit it.

"Therefore, it must needs be sanctified from all unrighteousness, that it may be prepared for the celestial glory." (Ibid. 88:17.)

This earth, every part of it, will be celestial; not one-third telestial, and one-third terrestrial. It will be celestial—and only celestial beings shall dwell upon it. I always thought the Lord would require a larger would than ours for the telestial bodies to dwell on when I consider the millions of dead who will inherit the telestial glory. They may need some planet bigger than this earth.

Let me read again:

"Wherefore, it shall be sanctified; yea, notwithstanding it shall die, it shall be quickened and the righteous shall inherit it.

"For notwithstanding they die, they also shall rise again, a spiritual body.

"They who are of a celestial spirit shall receive the same body which was a natural body; even ye shall receive your bodies, and your glory shall be that glory by which your bodies are quickened.

"Ye who are quickened by a portion of the celestial glory shall then receive of the same, even a fulness.

"And they who are quickened by a portion of the terrestrial glory shall then receive of the same, even a fulness.

"And also they who are quickened by a portion of the telestial glory shall then receive of the same, even a fulness." (Ibid. 26-31.)

Therefore, I say, my brothers and sisters, the Lord has distinctly settled the question of our status, as established in our resurrection from the dead. If we have earned a celestial body, we may have celestial glory. Yet many of the Saints will wake up and find they sold their birthright for a mess of pottage. If I should come forth and find myself in the telestial world, or in the terrestrial world,

and look up to this earth, when it shall attain its place as a celestial orb, shining like a sun, when this earth will no longer need the sun to shine upon it by day nor the moon by night, when it shall become a sun, if I should be so unfortunate as to lose my chance of obtaining an inheritance in that place, and be compelled to dwell upon a telestial orb, I surely will feel the full force of the poet's statement, "Of all sad words of tongue and pen, the saddest are these, it might have been." I might have been there. I was born there. It was my right and privilege to be there, but I lost it through my own blindness, through my own wickedness; I have lost it forever. While I might have joy here, and experience and growth here, yet I have lost eternal companionship with my Heavenly Father.

Let me not only appeal to you to be greatly interested in working out the salvation of your dead, but be also intensely interested, be deeply concerned in the salvation of the living. What mortification, what humiliation would it be for me to stand before my redeemed dead, for whom I have labored in the temples, and have them say to me, "What of your sons or your daughters, your grandsons or granddaughters, those born under the covenants, born in the most glorious Dispensation of the Fulness of Times, yet were so foolish as to lose their right to the enjoyment of celestial glory?" How great would be my mortification and humiliation! And yet, there are great numbers of our children and our acquaintances, with whom we are now associated, who are in danger of losing their eternal salvation in the celestial kingdom of our God. While there is life, let us earnestly labor with all our might, mind, and strength, that we may bring them to Christ in full possession of all these blessings. And we can do it. Even if we labor all our lives, we shall have great joy if we save but one, for we will be shedding an influence for good over countless thousands who shall be their posterity. But if we have not done our full duty, we shall sorrow intensely because of our neglect, and we shall stand accused by them for having failed in the performance of our duty. On the other hand, if we have labored with all our might, mind, and strength, we shall stand with a clear conscience, blameless. Our status and condition will be like our Heavenly Father's. He sent his Only Begotten Son to save and redeem mankind, but unless we accept the atonement and act in conformity to the laws and requirements laid down for us, even God cannot save us.

Let us not be discouraged in our temple work. Let us renew our diligence and determination to do this work, and what we do not understand concerning our sealings, it will be later revealed to us.

You mothers worry about your little children. We do not perform sealings for them. I lost a son six years of age, and I saw him a man in the spirit world after his death, and I saw how he had exercised his own freedom of choice and would obtain of his own will and volition a companionship, and in due time to him, and all those who are worthy of it, shall come all of the blessings and sealing privileges of the house of the Lord. Do not worry over it. They are safe; they are all right.

Now, then, what of your daughters who have died and have not been sealed to some man? Unless it is made known to you, let their case rest. They will make known to you the agreements and contracts they have mutually entered into. The sealing power shall be forever and ever with this Church, and provisions will be made for them. We cannot run faster than the Lord has provided the way. Their blessings and privileges will come to them in due time. In the meantime, they are safe.

Let us be earnest in this work. It will cast an influence over your whole families. It will strengthen your faith. It will add testimony to your faith. Surely there is peace and joy in it. May you find it, and may everyone under the sound of my voice, go hence with a firm resolve, such as we have never had before, that we will make our calling and election sure, that at the last day our records may be clear, that there may be no clouds upon our titles, that we may receive our inheritance in the celestial glory of our God. If that shall be our reward, our joy will be full, beyond all my power to tell you. May the Lord help us to have a clear conscience and to do every day that which we ought to do. I am more concerned for the living than for the dead, when I realize that when the bridegroom cometh, five, or one-half, of the virgins shall be asleep, without oil in their lamps. That will not be the world; that will be the Latter-day Saints. Will you be asleep, or will there be oil in your lamps? Let us stand in our places and not flatter ourselves by thinking, "I will take care of John and Mary when they are dead." Let us not procrastinate but labor unceasingly for the salvation of our kindred, and if we succeed, if we win that prize, we shall be compensated beyond all expectations. We shall receive more than we have ever dreamed of joy and happiness and eternal satisfaction, but if we miss it, if we lose it, we, whose right it is to obtain it, I cannot tell you the sting of conscience and remorse, the hell of torment we shall endure endlessly, if we miss it, through our own ignorance and foolishness. May God save us from that affliction.

The Lord sanctify these humble remarks and my earnest testimony and desire for your blessing and welfare, for the salvation of the living and the dead, I pray in the name of Jesus Christ. Amen.

THE LORD SHALL HAVE POWER OVER SAINTS... AND THE DEVIL OVER HIS DOMINION...

A stenographer's transcript of the address given at the evening session of the Capitol District conference of the Eastern States Mission, held in the Washington, D. C., Chapel. It is the last of Elder Ballard's public sermons which was recorded.

RECENTLY I said to a large body of priesthood that the most important institution in the earth today is the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. I should like to amplify that thought now because I fear some of us have not caught the vision of the magnitude of the work this Church is expected to perform, not only for its members but also for the world, for we have a world mission, and world problems are to be solved by this Church. That is our faith and our conception of our mission. I should like to discuss some of the world problems and how we will solve them.

There is anxiety and uncertainty in the hearts of men today. Threat of war perils that may come day by day fill the hearts of men with anxiety for the future. I know that when, some twenty years ago, we were sending the flower of our youth, our young men, across the water, it was with the hope, as we used often to hear it in the slogans, that we were going to fight the last battle. We thought to fight "a war to end war" and that we were engaging in a struggle to "make the world safe for democracy." These were our high ideals and hopes! How disappointed we are to see that the sacrifice of men and treasure failed to achieve that which we ourselves had in mind when we made our great contribution.

We were built up with hope following the close of the war when we saw nation after nation pattern governments after this great democracy, America—the United States. Kings and monarchs disappeared, and in their places came republics and democracies with representative bodies of the people, with presidents. And many of us thought we were right on the road to the golden age, an age which prophets and poets have sung and prophesied about, the age the good men of all years have hoped might be realized in their day, only to see the night of darkness come in disappointment and the old struggle go on. We have, therefore, been considerably disturbed to see these democracies disappear and to see rise in the place of a free government a dictatorship, to see the rights of people taken from them, to see great powers established in these mighty nations, with a plan and a panacea which they are seeking by might and by force to thrust onto the rest of the world, because they have the conception that their plan—whether it is Fascism or Communism or some other ism—is the only way to bring security to the entire group and bring peace and advantages to be realized through their efforts.

It is a sad picture, however, to see the power of force again raise its head, to see the wealth of nations employed as never before in building instruments of destruction upon the land, the sea, and in the air, and to see that power threaten the peace of the world. We are disturbed. No wonder the British people were in a state of great anxiety when they realized that across the English Channel were 20,000 well-equipped German airplanes, which in an hour could cross the channel and let death bombs rain upon the cities in England. In those perilous days, both from London as well as from Paris, people were fleeing into the country to find refuge, to escape from the dread peril that threatened. Trenches were being dug on the lawns of lovely homes, and the government, itself, constructed gas chambers in nearly every house, and since then has constructed a bell—a metal bell—that would be a place of refuge for a certain number of people to rush into if the dread moment should arrive. And there are those who have knowledge of the destructiveness of these mighty forces that predict, if once again the world enters into a conflict like the recent World War—with all these modern facilities that have been invented—civilization, itself, might not survive; and there is great anxiety. What of tomorrow? What of the future? Will they be solved—the problems that are now causing this great unrest in the world? Will they be solved by the might of armies? Will they be solved by taking away from people their free agency? I am greatly disturbed when I see an attempt to frustrate God's program.

WHY did this generation receive such a flood of light and knowledge as our modern science offers? I know there is a school of scientists and others who contend that it is because of the superior wisdom, brains, and genius and the application of the scientific method that have brought forth the marvels of this age. Greater human progress has been made during my lifetime than through all the generations of my fathers back to Adam. I am so impressed, when I stand in the presence of all this evidence and think what this all means, that I ask myself often: Why have I been privileged to live in such a wonderful age, and what is my responsibility, and what is the meaning of it all? And I am impressed that I am under a responsibility. I grant you that the scientific method is a true method, that it has produced by its application many wonders of this age; but going beyond that, I remind you that there lived before our age men of brains. The greatest things that have ever been produced in literature, in music, and in art occurred before our age. The generations that preceded ours were not lacking in brains or ability, but the hour for these marvels to occur had not yet arrived, when the old prophecy was to be realized, that the windows of heaven would be opened and God would pour his Spirit out on all flesh, and men would dream dreams and catch the secret of God; because all these marvels of our age are the result of finding eternal application of those eternal laws that brought us the wonders of our age. Men have not really invented anything; they have discovered the way by which the miracles of our age have come into existence. You know, there are many great scientists, humble men, who acknowledge that from a higher source than man's intelligence have come these miracles, that the inspiration of a higher power has touched their understanding, enabling them to see the secrets of God.

Why did they come into the world, these marvels? To be used to invent instruments of destruction more effective than man has ever known? The gas engine—is it rightly and properly used when we put it into an airplane and load the plane with death bombs to drop upon peaceful cities? The warfare of today is not conducted at the front. Those were terrible days the peoples of Spain went through when, far removed from the front, airplanes flew over the homes of the aged, the infirm, and little children, and dropped destruction upon them and, as they fled from peaceful homes, swept down on them and mowed down many. Actually is it the purpose of the gas engine to equip tanks that they may plow through armies and buildings and reap destruction? The skill that man has devised in the laboratory—was it intended that this superior knowledge was to be used to invent gases that would stifle and strangle and destroy? Do you think that was the primary purpose of it all?

I am as sure as I am that I live that the reason for all the marvels of this age was to abolish poverty, to break down the barriers between peoples, to make men brothers, and to bring in the world's golden age, the age of peace, when men would cease to learn war. I am sure that this is the purpose of it all, but when men aspire to power and take away from the people their free agency, their political rights, are they actuated by the Spirit of the Lord Almighty? If there is anything that is clear in the history of God's dealings with man, it is that—from the very beginning, when he selected the Lord, Jesus Christ, before the foundations of the world were laid—it is that he desired to guarantee to every man and woman, liberty. He was opposed from the very beginning to taking away the free agency of man. I say to you that every institution or man that takes away from the people their free agency and their liberty is not of God. I care not how beneficial its purposes may be, if it takes away from man his liberty and free agency, it is working in harmony with that rejected and fallen son of God.

If we could read clearly and keep this program in mind all the time, we would not have been disappointed at anything that happened. I am going to remind you of some of the things we have had in our scriptures a long time and which have not been fulfilled. Some of us, in our desire and zeal for the speeding up of God's program have overlooked many things that must come before that day. In the very first section of the Doctrine and Covenants, I read the statement: "For I (the Lord) am no respecter of persons, and will that all men shall know that the day speedily cometh; the hour is not yet,"—this was spoken back in the year 1831—"the hour is not yet, but is nigh at hand, when peace shall be taken from the earth, and the devil shall have power over his own dominion." But there is a comforting message that follows it: "And also the Lord shall have power over his saints, and shall reign in their midst, and shall come down in judgment upon Idumea, or the world." (D. & C. 1:35-36.)

These two forces have been in battle array for a certain definite objective even from before the foundations of the earth, when one son was accepted and the other was rejected, and the rejected one was cast into the earth here and has been ruling over the kingdoms of the world from the beginning to the ends of the earth. When the rightful Heir appeared, following his baptism, he was taken upon the summit of the mountain, and the kingdoms of the world in panorama then passed before his mind, and they were offered to him by the usurper on easy terms. If the Lord Jesus would only fall down and worship his usurper, he offered to give him the kingdoms of the world, but Jesus rejected the offer. He said, "Thou shalt worship the Lord, thy God, and him only shalt thou serve," and he knew this was not the Lord, and ordered him hence as Satan, and Satan left. Jesus Christ went to Calvary and gave his precious life to win the right to rule over the kingdoms of this world. Ultimately he will come and claim that right. There never has been peace in the earth since the usurper has been here, and there never will be peace until the question is settled as to who shall be supreme.

THE OLD prophets said Armageddon, yet to come, was to settle this question. There were some folk that thought the World War, costing ten million human lives, was Armageddon, but it was not. It is yet to come. When I see these misuses of God's divine blessings upon man, I think that if all that science has brought to war were confiscated and secured for the alleviation of poverty and promotion of brotherhood, what speed we could make toward the golden age; but instead of that, when I see these beneficent things, calculated and intended to bring this happiness to the world, used in the most brutal manner, I cannot help feeling that the devil is ruling in the midst of his kingdoms. He is stealing again the blessing of heaven, which is liberty, to serve his purposes, and he would even wreck and ruin the kingdom that he must give up and forfeit.

I want you to know that these things are real. There is a mighty conflict going on between two great forces that are in the earth. It will continue until the mighty struggle will come when all the righteous living and the righteous dead, under the same great leader, the Lord, Jesus Christ, shall engage in mighty conflict against all the wicked living and all the wicked dead and their great leader, the rejected, fallen son of God, to settle this question of supremacy in the earth, and not until that question is settled—and it will be settled, and Christ will be victorious—and not until then will swords be beaten into plowshares nor spears into pruninghooks. You may not look for it tomorrow. It will not come until this power that makes war and steals the blessed things of God, designed for the elevation of his children, not until this power is curtailed, will we see that golden age.

How fortunate and blessed are we who live here in this land of America. We already have seen the benefits of our fathers' and mothers' accepting the gospel in the Old World and coming to this land, but we have not seen anything yet. I have many times thanked the Lord for the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans that put a mighty barrier between us and the seat of this great conflict, but yet with our modern devices even the ocean itself is not such a great barrier as it used to be. I am not afraid of Japan nor of any foreign nation ever bringing war peril to America. There are prophecies of the Lord God of heaven, that this land of Zion—this land of America—is choice above all other lands; and Zion is the people of America. Herein is our security: So long as the people of America shall serve the God of this land, who is Jesus Christ, no power on earth shall overcome her or conquer her. In modern revelation it is said that the wicked inhabitants of the earth will say, "Let us not go up to battle against Zion, because her inhabitants are terrible." Zion is America. No foreign foe will bring war to America. They will try to get us into their struggles and their conflicts. I said to Senator Smoot recently, "Suppose we never get a dollar of all the money we lent, the eleven billions of dollars, if that in itself will keep us from any future European wars, it will be a small price to pay. Maybe that divine providence of God is just setting that barrier up to hold us in check."

Will there be wars in the world? I wish I could see peace coming, for I love peace, and the mission and responsibility of the Church is to lift up an ensign for peace, to cry peace, but there can be no peace while the order of things obtains as it does in the world, for it is still true that he that taketh up the sword, by the sword shall he perish. That is not the way to solve these human problems. When I see the tremendous power that is now vested in the hands of one man in a great nation, armed and equipped, I realize that by the slightest whim or notion all its forces may be turned loose to begin a mighty cataclysm. You do not read your history right if you do not see that after a nation has spent its wealth and strength in arming and equipment, it will be tempted to use its strength, feeling that it is mightier than any other country. So I am sorry to say I see war. I cannot tell when. There will be extended war, extended struggle and strife, for the powers of evil are determined not only to hold their kingdom that they now control but also to extend it. When Germany and Italy and Japan signed the league that they will combine all their forces to subdue the world to their forms of government, it was not the power of God that was in it but that which comes from greed, from selfishness, from lust, from a source of evil that is not God's program or way. It is the program of his fallen son.

I know how the world of Christian men and women must feel, their hearts filled with despair and anxiety, as expressed by Carrie Chapman Catt when she calls attention to our having waited nineteen centuries of Christianity to see its power and strength, only to find our helplessness to save us from the greatest catastrophe since the flood. Christian nations fought Christian nations. And later from the headquarters of the greatest church on earth, Italy, went the soldiers of that church in one of the most unjustified wars, to rob a sister nation of her lands. That is so far from the Spirit of the Christ and his mission that it is apparent that the seeds of the real gospel of Jesus Christ never took root in the hearts of such a people. For a thousand years Spain was the right arm of the Roman Catholic Church, by which she established herself in all Latin America, and now within the last three years we have witnessed the disloyalty of the people of Spain, one faction of them against their own church, wherein they have crucified priests upon the crosses of their own churches, ravished nuns, and robbed the treasury; and the other faction, which pretends to show some allegiance to the church, refused to listen to the pleading of their pope to desist from engaging in civil war, a civil war that has cost some two million human lives and has left a devastated Spain.

When we see a great nation like Russia turn away from all hope of anything beneficial coming to them from Christianity in its various forms as they know it; when we see in Germany, which was the source of strength and power that produced the success of the Reformation—her leaders persuading her people to abandon their Christian forms of government and seeking to establish a state religion—it all speaks of man's having lost faith in the ability of the institutions that have arisen in the name of Christ, to be effective in meeting and solving world problems. And more people are saying today what the Lord Jesus Christ said to Joseph Smith more than one hundred years ago in the Sacred Grove, in answer to the question as to which of all the churches was right, and they were all discarded as being helpless, "having a form of godliness but lacking the power thereof." Men are saying today, almost universally, that there is something woefully lacking. In an age when there is doubt and uncertainty, in an age when new and untried things are being set up for panaceas and free forms of government are being supported by great military organizations, what an opportunity has come to us at last. This is our chance to be heard and to demonstrate that without armies, without military equipment, we can solve the problems of the world, a distressed world.

Let me read a word of comfort found in the Doctrine and Covenants, concerning this land and the peoples of the land: "And it shall come to pass among the wicked, that every man that will not take his sword against his neighbor must needs flee unto Zion for safety." And I say again, this land of Zion is America. We have not seen that yet, the day "that every man that will not take his sword against his neighbor must needs flee" here, because this land is Zion. "And there shall be gathered unto it out of every nation under heaven; and it shall be the only people that shall not be at war one with another.

"And it shall be said among the wicked: Let us not go up to battle against Zion, for the inhabitants of Zion are terrible; wherefore we cannot stand." (D. & C. 45:68-70.)

But there is a happy ending. Our troubles in America shall all come from within, not from without. The intent to capitalize upon our misfortunes, to plant the seeds of Communism or Fascism—that will go on, but it shall never prosper nor succeed. It is true that our Prophet saw the very Constitution hang as by a thread, but thank the Lord he never saw the thread break, and it shall not break. But he saw this people playing a conspicuous part, adding to the strength of others to become a balance of power to preserve these institutions. There is a comforting assurance that I have that God is still governing and guiding the destinies of America, that when He sees necessary to make a change, he knows how to achieve it, and that out of all our experiments will ultimately come good. The heart of the American people is yet sound, and I thank God for that, because if the majority of the American people should lose sight of the great destiny and mission of America, it might collapse.

Also I warn you, and this is one reason the Church has been so much interested in its welfare program to get all of its members off relief—I warn you that there is coming a day of trial, that the army of people who are now on various types of government relief will find these means of assistance curtailed; and they must be. I grant you that if the vast sums of money that have been spent for relief had not been spent, we would have had a revolution in this country before this, but yet we cannot go on endlessly spending. The thing that brought dictatorships to Italy and to Germany and to Russia was the financial distress that came upon the nations. When Italy's public obligations reached twenty-five billions of dollars and her currency fell, as did Germany's, to a fraction of its original value, distress was everywhere, and the innocent suffered, and a speculator and theorist capitalizing upon the misfortunes of the people rode into power, because people in distress, like drowning men, will grasp at straws. That must never come to America. I do not see us in dire peril at this moment, but I see the need of the people of America saving the country by being supporters of the government rather than by being wards of the government, for every dollar that the national government or your state or city governments spend must be secured from the taxes levied upon the people. Let these taxes become so heavy that the people cannot pay the taxes, and their property is confiscated for their payment, the wealth of the government, and we would pass into a state such as Russia is in before we knew it. When the late Chief Justice Holmes left a will in which he bequeathed the major part of his accumulated wealth to the United States, I was thrilled to see at least one American giving his help to his government. That is a rare thing.

So I say to you of the Church, that we are exceedingly anxious to put everyone in a state of independence, so that you shall not be enslaved nor contribute to any enslaved condition that would naturally come if our properties were gradually taken over and confiscated to become the properties of the State or Nation.

I should like to see the hands of those in this congregation whose ancestors came from England, Ireland, Scotland, and Wales. (Numerous hands were raised.) Those whose ancestors came from Denmark, Norway or Sweden. (Other hands were raised.) Now I should like to see the hands of those whose ancestors came from Germany, from Holland, from Switzerland, and the central countries of Europe. (Still other hands were raised.) Here are the nations assembled, right here in this meeting. That is the story that we tell throughout the Church. How difficult it has been in the past, even in the time of Christ, to get a Jew and a Gentile to sit down to worship in the same church. Race barriers have been one of the great contributing factors to inhumanity, to greed, to selfishness, and to war, and that is working today until there are certain races that some of these dictators think are the only ones fit to live and others are unworthy of any consideration whatever. Here we have for a hundred years past now, been bringing men and women of all nations into this Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, and we have built up a brotherhood, the like of which the world has never seen. We sit together and worship together; our children intermarry; and we are giving, for the security of all, a tenth of all we receive. If every member of this Church will do that, and I pray God that we shall be so touched and so inspired with the vision of this, that we will cheerfully give our tenth, and then fast on the first Sunday of the month and give the equivalent of two meals, and then our surplus, we shall be blessed.

When I see what the Church is doing and what response to our appeals has been made in the last three years, my soul is made glad, for I have been acting, as you know, for two years as chairman of this work and am still identified with it as adviser, and I go throughout the stakes of the Church. We reached the highest tithing in the history of the Church last year; we reached the highest amount in fast offerings; and we have received the surplus of the people. Twenty-six great storehouses today are as swarming hives of industry. The people after paying tithes and offerings are giving of their surplus grains and surplus fruits for the blessing and benefit of unfortunate brothers and sisters. This is the brotherhood achieved without war, without force, and without compulsion, but through love.

The love that is in the hearts of the Latter-day Saints—if it were in the hearts of the peoples of the Old World, where our fathers came from, there would be no war; but until this love comes to their hearts, there is ever the menace of war. War will so waste them that they will not accept of God's offering; war will so waste them that after the fierceness and struggle of it all, ultimately they will despair of solving their problems by their methods. That is the time that those from the East and the West and the North and the South will say: "Let us go up to the mountains of the Lord, to the house of the God of Jacob, where we may learn their ways, for they have solved the problems; they have amalgamated people of all nations; they give a tenth of their income as tithing; they give fast offerings and their surplus for love, in peace."

There is more power in this Church to solve the world's problems than there is in all the armies and navies of all the nations of the earth, and God expects us to do it. He said, in the Doctrine and Covenants, unto the Church, with all its poor, to do these things: "Arise and shine forth, that thy light may be a standard for the nations." (D. & C. 115:5.) In the very darkest hour of the Church, following the exile from Missouri, when many hearts were discouraged and great suffering and want were experienced, the Lord made a promise: "But verily I say unto you, I have decreed a decree which my people shall realize, inasmuch as they hearken from this very hour unto the counsel which I, the Lord their God, shall give unto them.

"Behold they shall, for I have decreed it, begin to prevail against mine enemies from this very hour." But like all God's marvelous promises, it is conditional. "And by hearkening to observe all the words which I, the Lord their God, shall speak unto them,"—we cannot take part of the word and the will of God and discard the rest of it; we must adhere to it all—"they shall never cease to prevail until the kingdoms of the world are subdued under my feet, and the earth is given unto the saints, to possess it forever and ever." (D. & C. 103:5-7.) That is a promise and there is a responsibility, the responsibility to win this word to Christ, not through might and force or power, but by the spirit of love, by the spirit of the real gospel of Christ. Oh, my brethren and sisters, do we know it, do we realize how great is this responsibility? And yet, great as it is, it is not impossible of achievement. It shall come.

It will be 95 years next Tuesday since the prophet of God gave his life for the testimony he bore. Yesterday there was conducted in the City of Nauvoo, a ceremonial of rededication of Nauvoo, led by the authorities of the State, where they are making it into a shrine to glorify the achievements of the Mormon people who built the city. The plan contemplates restoring to the Church the entire temple block, and they hope and expect that we shall put upon it a suitable bureau of information, that we might tell our own story. Today there was rededicated, with the cooperation of the state officials of Illinois, Carthage Jail, which has been restored to its original status, to nearly as possible exactly as it was, and it is to become a shrine. My soul swells to see how men's hearts are turning toward the Prophet of God and toward the people that have accepted the restored gospel; and if only we will live it, they will continue to turn toward us until we shall wield a power in this world that no nation, no army, has ever known; and that power will ultimately bring the Lord Jesus Christ, to his kingdom to rule and reign as King of kings, while swords will be beaten into plowshares and spears into pruninghooks. There is no other way. You have the way. God help you to walk the way of loyalty and devotion and faithfulness, that you may speed the work on to its glorious mission and destiny in the earth, I pray, in the name of Jesus Christ. Amen.
