Robert L. Millet, Selected Writings of Robert L. Millet: Gospel Scholars Series ( 2000)

The Abundant Life

Chapter 26

On Being Christian

I was born and reared in the southern states and attended Louisiana State University for two years. Those two years were perhaps the loneliest time of my life. In spite of what many have said, for me the 1960s were a lousy time to grow up. By the time I had graduated from high school, the Beatles and British music had taken the world by storm. The other type of music that survived the revolution was folk music, where everyone sang or chanted about the economy, the Vietnam War, and nuclear holocaust. Really depressing stuff! Many of the movies dealt with social issues, and few had happy endings. It was a time of revolution, and everyone seemed to be in search of a cause, a crusade of some type. Marches and sit-ins and protests abounded. In addition, I was a part of the "baby boom" generation that arrived at the college campus before we were ready to be received. Institutions of higher learning literally did not have the resources to meet the needs of the flood of young people who hit the campus. Consequently, many universities set up a type of selection process, a means whereby only the most serious and dedicated of students would make it through the first year. For example, we were told that of the 4,300 freshmen who entered with me in the fall of 1965 at LSU, only about 1,800 continued as sophomores. Freshman biology and freshman English were the designated "flunkout" courses. To be honest, although I was very happy in high school, I did not enjoy my first years of college. I felt very much alone.

After my mission I transferred to Brigham Young University and fell in love with the Provo community and with BYU. For someone who as a boy had gotten no closer to the Salt Lake Temple than an Articles of Faith card, there was something special about being so near the headquarters of the Church. Every Tuesday there was a devotional on the campus, and almost always one of the General Authorities of the Church was the speaker. I loved each of those devotionals; I still have copies of the addresses in my files. I thrilled at the idea of having prayer in some of my classes. I can't explain it, but there was something strange and unusual, something marvelous about being on a large university campus among thousands of people who believed basically the same things about life that I did.

My earliest class was an 8:00 a.m. Monday-Wednesday-Friday class titled "An Introduction to Philosophy." The instructor was excellent; he was warm and accommodating and patient with us as students. About three weeks into the semester, I approached him on a matter we had covered during the hour. "What can I do for you?" he asked. I posed my question. He looked at his watch. Memories of disinterested and discourteous teachers from other places flooded back into my mind, and my heart began to beat a little faster. I fully expected him to say: "I'm a busy man. Don't bother me at times other than my office hours!" Instead, he asked: "What are you doing this hour? Do you have a class?" I answered that I was free for two hours. "Come on," he said, as he began to leave the classroom, "walk with me to the Wilkinson Center (the Student Union)—I'll buy you something to drink, and we'll talk about it." It was a tender and important moment for me, one that comes back frequently when I'm busy, tired, and being summoned by a troubled student. It was a simple act of courtesy and concern; it was a quiet, Christian deed, and it made all the difference in the world to me. I felt at home, at peace on campus, and my grades showed it.

The spirit of that little incident over thirty years ago drives what I feel today. I speak of being Christian, followers of him who has taught us to reach out, lift up, and embrace those who need us. The incident epitomizes for me what can exist among people, how men and women, how Latter-day Saints and non-Latter-day Saints can live together in love and harmony.

On Being a True Christian

Maybe it would be helpful, to begin with, to suggest what being Christian is not. It is easy to become caught up in many of the trappings of Christendom, to become enamored with so much of what so many feel to be Christian activity. For example, a Christian is not necessarily one who is so nice, so sweet, so Milquetoast, that people trample over him or her. Jesus was not a doormat, and he certainly did not call his disciples to be doormats. He has asked us to be patient, to avoid confrontations and disputations where such is possible, but he never asked us to roll over and play dead while others take advantage of us.

Nor is a Christian necessarily one who is so broad-minded, so eager to celebrate diversity, so tolerant, so pluralistic that he or she cannot hold to principle or embrace the full truth. Elder Dallin H. Oaks explained that "other strengths that can be used for our downfall are the gifts of love and tolerance. Clearly, these are great virtues. Love is an ultimate quality, and tolerance is its handmaiden. Love and tolerance are pluralistic, and that is their strength, but it is also the source of their potential weakness. Love and tolerance are incomplete unless they are accompanied by a concern for truth and a commitment to the unity God has commanded of his servants. Carried to an undisciplined excess," Elder Oaks continued, "love and tolerance can produce an indifference to truth and justice and opposition to unity. What makes mankind 'free' from death and sin is not merely love but love accompanied by truth. 'And ye shall know the truth, and the truth shall make you free' (John 8:32). And the test of whether we are the Lord's is not just love and tolerance but unity. 'If ye are not one,' the risen Lord said, 'ye are not mine' (D&C 38:27)." [^1]

A Christian is not necessarily one who champions every cause and leads every crusade. In fact, one of the great needs of this age is for persons possessed of the Spirit of God to be discerning, not alone in knowing good from evil, but also in sensing what things matter more than others. In a word, with so very many pressing needs, so very many enterprises that beckon for a leader or for followers, it is essential that we spend our days laboring in primary causes. Only four months after the Watergate scandal had become public, Elder Bruce R. McConkie spoke in general conference: "In view of all that prevails in the world," he said, "it might be easy to center our attention on negative or evil things, or to dissipate our energies on causes and enterprises of doubtful worth and questionable productivity.

"I am fully aware of the divine decree to be actively engaged in a good cause; of the fact that every true principle which works for the freedom and blessing of mankind has the Lord's approval; of the need to sustain and support those who espouse proper causes and advocate true principles—all of which things we also should do in the best and most beneficial way we can. The issue, I think, is not what we should do but how we should do it; and I maintain that the most beneficial and productive thing which Latter-day Saints can do to strengthen every good and proper cause is to live and teach the principles of the everlasting gospel." [^2]

The problem with the "social gospel movement," the effort to take Christendom into society and make of Christian theology a relevant religion, is that such an enterprise is, and will be forevermore, deficient. Permanent change is in Christ the Person, not in programs. Christ can have impact on society only to the degree that he is allowed to have impact on individual souls. One Evangelical writer, John Stott, has beautifully described the importance of extending the full blessings of Christianity to those who are in need: "If a vagrant comes to us in dire need, down and out, in rags and tatters, and sick, even starving, it will be good to give him a bath and a change of clothing, but not enough. For he is ill and undernourished. So, in addition, he needs food and hospital treatment. Similarly, we come to Christ down and out, in the rags and tatters of our sin, spiritually sick and starving. In Christ we are at once made welcome and accepted, and given a bath and a change of clothes. God sees us as righteous in Christ. This is our new status. So he puts his Spirit within us to give us new life and health, and he feeds us with his word until we grow strong and vigorous. There are no half-measures with him." [^3]

In the truest sense, one is a Christian when he or she fully believes that Jesus of Nazareth was and is the Son of God, the Savior and Redeemer, the Christ or Anointed One. A Christian is one who knows by the witness of the Holy Spirit that Christ is God, that he laid down his life by the power of the flesh and took it up again by the power of the Spirit. A Christian is one who calls upon the Father in the name of the Son for forgiveness, forsakes sin and indecency, and yearns to qualify for that new life that comes through redemption and renovation of the soul. A Christian is one whose commitment to Christ is such that he or she strives daily to become as Christ is, to acquire that nature and to embody those spiritual attributes and qualities that flow from him in whom all fulness and perfection dwell. A Christian, in other words, is not just one who does good deeds, as important as that is. It is one who accepts the doctrine of Christ, takes the name of Christ, and seeks thereafter to do the works of Christ. Goodness and decency and compassion are the natural by-products, the fruits that readily manifest themselves in the lives of those who have truly made Jesus their Lord and Master.

On Giving and Taking Offense

In 1977 my family and I moved to the South where I was to assume the direction of the institute of religion adjacent to the university there. I was asked to replace a man who had become an institution—both among his students and the members of the stake in which he served. He had become one of the most beloved of teachers I have ever known. A few days after our arrival, it became very clear that taking his place would not be easy. A student stopped by my office and, with a frightened look in his eye, asked: "Where's Brother Jensen?" I answered that he had moved from the area. "Moved from the area? Well, who's going to take his place?" I meekly admitted that I would try to do so. "Oh, terrific," he answered. The overall reception was not exactly cold, but rather a bit guarded. For three weeks students came into the place asking about Brother Jensen, some mourning his departure, others observing sadly that they had enjoyed institute very much up until now.

My wife, Shauna, and I were asked to speak in sacrament meeting in our new ward. We did so, and I thought it went fairly well. After "Amen" was said, I noticed a man from the congregation walking very quickly to the stand. He reached out his right hand, shook mine and said: "Hello. My name is Alex Campbell. My family was very, very close to the Jensens. I would like to say that you will never replace Brother Jensen as a speaker or a teacher, but we will try to love you anyway." I waited for him to smile, supposing that he was teasing or being sarcastic. He did not smile, but simply left the stand and returned to his family. The member of the bishopric conducting the meeting hastened to my side and explained how, indeed, the two families had become very close. When my wife and I got home, I remember going to the bedroom, lying on the bed, and crying. I said to her: "Why won't they at least give me a chance?" For a day or two, I am ashamed to admit, I had unkind feelings toward Alex Campbell. He was the straw that had broken the camel's back. It is important that you understand that my family and I came to love that part of the country more than any place we had lived, and, ironically, Alex became one of my dearest and closest friends.

To show you that Alex didn't change a great deal even after we became quite close, I relate the following. About six months after we had moved from the area, Alex and his family came to visit us during the Christmas season in our new home. I opened the door to welcome them and Brother Campbell looked into our home. His opening words were: "I've never cared for artificial Christmas trees!" I came to love him like a brother (and still do), not because all of his comments to me or mine were complimentary, nor because his style or taste or manner was just like mine. No, once I knew his heart, once I knew who he was and how much he cared, I felt no reason to take offense. I knew he had no desire to give offense, and so I chose to love him in spite of himself.

A few years after I had joined the faculty at BYU I had an experience that caused me much pain at the time. A man came to my office and indicated that he had heard that Joseph McConkie and I had published a book on life after death. I nodded. He then said: "I wonder if I might borrow a copy for a few days to see if it's something I might want to buy." I was a bit startled by the request but sheepishly complied and provided a copy of the book for him. Three days later he dropped by, slid the book across the desk, and said: "I've looked it over and decided that I don't want to buy it!" To say that I was hurt would be the grossest of understatements. Most of all I was shocked. And, of course, hurt. But I add quickly that over time this person and I developed a warm relationship.

I have feelings just like the next person. I have been insulted, belittled, put down in front of others. I know what it feels like to be misunderstood, to have my motives or my intentions questioned. In other words, I know what it feels like to be offended. On the one hand, you and I need to be more sensitive, more cautious with people's feelings. God loves us all, and, as the scriptures affirm, he is no respecter of persons. Christians do not shun others whose religious or political views are different than their own, any more than the Lord Jesus Christ would shun people. The Prophet Joseph Smith taught that "there is a love from God that should be exercised toward those of our faith, who walk uprightly, which is peculiar to itself, but it is without prejudice; it also gives scope to the mind, which enables us to conduct ourselves with greater liberality towards all that are not of our faith, than what they exercise towards one another. These principles approximate nearer to the mind of God, because [they are] like God, or Godlike." [^4]

There is, of course, another side to this story. In order to live in harmony, we must become the kind of people who are not constantly looking to take offense. Each of us could easily waste our lives striving to make our associates offenders for a word. I have come to know that we need not be offended, that one of the most important signs of spiritual growth is a refusal to take offense. We need not be angry or bitter or insulted. We need not make our sister or our brother an offender for a word. It really is not too difficult to look at a person's heart, to try to understand what they meant to do rather than what they did, or what they meant to say rather than what they said. Sometimes this entails simply looking the other way and assuming the best. Sometimes it requires forgiveness.

On Being a Friend to All

Jesus ate and drank with sinners. He occasionally companied with those who were considered to be on the lower crust of society. He befriended the underdog and was kind to the castoff. Because there was no insecurity within him, because he was guided always by the knowledge of who he was and whose he was, he felt no need to put on airs, manage appearances, or be socially selective. When someone spoke to Jesus, surely they had his full attention.

It is so easy for those of us who aspire to Christian discipleship to be driven by what others think, to allow our conversation and our conduct to be determined by less-than-noble motives. It is so simple to be drawn into duplicity, to become obsessed with whose opinion matters and whose company would bring the most mortal medals. But the lowly Nazarene calls us to a higher righteousness. He bids us to follow where he has led, to become a friend to all. I know what it feels like to be conversing with someone, only to have that conversation interrupted by a man or woman of greater social stature. I know what it feels like for the person with whom I was conversing to then ignore or shun me, to turn his attention to the one who seems to matter most at the moment. I also have been in the presence of persons whose hearts are unconcerned with society's pecking order, men and women who love people, not position. The former category of persons are those who tend to distinguish people in terms of rank and place in society; theirs is a degrading and demoralizing perspective and influence. On the other hand, those who have risen above the temptation to exclude or divide or distinguish in terms of getting ahead make a significant difference in the world.

On Being Inconvenienced

The call to follow Christ is a call to inconvenience. Some things simply take time. They take effort. Doing for others generally entails putting on hold what I had planned to do for myself. In the seventh chapter of Mark we read the following: "And from thence [Jesus] arose, and went into the borders of Tyre and Sidon, and entered into an house, and would have no man know it: but he could not be hid." The account continues by explaining that a certain woman found Jesus and pleaded with him to heal her daughter (Mark 7:24-26). Our Lord appears to be tired, weary, in need of rest and peace and solitude. The Joseph Smith Translation of this passage is most instructive: "And from thence he arose, and went into the borders of Tyre and Sidon, and entered into a house, and would that no man should come into him. But he could not deny them; for he had compassion upon all men" (JST, Mark 7:22-23; emphasis added). It is inconceivable that the Redeemer of the world couldn't hide himself if he wanted to. He is the God of the universe and has power over the elements. It is unthinkable that he could not conceal himself in some way, except that his compassion for his brothers and sisters would not allow him to do so. Our Savior was willing to be inconvenienced. And so must we be, if we are to become as he is. Such inconvenience may take many forms, some quite simple, others more dramatic. We may offer to assist a fellow member of the Church who is struggling with a particular principle; sincerely befriend a non-Latter-day Saint, even if he or she has no intention whatsoever of joining the LDS Church; or take the time to visit and cheer up someone who is homesick, lonely, or depressed.

Sometimes all we can do is wish we could help (see Mosiah 4:24). At least that's a start. Elder Boyd K. Packer told of an experience he had while in the military. Having been stationed for a time in Japan, Elder Packer explained, "I boarded a train in Osaka for Yokohama and a ship that would take me home. . . . Many tears were shed as we bade one another farewell.

"It was a very chilly night. The railroad station, what there was left of it, was very cold. Starving children were sleeping in the corners. That was a common sight in Japan in those days. The fortunate ones had a newspaper or a few old rags to fend off the cold.

"On that train I slept restlessly. The berths were too short anyway. In the bleak, chilly hours of the dawn, the train stopped at a station along the way. I heard a tapping on the window and raised the blind. There on the platform stood a little boy tapping on the window with a tin can. I knew he was one of the orphans and a beggar; the tin can was the symbol of their suffering. Sometimes they carried a spoon as well, as if to say, 'I am hungry; feed me.'

"He might have been six or seven years old. His little body was thin with starvation. He had on a thin, ragged shirt-like kimono, nothing else. His head was shingled with scabs. One side of his jaw was swollen—perhaps from an abscessed tooth. Around his head he had tied a filthy rag with a knot on top of his head—a pathetic gesture of treatment.

"When I saw him and he saw that I was awake, he waved his can. He was begging. In pity, I thought, 'How can I help him?' Then I remembered. I had money, Japanese money. I quickly groped for my clothing and found some yen notes in my pocket. I tried to open the window, but it was stuck. I slipped on my trousers and hurried to the end of the car. He stood outside expectantly. As I pushed at the resistant door, the train pulled away from the station. Through the dirty windows I could see him, holding that rusty tin can, with the dirty rag around his swollen jaw.

"There I stood, an officer from a conquering army, heading home to a family and a future. There I stood, half-dressed, clutching some money which he had seen, but which I could not get to him. I wanted to help him, but couldn't. The only comfort I draw is that I did want to help him.

"Perhaps I was scarred by that experience," Elder Packer concludes. "If so, it is a battle scar, a worthy one, for which I bear no shame. It reminds me of my duty." [^5]

In January 1982 at Washington's National Airport, Air Florida's flight 90 to Tampa crashed into the Fourteenth Street Bridge and slid into the Potomac River with seventy-four passengers aboard. One reporter explained: "For a moment, there was silence, and then pandemonium. Commuters watched helplessly as the plane quickly sank. . . . A few passengers bobbed to the surface; some clung numbly to pieces of debris while others screamed desperately for help. Scattered across the ice were pieces of green upholstery, twisted chunks of metal, luggage, a tennis racket, a child's shoe. . . .

"Within minutes, sirens began to wail as fire trucks, ambulances and police cars rushed to the scene. A U.S. Park Police helicopter hovered overhead to pluck survivors out of the water. Six were clinging to the plane's tail. Dangling a life preserving ring to them, the chopper began ferrying them to shore. One woman had injured her right arm, so [the] pilot . . . lowered the copter until its skids touched the water; his partner [then leaped out and] scooped her up in his arms. Then [a young woman] grabbed the preserver, but as she was being helped out of the . . . river by [a] fellow passenger . . . she lost her grip. . . . A clerk for the Congressional Budget Office who was watching from the shore plunged into the water and dragged her to land. But the most notable act of heroism was performed by [another] of the passengers, a balding man in his early 50s. Each time the ring was lowered, he grabbed it and passed it along to a comrade; when the helicopter finally returned to pick him up, he had disappeared beneath the ice." [^6]

In that same issue of Time, another writer described the unknown man in the water: "His selflessness [is] one reason the story held national attention; his anonymity another. The fact that he [has gone] unidentified invests him with a universal character. For a while he was Everyman, and thus proof (as if one needed it) that no man is ordinary.

"Still, he could never have imagined such a capacity in himself. Only minutes before his character was tested, he was sitting in the ordinary plane among the ordinary passengers, dutifully listening to the stewardess telling him to fasten his seat belt and saying something about the 'no smoking sign.' So our man relaxed with the others, some of whom would owe their lives to him. Perhaps he started to read, or to doze, or to regret some harsh remark made in the office that morning. Then suddenly he knew that the trip would not be ordinary. Like every other person on that flight, he was desperate to live, which makes his final act so stunning.

"For at some moment in the water he must have realized that he would not live if he continued to hand over the rope and ring to others. He had to know it, no matter how gradual the effect of the cold. In his judgment he had no choice. When the helicopter took off with what was to be the last survivor, he watched everything in [his] world move away from him, and he deliberately let it [go]. . . .

"The odd thing is that we do not . . . really believe that the man in the water lost his fight.

" . . . He could not [like nature], make ice storms, or freeze the water until it froze the blood. But he could hand life over to a stranger, and that is a power of nature too. The man in the water pitted himself against an implacable, impersonal enemy; he fought it with charity; and he [won]." [^7]

Conclusion

The Savior expects us to do our part to assure that all we do in the Church is imbued with the religion of Jesus Christ. President Hugh B. Brown observed that "religion has too often spent a large proportion of its effort on doings apart from the real business of life. One of life's problems is to establish a deep understanding of man's relationship to his fellow men. . . . Every man's religion should have practical issue," he continued, "not merely emotional responsiveness which delights in hearing the gospel but lacks diligence in living it. We must remember that religion is action, not diction. Let us pray that God will deliver us from our dullness of conscience, from a feeble sense of duty, from thoughtless disregard of others, and from all halfheartedness in our work." [^8] People really matter. They matter more than anything. God is in the people business (see Moses 1:39), and we should be too. The story is told that Julia Ward Howe expressed a concern to a senator on one occasion. "I am in need of help for a very special person," she said. "Julia, I am so busy," the man answered, "I can no longer concern myself with individuals." Her reply is so very pertinent to our day: "That's remarkable," she came back. "Even God hasn't reached that stage yet." [^9]

Is there someone out there who needs me? Do I know of someone who could use a friend, who would come alive to an unassigned or unexpected phone call or visit? Do I treat those not of my faith with dignity, respect, and consideration, attempting earnestly never to exclude them or make them feel uncomfortable? "It is a serious thing," C. S. Lewis has written, "to live in a society of possible gods and goddesses, to remember that the dullest and most uninteresting person you talk to may one day be a creature which, if you saw it now, you would be strongly tempted to worship. . . . There are no ordinary people. You have never talked to a mere mortal. Nations, cultures, arts, civilization—these are mortal, and their life is to ours as the life of a gnat. But it is immortals whom we joke with, work with, marry, snub, and exploit." [^10]

At the convocation for the College of Education at Brigham Young University in the summer of 1992, one of the students shared with her fellow graduates, and the others present, a touching story about an experience she had with a young Native American boy. He had been stereotyped by previous teachers as incorrigible, as a serious problem. She felt impelled to reach out and help. She knew the family situation was difficult and thought that if she visited his home she might find some clue as to how to reach him. The experience stunned and sobered her. She found poverty, neglect, addiction—everything that is negative and destructive seemed to be present. Her heart ached for the boy; his situation made her despondent. As she poured her heart out in prayer to the Lord she found herself asking, "Have you forgotten this boy?" Then the answer came, quietly and reassuringly: "No, that is why I sent you."

So very often the Almighty answers people's prayers—the prayers of the lonely, the downtrodden, the hungry, the bitter—through other people, through those sensitive souls who open themselves to inspiration and are willing to be inconvenienced. There are joys, supernal joys, that unfold in our lives as we learn to love others as we would desire to be loved. As we come to do so, we come unto him who is the embodiment of love. And in so doing, we become truly Christian.

Notes

From an address given to BYU faculty and students, Provo, Utah, 14 January 1993.

---
Notas:
[^1] C. S. Lewis, Mere Christianity (New York: Touchstone, 1996), 10-11.
[^2] Gordon B. Hinckley, "Excerpts from Recent Addresses of President Gordon B. Hinckley," Ensign, February 1998, 73.
[^3] Gordon B. Hinckley, in Conference Report, April 1998, 13.
[^4] Ezra Taft Benson, in Conference Report, October 1985, 5.
[^5] Howard W. Hunter, in Conference Report, October 1979, 93.
[^6] Gordon B. Hinckley, in interview with Phil Riesen, KUTV Television, Salt Lake City, 12 May 1995; as quoted in Sheri L. Dew, Go Forward with Faith: The Biography of Gordon B. Hinckley (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1996), 576.
[^7] Lewis, Mere Christianity, 178.
[^8] Hugh B. Brown, Vision and Valor (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1971), 48, 50; emphasis added.
[^9] Richard L. Evans, Richard Evans' Quote Book (Salt Lake City: Publisher's Press, 1971), 165.
[^10] C. S. Lewis, The Weight of Glory (New York: Macmillan, 1949), 14-15; emphasis in original.
