Robert L. Millet, Selected Writings of Robert L. Millet: Gospel Scholars Series ( 2000)

Chapter 27

Latter-day Saint Christianity

Few things are needed more in this complex world than understanding. Unfortunately, religious discussions too often devolve into debates or wars of words as a result of defensiveness over this or that theological issue. On the other hand, I have been involved in some truly remarkable conversations during the last several years, sharing and comparing and contrasting the vexations of the soul that took place between people who honestly wanted to know about the other person's faith and way of life. Christian dialogue is vital if we are to come to that understanding out of which can derive meaningful engagement of the pressing problems that face us as we enter the twenty-first century.

The Christian Definition

Latter-day Saints claim to be Christians on the basis of their doctrine, their defined relationship to Christ, and their practice or way of life. One reason why C. S. Lewis is so well received by Latter-day Saints—and so often quoted—is because of his broad and inclusive vision of Christianity. We resonate with Lewis's words: "It is not for us to say who, in the deepest sense, is or is not close to the spirit of Christ. We do not see into men's hearts. We cannot judge, and are indeed forbidden to judge. It would be wicked arrogance for us to say that any man is, or is not, a Christian in this refined sense. . . . When a man who accepts the Christian doctrine lives unworthily of it, it is much clearer to say he is a bad Christian than to say he is not a Christian." [^1]

Several years ago, Professor Stephen Robinson and I were contacted by the LDS Church Public Affairs Office and asked if we would be willing to participate in an interview with representatives of the Southern Baptist Convention (SBC). We were informed that they were preparing a video presentation on The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, in preparation for an upcoming SBC conference in Salt Lake City in June of 1998. My interview—which consisted basically of my response to a series of questions—lasted for about an hour and a half. We covered much ground, including the role of prophets, our views concerning the Bible, the person and nature of God the Father, and our teachings on Jesus Christ. For at least twenty or thirty minutes I described our understanding of the Atonement and of the necessity of the mercy and grace of Christ. When the Baptists' videotape The Mormon Puzzle was released about a year later, I felt that it portrayed quite accurately, for the most part, our fundamental beliefs and, of course, the differences between LDS and Baptist beliefs. One part was, however, particularly troublesome to me: the narrator stated that the Latter-day Saints do not believe in salvation by the grace of Christ.

Several months later, Stephen and I were invited to Kansas City to meet once again with representatives of the SBC. They were eager to know our feelings concerning the movie. We commented that it was nice that Mormons had been allowed to express themselves. But I also voiced my disappointment in what was said about our lack of belief in grace. I said, essentially, "If you want to say that the Latter-day Saints have an unusual view of grace, or a deficient view of grace, or a false view of grace, we can live with that, for we obviously have differences on what constitutes grace. But to say that we have no view of grace is a serious misrepresentation that confuses and misleads people." This episode highlights what I believe to be an important issue in meaningful dialogue: people ought to be allowed to express their views, and we ought to believe them. We don't have to agree with their beliefs, but it accomplishes precious little to ask a person what he believes and then to ignore his observations or to respond, as the interviewer did to me—at least ten times—"Yes, but you don't really believe that." After hearing that phrase repeatedly, I said: "You know, I don't mean to be defensive or unkind, but I'm an expert on what I believe. I have no reason to be dishonest with you. Don't you think it would be extremely unwise for me to state on film that the Latter-day Saints believe this or that when in fact we believe something else?"

I have reflected on those experiences for some time now. That visit of the Southern Baptists provided at least twenty opportunities for me to clarify to newspaper reporters, radio or television personalities, or magazine editors what we really believe. Having done this a few times, therefore, let me state what I believe our position is in regard to Christianity. In short, Latter-day Saints believe in Christ. That is:

We believe Jesus is the Son of God, the Only Begotten Son in the flesh.

We believe the accounts of Jesus' life and ministry recorded in Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John in the New Testament to be historical and thus truthful. For us the Jesus of history is indeed the Christ of faith.

We believe that he was born of a virgin, Mary, in Bethlehem of Judea in what has come to be known as the meridian of time, the central point in salvation history. From his mother Mary, Jesus inherited mortality, the capacity to feel the pains and frustrations and ills of this world, including the capacity to die.

We believe Jesus is the Son of God the Father and as such inherited powers of godhood and divinity from his Father, including immortality, the capacity to live forever and to make those same attributes and powers available to others.

We believe Jesus performed miracles, including granting sight to the blind, hearing to the deaf, life to those who had died, and forgiveness to those steeped in sin. We believe the New Testament accounts of healings and nature miracles and the cleansing of human souls to be authentic and real.

We believe Jesus taught his gospel—the glad tidings or good news that salvation had come to earth through him—in order that people might more clearly understand their relationship to God and their responsibility to one another.

We believe Jesus conferred divine authority upon others and organized a church. The Church of Jesus Christ was established, as the Apostle Paul later wrote, for the perfecting of the Saints and for the unity of the faith (see Ephesians 4:11-14).

We believe that Jesus' teachings and his own matchless and perfect life provide a pattern for men and women to live by and the only way to find true happiness and fulfillment in this life.

We believe that Jesus understood clearly who he was and that he made it sufficiently clear to others. He was condemned and tried for what the Jews called blasphemy and for what the Romans considered treason.

We believe Jesus suffered in the Garden of Gethsemane and that he submitted to a cruel death on the cross of Calvary, all as a willing sacrifice, a substitutionary atonement for our sins. We believe that offering is made efficacious as we exercise faith and trust in him; repent of our sins; are baptized by immersion as a symbol of our acceptance of his death, burial, and rise to newness of life; and receive the gift of the Holy Ghost (see Acts 2:37-38; 3 Nephi 27:19-20).

We believe that true Christian discipleship consists in continuing in his word (see John 8:31-32) through faithful obedience to his commandments. We do not believe that we can either overcome the flesh or gain eternal reward through our own unaided efforts. We must work to our limit and then rely upon his merits, mercy, and grace to see us through the struggles of life and into life eternal (see 2 Nephi 2:8; 31:19; Moroni 6:4).

We believe that our discipleship ought to be evident in the way we live our lives, that those who have come unto Christ by covenant should manifest the "fruit of the Spirit" (Galatians 5:22-25; Alma 7:23-24) and thus be Christlike in their dealings with others.

Obviously I could go on and on in setting forth what we believe, in articulating the ways in which the Latter-day Saint tradition defines itself as Christian. But suffice it to say that we consider ourselves to be Christian in that we claim that Jesus Christ is the head of our church and the central figure in the doctrine and practice of the LDS faith and way of life.

President Gordon B. Hinckley stated: "Are we Christians? Of course we are! No one can honestly deny that. We may be somewhat different from the traditional pattern of Christianity. But no one believes more literally in the redemption wrought by the Lord Jesus Christ. No one believes more fundamentally that He was the Son of God, that He died for the sins of mankind, that He rose from the grave, and that He is the living resurrected Son of the living Father.

"All of our doctrine, all of our religious practice stems from that one basic doctrinal position: 'We believe in God, the Eternal Father, and in His Son, Jesus Christ, and in the Holy Ghost.' This is the first article of our faith, and all else flows therefrom." [^2]

Relating to Other Christian Groups

President Hinckley has also noted: "There are some of other faiths who do not regard us as Christians. That is not important. How we regard ourselves is what is important. We acknowledge without hesitation that there are differences between us. Were this not so there would have been no need for a restoration of the gospel." [^3] This statement highlights one of the challenges Latter-day Saints face in the religious world: people deny that we are Christian. Having read others' views on the matter and having discussed this for hundreds of hours, my conclusion is that the LDS Church is said to be a non-Christian organization for the following reasons:

The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is not in the historical Christian tradition. That is to say, we are neither Catholic nor Protestant and thus cannot trace our roots historically, in an unbroken fashion, through the Reformation and back in time to the first-century Christian church. Implied in this criticism is the fact that Latter-day Saints believe in an apostasy, a loss of precious truths and divine authority from the church Jesus organized. Thus the Latter-day Saints reject the doctrine of the Trinity and the theological formulations of the church councils through the centuries.

The Mormons do not believe in the sufficiency or inerrancy of the Bible. They believe in modern revelation, modern prophets, and thus modern scripture.

The Mormons have unusual doctrines that distance them from traditional Christians (nature of God, nature of the creation, the need for temples and temple ordinances, the deification of man, etc.).

Again, we could list other reasons why certain groups do not acknowledge the Latter-day Saints as Christian, but these three seem to distil the concerns most effectively.

Our belief in an apostasy of the primitive church is of course directly tied to our belief in the need for a complete restoration of the gospel. We are neither Protestant nor Catholic, but rather a restored church. Thus when someone asks a Latter-day Saint to justify or "prove" this or that Latter-day Saint doctrine or practice from the Bible, the most honest response might be something like this: "We do not establish our doctrine from the Bible alone. Ours is an independent revelation. We know what we know and do what we do as a result of modern and continuing revelation delivered to Joseph Smith and his prophetic successors."

Occasionally we hear certain Latter-day Saint teachings described as unbiblical or of a particular doctrine being contradictory to the Bible. The Bible is one of the books within our canon or standard works, and thus our doctrines and practices are in harmony with the Bible. There are times, of course, when latter-day revelation provides clarification or enhancement of the intended meaning in the Bible. But addition to the canon is not the same as rejection of the canon. Supplementation is not the same as contradiction. All of the prophets, including the Savior himself, were sent to bring new light and knowledge to the world; in many cases, new scripture came as a result of their ministry. That new scripture did not invalidate what went before, nor did it close the door to subsequent revelation.

A belief in the need for a restoration (as well as our position, so understandably unpopular among many, that ours is the "only true church") does not mean that we do not acknowledge truth and goodness in individuals and organizations throughout the earth, but rather that through Joseph Smith God chose to restore the fulness of the everlasting gospel with its doctrine, priesthood authority, and church organization. And so on the one hand, there are many things about which fruitful dialogue can and should go on, including the testimony and teachings of Jesus contained in the four Gospels and the other books of the New Testament.

In early August of 1997, my colleague Brent Top and I traveled to another part of the country to meet with a well-known Evangelical theologian, author, pastor, and teacher who is also host of a radio broadcast that is heard throughout the nation. Brent and I had read several of this man's books and had enjoyed his preaching over the years. Let me explain that as a part of an outreach effort to better understand those of other faiths (and to assist them to understand us a little better), we have visited such institutions as Notre Dame, Baylor, Catholic University, and Wheaton College. We met the minister and then attended his church on both Sunday morning and Sunday evening, and in both meetings were impressed with his expository preaching style.

The next day we met for lunch and then had a wonderful, two-hour doctrinal discussion. I explained that we had no set agenda and were not exactly sure why we had chosen to visit him, except that we had admired his writings and wanted to meet him. I think we added that we had several questions we would like to pose in order to better understand Evangelical theology. I mentioned that I oversaw the teaching of religion of almost thirty thousand young people at Brigham Young University and that I felt it would be wise for me to be able to articulate properly and accurately the beliefs of our brothers and sisters of other faiths. I hoped, as well, that they might make the effort to understand our beliefs so as not to misrepresent what we teach.

I should add, at the first, that the pastor was absolutely stunned that two Latter-day Saint religion professors would visit him, but he was even more perplexed that we had read his books and enjoyed them! I took it a step farther: I indicated to him that although there were some doctrinal chasms between us, I had quoted him in quite a few of my own books. We began our discussion of one of his books and shared our feelings, as he had stated so forcefully in his work, that true faith always manifests itself in faithfulness and that too many people who claim Christian discipleship betray their lack of conversion to the Savior by their worldliness.

Early in our conversation he said something like, "Look, anyone knows there are big differences between us. But I don't want to focus on those differences. Let's talk about Christ." We then discussed faith in Christ, justification by faith, baptism, sanctification, salvation, heaven, hell, agency and predestination, premortal existence, and a number of other fascinating topics. We compared and contrasted, we asked questions, and we answered questions. In thinking back on what was one of the most productive and worthwhile learning experiences of our lives, I recognize that the one thing that characterized our discussion, and the one thing that made the biggest difference, was the mood that existed there—a mood of openness, candor, and a general lack of defensiveness. We knew what we believed, and we were all committed to our own religious tradition. No one was trying to convert the other, but rather instead we were making an effort to understand one another. To be sure, we would have loved to have left the area after having attended his baptism, but that wasn't why we organized the visit, nor did we have any pretension to anything so bold. Likewise, the minister said to us, "Well, guys, obviously I would love to bring you around to my way of thinking, but it's nice to better understand you." This experience says something to me about what can happen when men and women of good will come together in an attitude of openness and in a sincere effort to better understand and be understood.

More recently my colleague Andrew Skinner and I visited Wheaton College in Illinois on two different occasions. The first trip was simply an opportunity to get to know some of the religion faculty there, to visit religion and history classes, and to become acquainted with the personnel and the resources at the Wade Center, which houses the largest collection of C. S. Lewis materials in the world. We learned of an upcoming conference on Lewis and requested information. A call for papers was sent to me, and I made a proposal. The organizing committee accepted and explained that they would be delighted to have me come. Our hosts stated that the Latter-day Saint perspective on Lewis would add a valuable dimension to the conference.

My paper provided an LDS perspective on the theology of C. S. Lewis (one of the later chapters in this volume), dealing mostly with why Lewis's thinking is so well received among the Mormons. Professor Skinner and I had an unforgettable experience there and came away richly blessed for the association, the conversations, and the exchange. Again, everyone there, faculty and students alike, knew of our religious differences, but no one seemed eager (at least in the public settings) to label us as cultists or to suggest that we had some malicious purpose or ulterior motive for being there. The questions from students and faculty were courteous, thoughtful, and contributive to meaningful dialogue.

Implications for Dialogue

There is a very real sense in which the Latter-day Saints are a part of the larger "body of Christ," the Christian community, whether certain groups feel comfortable with acknowledging our Christianity or not. Given the challenges we face in our society—fatherless homes, child and spouse abuse, divorce, poverty, spreading crime and delinquency, spiritual wickedness in high places—it seems so foolish for men and women who claim to believe in the same Lord and Savior, whose hearts and lives have been surrendered to that Savior, to allow doctrinal differences to prevent them from working together. Okay, you believe in a triune God, that the Almighty is a spirit, and that he created all things ex nihilo. I believe that God is an exalted Man, that he is a separate and distinct personage from the Son and the Holy Ghost. She believes that the Sabbath should be observed on Saturday, while her neighbor does not believe in blood transfusions. This one speaks in tongues, that one spends much of his time leading marches against social injustice, while a third believes that little children should be baptized. One good Baptist is a strict Calvinist, while another tends to take freedom of the will seriously. And so on, and so on.

Do we agree on the problems in our world? Do we agree on the fact that most all of these ills have moral or spiritual roots? President Ezra Taft Benson once quoted Beverly Nichols: "You do change human nature, your own human nature, if you surrender it to Christ. Human nature can be changed here and now. Human nature has been changed in the past. Human nature must be changed on an enormous scale in the future, unless the world is to be drowned in its own blood. And only Christ can change it." [^4] Do we, as believers in the divinity of Jesus of Nazareth, believe this? Elder Howard W. Hunter once remarked that "whatever Jesus lays his hands upon lives. If Jesus lays his hands upon a marriage, it lives. If he is allowed to lay his hands on the family, it lives." [^5] Does this have implications for broken homes, broken covenants, and broken hearts in a world strangled by relativism?

What I am asking is this: in the spirit of Christian brotherhood and sisterhood, is it not possible to lay aside theological differences long enough to address the staggering social issues in our troubled world? My recent interactions with men and women of various faiths have had a profound impact on me; they have broadened my horizons dramatically and reminded me—a sobering reminder we all need once in a while—that we are all sons and daughters of the same Eternal Father. We may never resolve our differences on the Godhead or the Trinity, on the spiritual or corporeal nature of Deity, or on the sufficiency of the Bible, but we can agree that salvation is in Christ; that the ultimate transformation of society will come only through the application of Christian solutions to pressing moral issues; and that the regeneration of individual hearts and souls is foundational to the restoration of virtue in our communities and nations. One need not surrender cherished religious values or doctrines in order to be a better neighbor, a more caring citizen, a more involved municipal.

In addition, we can have lively and provocative discussions on our differences, and such interactions need not be threatening, offensive, or damaging to our relationships. What we cannot afford to do, if we are to communicate and cooperate, is to misrepresent one another or ascribe ulterior motives. Such measures are divisive and do not partake of that Spirit of Christ that strengthens, binds, and reinforces.

Conclusion

President Gordon B. Hinckley said of the Latter-day Saints: "We want to be good neighbors; we want to be good friends. We feel we can differ theologically with people without being disagreeable in any sense. We hope they feel the same way toward us. We have many friends and many associations with people who are not of our faith, with whom we deal constantly, and we have a wonderful relationship. It disturbs me when I hear about any antagonisms. . . . I don't think they are necessary. I hope that we can overcome them." [^6]

In conclusion, it seems appropriate to share some personal feelings. I believe with all my heart in God and in his Son, Jesus Christ. I am committed to the doctrine and practices of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints; indeed, I have never been more committed to my own religious tradition than I am right now. At the same time, I have never been more liberal in my views—in the proper sense of that word liberal, meaning open, receptive—in regard to people of other faiths, especially Christian faiths. To some extent I am motivated in this direction by the following statement in the Book of Mormon: "For behold, the Spirit of Christ is given to every man, that he may know good from evil; wherefore, I show unto you the way to judge; for every thing which inviteth to do good, and to persuade to believe in Christ, is sent forth by the power and gift of Christ; wherefore ye may know with a perfect knowledge it is of God" (Moroni 7:16).

It is my conviction that God loves us, one and all, for I believe he is our Father in heaven and that he has tender regard for us. I also feel strongly that, in spite of growing wickedness, men and women throughout the earth are being led to greater light and knowledge, to the gradual realization of their own fallen nature and thus of their need for spiritual transformation. C. S. Lewis once stated that there are people "who are slowly becoming Christians though they do not yet call themselves so. There are people who do not accept the full Christian doctrine about Christ but who are so strongly attracted by Him that they are His in a much deeper sense than they themselves understand." Lewis went on to speak of people "who are being led by God's secret influence to concentrate on those parts of their religion which are in agreement with Christianity, and who thus belong to Christ without knowing it." [^7]

That God's Holy Spirit will bring to consummation his works and designs on this planet, in order that the ancient Christian supplication—"Thy kingdom come. Thy will be done in earth, as it is in heaven" (Matthew 6:10)—may thereby be granted, is my sincere prayer.

Notes

From an address delivered at the Conference on Christian Dialogue, Utah Valley State College, Orem, Utah, 29 October 1998.

---
Notas:
[^1] See Random House College Dictionary, rev. ed. (New York: Random House, 1988), s.v. "holy."
[^2] Teachings of Gordon B. Hinckley (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1997), 461-62.
[^3] "Follow the Prophet," Children's Songbook (Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1989), 111.
[^4] William Wordsworth, as cited in Jack M. Lyon et al., Best-Loved Poems of the LDS People (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1996), 305.
[^5] Dallin H. Oaks, "Our Strengths Can Become Our Downfall," 1991-92 Brigham Young University Speeches (Provo: Brigham Young University Publications, 1992), 107-15.
[^6] Boyd K. Packer, "That All May Be Edified" (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1982), 65.
[^7] Dallin H. Oaks, as quoted by N. Eldon Tanner, in Conference Report, October 1973, 124.
