Robert L. Millet, Selected Writings of Robert L. Millet: Gospel Scholars Series ( 2000)

Chapter 28

A Call to Holiness

We are Latter-day Saints. As members of the Lord's restored church, we are striving to become holy. Let's begin with a definition. To be holy is to be consecrated, dedicated, devoted, devout, pure, just, good, godly. [^1] As the 1828 Webster's Dictionary states, "We call a man holy, when his heart is conformed in some degree to the image of God, and his life is regulated by the divine precepts." Please note, then, that a holy person is one who lives a life that is patterned after the Savior, where divine precepts both motivate and monitor one's conduct.

We live in a day that militates against holiness, when time-honored values are ridiculed and when those who stand up for basic morality are considered marginal in society. It is, in fact, the day of Satan's power, wherein evil is called good and good is defined as evil, where darkness is labeled as light and light is considered to be darkness (see Isaiah 5:20). Because society's slouch toward Gomorrah will persist, it is impossible for us to ascertain moral truth in the world and dangerous for us to follow current and future trends. That is to say, we take our cues from society at our peril. Where, then, in a world afflicted with creeping relativism, do we turn for standards? A few years ago President Gordon B. Hinckley cited a study conducted on the moral values of producers, directors, and writers in Hollywood and television. The study indicated that these persons are "far less religious than the general public and 'diverge sharply from traditional values' on such issues as abortion, homosexual rights and extramarital sex. . . . This group has had a major role in shaping the shows whose themes and stars have become staples in our popular culture." [^2]

Again, where do we look for moral and spiritual constants? We look to the scriptures, to the prophets. We sustain fifteen men as prophets, seers, and revelators. They are prophets in that they have the testimony of Jesus (see Revelation 19:10; D&C 46:13) and stand as special witnesses of the name of Christ in all the world (see D&C 107:23). They are revelators in the sense that they are called to stand as covenant spokesmen, charged to learn the will of God concerning the people of the covenant and then make it known. They are seers in the sense that they see things not visible to the natural eye, troublesome and disturbing things afar off, things about which we need to be forewarned (see D&C 101:54; Moses 6:36). The children sing it best: "Follow the prophet; he knows the way." [^3] I plead with us, therefore, to look to the prophets, to listen to them, to read their words in the most recent conference issue of the Ensign, to make their teachings our walk and talk.

Excessive Tolerance and Misplaced Loyalty

I have a grave concern with spiritual desensitization, with the effort by Satan to dull our sensitivities to sin and to confuse our consciences. As the poet Wordsworth wisely observed, "The world is too much with us." [^4] There are too many things that an earlier generation would have spurned and rejected as deadly to their souls that we have allowed to become part of our world. Some of this has happened as a result of what I call excessive tolerance or misplaced loyalty.Let me illustrate. Several years ago one of my students asked if she could visit with me after class. She had been with me for two semesters of Book of Mormon, and she was, frankly, a delight to have in class. The light of the gospel radiated from her countenance. She came in to tell me good-bye. I said, "Well, I'll see you next year, won't I?" She shook her head and said, "No, I won't be coming back to BYU." I asked why. She said: "Brother Millet, I'm tired. No, it's more than that—I'm worn out. I haven't slept for almost a year now." Was she tired of studying? I asked. Wouldn't a summer break do the trick? No, that wasn't it. She explained that her roommates, all returned missionaries, had their boyfriends over each night until the early morning hours. More specifically, there was never a place for her to sleep, inasmuch as two of her roommates had their male companions in bed with them every night.

I was stunned. Shocked. Sickened. "Well, why didn't you tell someone? Why didn't you mention it to the landlord or the bishop?" Her answer was very revealing, and it also highlights a significant problem that many in this generation face. She said: "But wouldn't that be judging them?" We then had a long, long discussion about what it meant to judge righteous judgment.

I explained to her that you and I, as men and women seeking to be holy, are under obligation to make judgments each day of our lives. We must decide whether we will spend time with some people, in particular places, doing certain things. Such decisions, very much a part of making our way through the mists of darkness, are vital; our hope for eternal life depends upon our making wise judgments.

In our day, it seems as though the most serious flaw a person can have is to be intolerant. One would rather be immoral, unclean, degenerate. But whatever you do, don't dare to be intolerant. Now, to be sure, we must be Christian, must be understanding, must be loving and concerned. But such virtues must never cloud the issue of what is right and what is wrong, what is good and what is evil. We must not, as Elder Dallin H. Oaks pointed out to BYU students, allow our strengths to become our weaknesses. [^5] We must not allow our tendency to be tolerant to become the very means by which vice becomes acceptable and even encouraged. If we do not stand up for some things, we will fall for most anything.

To be aware of sins and indiscretions all about us and to refuse to report these things is to be dishonest and dishonorable. It is, in a sense, to condone and even enable sin. Further, please do not misunderstand the principle of loyalty. I am under no obligation, even as a caring friend, to be loyal to an associate or a roommate or a coworker who is guilty of gross dishonesty or of violating the standards of the Church or the community in which we live. My primary loyalty is to God, his Son Jesus Christ, and the leaders of the Church. Can we not see the inconsistency of attempting to be loyal to someone who is being disloyal to divine precepts or established standards of decency?

Safeguarding Our Thoughts

President Boyd K. Packer declared: "Years ago I put up signs in my mind. They are very clearly printed and simply read: No Trespassing. No dumping allowed. On occasions it has been necessary to show them very plainly to others.

"I do not want anything coming into my mind that does not have some useful purpose or some value that makes it worth keeping. I have enough trouble keeping the weeds down that sprout there on their own without permitting someone else to clutter my mind with things that do not edify.

"I've hauled a few of these away in my lifetime. Occasionally I've tossed these thoughts back over the fence where they came from, when it could be done in a friendly manner.

"I've had to evict some thoughts a hundred times before they would stay out. I have never been successful until I have put something edifying in their place." [^6]

Happy is the man or woman whose thoughts are clean and pure. We must do all in our power to control what goes into our minds. Let us use wisdom and discernment in what movies we attend, what videos we watch, what sitcoms we become addicted to. If for no other reason than pure obedience, we should avoid R-rated movies and any others (no matter their rating) that wink at immorality or parade excessive violence. We must not gauge our viewing according to what the box office says. Very often, in fact, box office success should serve as a caution light. Remember the words of the Savior: "Enter ye in at the strait gate: for wide is the gate, and broad is the way, that leadeth to destruction, and many there be which go in thereat: because strait is the gate, and narrow is the way, which leadeth unto life, and few there be that find it" (Matthew 7:13-14).

We must give careful attention to the music we consume, the pictures that surround us, and what we view on the internet. Thoughts are seedbeds of action. Some years ago President Dallin H. Oaks said to BYU students: "We are surrounded by the promotional literature of illicit sexual relations on the printed page and on the screen. For your own good, avoid it. Pornographic or erotic stories are worse than filthy or polluted food. The body has defenses to rid itself of unwholesome food, but the brain won't vomit back filth. Once recorded it will always remain subject to recall, flashing its perverted images across your mind, and drawing you away from the wholesome things in life." [^7]

There is another matter that prevents many of us from enjoying the Spirit of the Lord in our lives as we might: the tendency to live on the edge, to play percentages with God, to tempt fate and to place ourselves in circumstances that can contribute to our spiritual undoing. There are those who want to see how far they can go without going all the way; those who want to drive the vehicle as close to the edge of the cliff as possible with no intention whatever of falling; those who cunningly creep up on the flame with no intention of ever being burned; those who want to enjoy all the privileges of Babylon but at the same time keep their citizenship in Zion intact. I promise you that there is no lasting happiness in such approaches to life, but rather a type of moral or spiritual schizophrenia. Too many people want to be good, but not too good; others want to be bad, but not too bad. Some want to serve the Lord without offending the Devil. As my colleague Brent Top once observed, one cannot "dance and dine in the great and spacious building" and still hold on to the iron rod; clinging to the iron rod requires both hands, as well as both heart and soul. [^8] James taught that "a double minded man is unstable in all his ways" (James 1:8). We would do well to stay as far away from sin and compromise as we can, to not only avoid evil but also the very appearance of evil (see 1 Thessalonians 5:22). Prevention is far, far better than redemption.

A Peculiar People

The Apostle Peter wrote to the primitive Saints scattered abroad: "Ye are a chosen generation, a royal priesthood, an holy nation, a peculiar people; that ye should shew forth the praises of him who hath called you out of darkness into his marvellous light" (1 Peter 2:9). Yes, the Saints of the Most High are called upon to be a peculiar people. "We are not freaks," Elder Bruce R. McConkie pointed out, "but normal, wholesome people who enjoy life. We work and play, engage in sports, mingle with other people, go to parties, and enjoy festive occasions. But we are, nonetheless, peculiar in the eyes of worldly people. We are a breed set apart. We are different from the world because we do not ape the practices and follow the fashions of worldly and carnal people. We glory in the things which set us apart by ourselves, and we hope and pray that we may maintain and increase the differences." [^9]

We ought to search out, be sensitive to, and applaud the good that is in our society. There is much that is sweet and uplifting and edifying. But if we are to qualify to go where God and angels are, we must see to it that the distance between us and worldliness is increasing day by day. This will come to pass as our minds and hearts are transformed by the Spirit of God, as we come to see what we ought to see, hear what we ought to hear, and feel what we ought to feel. If we live in such a way that the Holy Ghost can dwell in us, then over time our desires are educated, our judgment is refined, our conscience is sharpened. In speaking of the former-day Saints, Alma observed that they "were sanctified, and their garments were washed white through the blood of the Lamb." Now note what follows: "Now they, after being sanctified by the Holy Ghost, having their garments made white, being pure and spotless before God, could not look upon sin save it were with abhorrence; and there were many, exceedingly great many, who were made pure and entered into the rest of the Lord their God" (Alma 13:11-12).

The Holy Ghost is a Revelator as well as a Comforter. And the Holy Ghost is a Sanctifier, the means by which waywardness and rebellion and stubbornness, along with sin and iniquity and vice, are burned out of our souls as though by fire. That sanctifying or cleansing influence can be ours as we make up our minds to do things the way the Lord would have us do them. Too many people in today's world want to go to their graves singing, "I did it my way." As C. S. Lewis once remarked, there are only two kinds of people in this world: those who say to God in this life, "Thy will be done," and those to whom God says, in the life to come, "Thy will be done." [^10] In that spirit, Mormon explained concerning a group of Saints living in about 40 b.c.: "They did fast and pray oft, and did wax stronger and stronger in their humility, and firmer and firmer in the faith of Christ, unto the filling their souls with joy and consolation, yea, even to the purifying and the sanctification of their hearts, which sanctification cometh because of their yielding their hearts unto God" (Helaman 3:35).

A peculiar people is a purchased people. That is, we are not our own; we have been bought with a price (see 1 Corinthians 6:19-20), even "the precious blood of Christ, as of a lamb without blemish and without spot" (1 Peter 1:19). We believe that we are saved by the merits and mercy and grace of the Holy Messiah (see 2 Nephi 2:8), but we do not believe in "cheap grace." What cost God the Father everything, even the life blood of his Only Begotten Son, cannot be treated as "a thing of naught" (1 Nephi 19:9). We are a people of covenant. We have made supernal promises, some of us in holy places, to stand as lights to a world desperately in need of direction and focus. We are under solemn obligation to be the salt of the earth (see D&C 101:39-40), to bring out the best in the world, to preserve the world from decay and destruction. It is important to remember that salt does not lose its savor or influence with age; salt loses its savor through mixture and contamination.

The Way Back

Perhaps there are some among us who are carrying heavy burdens, even the burdens of sin. Satan would whisper lies to us. He would suggest that serious sins are between you and God, that you can work it out by yourself. He would try to convince some that it's too late, that they have gone too far, that the way back is too difficult. I bear my witness that these are lies, lies spawned in the infernal pits by the Father of Lies himself. He would have you to be miserable like unto himself (see 2 Nephi 2:18). We must never surrender ourselves to such rubbish. There is a way back. It will not be easy, but it is possible. Our priesthood leaders hold the keys that will assist in lifting the heavy weight from the heart. Our Savior suits his tender mercies according to our varying and specific needs (see D&C 46:15), and he who knows us best will direct our priesthood leader in exactly how best to bless our lives.

That 1828 Webster's Dictionary that I mentioned earlier provides one additional definition of the word holy. To be holy is to be whole, complete, fully formed, finished. In other words, to be holy is to be perfect in the scriptural sense. No man nor woman can of themselves ever, worlds without end, become perfect in this life in the sense that they no longer make mistakes, no longer take a backward step. But we can become perfect in Christ. Our Divine Redeemer is complete, while I am incomplete. As I come unto him, we (the Lord and I) are complete. He is whole while I am partial. Together we are whole and complete. He is finished while I am unfinished. Together we are finished. And he is perfect while I am oh, so imperfect. Together, in covenant, we are perfect. Covenant union with Christ allows him to share with me and transfer to my spiritual account his riches and his righteousness. Thus it is that the faithful learn to rely alone upon the merits of Christ, "who [is] the author and the finisher of their faith" (Moroni 6:4). Thus it is that the revelations declare concerning those who inherit the celestial kingdom: "These are they whose names are written in heaven, where God and Christ are the judge of all. These are they who are just men [and women] made perfect through Jesus the mediator of the new covenant, who wrought out this perfect atonement through the shedding of his own blood" (D&C 76:68-69; see also Moroni 10:32).

Conclusion

I know that God, our Heavenly Father, lives. He is the Man of Holiness (see Moses 6:57).

I desire with all the strength I have within me to become a holy man, to qualify one day to go where he is. I desire the same for you. Peter wrote: "As he which hath called you is holy, so be ye holy in all manner of conversation," meaning in conduct as well as in speech. "Because it is written, Be ye holy; for I am holy" (1 Peter 1:15-16; see also Leviticus 11:44).

I know that Jesus Christ lives, that he is the Son of God and our only hope for reconciliation with the Man of Holiness. It is only through applying his atoning blood and putting off the natural man that we become a holy people (see Mosiah 3:19). Truly, there is power, power in the blood, even the blood of Christ (see Leviticus 17:11). I know that the Holy Ghost, the third member of the Godhead, is a revelator and a sanctifier. By his influence we come to know the truthfulness of the restored gospel and the reality of personal redemption in Christ. While it is by virtue of the blood of Christ that we are purified, the Spirit is the agent, the sanctifying medium by which we come unto Christ and are made holy.

I know that Joseph Smith was a prophet of God, the Choice Seer (see 2 Nephi 3:7) raised up by the Almighty to stand as the head of this final dispensation. And I know that this Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is, in the language of the revelations, the only true and living church on the face of the whole earth (see D&C 1:30). As now constituted, with apostles and prophets at its head, it is in the line of its duty and is preparing a people for the second coming of the Son of Man.

God grant that we, the people of the covenant, will be wise in the days of our probation; that we will put away the foolishness of the flesh and put out of our lives those things that have no place among a people concerned with holiness. I pray that we will do so, that we may in time see the face of the Lord with pleasure and hear those tender words of welcome, "Come unto me, ye blessed, there is a place prepared for you in the mansions of my Father" (Enos 1:27).

Notes

From an address delivered at the BYU Fourteenth Stake Conference, Provo, Utah, 25 October 1998.

---
Notas:
[^1] PromisedMessiah, 515-16; emphasis added.
[^2] See Gospel Doctrine, 373.
[^3] Neal A. Maxwell, in Conference Report, October 1988, 40.
[^4] George Q. Cannon, Gospel Truth, comp. Jerreld L. Newquist, 2 vols. in 1 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1987), 493.
[^5] Bruce R. McConkie, Doctrines of the Restoration, ed. Mark L. McConkie (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1989), 232.
[^6] Gospel Doctrine, 9.
[^7] John A. Widtsoe, Evidences and Reconciliations, arr. G. Homer Durham (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1987), 16-17.
[^8] Ibid., 31-32.
[^9] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 216.
[^10] C. S. Lewis, The Great Divorce (New York: Touchstone, 1996), 72.
