Robert L. Millet, Selected Writings of Robert L. Millet: Gospel Scholars Series ( 2000)

Chapter 32

Alma, the Angel, and Aunt Gladys

In the Book of Mormon we read of a tragic and poignant moment in the lives of King Mosiah and Alma. These two noble souls had given themselves to the gospel cause and laid their all on the altar of Christ. What might otherwise have been a joyful season in life was flawed by the disobedience and waywardness of their own sons: Alma the younger and the sons of Mosiah were among the unbelievers who had actually begun to fight against the Church of Christ and to lead others astray. Of Alma the younger, the account states: "He was a man of many words, and did speak much flattery to the people; therefore he led many of the people to do after the manner of his iniquities. And he became a great hinderment to the prosperity of the church of God; stealing away the hearts of the people; causing much dissension among the people; giving a chance for the enemy of God to exercise his power over them" (Mosiah 27:8-9). One can only imagine the grief and perhaps embarrassment that the king and president of the Church must have felt as they preached of the importance of love and fidelity to truth and the joys of family living.

Mormon writes that "as they were going about rebelling against God, behold, the angel of the Lord appeared unto them; and he descended as it were in a cloud; and he spake as it were with the voice of thunder, which caused the earth to shake upon which they stood." The angel said unto Alma: "Behold, the Lord hath heard the prayers of his people, and also the prayers of his servant, Alma, who is thy father; for he has prayed with much faith concerning thee that thou mightest be brought to the knowledge of the truth; therefore, for this purpose have I come to convince thee of the power and authority of God, that the prayers of his servants might be answered according to their faith" (Mosiah 27:11, 14).

Alma and the sons of Mosiah were stopped in their tracks, as it were, turned about and redirected. Alma underwent a major spiritual transformation, was born again—changed from a carnal and fallen state to a state of righteousness. The sons of Mosiah—Ammon, Aaron, Omner, and Himni—underwent a similar transformation (see Mosiah 28:3). Thereafter the foursome devoted themselves wholly to the work of the Lord and were directly involved in the conversion of thousands of souls to the gospel. Their conversion could not repair every damage and retrieve every apostate word. Indeed, as President Boyd K. Packer explained, "There are times you cannot mend that which you have broken. Perhaps the offense was long ago, or the injured refuse your penance. Perhaps the damage was so severe that you cannot fix it no matter how desperately you want to." However, he continued, "when your desire is firm and you are willing to pay the 'uttermost farthing,' the law of restitution is suspended. Your obligation is transferred to the Lord. He will settle your accounts." [^1] And so it was that Alma and the sons of Mosiah transferred their burden to God and yielded themselves to the work of the Master. They "labored without ceasing, that [they] might bring souls unto repentance; that [they] might bring them to taste of the exceeding joy of which [they] did taste; that they might also be born of God, and be filled with the Holy Ghost" (Alma 36:24).

This conversion is a remarkable story, an inspiring narrative, one that spawns significant lessons for life, lessons that span the chasm of time. For example, one important lesson is that no one of us is beyond spiritual recovery, that "all are within the reach of pardoning mercy, who have not committed the unpardonable sin." [^2] God can recognize goodness and potential within each of us, as he did with Saul of Tarsus, the infamous persecutor of the Christians. When Ananias hesitated to assist this enemy of the faith after Saul had been struck down on the road to Damascus, the Lord said boldly: "Go thy way: for he is a chosen vessel unto me, to bear my name before the Gentiles, and kings, and the children of Israel" (Acts 9:15).

Secondly, parents may find especial comfort in this story, particularly parents whose children have wandered from the fold. It is so very difficult to keep going, to do all the right things, to keep one's head up and one's courage intact—it is extremely tough to stay at the wheel when those we love the most forsake the faith and way of life to which we have consecrated ourselves. And yet the promise is extended to all of us that "the effectual fervent prayer of a righteous man availeth much" (James 5:16), and that both in time and eternity our God shall wipe away all tears (see Isaiah 25:8; Revelation 7:17; 21:4). Parents thus hope on, pray on, and trust in the power of the gospel covenant to restore, renew, and rekindle the flame of faith in the hearts of our children.

These are indeed soothing and settling thoughts. But there is an aspect of the story that may prove a bit unsettling for some, a dimension of this conversion experience that may cause us unrest. Some questions arise: Why would an angel come to Alma? Why should he be so privileged? Is that the way most of us are turned around? Where is the fairness in the system? Why should the bulk of humankind be asked to wait and yearn and suffer until something much less dramatic (if at all) comes to pass? And so forth.

I suppose if all rebellious souls were struck down by an angel who confirmed such matters as the reality of God, the truthfulness of the gospel, and the certainty of a life beyond, there would be little need for faith on anyone's part. If every time I was about to take a backward step or to stray from the strait and narrow, my effort were to be blocked by a caring but conspicuous ministering angel, I would never be left to myself to choose good over evil and therefore would never grow into that spiritual maturity that derives from overcoming the world.

Second, such appearances by angels might actually create the temptation to obtain a testimony by negative behavior rather than through quiet and consistent gospel living. Young people might, for example, become fascinated with the possibility of seeing an angel. And what would be required? Simply to misbehave. Since few among the faithful are accorded the privilege of seeing angels, it would seem a strange system of salvation that freely granted such a privilege to the wayward.

Third, it just might be the case that an appreciable number of people have indeed had an angelic ministration but have rejected the divine counsel and chosen to continue in their waywardness. We would undoubtedly be left without a record of such instances, except perhaps by believers who knew about them. Furthermore, the coming of an angel does not assure change. We know, for example, that Laman and Lemuel were chastened by an angel but that his words were ignored. "Ye are swift to do iniquity," Nephi said to his older brothers, "but slow to remember the Lord your God. Ye have seen an angel, and he spake unto you; yea, ye have heard his voice from time to time; and he hath spoken unto you in a still small voice, but ye were past feeling, that ye could not feel his words; wherefore, he has spoken unto you like unto the voice of thunder, which did cause the earth to shake as if it were to divide asunder" (1 Nephi 17:45; emphasis added).

Fourth, the Savior explained that those who reject the testimony of scripture and living prophets are no more prone to accept the testimony of angels. In the parable of the rich man and Lazarus, the rich man, now in the postmortal spirit world and sensing finally that he has sealed his doom by insulating himself from the pleadings of the needy on earth, begs thereafter that words of warning be sent to his living kindred. "Then he said, I pray thee therefore, father [Abraham], that thou wouldest send him [Lazarus, who is now in paradise] to my father's house: for I have five brethren; that he may testify unto them, lest they also come into this place of torment. Abraham saith unto him, They have Moses and the prophets; let them hear them. And he said, Nay, father Abraham: but if one went unto them from the dead, they will repent. And he said unto him, If they hear not Moses and the prophets, neither will they be persuaded, though one rose from the dead" (Luke 16:27-31; emphasis added).

Fifth, the Apostle Paul offered the following sobering counsel: "Let brotherly love continue. Be not forgetful to entertain strangers: for thereby some have entertained angels unawares" (Hebrews 13:1-2). That is to say, sometimes we are like the two disciples on the road to Emmaus—our eyes are holden or restrained (see Luke 24:16) so that we are not able to see who it is that walks among us, teaches us, lifts us up, and points or repoints us toward the abundant life. For that matter, is it not possible that unseen angels whisper or testify or warn in ways that we cannot now perceive but which will be obvious to us one day? In speaking of angels, Mormon affirmed that "the office of their ministry is to call men unto repentance, and to fulfil and to do the work of the covenants of the Father, which he hath made unto the children of men, to prepare the way among the children of men, by declaring the word of Christ unto the chosen vessels of the Lord, that they may bear testimony of him. And by so doing, the Lord God prepareth the way that the residue of men may have faith in Christ, that the Holy Ghost may have place in their hearts" (Moroni 7:31-32).

Finally, it should be remembered that the Lord, who can manifest his power in a variety of ways, is hardly limited to angelic ministrations or open visions. Many have had conversion experiences of spiritual impact and consequence equal to that of Alma and the sons of Mosiah, experiences that are the result of a coalescence of divinely contrived circumstances: life-changing experiences involving such things as a confrontation with death, an inspired sermon, a scriptural passage that seemed to leap off the page, or a caring and sensitive parent, relative, friend, or a concerned and persistent priesthood leader.

It was in fact while pondering upon the matter of this grand Book of Mormon conversion story several years ago that I was instructed through the medium of memory. At about the time I turned eighteen years of age, I was deeply involved in the activities and programs of the Church. I was a stake missionary, had memorized some of the missionary discussions and scriptures, and had been working along with the full-time missionaries at least a couple of nights per week. I was so excited about serving a full-time mission that I couldn't wait for the time to pass when my bishop (who was my dad) and I could begin the paperwork and interviews. All was well for several months, and then, without warning, my attitudes and my ideas began to change. I gradually began to think more and more about life at home, about friends and school, and about how long two years really was. In looking back now on that season of my life, there's no question but that Satan began to make subtle inroads into my character and my resolve to be a missionary.

I remember my father sitting down with me on a number of occasions at about the time of my nineteenth birthday and asking: "Well, son, shall we begin the process?" And I recall an answer that went something like: "Look, I really do want to do this, but I just don't feel prepared yet. I'm not quite ready." This happened at least three times. The last time my dad heard those words about my lack of readiness he gently and lovingly said, in effect, "Robert, this is your decision. It's something you need to do on your own. You need to pray sincerely about this. Your mom and I will never pressure or push you to go on a mission." And then he added this pertinent comment: "But let me say one more thing. You're as ready as anyone I know. If you wait until you are perfectly prepared to go, you will never go." His words meant something to me, mainly because I had such a deep respect for my father and for his example of commitment to the kingdom. But I didn't make any progress toward beginning the process.

A few days after my interview with Dad, there came a phone call for me. The person on the other end of the line said, "Is this you, Robert? This is Aunt Gladys. Do you have a few minutes?" I asked her if she wanted to speak with my mother, but she quickly fired back: "No, you're the one I want to talk to." I thought it was a little odd that she should call me in the middle of the day. But she was one of my favorite people in the world. Her daughter (my cousin Linda) and I had always been very close, and so Aunt Gladys was someone I dearly loved. There's one other thing that made her and my Uncle Junior special: they had been a significant influence in helping our family come back into full activity in the Church just after I was baptized. Uncle Junior had baptized me and my mother (who had been a Methodist) and had written my very first talk (which I memorized and delivered), a brief message on Joseph Smith's First Vision. It was clear from the way they lived and the things they valued that the gospel meant everything to them.

We carried on a light conversation for an hour and a half, discussing such varied topics as football and college and my love life. Though one side of me felt a little strange spending so much time on the phone with a mature adult, it was actually kind of fun. Then Gladys surprised me with this question: "Listen, Robert, there are some things I want to chat with you about. Do you have some time tomorrow?" I thought and searched and finally admitted that I had no plans. "Good," she said. "Why don't you come over and have lunch with me and we can spend the afternoon together." Again, I thought it sounded a bit strange, but I felt that no harm could come from it. I need to add that Aunt Gladys is one who is close to the Source, one who has lived in tune with the Spirit of the Lord. She always made me slightly nervous when she said something like, "I had a dream the other night . . ." or "I've been feeling lately as though I ought to . . ." or as she said to me when she called that day on the phone: "You've been on my mind a lot lately." Let me make it clear that there was nothing out of line, nothing inappropriate about her impressions, her feelings, and her dreams. They were from the Lord and we knew her well enough to know that. I suppose that my respect for her judgment and my awareness of her spirituality combined to cause me some nervousness about spending the afternoon with her. But I decided to do so anyway.

The next afternoon I found that the time slipped by rather quickly. There was an unusual spirit in her living room as we spoke, and my fears were banished by the feeling of love and peace I felt there. At the right moment, in a voice that shared her tender concern, she said, in essence: "Robert, I've been worried about you. I have known from the time that you were a tiny boy that you should serve a mission, and that your mission would chart the course for your life. I want you to know that your Uncle Junior and I love you, just as if you were one of our own children. Perhaps it is out of this love for you, and the deep affection I feel for your mom and dad, that I share with you some feelings I have had during the past few weeks. I feel that it's critical that you leave on a mission and that you leave soon. If you do not, I'm afraid you will never go." Though she didn't perhaps know it, I had heard similar words not long before from my father. But Aunt Gladys's words went down into my heart and burned like fire. I knew that I must serve a mission, and I knew that the time was short. The Lord needed me now. We embraced as I left and I thanked her for being in tune.

I left within weeks for the Eastern States Mission. And, as she predicted (and as I knew would be the case), my mission was a turning point in my life. I learned how to work hard, how to set and achieve goals, how to lead others, how to take setbacks and deal productively with adversity, how to love and cherish people, and how to acquire and cultivate the spirit of revelation. I learned what things matter most in life, how critical it is to have an eye single to the glory of God, and how to consecrate my heart to the gospel cause. Every major decision in my life thereafter—including what kind of person I should marry and how I would know when I found her—has to some degree been made by virtue of what I learned and what I experienced on a mission. Other than my temple marriage, which is the most significant event in my life, the choice to serve a mission is without exception the most far-reaching and influential decision I have ever made.

Over the last few years as I have rethought my experience with Aunt Gladys, it has become clear to me that although our Heavenly Father will force no man or woman to heaven, he will do everything he can to attract and entice us toward the fulness of gospel blessings. A zealous but misdirected Saul of Tarsus was redirected by the Lord Jesus himself. Alma's wayward course was interrupted by an angel, and his personal life and the Nephite narrative were never the same thereafter. God didn't choose to send an angel to me, but he did send Aunt Gladys, and my life has not been the same since. Alma may have had his angel, but I had Gladys. And for me at least, the turnaround was just as dramatic. I have come to appreciate President Spencer W. Kimball's insight that "God does notice us, and he watches over us. But it is usually through another mortal that he meets our needs." [^3] I know that angels have ministered and do minister and will yet minister to men and women on earth, "so long as time shall last, or the earth shall stand, or there shall be one man on the face thereof to be saved" (Moroni 7:36). But I also rejoice in the knowledge that the Almighty, who knows all things from beginning to end, has brought to pass, does now bring to pass, and will yet bring to pass great and important things through the sensitive intervention of attentive and caring men and women.

Notes

From a lecture given to an adult religion class on the Book of Mormon, BYU Continuing Education, Provo, Utah, 1996.

---
Notas:
[^1] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 160.
[^2] Joseph Fielding McConkie, "The Principle of Revelation," in Robert L. Millet and Kent Jackson, eds., Studies in Scripture, Volume 1: The Doctrine and Covenants (Sandy, Ut.: Randall Book Co., 1984), 81.
[^3] For prophetic statements as to the corporeality of God prior to this statement in section 130, see Words of Joseph Smith, 60, 64. For a detailed discussion of Joseph Smith's teachings regarding God's physical nature, see Robert L. Millet, "The Supreme Power Over All Things: The Doctrine of the Godhead in the Lectures on Faith," in The Lectures on Faith in Historical Perspective (Provo: Religious Studies Center, Brigham Young University, 1990), 221-40.
