Robert L. Millet, Selected Writings of Robert L. Millet: Gospel Scholars Series ( 2000)

Chapter 33

Learning the Spirit of Revelation

Salvation cannot come without revelation," Joseph Smith taught. "It is in vain for anyone to minister without it." [^1] It should thus come as no surprise to Latter-day Saints to learn that when the time had fully arrived for the promised restitution of all things, when the glorious day of restoration had dawned, it was necessary for God to make known through Joseph Smith myriad pertinent truths. Not the least of these was the nature and scope of revelation itself—from whence it comes, the manner in which it is to be received, and how it is to be understood. Thus, numerous passages in the Doctrine and Covenants describe, some almost as a passing comment, what people must do to qualify for the gifts and guidance of that member of the Godhead known as the Revelator. "It remained for Joseph Smith to announce to a disbelieving world," one Latter-day Saint has written, "that that same God who spoke so freely in times past not only could, but had spoken again, and that the promise of James that any who sought the wisdom of heaven in faith still had claim upon it." [^2]

The Light of Christ and the Holy Ghost

The Lord pulled back the veil, tore away the theological cobwebs of centuries of darkness and apostasy, and revealed to Joseph the Seer the nature and kind of being we worship. "The Father has a body of flesh and bones as tangible as man's," he explained; "the Son also; but the Holy Ghost has not a body of flesh and bones, but is a personage of spirit. Were it not so, the Holy Ghost could not dwell in us" (D&C 130:22). The Prophet thus made clear that our God is an exalted man, a Man of Holiness, a resurrected, immortal being in whose image man is in reality created. [^3] The corporeal or physical nature of the Almighty was thus made known once again through the one called and chosen in premortality to reveal God to man in the final dispensation of time.

Some of the revelations in the Doctrine and Covenants also do much toward explaining the divine nature of God. God is omnipotent: he has all power. He is omniscient: he has all knowledge. It is in the Doctrine and Covenants we learn that through his influence, that divine glory and power which emanates from him to fill the immensity of space, he is omnipresent: he is everywhere present at once. Inasmuch as God is a physical being, he cannot occupy more than one space at a time, but through his glory (called in the scriptures the light of Christ or the spirit of Jesus Christ) he is able to be in and through and round about all things:

"He that ascended up on high, as also he descended below all things, in that he comprehended all things, that he might be in all and through all things, the light of truth;

"Which truth shineth. This is the light of Christ. As also he is in the sun, and the light of the sun, and the power thereof by which it was made.

"As also he is in the moon, and is the light of the moon, and the power thereof by which it was made;

"As also the light of the stars, and the power thereof by which they were made;

"And the earth also, and the power thereof, even the earth upon which you stand.

"And the light which shineth, which giveth you light, is through him who enlighteneth your eyes, which is the same light that quickeneth your understandings;

"Which light proceedeth forth from the presence of God to fill the immensity of space—

"The light which is in all things, which giveth life to all things, which is the law by which all things are governed, even the power of God who sitteth upon his throne, who is in the bosom of eternity, who is in the midst of all things" (D&C 88:6-13).

This is a most remarkable revelation. Through it we become privy to the fact that the light of Christ is the governing principle in nature, the power by which the cosmos is held in check and by which order and organization exist. Elder Parley P. Pratt wrote that the light of Christ, "in its less refined existence," is "the physical light which reflects from the sun, moon, and stars." In its higher degrees, it serves as the means "by which we reason, discern, judge, compare, comprehend and remember the subjects within our reach. Its inspiration constitutes instinct in animal life, reason in man, vision in the Prophets, and is continually flowing from the Godhead throughout all his creations." [^4] According to Elder Bruce R. McConkie, the light of Christ "defies description and is beyond mortal comprehension. . . . It has neither shape nor form nor personality. It is not an entity nor a person nor a personage. It has no agency, does not act independently, and exists not to act but to be acted upon. It is variously described as light and life and law and truth and power. . . . It is the power of God who sitteth upon his throne. It may be that it is also priesthood and faith and omnipotence, for these too are the power of God." [^5]

The light of Christ is given to every man and woman at birth as a natural endowment; it is described as that spirit which "giveth light to every man that cometh into the world" (D&C 84:46; compare John 1:9; Moroni 7:16). It is a director, a moral monitor which is "innate, inborn, and intuitional in nature. Call it conscience, if you will; say that it is a divine inheritance from a Divine Parent; identify it as a spark of divinity sent by Deity to fire the soul with the flames of righteousness; . . . it has many names. But what counts is that it is real." [^6] The revelations further attest that "every one that hearkeneth to the voice of the Spirit [the light of Christ] cometh unto God, even the Father. And the Father teacheth him of the covenant which he has renewed and confirmed upon you . . . for the sake of the whole world" (D&C 84:47-48). That is to say, if men and women in the world will respond to the quiet promptings and subtle whisperings of the light of Christ within them, they will be led, either in this life or the next, to that higher light of the Holy Ghost found only in the covenant gospel through membership in the Lord's church. President Joseph F. Smith explained that this light "strives with the children of men, and will continue to strive with them, until it brings them to a knowledge of the truth and the possession of the greater light and testimony of the Holy Ghost." [^7] Elder McConkie has thus described the influence of the light of Christ and the ministry of the Holy Ghost as follows:

"The light of Christ (also called the Spirit of Christ and the Spirit of the Lord) is a light, a power, and an influence that . . . is everywhere present and accounts for the omnipresence of God. It is the agency of God's power and the law by which all things are governed. It is also the agency used by the Holy Ghost to manifest truth and dispense spiritual gifts to many people at one and the same time. For instance, it is as though the Holy Ghost, who is a personage of spirit, was broadcasting all truth throughout the whole universe all the time, using the light of Christ as the agency by which the message is delivered. But only those who attune their souls to the Holy Spirit receive the available revelation. It is in this way that the person of the Holy Ghost makes his influence felt in the heart of every righteous person at one and the same time." [^8]

Revelation for the Church

The Restored Church was less than six months old when difficulties regarding revelation were encountered. "Brother Hiram Page had in his possession a certain stone," Joseph Smith recorded, "by which he had obtained certain 'revelations' concerning the upbuilding of Zion, the order of the Church, etc., all of which were entirely at variance with the order of God's house, as laid down in the New Testament, as well as in our late revelations." [^9] In describing this incident in Church history, Newel Knight observed that "even Oliver Cowdery and the Whitmer family had given heed to them. . . . Joseph was perplexed and scarcely knew how to meet this new exigency. That night I occupied the same room he did," Brother Knight continued, "and the greater part of the night was spent in prayer and supplication. After much labor with these brethren, they were convinced of their error, and confessed the same, renouncing [Page's] revelations as not being of God." [^10] It was because of Page's claims to revelation for the Church that the Lord spoke through Joseph Smith to Oliver Cowdery, giving what we now know as section 28 of the Doctrine and Covenants:

"Behold, I say unto thee, Oliver, that it shall be given unto thee that thou shalt be heard by the church in all things whatsoever thou shalt teach them by the Comforter, concerning the revelations and commandments which I have given.

"But, behold, verily, verily, I say unto thee, no one shall be appointed to receive commandments and revelations in this church excepting my servant Joseph Smith, Jun., for he receiveth them even as Moses" (D&C 28:1-2).

Some five months later another episode provoked a similar oracle from the Lord. A Mrs. Hubble, presumably a recent convert to the Church, "professed to be a prophetess of the Lord and professed to have many revelations, and knew the Book of Mormon was true, and that she would become a teacher in the Church of Christ. She appeared to be very sanctimonious and deceived some who were not able to detect her in her hypocrisy: others however had the spirit of discernment, and her follies and abominations were made manifest." [^11] Again in reply the Lord spoke of Joseph Smith as "him whom I have appointed unto you to receive commandments and revelations from my hand. And this ye shall know assuredly" the Savior reemphasized, "that there is none other appointed unto you to receive commandments and revelations until he be taken, if he abide in me." And then, in summarizing the course the Saints were to follow in that day and forevermore, the Master said: "And this shall be a law unto you, that ye receive not the teachings of any that shall come before you as revelations or commandments; and this I give unto you that you may not be deceived, that you may know they are not of me" (D&C 43:2-3, 5-6).

The principle is clear and the doctrine certain: only the president of the Church—the prophet, seer, and revelator for the Church—has the right to receive divine direction for the whole Church, for this is the person the Lord will inspire "to move the cause of Zion in mighty power for good" (D&C 21:7). "He alone," explained President J. Reuben Clark Jr., "has the right to receive revelations for the Church, either new or amendatory, or to give authoritative interpretations of scriptures that shall be binding on the Church, or change in any way the existing doctrines of the Church. He is God's sole mouthpiece on earth for The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, the only true Church. He alone may declare the mind and will of God to His people." [^12] This principle and practice ensure orthodoxy in the Church and kingdom of God, an institution guided and led by him whose house is a house of order (see D&C 132:8).

Receiving Personal Revelation

"No man can receive the Holy Ghost," the Prophet explained, "without receiving revelations," for "the Holy Ghost is a revelator." [^13] President Joseph F. Smith likewise taught that "every individual in the Church has just as much right to enjoy the spirit of revelation and the understanding from God which that spirit of revelation gives him, for his own good, as the bishop has to enable him to preside over his ward." [^14] We thus find numerous instances in the Doctrine and Covenants—particularly in the early revelations to the Church—detailing such matters as how and in what manner God may choose to communicate with his people.

An important insight pertaining to the spirit of revelation came to Oliver Cowdery in April of 1829. Oliver, who desired to translate and thus do more than act as scribe to the Prophet in their work with the gold plates, was told: "Oliver Cowdery, verily, verily, I say unto you, that assuredly as the Lord liveth, who is your God and your Redeemer, even so surely shall you receive a knowledge of whatsoever things you shall ask in faith, with an honest heart. . . . Yea, behold, I will tell you in your mind and in your heart, by the Holy Ghost, which shall come upon you and which shall dwell in your heart. Now, behold, this is the spirit of revelation; behold, this is the spirit by which Moses brought the children of Israel through the Red Sea on dry ground" (D&C 8:1-3). [^15] We note with much interest that revelation is to be given to the heart as well as to the mind, that the divine communication is to involve the feelings as well as the natural cognitive processes of man. In commenting upon these verses, Joseph F. McConkie has written:

"We observe that neither [Oliver] nor Joseph was to experience any suspension of their natural faculties in the process of obtaining revelation. Quite to the contrary, their hearts and minds were to be the very media through which the revelation came. Prophets are not hollow shells through which the voice of the Lord echoes, nor are they mechanical recording devices; prophets are men of passion, feeling, and intellect. One does not suspend agency, mind, or spirit in the service of God. It is . . . with heart, might, mind and strength that we have been asked to serve, and in nothing is this more apparent than the receiving of revelation. There is no mindless worship or service in the kingdom of heaven." [^16]

In a sense, the mind and the heart serve as a system of witnesses, a means whereby one may not be deceived or misled to trust his eternal salvation to either the rational processes alone or to the feelings or emotions alone.

As to the workings of the Spirit of God, and as to the matter of things coming into the mind, let us here observe that almost always a revelation from God will be rational, will make sense, will be in harmony with the commonly accepted standards and ideals set down by God and prophets and the laws of the land. "In the Church," Elder Boyd K. Packer has pointed out, "we are not exempt from common sense. You can know to begin with that you won't be prompted from any righteous source to steal, to lie, to cheat, to join anyone in any kind of moral transgression." [^17] Yes, God did command Abraham to sacrifice Isaac, and Nephi to slay Laban, but these were rare exceptions, and both Abraham and Nephi were prophets and seers: they knew the voice of the Lord implicitly and thus could converse with the Spirit, which had come to be a constant companion. The Lord will not reveal to an individual member of the Church anything that is out of harmony with law and order and good judgment, or in conflict with the order of the Church and the position of the leaders of the Church. Further, God will never call upon his people to perform an action which is unnatural or indecorous in the eyes of God and man. [^18]

Enos, the son of Jacob, explained concerning his own spiritual odyssey: "I went to hunt beasts in the forests; and the words which I had often heard my father speak concerning eternal life, and the joy of the saints, sunk deep into my heart. And my soul hungered." After crying unto God "all the day long" in "mighty prayer," Enos declared that "there came a voice unto me, saying: Enos, thy sins are forgiven thee, and thou shalt be blessed." After Enos had learned that the remission of sins had come because of his faith in Jesus the Christ, after he had begun to feel a desire for the welfare of the Nephites, and after he had continued his struggle in the spirit, he recounted, "Behold, the voice of the Lord came into my mind again, saying: I will visit thy brethren according to their diligence in keeping my commandments" (Enos 1:3-5, 10). Joseph Smith also spoke of the manner in which the Spirit may act upon the mind: "A person may profit by noticing the first intimation of the spirit of revelation; for instance, when you feel pure intelligence flowing into you, it may give you sudden strokes of ideas, so that by noticing it, you may find it fulfilled the same day or soon; (i.e.) those things that were presented unto your minds by the Spirit of God, will come to pass; and thus by learning the Spirit of God and understanding it, you may grow into the principle of revelation, until you become perfect in Christ Jesus." [^19]

The nature of the occasion, as well as the readiness and need of the recipient, dictates how a message from God may be communicated. Certain situations require a message that pierces to the very soul, and in some cases that voice, although still and small, makes "the bones to quake" while it makes manifest the mind of the Lord (D&C 85:6; see also Helaman 5:30; 3 Nephi 11:3). In speaking of how God makes known his will through the heart of man, Elder Packer said: "These delicate, refined spiritual communications are not seen with our eyes nor heard with our ears. And even though it is described as a voice, it is a voice that one feels more than he hears." [^20] President Ezra Taft Benson similarly taught: "We hear the words of the Lord most often by a feeling. If we are humble and sensitive, the Lord will prompt us through our feelings. That is why spiritual promptings move us on occasion to great joy, sometimes to tears. . . . The Holy Ghost causes our feelings to be more tender. We feel more charitable and compassionate. We are calmer. We have a greater capacity to love. People want to be around us because our very countenances radiate the influence of the Spirit." [^21] Thus it is that Nephi explained to his errant brothers that in spite of the visible manifestations they had received from a benevolent God, they had remained unmoved and unchanged, incorrigible because they were "past feeling" (1 Nephi 17:45). Thus it is that the Lord explained to Oliver Cowdery that after he had studied and pondered and drawn conclusions on his own, he would come to feel those things which were right and from God (see D&C 9:8).

One of the precious but often overlooked aspects of revelation through our feelings is peace. In one sense, to be at peace is to have received a meaningful revelation, to have the inner awareness that God is pleased with one's life and that the course one has charted is in harmony with the divine will (see D&C 59:23). In another sense, peace is a means by which the Lord responds to petitions and answers prayers. "Blessed art thou," the Lord said to Oliver Cowdery, "for what thou hast done; for thou hast inquired of me [concerning the truthfulness of the Restoration], and behold, as often as thou hast inquired thou hast received instruction of my Spirit. . . . Behold, thou knowest that thou hast inquired of me and I did enlighten thy mind; and now I tell thee these things that thou mayest know that thou hast been enlightened by the Spirit of truth." The Savior then continued with his instructions and an invitation: "Verily, verily, I say unto you, if you desire a further witness, cast your mind upon the night that you cried unto me in your heart, that you might know concerning the truth of these things." This is a reference to the occasion when, while residing in the Smith home, Oliver had inquired of the Lord concerning the truthfulness of the family's claims concerning Joseph Smith Jr. and the coming forth of the Book of Mormon. "Did I not speak peace to your mind concerning the matter?" the Lord asked. "What greater witness can you have than from God?" (D&C 6:14-15, 22-23).

The Doctrine and Covenants identifies and illustrates a number of ways revelation comes: through personal appearance of the Lord (D&C 110:1-10); through personal appearance of other heavenly messengers (D&C 110:11-15; 128:20); in vision (D&C 76; 137; 138); by the voice of God (D&C 128:21); through the Urim and Thummim (D&C 3, 6, 11, 14); and through the Holy Ghost speaking to our minds and hearts (D&C 8:2-3; 9:7-9). It would be a mistake for the Latter-day Saints to suppose that answers and confirmations come only in one way—as a burning in the bosom, for example. The Lord desires to communicate with his children and will choose the means that will most clearly and persuasively convey his holy words and his perfect will to those who seek him diligently. "If thou shalt ask," he stated as early as 1831, "thou shalt receive revelation upon revelation, knowledge upon knowledge, that thou mayest know the mysteries and peaceable things—that which bringeth joy, that which bringeth life eternal" (D&C 42:61).

Teaching and Learning by the Spirit:A Form of Revelation

In a revelation called "the law of the Church," the Lord established the divine standard under which teachers of the gospel are to operate. "And the Spirit shall be given unto you by the prayer of faith; and if ye receive not the Spirit ye shall not teach" (D&C 42:14). This statement appears to be both a command and a prophecy. That is, the gospel teacher is told to seek for and to live worthy of the guidance and confirming power of that Spirit, which causes lessons to go down into the heart and burn like fire. In addition, the Lord affirms that which every teacher knows only too well—that if the Spirit of the Lord does not accompany the presentation of the message, then true spiritual communication, edification, and lasting learning will not take place.

Indeed, the teacher is under obligation to teach the gospel "by the Spirit, even the Comforter which was sent forth to teach the truth." In the language of our Lord, "He that is ordained of me and sent forth to preach the word of truth by the Comforter, in the Spirit of truth, doth he preach it by the Spirit of truth or some other way? And if it be by some other way it is not of God. And again, he that receiveth the word of truth, doth he receive it by the Spirit of truth or some other way? If it be some other way it is not of God" (D&C 50:14, 17-20). In offering commentary upon these verses, particularly upon other ways in which someone might seek to convey the word of truth, Elder Bruce R. McConkie observed: "If you teach the word of truth—now note, you're saying what is true, every thing you say is accurate and right—by some other way than the Spirit, it is not of God. Now what is the other way to teach than by the Spirit? Well, obviously, it is by the power of the intellect.

"Suppose I came here tonight and delivered a great message on teaching, and I did it by the power of the intellect without any of the Spirit of God attending. Suppose that every word that I said was true, no error whatever, but it was an intellectual presentation. This revelation says: 'If it be by some other way it is not of God' (D&C 50:18).

"That is, God did not present the message through me because I used the power of the intellect instead of the power of the Spirit. Intellectual things—reason and logic—can do some good, and they can prepare the way, and they can get the mind ready to receive the Spirit under certain circumstances. But conversion comes and the truth sinks into the hearts of people only when it is taught by the power of the Spirit." [^22]

One of the early messages of this dispensation is that adequate preparation must precede the power that accompanies a gospel presentation. Hyrum Smith was instructed in May of 1829: "Behold, this is your work, to keep my commandments, yea, with all your might, mind and strength." And then the Lord, the Master Teacher, spoke of the prerequisites for spiritual power: "Seek not to declare my word, but first seek to obtain my word, and then shall your tongue be loosed; then, if you desire, you shall have my Spirit and my word, yea, the power of God unto the convincing of men. But now hold your peace; study my word which hath gone forth among the children of men [e.g., the Bible], and also study my word which shall come forth among the children of men, or that which is now translating [the Book of Mormon]" (D&C 11:20-22).

This directive is certainly in harmony with what we find in the Book of Mormon. Of the sons of Mosiah the Nephite record attests that "they had waxed strong in the knowledge of the truth; for they were men of a sound understanding and they had searched the scriptures diligently, that they might know the word of God. But this is not all; they had given themselves to much prayer, and fasting; therefore they had the spirit of prophecy, and the spirit of revelation, and when they taught, they taught with power and authority of God" (Alma 17:2-3). In emphasizing that the study of scripture is directly associated with the receipt of revelation, Elder Bruce R. McConkie explained to the regional representatives of the Church in 1982:

"Our tendency—it is an almost universal practice among most church leaders—is to get so involved with the operation of the institutional church that we never gain faith like the ancients, simply because we do not involve ourselves in the basic gospel matters that were the center of their lives.

"We are so wound up in programs and statistics and trends, in properties, lands, and mammon, and in achieving goals that will highlight the excellence of our work, that we 'have omitted the weightier matters of the law.' And as Jesus would have said: 'These [weightier things] ought ye to have done, and not to leave the other undone' (Matthew 23:23).

"Let us be reminded of the great basic verities upon which all church programs and all church organization rest.

"We are not saved by church programs as such, by church organizations alone, or even by the Church itself. It is the gospel that saves. The gospel is 'the power of God unto salvation' (Romans 1:16). . . .

"May I suggest, based on personal experience, that faith comes and revelations are received as a direct result of scriptural study.

"Paul says 'faith cometh by hearing' the word of God (Romans 10:17). Joseph Smith taught that to gain faith men must have a knowledge of the nature and kind of being God is; they must have a correct idea of his character, perfections, and attributes; and they must so live as to gain the assurance that their conduct is in harmony with the divine will.

"Faith is thus born of scriptural study. Those who study, ponder, and pray about the scriptures, seeking to understand their deep and hidden meanings, receive from time to time great outpourings of light and knowledge from the Holy Spirit. This is what happened to Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon when they received the vision of the degrees of glory.

"However talented men may be in administrative matters; however eloquent they may be in expressing their views; however learned they may be in worldly things—they will be denied the sweet whisperings of the Spirit that might have been theirs unless they pay the price of studying, pondering, and praying about the scriptures." [^23]

As we note from the above comment, the revelations specify the curriculum of the gospel teacher—that which is to be taught. "And again, the elders, priests and teachers of this church shall teach the principles of my gospel, which are in the Bible and the Book of Mormon, in the which is the fulness of the gospel. And they shall observe the covenants and church articles to do them, and these shall be their teachings, as they shall be directed by the Spirit" (D&C 42:12-13). [^24] In our standard works—which now include the Doctrine and Covenants and the Pearl of Great Price—when supplemented with the words of modern prophets and apostles, we have a standard that directs all that we should teach in the Church. These books of holy writ constitute the canon of scripture, the rule of faith and doctrine against which truth and error are to be measured. Those who teach the message of the Restoration are to say "none other things than that which the prophets and apostles have written, and that which is taught them by the Comforter through the prayer of faith" (D&C 52:9; see also verse 36; 80:4).In what is a marvelous recommendation for gospel teachers to see to it that they teach from the standard works, [^25] Elder Bruce R. McConkie has also written that "those who preach by the power of the Holy Ghost use the scriptures as their basic source of knowledge and doctrine. They begin with what the Lord has before revealed to other inspired men. But it is the practice of the Lord to give added knowledge to those upon whose hearts the true meanings and intents of the scriptures have been impressed. Many great doctrinal revelations come to those who preach from the scriptures." [^26]

Trying the Spirits

"Believe not every spirit," John the Beloved taught, "but try the spirits whether they are of God: because many false prophets are gone out into the world" (1 John 4:1). For those interested in spiritual things, for those intent on knowing the will of the Lord and doing it, such is an essential exercise, for "nothing is a greater injury to the children of men than to be under the influence of a false spirit when they think they have the Spirit of God." [^27] It is but fitting, then, to attend to some of the instructions delivered through Joseph Smith to enable the Saints of the Most High to stay on that strait and narrow course which leads to life eternal.

In the early days of the Church, "a custom of admitting only members and earnest investigators to the sacrament meetings and other assemblies of the Church had become somewhat general" (preface to D&C section 46). In March of 1831 the Lord instructed the Saints:

"And again I say unto you, concerning your confirmation meetings, that if there be any that are not of the church, that are earnestly seeking after the kingdom, ye shall not cast them out.

"But ye are commanded in all things to ask of God, who giveth liberally; and that which the Spirit testifies unto you even so I would that ye should do in all holiness of heart, walking uprightly before me, considering the end of your salvation, doing all things with prayer and thanksgiving, that ye may not be seduced by evil spirits, or doctrines of devils, or the commandments of men; for some are of men, and others of devils.

"Wherefore, beware lest ye are deceived; and that ye may not be deceived seek ye earnestly the best gifts, always remembering for what they are given;

"For verily I say unto you, they are given for the benefit of those who love me and keep all my commandments, and him that seeketh so to do; that all may be benefited that seek or that ask of me, that ask and not for a sign that they may consume it upon their lusts.

"And again, verily I say unto you, I would that ye should always remember, and always retain in your minds what those gifts are, that are given unto the church" (D&C 46:6-10; emphasis added).

The revelation then enumerates the various gifts of the Spirit, including the knowledge that Jesus is the Christ, as well as the gift to believe on the faith of those who know; the differences of administration and the diversities of operations; the gifts of wisdom and of knowledge; faith to heal as well as to be healed; prophecy; discernment; tongues, and the interpretation of tongues (see D&C 46:13-25; see also 1 Corinthians 12; Moroni 10).

The gifts of the Spirit of God are given to the Saints to enable them to discern and perceive those manifestations, beliefs, voices, and persons which claim heaven as the source of their authority but in reality represent the views and vagaries of men or the damning doctrines of demons. Because of the Restoration, because keys and powers and priesthoods and authorities have been delivered to man once again, and because the power to confer and enjoy the gifts and manifestations of the Holy Ghost is among us, every man and woman who qualifies is able to speak in the name of God the Lord, even the Savior of the world (see D&C 1:20). Every person possessing the testimony of Jesus becomes a prophet (see Revelation 19:10) and is thereby able to discern and dispel that which is not of the Light. Further, since "the spirits of the prophets are subject to the prophets" (1 Corinthians 14:32), it is appropriate and right and orderly that "unto the bishop of the church, and unto such as God shall appoint and ordain to watch over the church and to be elders unto the church, are to have it given unto them to discern all those gifts lest there shall be any among you professing and yet be not of God" (D&C 46:27). "Not every spirit, or vision, or singing, is of God," the Prophet taught. "The devil is an orator; he is powerful. . . . The gift of discerning spirits will be given to the Presiding Elder. Pray for him that he may have this gift." [^28] And thus it is that the revelations speak emphatically of the president of the Church, the presiding officer in the earthly kingdom, as he who is to "preside over the whole church, and to be like unto Moses—Behold, here is wisdom; yea, to be a seer, a revelator, a translator, and a prophet, having all the gifts of God which he [God] bestows upon the head of the church" (D&C 107:91-92).

The challenge of discerning when a teaching or a manifestation or revelation is from God was a significant challenge for the early Latter-day Saints, just as it is for us today. On the occasion when the first high priests of this dispensation were called and ordained (in June of 1831), some unusual spiritual displays were evident. A revelation given through Joseph Smith indicated a central guide, a standard, a pattern by which the Saints should judge that which is of God from that which is not. "And again," the Lord said, "I will give unto you a pattern in all things, that ye may not be deceived; for Satan is abroad in the land, and he goeth forth deceiving the nations—

"Wherefore he that prayeth, whose spirit is contrite, the same is accepted of me if he obey mine ordinances.

"He that speaketh, whose spirit is contrite, whose language is meek and edifieth, the same is of God if he obey mine ordinances.

"And again, he that trembleth under my power shall be made strong, and shall bring forth fruits of praise and wisdom, according to the revelations and truths which I have given you.

"And again, he that is overcome and bringeth not forth fruits, even according to this pattern, is not of me.

"Wherefore, by this pattern ye shall know the spirits in all cases under the whole heavens" (D&C 52:14-19).

Only those who obey the ordinances of God, his laws, commandments, and statutes, including the rites and ceremonies necessary for salvation (e.g., baptism and confirmation at the hands of an authorized servant of God), are accepted of him. In the true and saving sense, only those who have entered in at the strait gate bring forth fruits and works that originate with God and thus are to be received as his. "The whole world lieth in sin," the Savior explained, "and groaneth under darkness and under the bondage of sin. And by this you may know they are under the bondage of sin, because they come not unto me" (D&C 84:49-50). More specifically, the Lord remarked to Sidney Rigdon just after he had joined the Church that "there are none that doeth good except those who are ready to receive the fulness of my gospel, which I have sent forth unto this generation" (D&C 35:12). The light of Christ and the influence of the Holy Ghost [^29] are available to all men and women; the people of the earth may thereby be led into all truth, the fulness of which is to be found in the "only true and living Church upon the face of the whole earth" (D&C 1:30). But the gift of the Holy Ghost and the gifts of the Holy Ghost are reserved for baptized members, those who have truly come unto Christ and who forsake the ways of the world.

Conclusion

"We believe all that God has revealed, all that He does now reveal, and we believe that He will yet reveal many great and important things pertaining to the Kingdom of God" (Articles of Faith 1:9). This statement of belief is as true of individuals as it is of the institutional Church. There are great and important things yet to be made known to those Latter-day Saints who search, ponder, and pray. The Lord is no respecter of persons. He does not simply bless office holders, nor does he endow with knowledge from on high only those called to direct the destiny of the Church. "God hath not revealed anything to Joseph," the Prophet himself observed, "but what he will make known unto the Twelve, and even the least Saint may know all things as fast as he is able to bear them." [^30] In the words of a modern apostle, "we are entitled to revelation. I say that every member of the Church, independent and irrespective of any position that he may hold, is entitled to get revelation from the Holy Ghost; he is entitled to entertain angels; he is entitled to view the visions of eternity; and if we would like to go the full measure, he is entitled to see God the same way that any prophet in literal and actual reality has seen the face of Deity." [^31]

Some time after Joseph Smith's death, he appeared to Brigham Young and gave specific and pointed instructions as to why the members of the Church must labor to acquire and keep the Spirit of the Lord. "Tell the people to be humble and faithful," Joseph Smith counseled his successor, "and be sure to keep the Spirit of the Lord and it will lead them right.

"Be careful and not turn away the small still voice; it will teach them what to do and where to go; it will yield the fruits of the kingdom. Tell the brethren to keep their hearts open to conviction, so that when the Holy Ghost comes to them, their hearts will be ready to receive it. They can tell the Spirit of the Lord from all other spirits; it will whisper peace and joy to their souls; it will take malice, hatred, strife and all evil from their hearts; and their whole desire will be to do good, bring forth righteousness and build up the kingdom of God. Tell the brethren if they will follow the Spirit of the Lord, they will go right. Be sure to tell the people to keep the Spirit of the Lord; and if they will, they will find themselves just as they were organized by our Father in Heaven before they came into the world. Our Father in Heaven organized the human family, but they are all disorganized and in great confusion.

"Joseph then showed me the pattern," President Young continued, "how they were in the beginning. This I cannot describe, but I saw it, and saw where the Priesthood had been taken from the earth and how it must be joined together, so that there would be a perfect chain from Father Adam to his latest posterity. Joseph again said, 'Tell the people to be sure to keep the Spirit of the Lord and follow it, and it will lead them just right.'" [^32]

Growing into and learning the spirit of revelation is a central duty as well as a consummate privilege of those who belong to The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. God has spoken. He speaks now. He will yet speak. There is a crying need in this generation for more and better-attuned listening ears. And there is much need to understand how and in what manner the Lord communicates with his people. The Doctrine and Covenants is a marvelous collection of revelations—many and varied in type and kind, but all are sure and certain evidences of the reality that God is the same yesterday, today, and forever; that he who is infinite is ever ready to reveal himself and his will to those of us who are so very finite; that he is "merciful and gracious unto those who fear [him]" and delights to honor those who serve him "in righteousness and in truth." In his own words: "To them will I reveal all mysteries, yea, all the hidden mysteries of my kingdom from days of old, and for ages to come, will I make known unto them the good pleasure of my will concerning all things pertaining to my kingdom. Yea, even the wonders of eternity shall they know, and things to come will I show them, even the things of many generations" (D&C 76:5, 7-8).

This is the Lord's work and must be undertaken according to his holy will and in harmony with his grand and glorious purposes. "This latter-day work is spiritual," President Ezra Taft Benson has taught. "It takes spirituality to comprehend it, to love it, and to discern it. Therefore, we should seek the Spirit in all we do. That is our challenge." [^33]

Notes

From an address delivered at Brigham Young University Education Week and Know Your Religion series, 1987-88.

---
Notas:
[^1] Surely no roadblock could be more prevalent than distraction and preoccupation. Sometimes we don't pray well because our minds and hearts are focused on other things. We are too prone to think of prayer as something within the spiritual realm, and religion becomes just another department of life—alongside our social, economic, political, or intellectual lives—rather than a vital dimension of everyday living. Notice how hard it is sometimes to focus on the Savior during the passing of the sacrament. That's often because we haven't spent much time during the week focusing on the Savior. Communion with the Infinite requires discipline, and discipline requires prioritization. Obviously we need to chase darkness out of our lives (see D&C 50:25) if we are to draw close to God in prayer. But, in addition, when it is time to pray, we must put aside the things of the world, even good things, in order to engage the greatest good. We do not rush into the divine presence any more than we would rush into the office of the President of the Church or the president of the United States. It is often helpful, before we begin to pray, to slow down, stop what we're doing, sit quietly, listen to inspiring music, read several verses of scripture, ponder and reflect on things that matter most. David O. McKay, Gospel Ideals (Salt Lake City: Improvement Era, 1954), 390.
[^2] Another roadblock to an effective prayer life is duplicity or trying to lead two lives. James explained that "a double minded man is unstable in all his ways" (James 1:8). Thus we would suppose that a person who is worldly throughout the day would have great difficulty praying intently at night. Elder Howard W. Hunter observed: "Henry Ward Beecher once said: 'It is not well for a man to pray cream and live skim milk.' That was a century ago. There is now before us a danger that many may pray skim milk and live that not at all." [^2] Just as our lives are only as good as our prayers, so our prayers are only as good as our lives. That is, the more faithful we become in keeping the Lord's commandments and putting first things first in our lives, the more we open the doors of communication with the heavens and the more comfortable we feel with holy things and holy beings. Hymns, no. 123.
[^3] One of our most common shortcomings is to say our prayers regularly but to do so without much thought, reflection, or devotion, except when we suppose that we really need God's help. Now you know and I know that we need his help every moment of every day of our lives. As King Benjamin pointed out to his people, God "is preserving you from day to day, by lending you breath, that ye may live and move and do according to your own will, and even supporting you from one moment to another" (Mosiah 2:21). Elder Hunter explained: "If prayer is only a spasmodic cry at the time of crisis, then it is utterly selfish, and we come to think of God as a repairman or a service agency to help us only in our emergencies. We should remember the Most High day and night—always—not only at times when all other assistance has failed and we desperately need help. If there is any element in human life on which we have a record of miraculous success and inestimable worth to the human soul, it is prayerful, reverential, devout communication with our Heavenly Father." [^3] One practice that I have found particularly meaningful—especially when I find myself reciting words instead of communing with God—is to devote myself to a prayer in which I ask the Lord for absolutely nothing but instead express sincere gratitude for all my blessings. This kind of prayer pays remarkable dividends and settles the soul like few other efforts. Howard W. Hunter, in Conference Report, October 1977, 79.
[^4] Coach Vince Lombardi wisely remarked that fatigue makes cowards of us all. Fatigue also makes it extremely difficult to enjoy our prayers. Perhaps it is not always wise to make our prayers the last thing we do each day. It may be worthwhile occasionally to have prayer well before going to bed while our mind and body are in a position to do more than utter a few well-worn but familiar phrases. There have been several times over the years when one of my children has talked me into watching a late movie with them, perhaps on a Friday night. Concerned that I would inevitably fall asleep either on the floor or on the couch, more than once I have gone into my bedroom, closed the door, and had a meaningful prayer before going downstairs to watch the movie. Ibid.
[^5] Francis M. Lyman, address delivered at MIA Conference, 5 June 1892, Salt Lake City, Utah; reprinted in Improvement Era, April 1947, 245.
[^6] William Shakespeare, Hamlet, act 3, scene 3.
[^7] Joseph Smith, as quoted in Hyrum and Helen Mae Andrus, comps., They Knew the Prophet (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1974), 100.
[^8] Anonymous LDS youth, as quoted in Brent L. Top and Bruce A. Chadwick, Rearing Righteous Youth of Zion (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1998), 89.
[^9] Ezra Taft Benson, "A Message to the Rising Generation,"Ensign, November 1977, 32.
[^10] Hymns, no. 17.
[^11] Bruce R. McConkie, "Why the Lord Ordained Prayer," in Prayer (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1978), 8.
[^12] Romans 8:26; see also Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 278. Compare 3 Nephi 19:24; D&C 46:30; 50:29-30; 63:65.
[^13] Neal A. Maxwell, "What Should We Pray For?" in Prayer, 45.
[^14] C. S. Lewis, Letters to Malcolm, Chiefly on Prayer (New York: Harcourt Brace & Co., 1992), 25-26.
[^15] Boyd K. Packer, in Conference Report, April 1992, 91.
[^16] Joseph Fielding McConkie, "The Principle of Revelation," 83.
[^17] Boyd K. Packer, in Conference Report, October 1979, 29.
[^18] See Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 156-57, 209, 214. See also Marion G. Romney, in Conference Report, April 1942, 17-18.
[^19] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 151.
[^20] "The Candle of the Lord," in Boyd K. Packer, That All May Be Edified (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1982), 335; see also Conference Report, October 1979, 28; see also 1 Nephi 17:45.
[^21] Ezra Taft Benson, Come unto Christ (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1983), 20.
[^22] Bruce R. McConkie, "The Foolishness of Teaching," address delivered to Church Educational System personnel (Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1981), 9.
[^23] Bruce R. McConkie, "Holy Writ: Published Anew," address delivered at a seminar for Regional Representatives, 2 April 1982, in Doctrines of the Restoration, ed. Mark L. McConkie (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1989), 236-38.
[^24] The "articles and covenants" were specifically what we have today as sections 20 and 22 of the Doctrine and Covenants. See Richard O. Cowan, "How Our Doctrine and Covenants Came to Be," in Robert L. Millet and Larry E. Dahl, eds., The Capstone of Our Religion (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1989), 1-16.
[^25] In 1938 President J. Reuben Clark Jr. emphasized to Church educators that "your chief interest, your essential and all but sole duty, is to teach the Gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ as that has been revealed in these latter days. You are to teach this Gospel using as your sources and authorities the Standard Works of the Church, and the words of those whom God has called to lead his people in these last days. You are not, whether high or low, to intrude into your work your own peculiar philosophy, no matter what its source or how pleasing or rational it seems to you to be. To do so would be to have as many different churches as we have seminaries—and that is chaos" (J. Reuben Clark Jr., "The Charted Course of the Church in Education," address delivered on 8 August 1938; in Clark, J. Reuben Clark: Selected Papers, 253).
[^26] Promised Messiah, 515-16.
[^27] See Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 205.
[^28] Ibid., 162.
[^29] Joseph Smith made a distinction between the Holy Ghost (i.e., the influence of the Holy Ghost) and the gift of the Holy Ghost. The former is the means, for example, by which an interested investigator of the faith comes to know the truth of the message of the Restoration (see Moroni 10:4-5). The latter—the gift of the Holy Ghost—comes only after baptism by proper authority at the hands of a legal administrator. See Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 199.
[^30] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 149.
[^31] Bruce R. McConkie, "How to Get Personal Revelation," address delivered at a devotional assembly at Brigham Young University, 11 October 1966.
[^32] Journal History, 23 February 1847.
[^33] Ezra Taft Benson, Come unto Christ23.
