Robert L. Millet, Selected Writings of Robert L. Millet: Gospel Scholars Series ( 2000)

Chapter 39

Fear Not

Like Nephi of old, "I glory in my Jesus, for he hath redeemed my soul from hell" (2 Nephi 33:6). Like Ammon, son of Mosiah, I feel to rejoice in the Lord: "Yea, I know that I am nothing; as to my strength I am weak; therefore I will . . . boast of my God, for in his strength I can do all things" (Alma 26:12). I ask, as did Jacob, "Why not speak of the atonement of Christ?" (Jacob 4:12). Indeed, why not?

Why Be Faithful?

Let me pose to each one of us a few questions: Why do we serve? Why do we come to church? Why do we avoid R-rated movies and pornography? Why do we live the Word of Wisdom? Why do we avoid immorality in every form? There are many people in this Church who are in good standing and thus qualify for temple recommends. Why do they do what they do, and why do they avoid what they avoid? For many, the motivation to keep the commandments is fear—fear of rejection by friends or family, fear of being arrested or of contracting a life-threatening disease, fear of encountering disciplinary measures in the Church, or fear of having to face God one day.

To be sure, fear is not a bad motive. Sometimes there is nothing except "harshness, preaching and prophesying of wars, and contentions, and destructions, and continually reminding [us] of death, and the duration of eternity, and the judgments and the power of God, and all these things—stirring [us] up continually to keep [us] in the fear of the Lord" (Enos 1:23). Yes, sometimes the prophets and apostles and Church leaders must resort to speaking of such consequences to sin as endless torment and eternal damnation so "that it might work upon the hearts of the children of men" (D&C 19:6-7). It is better to be afraid of sin and to be frightened of the effects of wilful wandering than to sin or wander. To say this another way, once in a while, we simply need to have the word of the Lord shake us in our boots in order to remind us why we are here, who we are, and whose we are. In that sense, fear can and does serve a useful purpose in calling us to repentance.

I would suggest, however, that if fear is our only motive for faithfulness, we will eventually become weary and beaten down spiritually, or else we will begin to ignore the word of truth and turn a deaf ear to the invitation to change. Further, we will never come to know the Lord, trust the Lord, and enjoy a quiet confidence in the Lord unless we are motivated by other things. Let me illustrate by turning to the scriptures, to a message from one of the parables of Jesus.

The Talents

Chapter 25 of Matthew contains what might be called three parables of preparation—the parable of the ten virgins, the parable of the talents, and the parable of the sheep and the goats. They all have something to say about how to prepare for the Second Coming of the Son of Man and the time of judgment. The parable of the ten virgins speaks essentially of the need for a consistent, ongoing program of spiritual growth and of the problem with trying to develop spirituality suddenly. The parable of the sheep and the goats teaches that those who are prepared to meet the Lord are those who have come to love and serve the people of the Lord, those whose hearts are drawn out in compassion to "the least" of our brothers and sisters.

It was only a few months ago, while sitting in an inspiring Gospel Doctrine class, that I saw something in the parable of the talents that I had never seen before. You know the story: the master travels into a far country and leaves differing talents—amounts of money, in this case—with three men. The assumption here is that the master expects them to build upon what they have received, to be productive and industrious with what they have been given. When he returns, he praises and rewards the man whose five talents have been doubled, as well as the one whose two talents have likewise been doubled.

"Then he which had received the one talent came and said, Lord, I knew thee that thou art an hard man, reaping where thou hast not sown, and gathering where thou hast not strawed: And I was afraid, and went and hid thy talent in the earth: lo, there thou hast that is thine." The master was angry and responded: "Thou wicked and slothful servant, thou knewest that I reap where I sowed not, and gather where I have not strawed: Thou oughtest therefore to have put my money to the exchangers, and then at my coming I should have received mine own with usury. Take therefore the talent from him, and give it unto him which hath ten talents. For unto every one that hath shall be given, and he shall have abundance: but from him that hath not shall be taken away even that which he hath. And cast ye the unprofitable servant into outer darkness: there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth" (Matthew 25:14-30).

Generally, when we speak of the meaning or interpretation of this parable we focus on the need for everyone to use their talents—their gifts, abilities, or even financial resources—wisely, and to become more profitable servants. We assume, I suppose rightly, that the master in this parable is God; that he has given to each one of us some things that we should enhance and improve in order to contribute to the building of the kingdom of God and the establishment of Zion; and that he will soon come again, at which point we will be required to stand before him and account for what we did with what we had. And perhaps this is just what the Savior wants us to understand in the parable of the talents.

I would like to draw our attention, however, to a less obvious aspect of the parable. Note that the unproductive steward saw his master as hard or strict, one who punishes and condemns.

I believe this perspective of the master—which is undoubtedly an ill-advised and inaccurate one—directly affected how the steward behaved. What we believe affects what we do. If I live my life in constant fear of God, in dread or unhealthy fear, then my actions will seldom if ever be done out of proper motives, such as love of God and a longing to serve my fellow man. Rather, I will approach each day with the kind of fear and trembling that leads to fretful and unproductive living.

We know that our God is almighty, that he has all power and that he can, as the scriptures attest, smite us with one glance of his all-searching eye. His is the power and prerogative to give life and take it. We are told that we should "fear God" and that the fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom (Psalm 11:10; Proverbs 1:7; 9:10). We are told that we should "work out [our] own salvation with fear and trembling" (Philippians 2:12). But almost always the word translated as fear may also be translated as reverence. That is, we should honor and respect and reverence our God. He is the Man of Holiness (see Moses 6:55), the God of all creation, the embodiment of every virtue and perfection. But he is also our Father in Heaven, the Father of our spirits, a kind and loving Parent who delights in our happiness and yearns to save us, one and all, with an everlasting salvation (see D&C 43:25).

If I might take a bit of license with the parable of the talents, I would suggest that while the Lord does indeed want us to be productive with what we have, he is in no way desirous of comparing us with others, nor is the quantity of the return of any special interest to him. I believe that if one of the servants in the parable had sincerely worked and labored to improve upon his talent but had in the end been unable to expand appreciably upon the original amount, the Lord would have accepted of his offering. Truly, "the Lord requireth the heart and a willing mind" (D&C 64:34). We are judged by the desires of the heart, as well as our works (see Alma 41:3: D&C 137:9).

In speaking of a little-known character in Church history, a man by the name of Oliver Granger—called to serve as the agent of the First Presidency in Kirtland as the Saints moved themselves to Missouri—the Lord said: "I remember my servant Oliver Granger; behold, verily I say unto him that his name shall be had in sacred remembrance from generation to generation, forever and ever, saith the Lord." And now note these tender and consoling words, words that teach us a great deal about the Being we worship: "Therefore, let him contend earnestly for the redemption of the First Presidency of my Church, saith the Lord; and when he falls he shall rise again, for his sacrifice shall be more sacred unto me than his increase, saith the Lord" (D&C 117:12-13; emphasis added).

In short, how we view the Lord affects how we live the gospel. If in every move we make we find ourselves looking over our shoulder to make certain that God isn't going to smite us should we fail or fall short, our offering will not be from the heart nor will the product of our labors be fruitful. And, frankly, it just won't be much fun to choose the right. Who wants to live that way? On the other hand, if we see our Heavenly Father and his Son, Jesus Christ, for who and what they are—as glorified, exalted beings whose whole purpose and work are to "bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man" (Moses 1:39), and whose greatest desire is for all of us to inherit exaltation—then our hearts will be lighter, our actions will be motivated by love and acceptance, and our work will be profitable and enjoyable.

Christ's Love for Us

It is only in and through the Savior that we can be changed and renewed, made clean and free from guilt and shame, relieved of the anxiety and unhealthy dread associated with fearful living. As we properly confess our sins and forsake them, the blood of Christ is able to sanctify us from worldliness and from a stilted view of things. The more pure we become—and this purity comes only through Christ, by the power of the Holy Ghost—the more we are able to see things as they really are. When we continue in sin, we are unable to see things clearly; we see things as we are, not as they are in reality. But the power of the Atonement gives us a new heart and a new mind and new eyes with which to see things. We feel and think and perceive an entirely new realm of reality.

These blessings come to us through the mercy and love of the Lord Jesus Christ. But they do not come to us fully until we choose to repent, to turn away from our sins and to be transformed in our minds and our hearts (see Romans 12:1-3). In speaking of charity or the pure love of Christ, Mormon implored: "Wherefore, my beloved brethren [and sisters], pray unto the Father with all the energy of heart, that ye may be filled with this love, which he hath bestowed upon all who are true followers of his Son, Jesus Christ; that ye may become the sons [and daughters] of God; that when he shall appear we shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is; that we may have this hope; that we may be purified even as he is pure" (Moroni 7:48).

Generally when we speak of charity we speak of the love that we should and must demonstrate toward our brothers and sisters. But let us be clear in our minds that we will never be in a position to love purely and have a meaningful impact on the lives of others until we have experienced the pure love of Christ in our own hearts and minds. Elder Jeffrey R. Holland has written: "It is instructive to note that the charity or 'the pure love of Christ' we are to cherish can be interpreted two ways. One of its meanings is the kind of merciful, forgiving love Christ's disciples should have one for another. That is, all Christians should try to love as the Savior loved, showing pure, redeeming compassion for all. Unfortunately, few, if any, mortals have been entirely successful in this endeavor, but it is an invitation that all should try to meet.

"The greater definition of 'the pure love of Christ,' however, is not what we as Christians try but largely fail to demonstrate toward others but rather what Christ totally succeeded in demonstrating toward us. True charity has been known only once. It is shown perfectly and purely in Christ's unfailing, ultimate, and atoning love for us. It is Christ's love for us that 'suffereth long, and is kind, and envieth not.' It is his love for us that is not 'puffed up . . . , not easily provoked, thinketh no evil.' It is Christ's love for us that 'beareth all things, believeth all things, hopeth all things, endureth all things.' It is as demonstrated in Christ that 'charity never faileth.' It is that charity—his pure love for us—without which we would be nothing, hopeless, of all men and women most miserable. Truly, those found possessed of the blessings of his love at the last day—the Atonement, the Resurrection, eternal life, eternal promise—surely it shall be well with them.

"This does not in any way," Elder Holland continues, "minimize the commandment that we are to try to acquire this kind of love for one another. We should 'pray unto the Father with all the energy of heart that [we] may be filled with this love.' We should try to be more constant and unfailing, more longsuffering and kind, less envious and puffed up in our relationships with others. As Christ lived so should we live, and as Christ loved so should we love. But the 'pure love of Christ' Mormon spoke of is precisely that—Christ's love. With that divine gift, that redeeming bestowal, we have everything; without it we have nothing and ultimately are nothing, except in the end 'devils [and] angels to a devil.'

"Life has its share of fears and failures. Sometimes things fall short. Sometimes people fail us, or economies or businesses or governments fail us. But one thing in time or eternity does not fail us—the pure love of Christ." [^1]

Comfort in the Covenant

I bear my testimony that there is a new life in Christ that enables and empowers us to live peacefully, peaceably, and comfortably, even as hell rages on all sides. The revelations declare that "he that looketh on a woman to lust after her, or if any shall commit adultery in their hearts, they shall not have the Spirit, but shall deny the faith and shall fear" (D&C 63:16; emphasis added). On the other hand, those who "let virtue garnish [their] thoughts unceasingly" feel confidence "in the presence of God" (D&C 121:45). Fear. Confidence. Which do you want? Which of these appeals to you? Those who choose to live the gospel—to repent and submit to the will of the Lord, to deny themselves of all ungodliness (see Moroni 10:32)—enjoy that quiet and sublime confidence, that peace which passes all understanding (see Philippians 4:7). Truly, as John the Beloved wrote, "if our heart condemn us not, then have we confidence toward God" (1 John 3:21; see also 2:28; 5:14).

The Lord never intended for us to languish in guilt or to live in constant anxiety concerning whether or not we are pleasing a hard-to-please God. Each of us has within us a manifestation of the light of Christ or Spirit of Jesus Christ (see Moroni 7:16-19). It is the conscience, that inborn, inherent moral monitor that points us toward the right and warns us of the wrong. If we give heed to that light, we are led to higher light and knowledge (see D&C 84:46-48), as well as a deeper measure of joy and fulfillment. If we ignore or spurn the warnings of the light of Christ, we weaken our resistance to sin and distance ourselves from Deity. We then become oblivious to the light and resentful of those who possess it. And we fear. We feel tension and anxiety, frustration and noise within our souls. Isaiah wrote: "Peace, peace to him that is far off, and to him that is near, saith the Lord; and I will heal him. But the wicked are like the troubled sea, when it cannot rest, whose waters cast up mire and dirt. There is no peace, saith my God, to the wicked" (Isaiah 57:19-21; see also 48:22).

The Prophet Joseph Smith taught: "If you wish to go where God is, you must be like God, or possess the principles which God possesses, for if we are not drawing towards God in principle, we are going from Him and drawing towards the devil. . . . Search your hearts and see if you are like God. I have searched mine, and feel to repent of all my sins. . . . As far as we degenerate from God, we descend to the devil and lose knowledge, and without knowledge we cannot be saved, and while our hearts are filled with evil, and we are studying evil, there is no room in our hearts for good, or studying good. Is not God good? Then you be good; if He is faithful, then you be faithful." [^2]

The gospel of Jesus Christ is in reality a gospel covenant. As a part of that covenant, we agree to do those things that we can do—to have faith, to repent, to be baptized and receive the gift of the Holy Ghost, and to endure faithfully to the end of our lives. On his part, the Lord agrees to do for us what we cannot do for ourselves—forgive our sins, cleanse and purify our hearts, empower us in our efforts to keep the commandments, raise us from the dead, and endow us with glory and honor hereafter.

Our Heavenly Father and his Son, Jesus Christ, are eager to do all in their power to welcome us back, to make us better and truer than we are now, and to bring into our lives that peace and assurance that we are on course. "No amount of falls will really undo us if we keep on picking ourselves up each time. We shall of course be very muddy and tattered children by the time we reach home. But the bathrooms are all ready, the towels put out, and the clean clothes in the airing cupboard. The only fatal thing is to lose one's temper and give it up. It is when we notice the dirt that God is most present in us: it is the very sign of His presence." [^3]

The story is told of a woman who visited President Joseph Fielding Smith. She had been guilty of serious transgression but had fully repented and now just wanted to find her way. President Smith asked her to read to him from Genesis the story of the destruction of Sodom and Gomorrah and of Lot's wife being turned to a pillar of salt. He asked her what lesson was to be learned. She answered, essentially: "The message of that story is that God will destroy the wicked." "Not so," President Smith told this repentant woman. "The message for you is: 'Don't look back!'" [^4]

I bear testimony that happiness cannot come through acquiring this world's toys or through yielding to the enticements of the great and spacious building; true happiness can come only through faithful observance of the Lord's commandments, through being loyal to the royal within us. "Therefore, fear not, little flock; do good; let earth and hell combine against you, for if ye are built upon my rock, they cannot prevail. . . . Look unto me in every thought; doubt not, fear not" (D&C 6:34, 36). Truly, "if [we] are prepared [we] shall not fear" (D&C 38:30).

Jesus Christ is the Promised Messiah, our Savior and Redeemer, and because of what he has done and is doing for us, we need not fear. The Gods of heaven have restored the everlasting gospel to earth in these last days through the instrumentality of a modern prophet, Joseph Smith, and all the powers and knowledge needed to exalt us in the highest heaven are vested in The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Further, living apostles and prophets preside over this, the "only true and living church" on the face of the earth (D&C 1:30). Let us each choose to come unto Christ, partake of his healing and regenerating powers, and find joy and peace in this world and eternal life in the world to come. God grant that we may be true and faithful—true to who we are and faithful to Him whose we are.

Notes

From an address delivered at Brigham Young University FourteenthStake conference, Provo, Utah, 24 October 1999.

---
Notas:
[^1] It is unhealthy, inappropriate, and spiritually counterproductive to compare ourselves with others, whether in terms of perks and benefits and blessings or of crosses to be borne. None of us knows what goes on in the hidden parts of another's life, either the successes or the failures. We are told by the Savior to judge righteous judgment (see JST, Matthew 7:1); that includes a warning against judging ourselves too harshly as a result of what we think we know about others. Always remember that the Lord can do extraordinary things with very ordinary people, if they will let him. President Joseph F. Smith explained that "to do well those things which God ordained to be the common lot of all mankind, is the truest greatness." [^11] John F. MacArthur Jr., Faith Works: The Gospel According to the Apostles (Dallas: Word Publishing, 1993), 32.
[^2] Jesus warned about being unduly anxious or concerned about having enough food or clothing for the future (see 3 Nephi 13:25). That is good counsel about life in general; the disciples would do well to stop worrying and fretting so much about making the cut. The more we learn to trust the Lord and rely upon his merits and mercy, the less anxious we become about life here and hereafter. "Thus, if you have really handed yourself over to Him," C. S. Lewis remarked, "it must follow that you are trying to obey Him. But trying in a new way, a less worried way." [^12] M. Russell Ballard, "Building Bridges of Understanding," address delivered to the Logan Institute of Religion, Logan, Utah, 17 February 1998, typescript, 6-7.
[^3] The work of spiritual transformation is only partly our work. We will become holy people as we do our best to keep our covenants and then, as Moses said, "stand still, and see the salvation of the Lord" (Exodus 14:13). C. S. Lewis, Mere Christianity (New York: Touchstone, 1996), 59.
[^4] The Lord God loves us and desires to save us with an everlasting salvation. There is no quota on the number of saved beings, no bell curve to determine our final standing in the royal grade books. We can make it. God knows that and desires for each one of us to know it as well. Lucifer would prefer, of course, that we think otherwise. Whereas the ultimate blessings of salvation do not come until the next life, there is a sense in which people in this life may enjoy the assurance of salvation and the peace that accompanies that knowledge (see D&C 59:23). See Ezra Taft Benson, Teachings of Ezra Taft Benson (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1988), 361.
