Robert L. Millet, Selected Writings of Robert L. Millet: Gospel Scholars Series ( 2000)

Chapter 40

After All We Can Do

The matter of the grace of God, as mediated through Jesus the Christ, has for some time now seemed to "occupy my mind, and press itself upon my feelings" (D&C 128:1); in fact, for the past fifteen years the topic has nearly consumed me. I have not desired to become a crusader or to be a part of some new theological craze in the Church but have sought with real intent to better understand what it means to trust in and rely upon the merits and mercy and grace of the Holy Messiah (see 2 Nephi 2:8).

In Context

I have felt for some time that the matter of the grace of Jesus Christ deserves more of our attention as Latter-day Saints, especially when it is such a central doctrine in the Book of Mormon and the New Testament. Perhaps some of us have been hesitant to perceive the truthfulness and eternal relevance of this doctrine because it brings us face to face with our own limitations. Perhaps we shy away from it because we sense that it may entail an alteration in our present way of viewing things. Whatever the cause, it just may be that we have not enjoyed the quiet but pervasive power that does come to those who acknowledge their weakness and turn to Him who has all power. I do believe, however, that there is wisdom in presenting this doctrinal message in context, in the way it is presented in scripture—the context of the Atonement. That is to say, grace is not a doctrine that stands alone; it is inextricably tied to several other matters and therefore makes sense and brings peace only when seen in that context.

Latter-day Saints have often been critical of those who emphasize salvation by grace alone, while we as a church have often been criticized for a type of works-righteousness. The gospel is in fact a gospel covenant—a two-way promise. The Lord agrees to do for us what we could never do for ourselves—to forgive our sins, to lift our burdens, to renew our souls and re-create our nature, to raise us from the dead and qualify us for glory hereafter. At the same time, we promise to do what we can do: receive the ordinances of salvation, love and serve one another (see Mosiah 18:8-10), and do all in our power to put off the natural man and deny ourselves of ungodliness (see Mosiah 3:19; Moroni 10:32). We believe that more is required of men and women than a verbal expression of faith in the Lord, more than a confession with the lips that we have received Christ into our hearts. The scriptures of the Restoration add perspective and balance to the majestic teachings of the Apostle Paul on the matter of salvation by grace. We know, without question, that the power to save us, to change us, to renew our souls, is in Christ. True faith, however, always manifests itself in faithfulness. Good works evidence our faith, our desire to remain in covenant with Christ. But these good works, though necessary, are not sufficient.

Too often we are prone to view grace as that increment of goodness, that final gift of God that will make up the difference and thereby boost us into the celestial kingdom, "after all we can do" (2 Nephi 25:23). To be sure, we will need a full measure of divine assistance to become celestial material. But the grace of God, through Jesus Christ our Lord, is available to us every hour of every day of our lives. "True grace," as one non-LDS writer has suggested, "is more than just a giant freebie, opening the door to heaven in the sweet by and by, but leaving us to wallow in sin in the bitter here and now. Grace is God presently at work in our lives." [^1] The grace of God is a precious gift, an enabling power to face life with quiet courage, to do things we could never do on our own. The Great Physician does more than forgive sins. He ministers relief to the disconsolate, comfort to the bereaved, confidence to those who wrestle with infirmities and feelings of inadequacy, strength and peace to those who have been battered and scarred by the ironies of this life (see Isaiah 61:1-2; Alma 7:11-13).

Few things would be more sinister than encouraging lip service to God but discouraging obedience and faithful discipleship. On the other hand, surely nothing could be more offensive to God than a smug self-assurance that comes from trusting in one's own works or relying upon one's own strength. Understanding this sacred principle—the relationship between the grace of an infinite Being and the works of finite man—is not easy, but it is immensely rewarding.

Who's in Control?

I cannot speak for the Church. I am, however, an expert on my own feelings. I have come to know firsthand some of the despondency and guilt associated with falling short of my goals, of trying to do it all, of striving to make myself perfect. The Apostle Paul seems to have been addressing a similar problem in his day. He wrote: "Brethren, my heart's desire and prayer to God for Israel is, that they might be saved. For I bear them record that they have a zeal of God, but not according to knowledge. For they being ignorant of God's righteousness, and going about to establish their own righteousness, have not submitted themselves unto the righteousness of God. For Christ is the end of the law for righteousness to every one that believeth" (Romans 10:1-4; emphasis added).

I have been associated with many wonderful, caring people who struggle often with feelings of inadequacy, who hope against hope that one day—in some distant age in the future—in spite of their frailty in this sphere, they might qualify to go and feel comfortable where Gods and angels are. Since it is true that the gospel of Jesus Christ is intended to liberate us, to ease and lighten our burdens, to bring that comfort and rest found in no other way, why is it that some of us struggle at times? Why is it that once in a while we find ourselves simply going through the motions, doing our duty in the Church but finding little fulfillment and enjoyment in it?

I suspect that many Latter-day Saints will agree to the same faulty orientation I find occasionally in myself. My greatest frustrations seem to come as a result of my efforts to "handle it" myself or, in other words, my failure to trust in and rely on the Lord. Maybe it's our culture that contributes to our dilemma; maybe it's the constant chants of "You can do anything you put your mind to," or "You have unlimited possibilities and potential" that tend to focus our attention away from the powers of the Divine toward our abilities, our merits, and our contributions. I have come to know that the answer to our problems is not to be found alone in humanity, no matter how impressive our accomplishments. The solution to the soul's yearning for solace is not to be located in the programs of society per se. In a way, we almost need to work at cross purposes to social trends, to attune our ears to a quiet voice that beckons to us amidst the loud babble of competing voices. That quiet voice pleads with us simply to come unto Christ. The answer to individual hurt and personal pain is not to be found solely in congressional decisions or developments in personnel management, not in louder cries of victimization, but in and through Jesus Christ. The most pertinent crusade in which the Christian is involved is the quest for personal peace and the campaign for purity of heart, all of which come from Christ through the ordinances of the priesthood and by the power of the Holy Ghost. The scriptures teach plainly and persuasively that coming unto Christ entails a moment of decision. It is that poignant point in our progression wherein we realize that man-made solutions are in reality "broken cisterns, that can hold no water" (Jeremiah 2:13) and that only through yoking ourselves to the Master may we rid ourselves of the burdens of Babylon.

Few things in this life are exactly as they seem to be. We live in a time, for example, where everyone is told of the importance of being in control. We must be in charge. We must have access to and management over all the variables. We operate by plans and formulae and procedures. Lists and tables and charts abound. One of the harsh realities facing someone acclimated to this fallen world is that spiritual things are not programmable. We cannot require or demand or shape spiritual experience. The Spirit is in control, not us. The Lord through his Spirit works his marvelous wonders in his own time, in his own way, and according to his own will and purposes. To enter the realm of divine experience, therefore, is to enter a realm where we are not in complete control. We can seek to be worthy, strive to be in a position to be blessed, plead and pray for divine intervention, but we do not force the hand of the Almighty.

Though such matters as self-reliance and self-confidence may prove to be valuable in some of our dealings in this life, the reciprocal principles of submission, surrender, and having an eye single to the glory of God are essential if we are to acquire that enabling power described in scripture as the saving grace of Jesus Christ. It is as if the Lord inquires of us: "Do you want to be a possessor of all things such that all things are subject unto you?" We of course respond in the affirmative. He then says: "Good. Then submit to me. Yield your heart unto me." The Lord asks further: "Do you want to have victory over all things?" We nod. He follows up: "Then surrender to me. Unconditionally." Odd, isn't it? We incorporate the powers of divinity only through acknowledging our own inabilities, accepting our limitations, and realizing our weakness. We open ourselves to infinite strength only through accepting our finite condition. We in time gain control through being willing to relinquish control.

I am haunted by the words that Paul wrote in his second epistle to the Corinthians. As you know, Paul was, sadly, required to spend a significant amount of time defending his apostolic calling. Having been a zealous Pharisee and even a persecutor of the Christians before his conversion, and not having been one of the original witnesses of the Resurrection of Christ, he felt the need to testify to his detractors that his call had indeed come from God. In doing so with the Corinthian Saints, he went on to describe some of the marvelous spiritual experiences the Lord had given to him. "And lest I should be exalted above measure," Paul hastened to add, "through the abundance of the revelations, there was given to me a thorn in the flesh, the messenger of Satan to buffet me, lest I should be exalted above measure. For this thing I besought the Lord thrice, that it might depart from me. And [the Lord] said unto me, My grace is sufficient for thee: for my strength is made perfect in weakness." Paul then remarks: "Most gladly therefore will I rather glory in my infirmities, that the power of Christ may rest upon me. Therefore I take pleasure in infirmities, in reproaches, in necessities, in persecutions, in distresses for Christ's sake: for when I am weak, then am I strong" (2 Corinthians 12:7-10; emphasis added).

No one really knows what Paul's "thorn in the flesh" was. Was it a lingering sickness, perhaps malaria, so common in Galatia? Was it a memory of his past, a hellish reminder of who he had been? Was it an evil spirit that dogged his steps and wearied him in his ministry? Perhaps one day we'll know. All we know for sure is that whatever it was, it kept Paul humble and forced him to his knees. His inabilities and his impotence in the face of this particular challenge were ever before him. I rather think that when Paul states that he "besought the Lord thrice" for the removal of the thorn, he is not describing merely three prayers but instead three seasons of prayer, extended periods of wrestling and laboring in the Spirit for a specific blessing that never came. Indeed, as he suggests, another kind of blessing came—a closeness, a sensitivity, an acquaintance with Deity, a sanctified strength that came through pain and suffering. It was up against the wall of faith, when shorn of self-assurance and naked in his extremity and his frightening finitude, that a mere mortal received that enabling power we know as the grace of Christ. As the Savior explained to Moroni, when we acknowledge and confess our weakness—not just our specific weaknesses, our individual sins, but our weakness, our mortal limitation—and submit unto him, we transform weakness into strength (see Ether 12:27).

As Jacob, son of Lehi, affirmed: "Wherefore, we search the prophets, and we have many revelations and the spirit of prophecy; and having all these witnesses we obtain a hope, and our faith becometh unshaken, insomuch that we truly can command in the name of Jesus and the very trees obey us, or the mountains, or the waves of the sea." Now note these words: "Nevertheless, the Lord God showeth us our weakness that we may know that it is by his grace, and his great condescensions unto the children of men, that we have power to do these things" (Jacob 4:6-7; emphasis added).

Too much of my own frustration over the years has come as a result of my refusal to let go and thus let God. Something—I suppose it is the natural man, the prideful self that automatically asserts its own agenda—drives me to want to do it myself. Oh, I believe in God, to be sure, that he loves me, that he sent his Son to earth to help me. All too often, however, my actions have betrayed my limited orientation, my vision of Christ as a type of spiritual adviser, a sort of celestial cheerleader who stands on the sidelines and whispers encouragement, but not the Lord God Omnipotent who came to earth to make men and women into new creatures through empowering them to do what they could never do for themselves.

In an eagerness to draw closer to Christ, some members of the Church have begun to cross a sacred line and go beyond that reverential barrier that must be observed by true followers of the Christ. They speak of Jesus as though he were their next door neighbor, their buddy or chum, their pal. This is not the way to intimacy with the Savior. Oddly enough, strangely enough, it is not through humanizing Jesus, through trying to make him one of the boys, that we draw close to him and incorporate his saving powers. It is, rather, through recognizing his godhood, his divinity, his unspeakable power. In short, the more I sense his greatness, his infinity, his capacity to transform the human soul, and my utter helplessness without him, the more I come unto him. Remember, it is through the recognition of our own nothingness and weakness that strength is derived (see Mosiah 2:20-21; 4:11-12, 26; Moses 1:10).

This is somewhat related to our tendency to speak of Jesus as our Elder Brother. He is, of course, our Elder Brother in that he was the firstborn spirit child of God in the premortal existence. But it is of interest to me that the Book of Mormon prophets never speak of Jehovah as our Elder Brother. Rather, he is the Almighty God, the Eternal Judge, the Holy One of Israel, the Holy Messiah, the Everlasting Father, the Father of heaven and of earth, the God of nature, the Supreme Being, the Keeper of the gate, the King of heaven, and the Lord God Omnipotent. Elder M. Russell Ballard explained: "We occasionally hear some members refer to Jesus as our Elder Brother, which is a true concept based on our understanding of the premortal life with our Father in Heaven. But like many points of gospel doctrine, that simple truth doesn't go far enough in terms of describing the Savior's role in our present lives and His great position as a member of the Godhead. Thus, some non-LDS Christians are uncomfortable with what they perceive as a secondary role for Christ in our theology. They feel that we view Jesus as a spiritual peer. They believe that we view Christ as an implementor, if you will, for God but that we don't view Him as God to us and to all mankind, which, of course, is counter to Biblical testimony about Christ's divinity. Let me help us understand, with clarity and testimony, our belief about Jesus Christ. We declare He is the King of Kings, Lord of Lords, the Creator, the Savior, the Captain of our salvation, the Bright and Morning Star. He has taught us that He is in all things, above all things, through all things and round about all things, that He is Alpha and Omega, the Lord of the universe, the first and the last relative to our salvation, and that His name is above every name and is in fact the only name under heaven by which we can be saved. . . .

". . . We can understand why some Latter-day Saints have tended to focus on Christ's Sonship as opposed to His Godhood. As members of earthly families, we can relate to Him as a child, as a Son, and as a Brother because we know how that feels. We can personalize that relationship because we ourselves are children, sons and daughters, brothers and sisters. For some it may be more difficult to relate to Him as a God. And so in an attempt to draw closer to Christ and to cultivate warm and personal feelings toward Him, some tend to humanize Him, sometimes at the expense of acknowledging His Divinity. So let us be very clear on this point: it is true that Jesus was our Elder Brother in the premortal life, but we believe that in this life it is crucial that we become 'born again' as His sons and daughters in the gospel covenant." [^2]

Too many of my efforts and unfortunately too many of my prayers have been bent on succeeding—according to my own predetermined plan. Instead of opening myself to divine direction and incorporating the powers of heaven, I wanted to be able to look back on life and sing with gusto, "I did it my way!" Too little time was spent in sacred submission; on too few occasions did I say the words (and mean it!), "Thy will be done, O Lord, and not mine." Instead of praying to know my limits, to know when my offering was acceptable, I prayed for more drive and more willpower. I have since come to believe that "fallen man is not simply an imperfect creature who needs improvement: he is a rebel who must lay down his arms." [^3] The saving and ironic truth is this: as we submit, we come to know his will. As we surrender, we come to gain his power. As we yield our hearts unto God, our affections and our feelings are sanctified by his grace. As President Ezra Taft Benson has taught, once we turn our lives over to the Lord, we discover that he can do far more with us than we could ever do with ourselves. [^4]

In Whom Do I Trust?

There is a passage in the Book of Mormon that can be rather frightening. Jacob explained: "And [Christ] commandeth all men that they must repent, and be baptized in his name, having perfect faith in the Holy One of Israel, or they cannot be saved in the kingdom of God" (2 Nephi 9:23). Perfect faith. Perfect faith! Who do you know who has perfect faith, at least as we tend to gauge perfection? I suggest that Jacob is here driving at a point that we are prone to miss—those who have perfect faith in the Holy One of Israel are those who have learned to trust in him completely, to trust in his purposes as well as his timetable. To come out of the world is to realize that we cannot place our trust in the world. "To come out of the world," President Stephen L Richards observed, "one must forsake the philosophy of the world, and to come into Zion one must adopt the philosophy of Zion. In my own thinking," he continued, "I have reduced the process to a simple formula: Forsake the philosophy of self-sufficiency, which is the philosophy of the world, and adopt the philosophy of faith, which is the philosophy of Christ. Substitute faith for self-assurance." [^5]

If I trust completely (or perfectly) in Christ, then how much do I trust in myself? Answer: None. My works are necessary. My reception of the ordinances, the performance of my duties in the Church, acts of service and kindness—these are a part of my Christian covenantal obligation. They are the things I can strive to do. My good works are necessary, but they are not sufficient. I cannot work myself into celestial glory, and I cannot guarantee myself a place among the sanctified through my own unaided efforts. Therefore even though my own merits are essential to salvation, it is not by my own merits that I will ever make it. Rather, it is by and through the merits of Christ. This transcendent truth should create not feelings of futility but feelings of deep humility.

"Suppose we have the scriptures," Elder Bruce R. McConkie explained, "the gospel, the priesthood, the Church, the ordinances, the organization, even the keys of the kingdom—everything that now is, down to the last jot and tittle—and yet there is no atonement of Christ. What then? Can we be saved? Will all our good works save us? Will we be rewarded for all our righteousness?

"Most assuredly we will not. We are not saved by works alone, no matter how good; we are saved because God sent his Son to shed his blood in Gethsemane and on Calvary that all through him might ransomed be. We are saved by the blood of Christ (Acts 20:28; 1 Corinthians 6:20).

"To paraphrase Abinadi [see Mosiah 13:28], 'Salvation doth not come by the Church alone; and were it not for the atonement, given by the grace of God as a free gift, all men must unavoidably perish, and this notwithstanding the Church and all that appertains to it.'" [^6] Or, as Elder Dallin H. Oaks observed: "Man unquestionably has impressive powers and can bring to pass great things by tireless efforts and indomitable will. But after all our obedience and good works, we cannot be saved from the effect of our sins without the grace extended by the atonement of Jesus Christ." [^7]

Lehi addressed his son Jacob with these words: "Wherefore, I know that thou art redeemed. . . ." Why was he redeemed? Because he was such an obedient son? Because he had followed the direction of his older brother? Because he was sensitive and submissive and faithful? We know that he was all of that. But note Lehi's words: "Wherefore, I know that thou art redeemed, because of the righteousness of thy Redeemer" (2 Nephi 2:3; emphasis added). Jacob was bound for glory because of the goodness of Jesus! But didn't Jacob's goodness matter? Of course it did; Jacob's carefulness to live according to the commandments evidenced his commitment to the Lord and his desire to keep his part of the covenant. But as noble a son as Jacob was, he could never save himself. As a modern revelation attests, Christ pleads our cause before the Father on the basis of his suffering and death and perfection (see D&C 45:3-5). Imperfect people can only be redeemed by a perfect Being.

Nephi encouraged his readers to rely "wholly upon the merits of him who is mighty to save" (2 Nephi 31:19). Aaron explained that "since man had fallen he could not merit anything of himself; but the sufferings and death of Christ atone for their sins, through faith and repentance" (Alma 22:14). Moroni added that the Saints of God rely "alone upon the merits of Christ, who [is] the author and the finisher of [our] faith" (Moroni 6:4). We are indeed saved by merits but by the merits of our Redeemer. Truly, as someone has suggested, the word grace is an acronym for a glorious concept—"God's Riches At Christ's Expense." [^8]

My confidence in God is essential. My confidence in myself is incidental, inextricably tied to my trust in God. As Elder Bruce Hafen has observed: "When we place our confidence in God rather than in ourselves, our need for self-esteem takes care of itself—not because of our manipulation of successful experiences but because our fundamental attitude allows us access to the only trustworthy source for knowing that the course of life we pursue is known to and accepted by God. It is not just the mistake-free, no-fault life that pleases God. He has deliberately placed us in a sphere where the most sharply focused purpose is to learn from our experience and to grow in both our desires and our understanding to be like him. Obviously that includes the greatest effort and integrity we can muster as we seek to do his will. But the heart of it all is not self-confidence. It is confidence in him, and in his power to make us into creatures far beyond the reach of what our goal setting and goal achieving can ultimately accomplish in the process of becoming as he is." [^9]

There is, then, a life, a life in Christ, a new life in Christ that we cannot know or experience unless we yield to and appropriate his transforming powers and stop trying to do everything ourselves. In the spiritual realm, there is nothing weak about trusting, nothing passive about reliance. In one sense, as C. S. Lewis observed, "the road back to God is a road of moral effort, of trying harder and harder. But in another sense it is not trying that is ever going to bring us home. All this trying leads up to the vital moment at which you turn to God and say, 'You must do this, I can't.'" Such submission, Lewis adds, represents a significant change in our nature, "the change from being confident about our own efforts to the state in which we despair of doing anything for ourselves and leave it to God.

"I know the words 'leave it to God' can be misunderstood," Lewis continues. "The sense in which a Christian leaves it to God is that he puts all his trust in Christ: trusts that Christ will somehow share with him the perfect human obedience which he carried out from His birth to His crucifixion: that Christ will make the man [or woman] more like Himself and, in a sense, make good his [or her] deficiencies." [^10]

Graceful Living

We have dealt at some length with this marvelous theological concept, one that is at the core of Christianity. Our doctrine undergirds our religious life, for what we believe always informs and directs what we do. Now, knowing as we do that we are saved by grace, after all we can do (see 2 Nephi 25:23), how shall we then live? What does it mean to live by grace? Consider the following simple points:

Conclusion

These principles have been in the scriptures all along. They have been a part of the restored gospel since the beginning and have been an integral part of the lives of those Latter-day Saints whose trust in the Lord was greater than their trust in other things. Living by grace is a way of life, an understanding, a perspective that comes to us as we come unto him who is the embodiment of peace and rest. Perhaps it is the complexity of life in a modern world that has driven many of us to our knees more frequently and caused us to search the scriptures with an earnestness born of pressing need. And perhaps it is our rediscovery of the Book of Mormon: Another Testament of Jesus Christ, that has led some of us to recognize through study what we have begun to know by faith. We sense more than ever the need to do our duty, to attend to our family and Church responsibilities, all as a part of keeping our covenant with Christ. That is, we come to know the value and necessity of good works. Those works come to be motivated by his Spirit and evidence our covenant. But we also seek for that balance, that critical and elusive balance in life that allows us to do our best without browbeating ourselves because of all we cannot do at the moment.

I know the Lord wants us to succeed and that he has every intention of bringing back as many of his children as is possible. Discouragement and despondency are not of the Lord. They are of Lucifer. The arch-deceiver would have us lose our balance, lose track of what matters most in life, and focus too much on the less significant. He would have us labor to exhaustion in secondary causes. We cannot do everything we are asked to do, at least not in a few weeks or months. There is great virtue in praying that the Lord will reveal to us our limits, let us know when enough is enough, when doubling or tripling our efforts will in reality be spiritually counterproductive.

Because we are human—because we are weak and mortal and tired—we will probably never reach the point in this life when we have done "all we can do." Too many of us misread 2 Nephi 25:23 and conclude that the Lord can assist us only after, meaning following the time that, we have done "all we can do." That is incorrect; he can and does help us all along the way. I think Nephi is trying to emphasize that no matter how much we do, it simply will not be enough to guarantee salvation without Christ's intervention. To paraphrase Nephi, "Above and beyond all we can do, it is by the grace of Christ that we are saved." And what is true of our ultimate salvation is true of our daily walk and talk, of our personality and our passions. Above and beyond all efforts at self-control, behavior modification, or reducing our sins to manageable categories, "everything which really needs to be done in our souls can only be done by God." [^13]

There is yet another way to look at 2 Nephi 25:23. After the conversion of thousands of Lamanites by the sons of Mosiah, the brother of Lamoni, named Anti-Nephi-Lehi, counseled with his people, those, you remember, who had made a covenant not to take up weapons against their brethren in war. Let me repeat here a part of his sermon, much of which was an expression of gratitude for the goodness of God—for sending the Spirit, softening the hearts of the Lamanites, opening doors of communication between the Nephites and the Lamanites, and convicting the people of their sins. He continues: "And I also thank my God, yea, my great God, that he hath granted unto us that we might repent of these things, and also that he hath forgiven us of those our many sins and murders which we have committed, and taken away the guilt from our hearts, through the merits of his Son.

"And now behold, my brethren, since it has been all that we could do, (as we were the most lost of all mankind) to repent of all our sins and the many murders which we have committed, and to get God to take them away from our hearts, for it was all we could do to repent sufficiently before God that he would take away our stain—

"Now, my best beloved brethren, since God hath taken away our stains, and our swords have become bright, then let us stain our swords no more with the blood of our brethren" (Alma 24:8-12; emphasis added).

There is a very real sense in which "all we can do" is to come before the Lord in reverent humility, confess our weakness, and plead for his forgiveness, for his mercy and grace. It occurred to me recently that life is repentance, that progression and improvement and growth and maturity and refinement are all forms of repentance, and that the God-fearing live in a constant state of repentance. It is not intended that we exist in a constant state of fear or frustration or anxiety, but rather that we have desires for holiness and purity, longings to feel quiet confidence before God. Indeed, king Benjamin taught that those who regularly and consistently acknowledge the greatness of God and our own nothingness without him are able to retain a remission of sins from day to day (see Mosiah 4:11-12).

To push ourselves beyond what is appropriate is, in a strange sort of way, a statement that we fear we must do the job ourselves if we expect it to get done. I know we must do our duty in the Church and that the works of righteousness are necessary. What seems so very unnecessary is the type of pharisaical extremism and the subsequent negative feelings that too often characterize the efforts of some members of the Church. I have a conviction that God is unquestionably aware of us. He loves you and he loves me. This I know. He certainly wants us to improve, but he definitely does not want us to spend our days languishing in guilt. I reaffirm that the gospel of Jesus Christ is intended to liberate us, to lift and lighten our burdens. If it is not doing that in our personal lives, then perhaps our approach and understanding, our orientation—not necessarily the quantity of work to be done—may need some adjustment. Balance. Balance. That is the key. I have come to sense the need to balance a type of "divine discontent"—a healthy longing to improve—with what Nephi called a "perfect brightness of hope" (2 Nephi 31:20)—the Spirit-given assurance that in and through Jesus Christ we are going to make it.

I am very much aware that there are those among us who have been subjected to much pain and distress in their lives, to abuse, to neglect, and to the agonies of wanting more than anything to live a normal life and to feel normal feelings but have been unable to do so. I would say, first of all, that each one of us, whoever we are, wrestles with something. Perhaps it's things like my weight or height or complexion or baldness or I.Q. Perhaps it's stuff that passes in time like a phase. Perhaps it's the torture of watching helplessly as loved ones choose unwisely and thereby close doors of opportunity for themselves and foreclose future privileges. And then there are the terrible traumas in our life, those occasions when someone we love betrays our tender trust and deals a blow that strikes at the center of all we hold dear and all we value about ourselves.

I bear my witness of the fact that the day is coming when all the awful wrongs of this life will be righted. I bear witness that the God of justice will attend to all evil. And I certify, for I know this to be true, that those things that are beyond our power to control will be corrected, either here or hereafter. Many of us may come to enjoy the lifting, liberating powers of the Atonement in this life and all our losses will be made up before we pass from this sphere of existence. Perhaps some of us will wrestle all our days with our traumas, for he who orchestrates the events of our lives will surely fix the time of our release. I have a conviction that when a person passes through the veil of death, all those impediments and challenges and crosses that were beyond his or her power to control—abuse, neglect, immoral environment, weighty traditions, etc.—will be torn away like a film, and perfect peace will prevail in our hearts. "Some frustrations," President Boyd K. Packer taught, "we must endure without really solving the problem. Some things that ought to be put in order are not put in order because we cannot control them. Things we cannot solve, we must survive." [^14]

Our Lord and Master seems to ask of us the impossible—to forgive those who have hurt us so dreadfully. Bruce and Marie Hafen have observed, "It seems fair to ask why the victims of abuse should be required to do anything to deserve the Lord's vast healing powers in such a case. Because abuse victims suffer so many of the same symptoms of guilt and estrangement from God as do willful transgressors, the irony that they should need to forgive those who have wronged them is almost overpowering.

"Still, there lurks between the lines of the scriptures on forgiveness a message of transcendent meaning—not only about abuse victims but about all of us, and about all of the Atonement."

The Hafens continue: "What are we doing when we are willing to absorb a terrible trauma of the spirit, caused not by our own doing but by one who claimed to love us—and we absorb the trauma even to help the sinner? That picture somehow has a familiar look—we've seen all this before. Of course, because this picture depicts the sacrifice of Jesus Christ: he took upon himself undeserved and unbearable burdens, heaped upon him by people who often said, and often believed, that they loved him. And he assumed that load not for any need of his, but only to help them.

"So to forgive—not just for abuse victims, but for each of us—is to be a Christ figure, a transitional point in the war between good and evil, stopping the current of evil by absorbing it in every pore, thereby protecting the innocent next generation and helping to enable the repentance and healing of those whose failures sent the jolts into our own systems." [^15]

I know of the power that is in Christ, power not only to create the worlds and divide the seas but also to still the storms of the human heart, to right life's wrongs, to ease and eventually even remove the pain of scarred and beaten souls. There is no bitterness, no anger, no fear, no jealousy, no feeling of inadequacy that cannot be healed by the Great Physician. He is the Balm of Gilead. He is the One sent by the Father to "bind up the brokenhearted, to proclaim liberty to the captives, and the opening of the prison to them that are bound" (Isaiah 61:1). True followers of Christ learn to trust in him more, in the arm of flesh less. They learn to rely on him more, on manmade solutions less. They learn to surrender their burdens to him more. They learn to work to their limits and then be willing to seek that grace or enabling power that will make up the difference, that sacred power that makes all the difference!

As Moroni has instructed us on the last page of the Book of Mormon, when we come unto Christ and seek, all through our lives, to deny ourselves of ungodliness and give ourselves without let or hindrance to God, "then is his grace sufficient for you, that by his grace ye may be perfect in Christ"—that is, whole, complete, fully formed. "And if by the grace of God ye are perfect in Christ, ye can in nowise deny the power of God" (Moroni 10:32). Those who completely surrender and submit to the Almighty cannot deny—block, stop, or prevent—the power of God from coming into their lives. In short, to come unto the Savior is to come to life, to awaken to an entirely new realm of reality. Because of who Christ our Lord is and what he has done, there is no obstacle to peace and joy here or hereafter that is too great to face or overcome. Because of him, our minds can be at peace. Our souls may rest.

Notes

From an address delivered at the 1998 Brigham Young University Women's Conference, Provo, Utah, May 1998.

---
Notas:
[^1] It is unhealthy, inappropriate, and spiritually counterproductive to compare ourselves with others, whether in terms of perks and benefits and blessings or of crosses to be borne. None of us knows what goes on in the hidden parts of another's life, either the successes or the failures. We are told by the Savior to judge righteous judgment (see JST, Matthew 7:1); that includes a warning against judging ourselves too harshly as a result of what we think we know about others. Always remember that the Lord can do extraordinary things with very ordinary people, if they will let him. President Joseph F. Smith explained that "to do well those things which God ordained to be the common lot of all mankind, is the truest greatness." [^11] John F. MacArthur Jr., Faith Works: The Gospel According to the Apostles (Dallas: Word Publishing, 1993), 32.
[^2] See Bruce R. McConkie, Mormon Doctrine, 2d ed. (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1966), 408; see also McConkie, Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, 3:333-36.
[^3] John F. MacArthur, The Gospel According to Jesus (Grand Rapids, Mich.: Zondervan, 1988), 198.
[^4] John F. MacArthur, Faith Works: The Gospel According to the Apostles (Dallas: Word Publishing, 1993), 109, 121; emphasis in original.
[^5] Orson Pratt, "The Holy Spirit," pamphlet (Liverpool: n.p., 1852).
[^6] Brigham Young, in Journal of Discourses, 10:173.
[^7] Bruce R. McConkie, "Jesus Christ and Him Crucified," 1976 Brigham Young University Fireside and Devotional Speeches of the Year (Provo: Brigham Young University Publications, 1976), 399.
[^8] Gospel Doctrine, 58, 126.
[^9] McConkie, Mormon Doctrine, 567; emphasis in original.
[^10] Brigham Young, in Deseret News Weekly, 31 August 1854, 37.
[^13] See Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 301, 305.
[^14] See Lectures on Faith, 7:9, 16.
[^15] See Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 12.
