Truman G. Madsen, Radiant Life ( 1994)

1

Souls Aflame

There is a legend about a grandfather, a holy man, who, caring for his grandson, sent him out to play. Shortly the boy returned, sobbing as if his heart would break. He explained: "I have been playing hide-and-seek with my friends. I went and hid and waited, but no one came for me." The grandfather embraced him and said: "Now you know how God feels. He hides, and no one comes for Him."

This church does not have a collection of what in classical terms is called devotional literature, nor again an official manual, which is a set of spiritual exercises. What we do have is a pool of experience, rich experience. Here I would like to select from it some bits and pieces that I believe will draw us closer to them and, through them, to the Lord.

There are religions in the world which in effect develop prayer practices after the preconceptions of their theology are taken into account. We have an opposite heritage. Our theology has been derived from prayer-this is safer, sounder, and saner, I believe. But first may I mention two hard reflective hang-ups that occur in the discussion of prayer and that have not only been resolved but also dissolved for us if we only will accept this.

First is the notion that God, being all-powerful and all-knowing, is therefore unchanging. And that since He knows all that will occur-having, it is said, absolute foreknowledge-prayer2 is pointless. For if God knew yesterday what is happening today, including all that I am going to do, then it is pointless to ask that it be changed. Though one can insist that His foreknowledge is not a cause, one can still ask, "But am I a cause, truly, if in fact the eventuations could not have been otherwise?"

The heritage of prayer in this church teaches us that, whether or not we settle the question of foreknowledge, there is point in reaching up to that personage who is himself free and has used His freedom to forbid to himself the use of force. He is not a computer, not a thing, I am grateful to report. He is a conscious being, and it is the relationship of our freedom to His freedom that does make a difference.

Our history is filled with instances in which what seemed to be inevitable was prevented from happening by the intervention of our prayers and God's response.

A second cause of confusion is the notion that God, being God, must know what is best for us; and that therefore if we pray and ask Him to change His mind, He would hardly be wise to answer yes. If we pray to our own hurt, a loving God would do well to answer no. And if we are simply praying to remind Him of what He already intends, why pray at all? There is a kind of intellectual lockjaw that comes from such reflection, but in truth again, the Restoration makes it clear that we have a need and that so does He, and that He needs us to listen as well as to ask. It is said among the Jews that, God preferring prayer to mere silence and not receiving it, caused great affliction among the Israelites of the Exodus, so they would at least cry out from their pain.

We do need Him and He does need us, and one would almost gather from diaries and journals which report firsthand experience that His will can be swayed-in part because the very prayer process changes us, and God can respond to the change; and in part because, in the two-way relationship that exists, we learn and grow through His response.

I turn now to questions that are more soulful and reply with experience. There is, some insist, a circularity in faith itself. Faith, the child once said in a Sunday School class, "means believing what you know darn well isn't so." Faith is sometimes thought to be in the religious world a substitute for reason, and in fact a form of credulity. It is thought to be faith that something is or isn't. But the first principle of the gospel of Jesus Christ is not such3 faith. It is faith in a person about whom we already have some knowledge. Faith is not exerted in vacuo. Trust in a person is based upon acquaintance with the person, or at least belief about the person that begins secondhand. But the whole point of the gospel is to make it firsthand. So He who counsels us, "Pray always," is asking that we come to Him in confidence.

Second, it is said that prayer is a crutch. After all, mature people are supposed to stand on their own two feet; they don't have to pray. Prayer is a form of wishful thinking, a kind of wanting pie in the sky. Well, as to that, first of all there is nothing wrong with crutches for people who need them. There is nothing wrong with escalators and elevators. But speaking of crutches, agnosticism is a kind of crutch. It is a perennial postponement of decision, and it assumes that postponement is safer than commitment. Atheism is a pair of iron braces. It claims to know more than can be known. Someone has said that atheists don't find God for the same reason that bank robbers don't find policemen. They work very hard to avoid Him. But throughout the Doctrine and Covenants is the admonition, "Seek and ye shall find." The implication is, don't seek and you likely won't find.

But it is said: "I don't pray because I have doubts. I doubt things about myself, about the gospel, and even about God." It is truly said that doubt and faith do not coexist in the same person at the same time, but they can exist within a second of each other. Witness Heber C. Kimball's standing by the door while Brigham Young was lying on what appeared to be his deathbed. Said Heber, "I doubt very much if Brigham ever rises from that bed."

However, "he had no sooner uttered the words, than he spoke up, as with another voice, and said, 'He shall live, and shall start upon this mission with me tomorrow morning.' And they did start the very next morning, on their mission to England." (Orson F. Whitney, Life of Heber C. Kimball [Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1967], p. 434.) He was right the second time. From doubt to faith.

On another occasion he stood in the Bowery in Salt Lake City and announced to threadbare and barely surviving people, "States goods will soon sell in Salt Lake City for less than they sell for in New York. In the name of the Lord. Amen." And as he returned to his seat from the pulpit, he said he "had missed it this time." Someone on the stand said, "I don't believe a word of it." And Brigham Young said, "Let it stand." It did stand. When the4 California gold rush came, the prophecy was actually and completely fulfilled. Elder Kimball was right the first time and he went from faith to doubt. (See Life of Heber C. Kimball, pp. 389-90.)

It is an honest prayer to say: "Lord, I believe. Help thou mine unbelief." And it was, after all, a prophet of God, Joseph Smith, who said-and he was a man of faith-"If I had not experienced what I have, I could not have believed it myself" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, comp. Joseph Fielding Smith [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1976], p. 361).

But it is said: "I don't pray because I am not good with words. I would rather someone else would do the talking." Fair enough, but our history is filled with instances of people who had mind-boggling verbal gifts and of others who did not. There have been many, like Moses, who needed an Aaron. And there are in our midst today those who are both deaf and dumb, whose lips are sealed but who yet may pray from their core wordlessly. Joseph Smith offered a better rendering of the King James Version's line by Paul that says "the Spirit maketh intercession for us with groanings which cannot be uttered" (Rom. 8:26). The Prophet's version is "with striving which cannot be expressed"-meaning, in words (see Teachings, p. 278). But if a person does have trust in the living God, he can from his core reach upward, put an arrow on those imprisoned needs, and they will be carried by the Spirit, perfectly communicated and responded to. And what relief when we do it!

But it is said, "I do not pray because my prayers have not been answered." Answered, we mean, do we, not heard? Ah, but they have been heard and recorded. We are taught that one day we will have a perfect, bright recollection of all that has been in our lives here, but what of all that has been before that? The historian B.H. Roberts thought long and hard on the record, and he pursued this subject so often and so deeply, trying to account for the radical differences he perceived among those who have received the gospel in this dispensation. Seeing that some seemed almost to be born with it, and had responses to the gospel and its powers far beyond anything they could have learned in the short space of mortality, he concluded that they did bring it with them. Thus his summary was "Faith is trust in what the spirit learned eons ago." We do come here bringing, though they are locked under amnesia, the residual powers, the distillation of a long experience. And to those of us5who see the hand of the Lord everywhere and to those who see it nowhere the same promise is made: The day will come when we shall know that we have seen Him, and that He is the light that is in us, without which we could not abound (see D&C 88:50). There is locked in all of us as there was in Enos-and I understand Enos to say he was surprised that it was there-more faith than we presently know. We are heard, but the response of God may not be what we would here and now wish. Yet haven't we lived long enough to say to the Lord, "Disregard previous memo," to thank him that He answered no, and to ask that He erase some of the requests that we now realize were foolish or hasty or even perverse?

Now may I take slices from autobiographical accounts. Are we to pray in practical terms or specific terms? It is said that on one occasion Brigham Young, hung up on a sand bar crossing a river on the plains, had a companion who said, "Let's pray." To which Brigham is supposed to have replied: "Pray? I prayed this morning. Let's get out and push." There is a time for total concentration in prayer and a time for answering prayer with one's own muscles and initiative.

This is the same man who was specific enough to bring to the Lord concrete and urgent feelings, even hostile ones. It is said he left his prize saddle once, in the proper place, but someone misplaced it or didn't hang it properly and the horse trampled it into shreds. He rebuked the man who had shown the neglect, and then made a beeline for the bedroom, where he said (someone overheard him), "Down, Brigham!" Then he knelt and said: "Lord, I am sorry. I was angry. Take my anger away and help me to do better next time." "When I am angry," said a friend of his, "the first thing I do is pray." Some of us have been taught that should be the last thing we do, that we should soak our head in a bucket and then pray. "I am never so angry but what I can pray," said Heber C. Kimball. (Journal of Discourses 3:231.) The same goes for related emotions.

In the same spirit, Brigham Young once said: "I do not recollect that I have seen five minutes since I was baptized that I have not been ready to preach a funeral sermon, lay hands on the sick, or pray in private or in public." Think of that. Then he added: "I will tell you the secret of this. ... If you commit an overt act, repent of that immediately and call upon God to ... give you the light of His Spirit." (Journal of Discourses 12:103.) Why spend a 6week rationalizing and defending what you have done amiss or have not done aright?

Can we pray when there is really hardly the heart for it? Lorenzo Snow leaves us the glimpse that after he was, as he felt, stillborn into the Church, nothing really significant happened in and after his baptism and confirmation. He kept praying for the witness of the Spirit. It didn't come. Not only not feeling as he was wont, but feeling that the heavens were as brass over him, he nevertheless went to an accustomed place to pray. He had no sooner opened his lips than the Spirit descended upon him in a marvelous way. He described it as like the sound of rustling silken robes-they did not have the word electricity then. This experience was more tangible in its effect upon every part of his body than being surrounded by water in baptism. He was filled, though praying when he didn't want to pray. (See Juvenile Instructor 22:22.)

But are we not to bring a certain proper reverence to prayer, and if we are out of that, should we not repent and wait? Listen to Heber C. Kimball. He is praying with his family and in the midst of the prayer says, "Father, bless Brother So-and-So." Then he bursts into a loud laugh. I can imagine the heads of his children popping up and their eyes opening. There is a slight pause, and then he says, "Lord, it makes me laugh to pray about some people," and he goes on with his prayer. (See Life of Heber C. Kimball, p. 427.) I leave you to say whether that is lightmindedness or profound intimacy with the Lord. He knows. We have a funny bone. He gave it to us.

My father taught me this ancient legend about Adam and Eve. As they were departing from the garden, there was a solemn farewell, the Father recognizing far more clearly than they did what they, as vanguard pioneers in the real world, were going to face. They said good-bye, but just before the couple disappeared in the mist the Father couldn't stand it. He called them back and gave them a sense of humor.

We are admonished not to betray the sacred. That is lightmindedness. "Remember that that which cometh from above is sacred, and must be spoken with care, and by constraint of the Spirit; and in this there is no condemnation, and ye receive the Spirit through prayer; wherefore, without this there remaineth condemnation" (D&C 63:64). 7

But we are also blessed that we should have a glad heart and a cheerful countenance. If you cannot laugh at yourself and even at some of the absurdities of this world, you take yourself too seriously. Prayer can manifest that phase of one's core with divine approval.

But again, there is the problem of method. Do you have to say it a certain way? Do you have to have an appropriate technique? We may say: "I don't know whether I am sincere or not. I don't know whether I want to pray or not." In the right circumstances this is an acceptable prayer.

But can you cry out of affliction with any hope of help? Of course. It was Joseph Smith in the dungeon at Liberty Jail who asked the questions we all sooner or later will: "O God, where art thou?" And the second question, "How long, O Lord?" To the first question, the answer was, "I am here," and to the second, "Not long, but a small moment, Joseph." Note that it was the Lord's definition of time. "If thou endure it well and art faithful, thou shalt triumph." (See D&C 121:1-2, 7-8.) I am impressed with the number of miracles of overcoming, of solving problems, but I give it as my testimony that equally impressive are those divine blessings that enabled people to endure what they could not overcome, to hold on, to wait and wait and wait.

But can one pray for the impossible? There is in certain traditions about omnipotence the inferential notion that one could ask that a friend who had been killed in a foreign war the day before should yet live. That God, having command of time, could actually answer the prayer with yes. Not so, I submit. There are laws. There are conditions. And God himself cannot change them. "Yes," we cry out, "He could and sometimes does prevent this or that." But He could not prevent it and still accomplish other of his multiple purposes. It must be rough to be the Father of everyone.

Is there a name that we are most often to use, which He prefers? Good question. It is answered in the life of Christ, who chose almost without exception one word-Abba. In Hebrew it means "Father," but it means a shade more than that. It means as a child would whisper it, "Daddy." Intimate. We are all given names after we are born, and the Lord wills to give us a name after we are reborn. We take it upon us, willingly and by covenant. It is His name. And through it and with it we are equipped to pray8more powerfully than if we prayed only in our own name. In my imagination, I wonder if when the personage said, "Joseph, this is my beloved," He might also have said, "Beloved, this is our Joseph." Or, if it might have been that they stood in visitation-which is more than vision, and must have been bewildering at least at the outset-and could have said, "Remember us?" We are to use the name of Him who descended below all things.

From the above slices I come to a focus and a conclusion. There are levels beyond levels of prayer. There are heights beyond heights. There are promises in modern revelation that in due time, after we have proved that we are determined to serve the Lord at all hazards, then we may receive keys whereby we may ask with the assurance of an answer.

Said Joseph Smith to Brigham Young on an occasion, "You have passed certain bounds and conditions, Brother Brigham," and Brigham explains, "he passed certain bounds before certain revelations were given" (Manuscript History of Brigham Young 4:19). Brigham passed the same keys to others, including Wilford Woodruff. Wilford Woodruff is the one who said at the dedication of the Salt Lake Temple that it had been made known to him by revelation that the reason a representative of the Woodruff family had been called to preside was that "the Lord could not find a weaker vessel" (Salt Lake Temple Dedication Notes, April 1893, p. 125, in Church Historical Department).

Our whole history teaches that out of weakness we can be made strong. Why does the Lord choose the weak? Among other reasons, it is because they can be taught and influenced, whereas He has to use a jackhammer on the proud. Further, because they are transparently weak, those who have eyes to see are not confused on where the power really comes from.

There are levels beyond levels, gifts beyond gifts. I summarize them with this glimpse. It was in a school of instruction, the school of prophets-and prophetesses, too. The first thing the Smith brothers thought on a day of rich spiritual outpouring in that room above the Newell K. Whitney store was, "Where is mother?" They sent a messenger in great haste, who brought her to participate. (See History of Joseph Smith by His Mother [Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1956], p. 224.)

In such a setting the Prophet asked that each in turn speak; that, as the revelation says, all might not speak at once, but that9everyone might have an equal privilege (see D&C 88:122). The subject was faith. Scriptures were quoted. The last man to speak, as it happened, was Heber C. Kimball, who told of an experience in his own family. His daughter, Helen Mar, was standing by a table on which dishes were stacked. Her mother warned the child as she left the house: "Stay away from those dishes. If you break one of them I will whip you." Vilate left, and Helen Mar did what little children do when they are told not to do it. To her dismay, she let a table leaf fall, and several dishes were broken. What now? She went out, as she had watched her parents do, and near a tree she prayed that her mother's heart would be softened. We don't know just what she said, but no doubt it was simple enough, such as, "Bless my mother that she won't whip me." When her mother returned, she saw the situation. She flared. She took the girl by the hand into the bedroom, intending to administer the promised punishment. But she couldn't do it. We can imagine the scene-the arms of her daughter around her neck and the child saying, "Oh, Mother, I prayed that you wouldn't. I'm sorry, I'm sorry."

When Brother Heber had finished telling the story, every man in the room, including Joseph, was in tears. And Joseph said-to those grown-up, strong, independent, willful, intelligent men-"Brethren, that is the kind of faith we need. The faith of a little child going in humility to its parent." (See Life of Heber C. Kimball, p. 69.) That sums it up.

This verse is a fitting conclusion: "Pray always and I will pour out my Spirit upon you, and great shall be your blessing-yea, even more than if you should obtain treasures of earth and corruptibleness to the extent thereof. Behold, canst thou read this without rejoicing and lifting up thy heart for gladness? Or canst thou run about longer as a blind guide? Or canst thou be humble and meek, and conduct thyself wisely before me? Yea, come unto me thy Savior." (D&C 19:38-41.) 1011
