Truman G. Madsen, Radiant Life ( 1994)

2

In a Place Called Gethsemane

A prophecy uttered by the Prophet Joseph Smith in 1841 is in fact being fulfilled before our very eyes: "Jerusalem must be rebuilt and the temple, and water come out from under the temple, and the waters of the Dead Sea be healed" (Teachings, p. 286), and all this before the coming of the Son of Man. When my wife, Ann, and I first touched that ground with our feet I had a prejudice that the setting of the Savior's life really was not significant; the meaning of His words was what mattered, and the environment and circumstances of the time were not crucial. After many visits since, for we have both visited and lived there, I am of the contrary opinion. I believe that He cared very much about the setting, and that meaning is lodged still in the very rocks, in the very mountains, in the very trees of Israel.

On many of our trips to Israel we had groups mostly of persons we would consider young, but on one trip there was a woman past eighty-two, who had to prepare for it at length-had to exercise and get constant reassurances from her physician as to whether she could endure the rigors. We were touched that as we walked away from a church that has been built near (and some say over) the ancient site of Gethsemane, she who had come so far and lived so long was on her knees near the place where tradition says Jesus knelt.

North of Jerusalem is the Galilee. And in visiting there I am struck that the location of Caesarea Philippi is at the mount called12Hermon. Some possibility assigns it as the Mount of Transfiguration, but it is in any case at the headwaters of the Jordan, which then feed the Galilee and then flow south and are literally the nourishment of all Israel. It was there, and I think Jesus chose the place carefully, that He announced to Peter, after Peter's confession, that He would build His church as on a rock. I think it is significant that there is there still a huge faced rock, and below it and in it a cave; and out of that cave, at the time Jesus stood there, there flowed water. Not so since-an earthquake changed all that. But was Jesus therefore saying to Peter, whom He knew by revelation was to be His presiding Apostle, and of Peter, who by revelation had recognized Him, "Upon this flowing rock I will build my church"? (Matt. 16:18.) Well, such are the suggestions of the setting. Is it also, one may ask, only happenstance that He chose to be baptized near the waters called dead at the lowest point of the earth-1200 feet below sea level-descending thus even physically below all things?

There are trees in Israel, and we are taught from the record that each in a way was significant in the Savior's ministry: palm trees, fig trees, oak trees, but most of all olive trees. Even to this day the process of planting, cultivating, pruning, and harvesting from olive trees is a laborious one. And the process of then taking the olives, which at first are bitter and useless, and going through another step of hard labor and pressure to produce ripe, mellow olive oil-that too is done today. In the time of the Master olives and olive oil and the olive mash that resulted from the crushing were the very essence of life. All that comes clearly to mind as one stands there.

Religious literature is permeated with the notion that a tree of life is representative of eternal life. It is planted in a goodly land, some traditions say on the very navel of the earth, the highest point of the earth; which, symbolically at least, is the temple mount in Jerusalem. A tree planted and watered by the waters of life whose fruit is the most precious. Our own Book of Mormon says further of that fruit that it is sweet, that it is pure, even that it is white (see 1 Ne. 8:11; 11:8). And there are even now, incidentally, in Hebron, in Israel, magnificent vineyards where the very fruit itself is white, almost transparent. These happen to be the sweetest and the purest of the grapes. The imagery that it was so precious impressed Nephi after he was given the blessing of13recapitulating the vision of his own father, Lehi. And he said it when asked-yes, precious, I beheld precious. But even that superlative didn't satisfy the angel, the narrator of the vision, who said, "Yea, and the most joyous to the soul." (See 1 Ne. 11:9, 23.)

Well, the tree of life has been utilized through sacred history as the symbol both of Israel and of the Redeemer of Israel. And there are traditions that in due time that tree, from which the branches had been broken off and dispersed, would somehow be planted anew, and graftings and gatherings take place anew, until the tree was again productive.

The olive tree is not deciduous. Its leaves never fall off. They are rejuvenated and stay. It is in that sense evergreen or ever olive-colored. It is a wild thing if not cultivated. But after long and patient cultivation, usually eight to ten years, it becomes productive; more than that, it continues to be with age. And there are trees today-for new shoots come forth from apparently dead roots-that are known by actual horticultural study to be eighteen hundred years old. Some trees on the Mount of Olives may be older than that. One could almost say of the olive tree, "It is immortal."

Olive oil is used by many today in the Middle East as a condiment for salads or as a cooking oil. But in the Savior's day olive oil was the very substance of light and heat in Israel. An olive lamp, into which one poured the pure oil and then lighted it at one end, provided light even in a darkened room, enough light to fill the room. Moreover, the mash provided fuel and burned long. And the balming influence, the soothing, salving influence of olive oil, was well known in the Middle East. The tradition of the balm of Gilead and the soothing even of troubled waters was well known in Jesus' own day.

We speak today of the olive branch as a symbol of peace and forgiveness. Paul even refers to "the oil of gladness" (Heb. 1:9). It is in that sense also symbolic of joy.

Did Jesus know all this? Surely He did. Was there then something significant in His choice of the mount known as the Mount of Olives? And was it true then, as now, that Mount Oilvet was symbolic and sacred, all of it? Let me remind you that on that mount four holinesses came together in a remarkable way. I speak first of the place. It was eastward from the temple, a temple which by now had been desecrated, the temple which He first called on a day of cleansing "my Father's house," but which later He spoke of14as "my house." (John 2:16; Mark 11:17.) In that house was a Holy of Holies. Two olivewood pillars stood as entrances, and they were in fact connected to the menorah, the perpetual lamp, and from them came two kinds of tubes, into which were poured olive oil; then it burned.

A Jewish tradition says that when Adam, close to the time of his own death, was debilitated, he sent Eve and his son Seth back to the garden for the healing oil. But at the threshold they were met by an angel who said there would be no oil again until the meridian of time when the Messiah would come, and then the oil would be that of the olive tree.

Another tradition, based on a scripture in Leviticus, says Moses was commanded to teach the children of Israel to bring to him for the tabernacle olive oil, "pure olive oil beaten for the light" (Lev. 24:2). The tradition says that such oil was burning in the time of Jesus; but it had lost its sacred significance, or had not yet received its sacred fulfillment.

Jesus went on the mount overlooking the temple mount, as, says the scripture, "he was wont" (Luke 22:39). Luke even says that in the last days of His life He lodged there, He "abode there" at night (see Luke 21:37). On that hill was a garden, but the more proper word is vineyard. A vineyard of olive trees? Yes. That same word is used in the parable or allegory of the tame and wild olive tree as related in the book of Jacob. The Lord of the vineyard, Dr. Sidney B. Sperry believed, was the Father of us all. The servant in the vineyard was the Messiah. His task, the weightiest in all history.

It is called Gethsemane. Geth or gat means "press," and shemen in Hebrew means "oil." The place of the olive press. You can see such presses still in Israel, for after the processes of salt and vinegar and pressure came the time when they gathered the olives, placed them in a bag, and then with a huge crushing rock (to push it usually required an animal) they crushed those olives until the oil flowed. The place of the olive press.

Another holiness was the week of Pesach, Passover. Ann and I have been privileged to attend that still kept and honored, sacrosanct celebration-Passover. Since the destruction of the temple it has been modified. At the time of Jesus they brought the lamb, the faultless lamb (and, by the way, down that very mount), to the altar, and it was slain and the blood sprinkled on the altar. That was the season-the time.15

As for the person, this was Yeshua Massiach, Jesus the Messiah, a stem of Jesse, so Isaiah prophesied, from the stump or the root of the house of David (see Isa. 11:1). He who had been the Revealer to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. He who had not only approached but sat upon Jacob's well, and to a despised woman announced, for the first time on record: "I am He. I am He from whom shall flow living waters." (See John 4:14, 26.) It was He who had been prophesied. The word messiah, as it appears today in the King James Version in Dan. 9:25-26, has roots of "the anointed one." Now came the night when He would become the anointing one.

Further, the word messias, as it is used in the Gospel of John, has another root: tsahar, meaning to glow with light as one glistens when one is anointed. To earn the name, the holiness of the name, He had to tread the press. That image is used by Isaiah, but the Lord himself uses it in our own time, in that remarkable summation revelation the Prophet Joseph gave us of that glorious vision recorded in D&C 76 of the Doctrine and Covenants. "I have trodden the press" (in this case the wine-press, but the two merge). "I have ... trodden the wine-press alone, even the wine-press of the fierceness of the wrath of Almighty God" (D&C 76:107).

Having spoken of the holy place, the holy time, the holy person, and the holy name, may I offer a glimpse of what must have gone through Him and of what He must have gone through. "Mine hour," He had said often, "has not yet come," but now it had. After the Last Supper the record says, "and it was night" (John 13:30). Thus an explanation-I think we need no other-for why the three Apostles couldn't stay awake even though He pleaded.

Somewhere, somewhere on that mountain, He knelt.

I have witnessed the effort of the most pious of Jews as they stand-they do not kneel-at the place that is but a remnant of the wall below the ancient walls of the temple mount. Rhythmically, they throw their whole bodies into their prayer. They are sometimes ridiculed for this. They say: "We are fighting distraction. We want to concentrate. Movement helps." Well, the movement of that night, I suggest, was internal, not external, and somehow the bitterness was as bitter as gall. Not just the family of our Father who dwell upon this earth were affected, but, as we have been taught by the Prophet Joseph Smith, those of other earths also16(see Bruce R. McConkie, Mormon Doctrine, 2d ed. [Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1966], pp. 65-66). So the atonement of Jesus Christ is intergalactic in its effect. That burden, that bitterness, He vicariously took within. "How?" we cry out. But a child can understand. Pain hurts. Even the presence of it hurts those of us who merely stand detached and observe. The Savior, who is supersensitive and did not take a backward step from the will of the Father, could and did feel for and with us. The pressure worked upon Him. Somewhere on the road between the north and the south, He cried out, anticipating, "Father, save me from this hour." We don't know how long was the interim between that sentence and prayer and the next, but He then cried: "but for this cause came I unto this hour. Father, glorify thy name." And the voice said, "I have both glorified it, and will glorify it again." (John 12:27-28.)

Luke, who tradition says was a physician, recorded that great drops of blood came from the Savior's pores (Luke 22:44). The bitterness oozed. It is not a spectacle one wishes to recall, but we have been commanded, and weekly we memorialize it in an ordinance called the sacrament. Even then, all His preparation and all that He could summon from His own strength was not sufficient. And more earnestly, says the record, He prayed, and an angel came, strengthening Him (see Luke 22:43-44). Strengthening, but not delivering. What is it like to have the power to summon legions of angels to end the ordeal yet not to summon them? During that same night He was betrayed. He was taken prisoner. He was broken into, pierced by scourging; and a merciful reading of Pilate's motives suggests that he hoped this would suffice for those who were crying out against Jesus. It did not. The weight, I submit, had begun there on the mount, a much greater weight than the weight of the cross that He was then to bear.

Now, what conclusions can we draw from all this? First, hereafter when we speak or hear the words, "I anoint you with this consecrated oil," let us remember what the consecration cost.

As we sit-but in our spirits as we kneel during the sacrament service-and are asked to remember His body, recall that it was the veritable tree and olive beaten for the light, and that there flows from that mount unto this whole earth, and beyond, the redemptive power of healing and soothing and ministering to the needy.17

In the hours of gladness, should our cup run o'er, let us remember that to make that possible a cup-the bitterest of cups-must have been drunk.

On that day when our life, the life of attempted faithfulness, is bludgeoned and becomes wearing and wearying, may we remember that no great and good fruits come easily, that we are the olive plants who were supposedly planted anew in Him, and that only time and suffering and endurance can produce the peaceable fruit which He yearns for us to have. He does not deliver until the perfect work has done its work.

Finally as we go into the days of affliction which have on every level and through all the prophets been promised us, hard days, let us remember that from that mount, in what most would have thought was the most tragic event of history, has come the source and power of purification and life. One day He will honor it again, this time descending in His glory. And when His foot touches it, this whole earth will know it. The mount itself shall separate, be shaken, and an earthquake will follow. The earth itself will be purged and cleansed and will eventually shine with celestial light. We are promised we may be there, either to descend with Him or to ascend to meet Him, and either of those is glorious. Over and over He spoke of himself as the bridegroom preparing His own for a feast. In our own Doctrine and Covenants we have been promised that feast, when all worthies who have been made worthy will gather (see 58:3-11). In the beginning of this dispensation, this revelation was given: "Wherefore, be faithful, praying always, having your lamps trimmed [that means full] and burning [that means alight and afire] and oil with you, that you may be ready at the coming of the Bridegroom" (D&C 33:17).

I bear witness that Jesus is the Messiah and that He could not have known, according to the flesh, how to succor His people according to their infirmities unless He had gone through in Gethsemane what He went through. I bear testimony that the knowledge He has today, what one of the prophets calls "the bowels of mercy," reaches out unto the Father, who grieves that any tree in His vineyard should be lost. He pleads even now for more time, for you and for me, until we too have been purged and can sing the song of redeeming love.1819
