Truman G. Madsen, Radiant Life ( 1994)

3

Man Illumined

The sum of this chapter can be put in one word: Light. We see with and through light; but we rarely examine light itself. Yet continually why and what and how questions are put to me which, I am convinced, are less questions than they are questings, questings for Light.

No theme is more central to modern revelation than light "which lighteth every man that cometh into the world" (John 1:9). The Church itself came "out of obscurity and darkness" into the light, and the light of modern revelation centers in Christ. Consider the following excerpts:

That which is of God is light (D&C 50:24).

That which doth not edify [lift, inspire, enliven] is not of God, and is darkness (D&C 50:23).

He that ascended up on high, as also he descended below all things, in that he comprehended all things, that he might be in all and through all things, the light of truth (D&C 88:6).

And the light which shineth, which giveth you light, is through him who enlighteneth your eyes, which is the same light that quickeneth your understandings (D&C 88:11).

Truth embraceth truth; virtue loveth virtue; light cleaveth unto light [as darkness cleaveth unto darkness] (D&C 88:40).

Light and truth forsake [detect and withdraw from] that evil one (D&C 93:37). 20

[Christ's light] is in all things, giveth life to all things ["maketh alive all things" (Moses 6:61)] ... is through all things [surrounds, envelops, permeates] ... is the law by which all things are governed. (D&C 88:13, 41.)

And if your eye be single [constantly upreaching and outreaching] to my glory, your whole bodies shall be filled with light, and there shall be no darkness in you; and that body which is filled with light comprehendeth all things (D&C 88:67).

Then shall ye know that ye have seen me [Christ (indirectly in the light of sun, moon, and stars, but directly in a former condition of glory in his presence)], that I am, and that I am the true light that is in you, and that you are in me; otherwise ye could not abound [that is, live, grow, flourish] (D&C 88:50).

Every man whose spirit receiveth not the light is under condemnation. For man is spirit. (D&C 93:32-33.)

That which was from the beginning is plainly manifest unto them, and they receive not the light (D&C 93:31).

He that keepeth his commandments receiveth truth and light, until he is glorified in truth and knoweth all things. (D&C 93:28.)

He that receiveth light, and continueth in God, receiveth more light; and that light groweth brighter and brighter until the perfect day [the day of perfect light, the light of the perfect day] (D&C 50:24).

From these revelatory and sweeping insights into the nature of light and the light of nature, one senses the beginnings of the whole cosmology, a prodigious and unifying key to the secrets of the vast universe. I select only those themes that apply to man himself, his makeup, his comprehension, his life fulfillment.

Light as the Real

These revelations suggest that man is more than a receptacle of degrees of light; he is somehow in his very primal makeup composed of light. One associate of the Prophet Joseph Smith understood him to say "that light or spirit, and matter, are the two great primary principles of the universe, or of Being; that they are self-existent, co-existent, indestructible and eternal and from these two elements, both our spirits and our bodies were formulated."

It is implicit in this statement that "pure light" (if that means unembodied light) is somehow less advanced than the living light21that comes in the complex organization of spirit bodies and physical bodies-could we say "light magnified"?

Yet the Prophet added: "Light and heat ... fill the immensity of space, and permeate with latent life, and heat, every particle of which all works are composed." (Letter from Benjamin F. Johnson to George Gibbs, p. 7, in Church Historical Department.)

Light and heat are, even in their grosser forms, refining and welding influences. But the light and heat in the fusion of realities that is man transcend somehow the lesser and grosser forms of light.

Light as Truth

If, then, light is interfused with man's spirit and physical bodies, we may see how fitting it is to say that light is truth. The glorified Christ says, "I am the Truth." Elsewhere He speaks of himself as "the Spirit of Truth" and in the same vein "the light of truth." And again as "Intelligence, or the light of truth," and says, "I am more intelligent than they all" (Abr. 3:19), more intelligent, that is, than all other intelligences.

Truth in one sense is, as our hymn says, "the sum of existence." It is another name for reality, that which is. But in a second sense, "truth is knowledge" (D&C 93:24), the accurate perception of that which is. Christ himself has become the truth in both senses. First, He is the fulness of personality: He is the sum of human existence. Second, He illumines the truth for us. By experiencing the struggle toward perfection, He "descended below all things" into darkness that "comprehended him not" (D&C 88:6; 45:7). Thus He received a fulness of the glory of the Father, which is a fulness of the light of God. And having made that light His own, He is for us the source of "the life and the light, the spirit and the power, sent forth by the will of the Father" (D&C 50:27).

In mortality the more light one receives, the more he can receive. We grow and glow not just by addition but by multiplication. Hence the promise, "For unto him that receiveth it shall be given more abundantly, even power" (D&C 71:6), and its correlative warning, "But whosoever continueth not to receive, from him shall be taken away even that he hath." (JST Matt. 13:11.) 22The more a person increases in light, the more he gains access to truth and acquires intelligent consciousness of all that light penetrates-on the one hand the immensity of space and, on the other hand the immensity of time, "things as they are, and as they were, and as they are to come" (D&C 93:24). Eventually he may receive the fulness of light that circumscribes all truth.

Said Brigham Young:

It is not the optic nerve alone that gives the knowledge of surrounding objects to the mind, but it is that which God has placed in man-a system of intelligence that attracts knowledge, as light cleaves to light, intelligence to intelligence, and truth to truth. It is this which lays in man a proper foundation for all education. (Discourses of Brigham Young, comp. John A. Widtsoe [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1946], p. 257.)

When we are told, "If ye receive not the Spirit ye shall not teach" (D&C 42:14), it means more than that we should not. We cannot. More-without it, we cannot even understand. "Why is it," the Lord asks, "that ye cannot understand and know, that he that receiveth the word by the Spirit of truth receiveth it as it is preached by the Spirit of truth? Wherefore, he that preacheth and he that receiveth, understand one another, and both are edified and rejoice together." (D&C 50:21-22.) Teaching any truth, even the most elemental or simple facts, is exciting to both teacher and student. Touched by the light, they tend to see the infusion, the "hand of God," as it were, everywhere.

And I have felt A presence that disturbs me with the joy Of elevated thoughts; a sense sublime Of something far more deeply interfused. (Wordsworth, "Lines written a few miles above Tintern Abbey.")

But one who has yet to respond needs what the Prophet once referred to as a rebirth of one's eyes or a change of heart before he can see any difference between the kingdom of God and the kingdom of the world (see Andrew F. Ehat and Lyndon W. Cook, eds., The Words of Joseph Smith [Provo: BYU Religious Studies Center, 1980], p. 256). Such a one moves about unaware of any23light. Just as 20-20 vision is helpless without light, so, in the wider world of the spirit, the "eyes of the understanding" must be quickened.

Quickened carries at least three strands of meaning-"to enliven, to hasten, to permeate." Careful introspection will show that there is no mental process that is not intensified by the subtle enlightening process described by the Prophet-"when you feel pure intelligence flowing into you" (Teachings, p. 151). Not only are there "sudden strokes of ideas," the "first intimations," but also a brightening effect that enables us to see what we saw before, but now in quite literally a new light. The effects extend to the person as a whole-even his balance, coordination, and motor skills. In the understanding, light has to do with the clarifying of concepts and judgments (more than analytic proficiency), with the heightening of imagination (more than aimless fantasy), with the recovery and interweaving of memories (more than chance deliverances of the subconscious), and with the strivings and inspirings of creativity. These phenomena take a person beyond the "light barriers." His mental life is "brighter."

The teaching that our "whole bodies" can be full of light (D&C 88:67) suggests that what we call I.Q. is a clumsy and misleading "measure" of man's cognitive powers. Genuine intelligence, or the conscious "light of truth," is the light that recognizes and absorbs or "cleaves" to truth, and it involves the whole person. Intelligence, in short, is a kind of light-susceptibility. Hence the Prophet needed a Urim and Thummim until he himself became one. We have a glimpse of that level of light and burning in the Prophet as he emerged with Sidney Rigdon from his chamber, after they had written "while yet in the Spirit" a portion of what they had together beheld in the vision of the degrees of glory (D&C 76). His statement is: "My whole body was full of light and I could see even out at the ends of my fingers and toes" (N.B. Lundwall, comp., The Vision [Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, n.d.], p. 11).

We are reaching toward this awareness when we say, "I know with every fiber of my being. . . ." The scriptures are replete with testimony that the capacities, the hidden potential, the lava of our inner responses to truth far exceed any plaudits ever offered for the "genius." We can no more "drink up the ocean" than we can learn all truth "line by line." But "that body which is filled with24light comprehendeth all things" (D&C 88:67), and the ocean, indeed all oceans, are subject to the rays that proceed from and return to Him who is "glorified in truth" (D&C 93:28) and "knoweth all things" (D&C 38:2).

The principle "truth embraceth truth; virtue loveth virtue; light cleaveth unto light" (D&C 88:40) helps us explain many of the experiences of the religious struggle. For example:

-How five minutes is sufficient to bring vibrant and total trust for one person, and fifty years not long enough for another, though the "evidence" or record is the same for both.

-How the most intense sympathy, empathy, and social feelings emerge in settings of light and spiritual experience, a mutual kinship out of mutual kindling.

-How enslaving habits and degenerate compulsions in the flesh, which stand like an impenetrable shield between the spirit of man and the Spirit of God, can be purged and purified-burned out-by a light-power that heals and redeems. And why the statement "you can't change human nature" is simply false if "you" includes your spirit and Christ's Spirit power.

-How light can be glaring and unpleasant, even blinding, when first we are subjected to it, but then the increasing intensities and heats become more than endurable; they render our former condition repugnant.

-How grosser light stops with surfaces and casts shadows, but the higher light can be in us and through us.

-How we "receive the Spirit through prayer" (D&C 63:64), but also we need to improve our prayer pattern until we pray with the Spirit and "in the Spirit" (D&C 46:28-30).

-How there are two kinds of burning in us; one a burning of conscience, urging and lifting us to become what we have in us to become (and accumulating guilt in postponement), and second a burning of approval and peace when we set about repenting.

-How negative feelings can restrain the peace and power of light as it flows down, yet the flow of the Spirit can melt away all such dross if we will permit our spirits to take the lead.25

Light as the Good

If light is somehow the substratum of all reality and also of all intelligent awareness of reality, it is only another step to say that light is the foundation of good. In few, if any, ancient or modern cultures has "light" become symbolic of evil, "dark" of good. Instead, light tends to be identified with the good, the valuable, the blessed, the sacred. But it is more than a symbol or a ritual. The scriptures teach that the light of Christ is given to every man that comes into the world, but that it enlightens "through the world" all those that hearken (D&C 84:46). Light edifies, lifts, and "that which does not edify is not of God and is darkness" (D&C 50:23). That is the bound and condition of all law, physical and moral, the "law by which all things are governed" (D&C 88:13). Light is not just the test of good; it is the nature of all that is judged truly good. Alma, who in earlier years had emerged from guilt-ridden darkness that made his own extinction seem desirable, wrote, "Whatsoever is light is good, because it is discernible" (Alma 32:35).

In the realm of the good, as elsewhere, light is the "bound and condition" of all preferred ways of life. And these bounds and conditions are inexorable and exceptionless, not because they tell us what our choices must be but because they tell us what the results of our choices will be. Of course, one can attempt to "become a law unto [himself]" (D&C 88:35), but only at the cost of diminishing the light. Every minute of every day we are increasing or decreasing in our receptivity to light, and there is no way to escape the inevitability of that consequence in our thoughts, our acts, our very breath. One can look upon the law of light either as the enemy of freedom or as freedom's guarantee, which "is preserved by law and sanctified by the same" (D&C 88:34). One can abide the law only as one can abide the light, and vice versa.

An unconditional imperative can be derived from this: Seek the increase of Christ's light. And all commandments are instrumental to this end, which is an intrinsic value. If it is said (as it is fashionable to say) that such an imperative is only binding upon me if I make it so, that if I find it unappealing, or meaningless, or even absurd, then it is not mine and therefore is not binding at all, one reply is that a measure of light itself is essential even to such a 26denial of the light. Christ is the true light that is in us, even when we turn our backs on Him. He himself became God by abiding in the light. And even God is bound by the law.

Light as Beauty

From the understanding that light is the root of reality, of truth, and of goodness, the next step is to recognize that light is the foundation of beauty. And, again, not only does light enhance the beautiful-light itself is beautiful.

The scriptures, and notably the Book of Mormon, teem with Hebraic symbols for the beautiful and the lovely, revolving around light, brightness, fire, and whiteness. Thus of the vision of the tree of life that Lehi and Nephi beheld, it is written: "The beauty thereof was far beyond, yea, exceeding of all beauty, and the whiteness thereof did exceed the whiteness of the driven snow" (1 Ne. 11:8).

Similarly one can feel the ancient writers straining for superlatives in their descriptions of white fruit, "to exceed all the whiteness that I had ever seen" (1 Ne. 8:11), of white robes or clothing, "nothing upon earth so white" (3 Ne. 19:25), and of the white virgin, "exceedingly fair and white ... most beautiful and fair above all other virgins" (1 Ne. 11:13-15).

Artists have often depicted this recognition of light as divine beauty by the halo, the nimbus, and the golden circle above the head. But that is at best a token of the promise and the actuality. For "whole bodies" are promised illumination, and the light not only hovers over but also surrounds and engulfs the entire personality until it is gloriously beautiful. It was, after all, every one of the multitude, and all of each of them, even the seams of their clothing, that became scintillant with white light in the presence of Christ during that "ineffable outpouring of prayer," as Elder James E. Talmage calls it, in the 3 Nephi narrative (see 3 Ne. 19:25). Modern men and women of God who have witnessed such radiance of soul say it is "like a search light turned on within." It is "the same glorious spirit," the Prophet once wrote, "gives them the likeness of glory and bloom. ... No man can describe it to you-no man can write it." (Teachings, p. 368).27Aesthetic delight, then, whatever else it is, is delight in light. And it is surely significant that the whole color spectrum, every vivid color of the rainbow, harmonizes in white light which, in turn, harmonizes in Christ.

At the everyday level there are the light-variations in the human face, almost infinitely intimate and animated. "You will always discover in the first glance of a man, in the outlines of his features, something of his mind," said the Prophet Joseph (Teachings, p. 299). Particularly around the eyes ("the light of the body is the eye" [Matt. 6:22] the forehead, and the lips one sees recorded a person's past and present encounters with light. It has nothing to do with fairness of complexion, with age, with cosmetic skill, with habitual patterns of facial set or mood, or even with the features we are accustomed to identify as "attractive." One must remember Isaiah's telling-should we say warning?-prophecy of the Messiah: "there is no beauty that we should desire him" (Isa. 53:2). Later Christ could see through the rough and rugged exterior of John the Baptist and call him "a burning and a shining light" (John 5:35). And John the Beloved could say of Christ that "in him is no darkness at all" (1 Jn. 1:5). The true beauty "in the eye of the beholder" is also in the eye of the beheld, and the glory of both. It is the divine light of beauty, as also the beauty of divine enlightenment, and it comes from above before it comes from within. Not all who are handsome or beautiful in the conventional sense are illumined. But all who are illumined, though conventionally "plain" or even "ugly," are beautiful.

The face may also reflect darkness. It is no abuse of terms to say that in some faces, and in all of ours at times, there is an "aura of darkness" that is disagreeable and unbeautiful, encircling in its gloom. Darkness here is not just a metaphor for attitude. It is an apparent absence of light that prefers and reflects "works of darkness" and finds the presence of light too much. No artifice successfully conceals it, not even a perpetual and mannerly smile. Seeking to become appealing, which is the ultimate testimony that light is good and beautiful, the adversary himself "transformeth himself nigh unto an angel of light" (2 Ne. 9:9). But his is "dark light"; and as the Master warned us, "If therefore the light that is in thee be darkness, how great is that darkness!" (Matt. 6:23.) Having fallen from a condition of brilliant light, having28flouted the inner light, Satan and those he seals his own in "outer darkness" are in deliberate darkness that cleaves to and surrounds them like a self-imposed cloak.

Light as Life

In mankind, the true, the good, the beautiful are not only reflected but come to life. And again the scriptures teach of the inseparable connection-in fact, the eventual union in their highest forms-of light and life. "In [Christ] was life; and the life was the light of men" (John 1:4). And it is His light that "giveth life to all things" (D&C 88:13). And in man the inclusive all refers to the life of the mind and all the creative and responsive forces that are interwoven in him. A modern revelation speaks not only of the classic symbol "eternal life" but also of "eternal lives" (D&C 132:22-25), the plural emphasizing expansion and intensification of the lives within the whole person.

As the flourishing of plant life depends upon the light-nourishment traceable to the sun in the process of photosynthesis, so the light of the sun depends upon the Son of God. "He is in the sun, and the light of the sun, and the power thereof by which it was made" (D&C 88:7). In fact, one man records that the Prophet once said, "There is no light, except the Father and the Son" (Alfred Douglas Young diary, p. 5, in Church Historical Department). The nourishing that leads to the flowering of the soul-the crucial need of the soul-is His, and through Him ours. "I am come that they might have life, and that they might have it more abundantly" (John 10:10). Without Him we could not "abound," which is to say live, draw breath, survive. But to abound is to abide in Him, and to abide in Him, as vine to root, is to live abundantly.

When we are instrumental in transmitting this life-renewing power, we can be so drained that, like the Master or his modern prophets, our very "virtue" goes out and we are left visibly pale. "I became weak," said the Prophet after blessing nineteen children, "from which I have not yet recovered" (Teachings, p. 281). But when we are recipients of this power, it is the very "renewing of [our] bodies" (D&C 84:33), the reversal of all forms of29distress, disease, disability, and degeneration, and the rekindling of our emotional life. In such times the effect in us is not only the opposite of darkness; it is the opposite of heaviness or burdensomeness. It is the essence of spiritual and physical buoyancy. "My burden is light" (Matt. 11:30).

In contrast, the soul-shrinking that occurs in the absence or withdrawal of light inevitably has to do with the heart's definition of life: love, and with love, joy and peace. It was John who recognized, as have few in history, that to hate is to be in darkness, and that conversely to love is to walk in the light (see 1 Jn. 2:10-11). "Your minds in times past have been darkened," says a modern revelation, "because of ... vanity and unbelief" (D&C 84:54-55). And vanity and unbelief are both ways of cutting ourselves from love, even from enlightened love of ourselves. The resulting condemnation is diminution of light, which blinds and numbs our capacities for the calm excitement of inspired love, the relish of joy, and the serenity of inner peace. We become, as Nephi told his brothers, "past feeling" (1 Ne. 17:45), and "the love of the Father shall not continue with [us]" (D&C 95:12). This, as the scripture earlier says, is the equivalent of "walking in darkness at noonday" (D&C 95:6), or, more technically, walking in noonday light, but afflicted with a darkness "that comprehendeth it not" (D&C 6:21). We literally die a little.

Even Temples

We began by saying that the universe is a combination of matter and of light or spirit, and that man himself is a microscopic universe. The Lord applies to us a more majestic word: temples (D&C 93:35). By divine design the temple is a microscopic man and man is a temple all alive. Standing on Mt. Scopus, northeast of Jerusalem, I was swept into a montage of images of temples-temples of Solomon, of Herod, of modern Kirtland and Nauvoo. I saw them built by the song of worthy sacrifice, endowed with encircling light and fire, and then violently desecrated, their veils ripped and trampled. Just so man, the living temple of God, can be a harmony of radiance or a divided shambles of darkness. In his vision of the future inhabitants of the holy city, John wrote:

And I saw no temple therein; for the Lord God Almighty and the Lamb are the temple of it.

And the city had no need of the sun, neither of the moon, to shine in it; for the glory of God did lighten it, and the Lamb is the light thereof. . . .

For the Lord God giveth them light; and they shall reign forever and ever. (Rev. 21:22-23; 22:5.)

To be light-magnified and light-purified is to have a foretaste of that temple of celestial personality: to begin to see as we are now seen by Him, and to know as we are now known by Him. And to enter that temple is to see God, the God of lights, born in us, the lightened god that is us. And as the temple is the fusion of all of heaven and earth, so within us the real, the true, the good, and the beautiful are to be blended in the prism of perfected personality. In Christ and through Christ, the singular sheen of saintliness will be swallowed up in the "eternal burnings" of godliness.31
