Truman G. Madsen, Radiant Life ( 1994)

4

The Intimate Touch of Prayer

All of us need deeper understanding in prayer. All of us reach. All of us speak. But none of us have perfected the process and all of us need encouragement. Here is a portrait of the prayer life of the Prophet Joseph Smith. I'm convinced that as we feel our way into his life we will receive glimpses that are more vivid and helpful than if we simply read statements about what we ought to do-the Prophet's life gives us clear insight into what we can do.

There is a letter in the Prophet's handwriting written in 1832-only a few months after one of the most remarkable revelations he received. The record of that revelation is now D&C 46 of the Doctrine and Covenants. Joseph is writing to his wife, Emma.

My situation is a very unpleasant one, although I will endeavor to be contented, the Lord assisting me. I have visited a grove which is just back of the town, almost every day, where I can be secluded from the eyes of any mortal, and there give vent to all the feelings of my heart in meditation and prayers. I have called to mind all the past moments of my life, and am left to mourn and shed tears of sorrow for my folly in suffering the adversary of my soul to have so much power over me, as he has had in times past. But God is merciful and has forgiven my sins, and I rejoice that he sendeth forth His Comforter unto as many as believe and humble themselves before Him." (Dean C. Jessee, ed., The Personal Writings of Joseph Smith32[Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1984], p. 238. Spelling and punctuation standardized.)

Now, that one paragraph is enough to tell us that he was struggling-blessed and magnified though he was-just as we are struggling with the weight of life, with the difficulties and weaknesses that are in us, and with the constant desire to receive of the Lord.

Some have asked in my hearing, "How is it that the Prophet Joseph Smith, age fourteen, could go into a grove, never before having prayed vocally (according to his own account, implying that he had prayed before in his heart), and that in that first prayer he received great and marvelous blessings-transcendent blessings? Does that mean that he simply had far greater faith than any of the rest of us?

One possible response to that is that the answer the Prophet Joseph Smith received wasn't just to his own prayer. I submit that it was to the prayers of literally millions, maybe those even beyond the veil who had been seeking and reaching for generations for the restoration of the gospel and the reestablishment of the kingdom of God on the earth. That suggests that you and I do not pray alone. We pray as part of a great modern movement, and we are united in that very process. I sometimes think that therefore we have some advantages that are not shared by others who have not yet found the gospel, found the authorities and gifts and blessings of the Holy Ghost, and found the crowning blessing of the priesthood.

Let me ask some elementary questions about Joseph Smith's prayer life to help us feel even closer to him, as his experience overlaps our own. Did the Prophet pray long or short? Was he, as we judge prayers, inclined to multiply words or was he inclined to be brief? The answer to that question is yes. There were times when the Prophet prayed briefly; there also were times when he stayed on his knees in prayer for a long time. Of the first, an example is an experience at Kirtland. The table has been set, and there is little to eat. He stands at the table and says, "Lord, we thank thee for this johnnycake and ask thee to send us something better. Amen." Shortly, someone knocks on the door, and there stands a man with a ham and some flour. The Prophet jumps to his feet and says to Emma, "I knew the Lord would answer my33prayer." Well, that's a telegram prayer-that's very brief. (See Truman G. Madsen, Joseph Smith the Prophet [Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1989], p. 32.)

On the other hand Mary Elizabeth Rollins Lightner, a convert to the Church, only fourteen years of age at the time of the experience, describes coming with her mother to the Prophet's home, sharing in a small meeting where he set up a box or two and put a board across them to make room for people to sit. Now he spoke with great power. One of her comments is that his face, to her at least, "turned so white he seemed perfectly transparent." A great outpouring of the Spirit. But then he asked them to kneel. And he prayed. Such a prayer, she says, "I never heard before or since." So much did this prolong the meeting that some on the hard floor stood up, rubbed their knees a bit, and then knelt down again. It was long. (See Hyrum L. Andrus and Helen Mae Andrus, comp., They Knew the Prophet [Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1974], pp. 23-24.)

Did the Prophet address the Lord as Father, or did he have a special manner of address? Most frequently, the Prophet prayed "Our Father" or simply, "Father," or "O Lord," and was not inclined, as are some in our midst, to add adjectives and flowery phrases to that. I'm not saying that making such additions is wrong, but I note that he was intimate in prayer and that a simple "Father" was sufficient.

In counseling some missionaries he once said, "Make short prayers and short sermons." And he said on another occasion, "Be plain and simple, and ask for what you want, just like you would go to a neighbor and say, 'I want to borrow your horse to go to the mill.'" (They Knew the Prophet, p. 100.) That's plain. That's simple. And that's honest. So were his prayers.

There were times in sacred circumstances when the Prophet prayed in a formal way. I have in mind especially the unique situation of dedicating temples. Some people were upset and even left the Church through the experiences of the temple, either because so little occurred in their own experience or because so much did. The Prophet read the dedicatory prayer for the Kirtland Temple and announced that it had been given him by revelation. We have it recorded in D&C 109 of the Doctrine and Covenants. That prayer has become the model, the archetype, if you will, for all subsequent temple dedication prayers. Some members were disturbed34at that. First of all, they'd been taught that we don't have set prayers in our midst. The truth is that we have some. The Lord has not permitted us to modify the sacramental prayers-not by one word. They are set. And so also with the baptismal prayer.

Second, they were troubled that here was a man who had apparently been given these words to say by the Lord to whom he was to say them. That struck them as circular. But the Prophet elsewhere has taught us that, as President J. Reuben Clark put it, one of the things we should most often pray for is to know what we should most often pray for. At least half of the prayer process is our bringing our souls into receptivity so that we know what we ought to pray; we listen. There are direct statements in modern revelation, for example, about being given all things.

He that is ordained of God and sent forth, the same is appointed to be the greatest, notwithstanding he is the least and the servant of all.

Wherefore, he is possessor of all things; for all things are subject unto him, both in heaven and on the earth, the life and the light, the Spirit and the power. . . .

But no man is possessor of all things except he be purified and cleansed from all sin.

And if ye are purified and cleansed from all sin, ye shall ask whatsoever you will in the name of Jesus and it shall be done.

Then: "But know this, it shall be given you what ye shall ask." (D&C 50:26-30.) A sensitive, developing spiritual-minded person becomes more and more attentive and responsive to the Spirit and is able, therefore, to pray as the Prophet did. The Lord also said: "He that asketh in the Spirit asketh according to the will of God; wherefore it is done even as he asketh" (D&C 46:30). Thus we ought to follow the Prophet's lead, to listen and to pray with the Spirit; then the Spirit will prompt us both as to how we should pray and what we should say as we pray.

I've asked myself, "Did the Prophet sometimes pray for things never given or for guidance not allowed, or for privileges denied him?" He did. Like us, he sometimes struggled, and the Lord simply left that problem without solving it.

Two examples. The Prophet earnestly desired to know the time of the Savior's second coming. We've been taught no man35knows the day nor the hour; but still, get a group of Mormons together, and after they admit that premise they say, "But, what do you think?" Well, the Prophet also wondered. He prayed very fervently to know, and the Lord's answer wasn't really an answer, except, "I won't tell you." It was: "Joseph, my son, if thou livest until thou art eighty-five years old, thou shalt see the face of the Son of Man; therefore let this suffice, and trouble me no more on this matter" (D&C 130:15). Joseph first assumed that that meant Christ would come in fifty-six years, which would have been when he, Joseph, would become eighty-five. But he realized that wasn't what he'd been told. He'd been told that if he lived to be eighty-five he would see the face of the Lord, and that might mean after dying. So he put down the only conclusion he could come to. "I believe the coming of the Son of Man will not be any sooner than that time" (see D&C 130:14-17; see also Diary of Oliver B. Huntington, p. 129, in Church Historical Department).

God simply doesn't want us to know the timing of the Second Coming. He wants us to go on living, I suggest to you, as if it were going to happen tomorrow. Spiritually speaking, that's what He wants from us-to be prepared. As He says, "I come quickly" (Rev. 22:20). But He also wants us to live our lives in a long-range way with inspiration and not in an unauthentic way, which some of our young people seem to follow. They say, "It's all going to blow up in our faces in five years, so why should I plan to go away to school?" That's not in keeping with the Lord's will.

On one occasion the Prophet was praying to know why our people had to suffer so in Missouri. A sorrowful letter he wrote them says, "He will not show [it] unto me" (Teachings, p. 34). There was at least one time earlier when he begged the Lord for what the Lord had told him He wouldn't give him. As we all do, the Prophet fell into the practice sometimes of saying, "Are you sure, Lord? Really, do you understand, Lord?" "I heard you, and the answer seems to be no, but are you sure?"

We remember the instance of Martin Harris. Twice the Prophet prayed asking for permission to lend Martin the manuscript. Twice the Lord said no. When the Prophet asked the third time, we might suppose he said or thought things like "But Lord, don't you understand, his wife is pushing him, Lord. What harm can it do? She needs to see something. She needs to have some36reassurance." Well, there's a passage that says, "Seek not to counsel your God" (D&C 22:4).

Mother Smith recalled how Martin came to the house, paced up and down in front, hesitant to open the door to tell the truth. The Prophet saw him out the window. Finally he entered the house. "Martin, have you lost ... ?" (See History of Joseph Smith by His Mother, pp. 127-29.)

For two weeks, the Prophet could not be comforted. He felt he had betrayed the Lord. And no one can conceive the joy that entered his heart when the revelation came, "Behold, ... repent of that which thou hast done ... and thou ... art again called to the work." (D&C 3:9-10.) He said thereafter, and I think this was a summary of his experience, "I made this my rule: When the Lord commands, do it" (History of the Church 2:170). Well, he learned that, but he learned the hard way.

Did the Prophet practice family prayer? The answer is yes. During one period of the Prophet's life Eliza R. Snow served as a kind of baby-sitter in his home, and she wrote a poem called "Narcissa to Narcissus." She described how she admired the Prophet in public-that she saw him for what he was. But when she was in his home and though, knowing his greatness, saw him, as she puts it, as humble and unassuming as a child, kneeling in family prayer, she could not withhold her heart, and she loved his soul. The phrase "Narcissa to Narcissus," I believe, suggests that to see him, as with the mythological lad who looked in the water and saw his own reflection, enabled her to see herself. She came to a deeper sense of prayer in beholding him.

A brother who had never met the Prophet or his family came and was about to knock on the door, but hesitated because he heard singing. Sister Emma was leading the family and the guests, who were always numerous, in a kind of preparatory worship service. And then the Prophet prayed. (See They Knew the Prophet, p. 147.) He prayed three times a day with his family. And though in our lives it's difficult to get together once and overlap everyone, I nevertheless recommend that principle. Morning, noon, and night they had a kind of family prayer-beautiful!

Joseph once said, citing the book of Daniel, "You must make yourselves acquainted with those men who like Daniel pray three times a day toward the House of the Lord" (Teachings, p. 161). What's the significance of facing the temple? Apparently it can37help recall both the promises the Lord has made to us in the temple and the promises we have made to Him-covenants in the House of the Lord. When President Wilford Woodruff dedicated the Salt Lake Temple he offered a specific prayer that people who had there committed their lives to the Lord Jesus Christ and were now assailed with temptation or trouble but were unable to get to the temple to supplicate the Lord might face the temple as they prayed, and that the Lord would honor their prayers. (See N.B. Lundwall, comp., Temples of the Most High [Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1966], p. 127.)

The Prophet, even in his own household, was templeminded both at Kirtland and at Nauvoo. The temple has been designated by the Lord himself as "a house of prayer" (D&C 88:119).

Did the Prophet pray when he was in desperate circumstances? Someone has said, intending it to be critical, that for some of us religion is like a spare tire-we never really put it on until we are in trouble. The Lord did indicate in a modern scripture that many in the day of peace and comparative well-being "esteemed lightly my counsel; but, in the day of their trouble, of necessity they feel after me." But He adds, "I will remember mercy." (D&C 101:8, 9.)

Well, the Prophet was in circumstances that were hard and difficult. Brigham Young once said of him: "Joseph could not have been perfected ... if he had received no persecution. If he had lived a thousand years, and led this people, and preached the Gospel without persecution, he would not have been perfected as well as he was at the age of thirty-nine years." (Journal of Discourses 2:7.)

In one dramatic situation he was hauled out of his bed by four men one night and dragged on the ground, beaten, stripped, tarred and feathered. They attempted to poison him-because he clenched his teeth they failed to get the poison into his mouth, but it subsequently fell onto the grass and killed it. It was aqua fortis. A quack doctor who had his tools had threatened that he would emasculate the Prophet. He didn't. Even as they were at him like fiends, the Prophet vocally prayed to the Lord for deliverance. He did pray in extremity. My personal conviction is that the last words he spoke in this life were not, as some have supposed, a distress signal, but were a prayer: "O Lord, my God." These words, a few minutes later, Willard Richards repeated with hands uplifted as he thought of the condition of the Church in the loss of the Prophet.38

Yes, Joseph prayed in extremity but he also prayed in great gratitude. And here is another insight. He taught the Saints that they should practice virtue and holiness, but that they should give thanks unto God in the Spirit for whatsoever blessing they were blessed with. In my own life, years have gone by, I'm sure, when I have offered prayers yet never spent an entire prayer simply to thank the Lord. My prayers have always had an element of asking, asking, asking. But Joseph taught the Saints that if they would learn to be thankful in all things-simply be thankful-they would be made glorious, and their prayers would take on a deeper, richer spirit.

The sin of ingratitude is one of the things that prevent us from as rich a prayer life as he had. He seemed to have an innate and deep capacity for gratitude, even for the slightest favor, from the Lord as from his fellowmen. And I have wept at times while reading that in his journal he sometimes wrote a kind of prayer for a brother. "Bless Brother So-and-So, Father, who gave me $1.35 today to help with such-and-such a project." Even the smallest favor called forth his warmth and gratitude.

Was the Prophet effective in silent prayers, did he commend that or even command it? I note with interest eight different places where the Lord, through the Prophet, says, "pray always." That's a strong imperative. How can we? If "pray always" means vocally, then none of us do it-none of us can. But if "pray always" includes the kind of prayer that is from the heart and wordless, we're getting closer to a possibility. And if it means, even more profoundly, that we are to be in the spirit of prayer regardless of what we may be doing, then all of us can pray always.

The Prophet gave us a better rendering of a New Testament verse about prayer. It is Rom. 8:26. The King James Version of the Bible has Paul saying (speaking of how the Spirit can assist us in prayer), "The Spirit itself maketh intercession for us with groanings which cannot be uttered." The Prophet's version is, "The Spirit maketh intercession for us with striving which cannot be expressed (Teachings, p. 278). I think he is saying that when we have enough confidence in the discerning power of the Spirit, we stop worrying so much about the words we use and are concerned more simply to open up what is really deep in us-even things that we cannot find words for. Strivings are different than groanings-you can groan in discouragement and despondency and it can all be turned down39instead of turned up, but strivings are upreaching. We can take our strivings-even those that we cannot express-and know that as we silently think and pour out our feelings, the Spirit will translate those and perfectly transmit them to the Lord. And in turn, the Spirit can respond from the Lord to us. A great confidence and a great freedom can come when we trust the Spirit for that.

The Prophet, as we know, became a learned man. He didn't begin so, but I occasionally wince a little when I hear people say, "Well, he was just an unlearned boy." How does one become learned? We say "go to school." What's a school? It's a place where there are teachers. Well, who were the Prophet's teachers? Not just the local schoolmarm or two in Palmyra. The Prophet Joseph Smith was taught face to face by some "minor" pedagogues like Moroni, Peter, James, and John, the ancient Apostles and prophets; and, if that weren't enough, the Father and the Son. It is not true to say that he was unlearned. He had the learning and wisdom of heaven. Who knows more about the epistles of Paul-professors who teach in graduate schools, or Paul?

We help ourselves in prayer by speaking aloud. It helps our minds stay on track. But there are advantages also to silent prayers and some kinds of mind wandering-letting the mind go in the direction that it seems to be impressed to go.

Now, just a word about the remarkable pattern the Prophet taught in the presence of priesthood brethren. This was a special kind of prayer circumstance in the Kirtland Temple. Here are his exact words: "I labored with each of these quorums [High Priests, Seventies, Elders] for some time to bring them to the order which God had shown to me, which is as follows: "The first part to be spent in solemn prayer before God, without any talking or confusion." (I take that to mean solemn, silent prayer.) "And the conclusion with a sealing prayer by President Rigdon" (that is, one man would then pray vocally with and for the group), "when all the quorums were to shout with one accord a solemn hosanna to God and the Lamb with an Amen, Amen, and Amen."

Notice, in passing, that we're warned by the Lord against vain repetition, but we are not warned against repetition. There are things we not only can but should repeat in our lives. And it is not correct to suppose that after you say something once, you mustn't ever say it again. Vain repetition is the kind of vanity of repeating40without genuine concern, just supposing that saying a thing over and over from the neck up without any feeling is acceptable. No. But the Hosanna Shout, itself, is a repetition-three times we say hosanna, hosanna, hosanna. And three times we say amen. To continue: "Then all take seats and lift up their hearts in silent prayer to God, and if any obtain a prophecy or vision, to rise and speak that all may be edified and rejoice together."

Now, that is a special set of instructions, but the spirit of it, it seems to me, applies even to our own private prayers. Note that there is first a concentration, not confused but silent, then a vocal prayer, then a giving of gratitude, and then waiting upon the Lord with our hearts sensitive, and speaking, or at least, in private life, knowing what comes by the Spirit. Did that happen, that aftermath? Yes. The Prophet says in his journal: "The quorum of the Seventy enjoyed a great flow of the Holy Spirit. Many arose and spoke, testifying that they were filled with the Holy Ghost, which was like fire in their bones, so that they could not hold their peace, but were constrained to cry hosanna to God and the Lamb, and glory in the highest." (History of the Church 2:391-92.)

Of a similar occasion a few days before this one, Joseph said: "After these quorums were dismissed, I retired to my home, filled with the Spirit, and my soul cried hosanna to God and the Lamb, through the silent watches of the night; and while my eyes were closed in sleep, the visions of the Lord were sweet unto me, and His glory was round about me" (History of the Church 2:387). Much can be learned from that.

Half a century later, when forty years had passed since construction had begun on the Salt Lake Temple, the pattern the Prophet taught was used as Elder Lorenzo Snow led the Saints-some forty thousand of them-in the glorious privilege of uniting their voices in praise of the Lord that they had been able to reach the capstone. Forty thousand, and the shout was a shout! It echoed through the mountains. Can you imagine forty years of struggle and patience bursting out in joy as they did so! Well, that's acceptable to the Lord.

Another kind of shouting the Prophet rebuked. Let me in passing mention it. One time, Father Johnson asked a convert who had been a Methodist exhorter to pray in the family's evening worship. He hadn't overcome his habits. The exhorters in41that old-time pattern were men who learned to throw their voice in a kind of falsetto quality. When the wind was right, they could be heard a mile away, some claim. This man began, literally, hallooing that way in prayer, and "alarmed the whole village." The Prophet was one of those who came running to the scene. In essence, he said, "Brother, don't pray like that again. You don't have to bray like a jackass to be heard of the Lord." (See Journal of Discourses 2:214.) Well, George A. Smith indicates that that brother left the Church. Now, if you're sincere, there's no problem. But there's something false and inconsistent about supposing that the Lord cannot hear you unless you halloo. He can hear the quietest turning of your own sacred conscience and knows the thoughts and intents of your heart.

The Prophet taught repeatedly that the Saints should be one in prayer, that when a group comes together in fasting and prayer, united in the petition of their hearts, that makes a greater difference somehow than if anyone alone had done so. The revelations say, "Be agreed as touching all things whatsoever ye ask of me" (D&C 27:18). Be one in your prayers, for "if ye are not one ye are not mine" (D&C 38:27). One of the sisters, the wife of George A. Smith, recalled the Prophet's statement to her. "He said that we did not know how to pray to have our prayers answered." But she added that when she and her husband received their endowments in the temple, they understood what he meant. (See They Knew the Prophet, p. 123.) The Lord instructed the Prophet to teach several of the brethren the keys whereby they might ask in prayer and receive an answer (see D&C 124:95, 97). Well, there is much about the privilege of the sanctuary that we cannot say outside the temple, but may I simply report that Brigham Young, who learned to pray listening to the Prophet, said repeatedly to the Saints that when someone prays in a congregation we should be saying in our minds what he or she is saying with the lips. We should repeat the very words in our minds, and then when we say amen we know what we're saying amen to. Without that repetition, sometimes we do not. Why is it important? So that the Saints may be one. Truly the effectual, fervent power of united prayer cannot be overestimated.

Later comment has to do with the original problem-the problem of guilt, the problem of sin. Here is the Prophet himself42writing to his wife, saying, "I have called to mind all the past moments of my life and am left to mourn and shed tears of sorrow for my folly."

If we study them closely we find that all the Saints have had their struggles. Nephi, just to name one, writes with such strength in those first and early chapters that you wonder if he ever doubted or murmured or had a setback. The contrast between his attitude and even that of his own parents is startling. But in the fourth chapter of 2 Nephi, you will notice, he opens his soul and levels with us. And even though he has been struggling with the burden of leadership, he says, "When I desire to rejoice, my heart groaneth because of my sins." Then he prays with a power that reminds one of David in the Psalms, "O Lord, wilt thou encircle me around in the robe of thy righteousness ... make a way for mine escape."

A homely illustration of the same point is the story about the two farmers talking, and there's a horse pulling the plow, but on his right flank every time he pulls, the strap rubs what has become an open gaping sore. The observer says, "Pretty tough on that horse to make him pull when he's got a gaping sore." The other farmer replies, "Yes, plumb tough, but I reckon we wouldn't get much work done in this world if we waited until everyone was plumb fit." And that's true in the Church. We wouldn't get any work done in the Church if we waited until all of us were perfect. The Lord wouldn't be able to call anyone to any position in the Church if he waited until we were all fully worthy.

If I may be personal for a moment, when I was called to be a mission president, the call was made by President Henry D. Moyle. I was taken aback by it, and surprised that he didn't ask any hard questions. I reminded him of that. "You haven't asked any questions of worthiness." He said, "Well, when one responds as you have, we don't have many questions." That didn't satisfy me. I said, "But President Moyle, I love the Church, but I have some problems." He came around the desk, put his arm around me, and said, "Brother Madsen, the Lord has to show a lot of mercy to let any of us work in His Church." That's true. But what does one do when he feels, as Lorenzo Snow put it, "that the heavens are as brass over his head" (see Juvenile Instructor 22:22). That though he ought to pray, he doesn't feel like praying. And43when he does feel like praying, he is so ashamed that he hardly can. What then? My response is this glimpse from the Prophet.

The period just prior to the dedication of the Kirtland Temple saw an outpouring of the Spirit. Many of the brethren saw glorious visions, and the Prophet himself had a manifestation in which he saw, in panoramic vision, the lives of the Brethren of the Twelve-saw them in their strugglings, their flounderings, saw them preaching the gospel, saw them eventually brought back into the celestial kingdom. Interestingly, he saw them together-a group of them at least-as he recorded it, "in foreign lands." He didn't say England, but that's where they eventually went. He saw them, standing in a circle, beaten, tattered, their feet swollen, and clearly discouraged. Now, there are different levels of discouragement; we can be disturbed a bit, we can be worried, we can then be despondent, and there are moments in life for some of us when we ask, "What is the use?" And when we sink that far, we're almost to the point of wishing we could cease to be.

Well, the Prophet didn't indicate that it had gone that far with the Twelve, but they were looking down in their discouragement. Yet standing above them in the air was the Lord Jesus Christ. And it was made known to the Prophet that He yearned to show himself to them-to reach down and lift them-but they did not see Him. And the Savior looked upon them and wept. (See History of the Church 2:381.) We're told by three of the Brethren who heard the Prophet rehearse that vision that he could never speak of it without himself weeping. Why? Why would he be so touched? Because he knew that Christ willingly came into the world and took upon himself the pains and sicknesses of His people so that He might be filled with compassion so that all the Father's family could come to Him, if to no one else-and sometimes there is no one else-could come to Him, knowing that He knows what is taking place in us when we sin, or suffer affliction, or are discouraged. The great tragedy of life is that, loving us and having paid that awful price of suffering, in the moment when He is now prepared to reach down and help us we won't let Him. We look down instead of up, accepting the adversary's promptings that we must not pray; we cannot pray; we are not worthy to pray. But, says Nephi in response to that, "I say to you that ye must pray always, and not faint." (2 Ne. 32:8-9.) 44

There may be things that we are unworthy to do at times in our life, but there is one thing we are never unworthy to do, and that is pray. I have a testimony about this. The Prophet Joseph Smith not only taught it, but exemplified it. You go to the Lord regardless of the condition of your soul, and He will respond. He never closes the door against you. You may close it against Him, but if so that is your initiative, not His. We should call upon Him when we need Him most, and that's usually when we feel least worthy, and then He can respond.

In the modern prophet Joseph Smith we have an example of living, breathing prayer-the kind that changes life. His early successes with prayer wore the foundation of a pattern that brought him progressively closer to God. If prayer had no other function than to help us concentrate on the deepest concerns of our life-even to reveal ourselves to ourselves-it would be worth doing. But beyond that the Prophet illustrates for all time that prayer isn't just subjective, it isn't just self-hypnosis. Rather, it is a plan and pattern whereby we do in fact break through the veil and receive at the living hand of the living God through His Christ.45
