Truman G. Madsen, Radiant Life ( 1994)

5

Forgiveness

The experience I relate first is well known in the Church. I want to share a few extra glimpses.

The one who had the experience was in the Quorum of the Twelve. As a junior member of that quorum he sat in a meeting in which the President of the Church (then John Taylor) asked his brethren for their vote to readmit into the Church a man who earlier had disgraced the Church. It is a complicated story. The man had not only committed a grievous sin but also, when confronted with it in the presence of the Twelve, had vehemently denied it. When finally he buckled and acknowledged his sin, he was excommunicated.

Considerable time had passed since then, and President Taylor now felt this man should have the privilege of beginning over. He asked his brethren. At first there was some feeling of "Oh no, is he really ready?" But over time, eventually, all the Quorum members except Heber J. Grant said yes. He alone said no.

In one of the later meetings at which this issue was discussed, President Taylor said to Elder Grant, "Why, Heber, why?" In substance, their exchange was as follows:

Elder Grant replied, "Because he stood up and lied!" That seemed to him almost more vicious than the sin.

Then President Taylor said: "But Heber, how will you feel when you stand before the Lord Jesus Christ hereafter, and it is46clear that you were responsible for keeping this man outside the Church?"

That didn't slow Elder Grant down at all. He said: "Why, I will look Him in the eye and say: I am responsible for keeping that man out of the Church!"

President Taylor smiled and said: "Well, Heber, stay with your convictions! Stay right with them!"

When Elder Grant went home that day, while waiting for lunch he opened the Doctrine and Covenants, as it happened turning to D&C 64. He read: "I, the Lord, will forgive whom I will forgive, but of you it is required to forgive all men" (D&C 64:10).

That's tough enough. All is an inclusive word, isn't it? There is no exception. But the revelation also says, "he that forgiveth not his brother his trespasses standeth condemned before the Lord; for there remaineth in him the greater sin" (D&C 64:9).

My first question on this is "Greater than what?" Are we to say, for example, that a woman who refuses to forgive her husband of adultery has committed a more serious sin than adultery? The sin of this man, who lied about it, was that, a moral sin; and yet, taken at its face value, the above verse seems to say, "It's worse not to forgive."

Well, one of the great things about Elder Grant was that when he knew he was wrong, he was wrong; and he was a practitioner of what Brigham Young called instant repentance. He brought his hand down hard on the book-so characteristic of him-and said aloud so his wife could hear: "Well, that settles it. If the devil himself repents, I'll baptize him!"

Now the sequence. He went right back down to the Church Office Building. He had to see President Taylor. He explained to him that he had changed his mind and wanted this man baptized into the Church. President Taylor was pleased. He laughed his Lancashire British Santa Claus laugh and then asked, "Heber, what happened?"

Elder Grant told him. He had opened the Doctrine and Covenants accidently to that passage. Now we are getting to the psychological.

"Heber, how did you feel this morning at the meeting?" (where he alone stood up in opposition). "How did you feel about this brother?"47

He said: "I felt like I wanted to go out and knock him down!"

"That's right, you did. Now Heber, how do you feel now?"

Elder Grant started to weep. "To tell the truth" (and I think it was a little bit of a surprise to him) "To tell the truth, President Taylor, I hope the Lord will forgive the man."

President Taylor said: "Heber, I put it to the vote so that you"-and I think he mentioned one or two others-"might learn what you have here learned today. This morning you did not have the Spirit of the Lord Jesus Christ. This afternoon you do. Never forget that, Heber!"

Elder Grant learned to forgive essentially because it was a commandment. It is in the scriptures. He had always sustained the scriptures. They said we should forgive everyone. He did it. That's not quite the same as learning to forgive because you profoundly need forgiveness yourself.

The problem with being as good a man and as righteous a man as Heber J. Grant is that one tends to lack compassion for those who have all kinds of problems with doing what to oneself is easy. But he later learned that; he had condemned one of his own brethren, accused him, and in effect said, "You are not doing what you ought to do in this matter." Then he came to realize that it was he and not the other man who wasn't doing what he should. And then he went in abject humility, threw his arms around the man, and pleaded for his forgiveness, and asked for his encouragement and help in repenting. Heber J. Grant was a more compassionate man after that.

It is implicit in Elder Grant's final reaction that even though he complied out of a sense of "I will obey because I am commanded," in the moment he did it, it sank into him; it changed him.

I recall the essence of a statement made years ago by Elder Jeffrey Holland in a Young Special Interest Multi-Regional Conference. He started by saying that forgiving others is the hardest thing required of us by the gospel of Jesus Christ. But we ought not to feel particularly sorry for ourselves that it is hard. He went on to say in a way I cannot duplicate that when some Roman had driven the spikes at the Crucifixion, of all the things Jesus the Christ might have thought or said, either in prayer or in outreach through others, the least likely from a mortal point of view is that the expression of His thought and heart would be to plead for48forgiveness for the crucifiers. That is Christlike in the ultimate sense! The miracle is that we have the power-we, mere men and women-to do that. But this doing isn't exactly an act-it's an inward doing that changes everything.

Now, may I digress for a minute with a few implications and then come back to our whole concern, which is, How can we do more to help our loved ones and ourselves become forgiving, as well as forgiven, in the recognition that somehow these two are inseparably linked?

First, a philosophical implication. People used to come to Joseph Smith and ask questions, and I would that someone had been around with a tape recorder. In the Nauvoo period some came and asked him a hard question. The controversy was between egoism and altruism. In its ultimate form egoism maintains that what we all are doing, when you get down to the basics, is seeking our own satisfaction! This view, psychological egoism, holds that no one ever acted in the interest of others. If he seemed to, that was all on the surface; at root, all motives are self-serving.

The opposite view is altruism, which means that at least some of our acts-and there are those who maintain it is possible that all of them-are not in the end self-serving but are other-serving, so that even those things that appear to be the mere gratification of self-eating, drinking, sleeping, whatever-and all the separate complications of those, turn out in the end to be an effort to help others.

Now, what these brethren wanted to know from the Prophet was, Is it wrong to seek your own satisfaction? Is the principle of self-aggrandizement wrong? The classic answer, one of the most illuminating things I have ever read in Mormon literature, is the Prophet's reply, according to Oliver B. Huntington, who was there. It is this:

Joseph acknowledged "that some people entirely denounce the principle of self-aggrandizement as wrong," but "it is a correct principle," But it-that is our concern that we have accomplished something for our own ultimate glory-"may be indulged upon only one rule or plan-and that is to elevate, benefit and bless others first." That's one version. Another version, not quite that strong, is "seek to elevate and enoble others also." "If you will elevate others, the very work itself will exalt you. Upon no other plan can a man justly and permanently aggrandize himself." Those49two adverbs suggest to me that it is possible temporarily and unjustly to aggrandize yourself; but permanently, no. (See They Knew the Prophet, p. 61.)

It seems to me that many of us suppose that all absolutes are obsolete! Under pressure, I would personally defend as an absolute law what I have just said. You can rephrase it as you wish, but it would come down to something like this: "It is impossible, worlds without end, to achieve your own fulfillment without the explicit and conscious inclusion of others. If you ignore, reject, or trample down others, in the long run you will absolutely and always fail." That's the gospel of Jesus Christ.

Now, a theological version of that. Does not the Lord's Prayer say that we are to pray: "Forgive us our debts, as we forgive our debtors"? (Matt. 6:12.) Have you ever wondered about that linkage? Why didn't he simply tell us to pray and ask to have our own debts forgiven? He asks us to pray in such terms that we could almost put it in this negative way: "Father, forgive us to that degree and only to that degree that we forgive others." That's a prayer which, if answered at all, would in some cases evoke a negative answer. The positive way is: "Father, because I have reached that point in my life where I have a broken heart and a contrite spirit, because I have seen my weaknesses and my need I yearn to forgive all others! Including my enemies"-and the point is reached where it isn't just "including; it is especially my enemies." Why? Because they are the ones that are bearing the heaviest burdens of unforgiveness.

Christ did set that pattern. He is our paradigm. It has always interested me that the reason the woman taken in adultery isn't stoned is that Jesus appeals to the conscience of those around Him: "Who among you is really justified?" That is what He is saying, and it interests me psychologically that He didn't stand up and put His chin up, saying: "Which one of you dares to throw a rock!" That's probably the way some of us might have done it. He wasn't even facing them. He was stooping down, writing in the sand. Some people think He was writing the Ten Commandments at the same time and then saying: "Which of you would say that you have. . . ." But their faces and their attitudes were not in His vision. They could slink away one by one and not have to question whether they were defying His defiance. I think the Master was a Master.50

So only He was left with her. "Woman, where are thine accusers?" He said, so as to underline "I do not condemn thee, go thy way and sin no more." The actual sequence of events, I think, is not that she first made radical restitution, proving what we all like to talk about, the four or five or six R's of repentance, and then having paid the full price, she is confronted by Jesus, who says: "You're off the hook now. You paid." Not exactly that. It's as if He forgives her first as the foundation for her repentance. The Joseph Smith Translation says: "And the woman glorified God from that hour, and believed on his name." (JST John 8:11.) It seems that from the moment she tasted the power of divine forgiveness, she repented.

Now, the reason I don't want to dwell on that is that it may be out of phase, that may not be quite the way the Lord wants us to understand the sequence. So as far as His forgiveness is concerned, we are taught, He went through it all to earn the right and to have the power to forgive. So far as our forgiveness is concerned, He keeps saying we have to forgive everybody. Everybody.

How much do we have to forgive?

Everything.

For how long do we have to forgive?

Just all the time.

After we clean the slate and get up to today, what if people go on deliberately, maliciously repeating the transgressions against us?

Answer: Continue to forgive.

The Prophet Joseph Smith said once in a sermon: "We have not yet forgiven [some people] seventy times seven, as our Savior directed; perhaps we have not forgiven them once." (Teachings, p. 238.)

I turn to the really important issue and I have to bear testimony to the truth of our own need and of the impact this can have in seeking the health and wholeness of those around us. It is remarkable that we are told not to forgive is a serious transgression. It is remarkable further that, in a way, sons of perdition, sons of darkness, are those who have deliberately and knowingly rejected Christ. How much do they really know? The Prophet said the symbol of that is standing out in the noonday sun saying the sun is not shining. To put this even more concretely, he said a person cannot commit the unpardonable sin unless he knows absolutely what he is doing. "He has got to deny the Holy Ghost51when the heavens have been opened unto him." (Teachings, p. 358.) Now, that indeed is a slamming of the door against God with a permanence and a depth of understanding that defies our present comprehension.

In D&C 132 of the Doctrine and Covenants the question is raised, What is unpardonable? The answer: "Wherein ye shed innocent blood" (v. 27). Now we have the explanation of what that phrase means. Whose blood? Jesus Christ's! But how could one do that? He has lived and died in this mortal time. "You assent," says the verse. "You assent [you agree with, you consent] unto my death." Elsewhere in the scriptures that is called "crucifying the Son of God unto themselves" (see D&C 76:35). In this case it isn't just a matter of killing a body, which is all the Romans saw. It is, in effect, wanting to render null and void, so far as you are concerned, what He did as to body, spirit, and mind or intelligence. It is, in effect, to say: "I prefer to serve Master Mahan, and I refuse to accept what you have done." Now, notice that this is not an act but is a sin, a most horrifying sin of the mind. It is something one does inside. My suggestion for our thoughts and prayers is, Isn't radical unforgiveness of others of the same caliber of sin?

If one commits murder in an act of passion, that may take five minutes; but if twenty-four hours a day, waking and sleeping, you go on holding grudges, harboring hostile feelings, this is a kind of self-contradiction. You may have reached that point of desperation in your own life when you have prayed and yearned to have the monkey off your back-your guilt and your sin-and maybe you sense that a half-measure of forgiveness has come from the Lord. But then you turn and say: "But not him! Don't you forgive him! I'm not going to; he doesn't deserve it!" Thus you then close the channel of love and compassion and revelation from the Lord. It is like triple plate steel against water. It cannot get through to us.

Now, seriously, how soon can you say to yourself: "Your unforgiveness is worse than your husband's (or wife's) sin"; or, "Your attitudes towards your father built up over thirty years are really more soul-shrinking than anything he ever did or didn't do."

That's strong, but it's right! I submit that it's true! We alone are responsible for allowing into our hearts the poison of unforgiveness. We have power that moment, gloriously, to see that this person we have thought of as the cause of our sins is himself suffering. We take on that glorious attitude of the Master.52

A simple illustration is the story told of Lord Byron. He's walking down the street, and here's a bully beating a smaller man until the welts rise, apparently just to be doing it. People are around, watching, some of them with alarm and some of them with a kind of strangely satisfying fascination. And the man goes on and on with it.

Byron comes to the man and says, "How long are you going to go on beating him?"

The bully turns and says, "What's that to you?"

He replies with tears in his eyes, "Because if you will let him go, I will take the rest of it."

The story of a woman I know illustrates all that I have been trying to convey. She hated her husband, but by counseling she was able to come to see what he was going through; this was not yet forgiveness, but the concern to somehow relieve him came to her like a wave. Jesus said we are to forgive our enemies, and we have been unaware that often our enemies are our loved ones. Categories get mixed, and the person we love the most we hate the most. But when we deeply forgive others we throw it all off and say, "No more will I nurse and brood that poison in any degree." The magnificent change in us is that then, sometimes for the first time, we believe and feel we have been forgiven.

We then belong to the family of the Lord Jesus Christ. In a sense we take on burdens similar to His. He didn't deserve it! He didn't have it coming! He had every right to say to mankind: "What right have you ... ?" Similarly, in many cases we do not deserve what we get at the hands of others in this world of pain and affliction. But that is beside the point. The point is that whatever has happened, we must forgive; and the law is, when we do we will feel a blessed forgiveness of ourselves from the Lord himself.

Faith and testimony tell us it is worth everything to go on seeking, to cleanse and purify our lives, to repent. I submit that the core of that is the power to forgive; that the core of that is the power to receive forgiveness. And the proper word at the end of that is grace. As we progressively keep God's commandments we "shall receive grace for grace" (D&C 93:20). One meaning of that is that we will receive as much grace-free, unearned, unmerited blessedness from the Lord Jesus Christ-as we are willing to give to others. Grace for grace. May God help us to catch that vision,53to recognize that love day by day cannot endure-I don't think it can last a day-unless there is forgiveness, reciprocal forgiveness.

There comes to my mind the punchline from the movie Love Story, which was not a real love story. Part of the line is "Loving is not having to say you are sorry." Perhaps that has an occasional application, but my own conviction is different. With all my soul I say it is precisely the opposite. When you really love, you instantly say "I'm sorry" when you have hurt the beloved.

I once thought the Atonement was over. Of course, in one important sense it is. It happened, it is locked in the New Testament era. Jesus did say on the cross "It is finished." But as I read the scriptures we cannot say that at that moment Jesus' suffering ceased forever. In one way His suffering has increased since the Garden of Gethsemane. That one way is obvious to any of us. After having paid that terrible price in an agony that is beyond our power to comprehend, He now must face the sorrow of God's children being heartless, cold, calculating, and indifferent. He sees us with His own compassion and knows how desperately we need mercy; yet He has to bear the burden of knowing that the reason mercy is not operative in our lives is that we ourselves lock it out. "All eternity is pained" (D&C 38:12). All eternity is embodied in Jesus Christ, and even now He suffers. But I know of no place in scripture where He announces that because of that He is giving up, or that because our sins have become so extreme He will refuse forgiveness to the penitent. He promises that forgiveness is always there, and this is a joyous thought. But along with the joys both here and hereafter there will always be a measure of sorrow.

Yes, in worlds ahead all of the righteous will experience a measure of pain and sorrow for the sins of the world. It will be part of our destiny, as with the three Nephites (see 3 Ne. 28:9). But that very sorrow can lead to mercy and forgiveness and redemptive love.5455
