Truman G. Madsen, Radiant Life ( 1994)

6

Human Anguish and Divine Love

The subject of this chapter is not a question or problem, not an academic toy. It is the human predicament, as we can show with three illustrations:

2.One day my family sat watching the big screen production of The Greatest Story Ever Told. There you see a sinister Herod send his soldiers to Bethlehem. Then come the screams of mothers, glimpses of blood-smirched swords pulled from children's bodies. Then you see Mary and Joseph, who have received divine warning, walking peacefully with their Babe toward the safety of Egypt. As this scene closed, the hand of my little girl came into mine and she whispered, confused and frightened, "Daddy, didn't Heavenly Father care about those other children?"

3.Third is the universal outcry of our own souls in tribulation. "Why?" and "Why me?" We speak much of worthiness56and blessedness-and of keeping the laws that result in both. But there is, in this cry, the sense of what some call "frustrated entitlement." We have, in measure (not perfectly, but close enough), kept the law; and we aspire through dark and dawn to do better. We feel a certain inner worthiness, a sense of "deserving better." But no better comes. Only worse. And still worse. Others we think of as less worthy seem to prosper. We do not demand ease. But we sense injustice, and we crave, alas, a little mercy. And how long can we hold on to this slipping rope and pray in faith, let alone in love?

All this supposes that God both can and should prevent such misfortunes; that, indeed, a good and loving God would.

Let us look at the "can" before we look at the "should."

In a seminar at Harvard we were devoted to the analysis of St. Augustine's writings. And if you've read any of Augustine's confessions, you're aware that his early life, to say the least, was a traumatic and guilty one (much more so, incidentally, than Joseph Smith's). In his doctrine of creation, Augustine begins with a premise that God is all-powerful. To him that means that all things-all else beside God, including space, time, and the souls of men-were created by God from nothing. The puzzle arises as to why a being of unlimited power should have chosen to create such a universe as this: of pain, torment, and (on some views) endless damnation. Specifically, evil and the devil were among the realities God chose to create. Why, being good, could He-would He-do such a thing?

This eventually led Augustine to the topic of freedom. How was it that God could make us from nothing and yet condemn us or reward us for actions? Why hold us responsible when He alone is responsible? "For," said one student in the class, "a God who is totally the cause of what is, is indirectly the cause of everything one does." At this point I raised my hand and said with a measure of restraint, "Isn't it at least conceivable that man is not totally the creation of God?" There was a roar of disapproval, and students began to hammer at me from both sides. When things quieted down, the professor said, "Well, the idea cannot be ruled out arbitrarily." But the idea is ruled out by the major wings of Christianity. Otherwise, on their view God would not be absolute.57

Actually, as soon as it is recognized, as in modern revelation it is, that there is more than one eternal will in the universe-indeed, an infinity of such wills or autonomous intelligences-we have cut the thread that supposes God can "do anything." In all-important ways even He, the greatest of all, can only do with us what we will permit Him to do. Our center selves can agree or disagree, assent or resent, cooperate or oppose. To say, as the scriptures do, that God has all power and that He is almighty and that with Him all things are possible is to say that He has all the power and might it is possible to have in this universe of multiple selves.

And as soon as it is recognized, as in modern revelation it is, that there are eternal inanimate things which are subject to laws, to "bounds and conditions" which God did not create but himself has mastered, we have cut another thread of illusory omnipotence. For on the extreme view of His power, whatever purpose He may have had in creating everything from nothing, those same results could have come if He had created nothing from everything. To say "that is impossible" is to say with the Mormon that God cannot "do just anything." He can do only what our wills and eternal laws will permit. In short, He did not make us from nothing, and what He makes of us depends on us and the ultimate nature of a co-eternal universe.

Thus we make it too simple when we say in an hour of stinging misfortune, "Couldn't God have prevented this?" The related issue is, ought He to? The "bounds and conditions" mean that if He prevents this He cannot achieve that.

For example, growth, expansion, development. We can only grow with stress and distress. There is no muscle without strain, no character without the fiery trials of action and conflict. "There must needs be opposition" not only implies an eternal resistance in the nature of things; it also implies that man needs opposition in order to become what he has it in him to become.

So much on the "can."

Now on the "should."

Our outcry supposes that if we really were in charge, these things would never happen. But is that completely the case? Did we come into the world "without our own permission"? On the contrary.

We chose knowingly to enter our present state or sphere of existence. That's a fascinating idea. You may have heard a teenager58who says shiftily, "I did not ask to be born," to which it can be truly replied, "Oh, yes, you did." There's another answer you can indulge for comic relief. When your child says, "I didn't ask to be born," you can say, "If you had, the answer would have been no."

We did knowingly elect, and not only choose and elect but also prepare for this world with its real risks, its real opportunities, and its real promises. And those who say they are in their second childhood are unwittingly speaking the truth.

The question thrown upward, "Why did you get me into this?" needs translation: "Why did I get me into this?"

Imagine, for a moment, what it might be like to have a close, intimate friend who is sworn to stand by you and protect you, and maybe even die for you. Suppose he is a native of a foreign country and has never heard of modern surgery.

If he were ushered into a room where you were undergoing an appendectomy, saw the doctors and nurses cutting away and the evidences of blood and pain, he would likely jump to three conclusions:

1.That these persons were trying to torture you, perhaps take your life.

2.That all this was being done against your will.

3.That the highest service he could render you would be to pull them off.

But, you see, he would not only be mistaken; his assumptions would, in fact, be the exact opposite of the truth. These highly trained persons are intent on helping you. Truly, they could spare you the pain of the operation; but only at the cost of your life. It is at your request; and your willingness, even anxiety, to "go through with it," however you might shrink, led you to sign a statement justifying any medical action they deemed proper while you were still incapable of further instructions. (You might even have cautioned them: "Don't pay any attention to my groans. Do what you have to do.") And third, the worst thing he could do would be to prevent or even to interrupt their carrying out their task.

Life is an obstacle course. And sometimes it is a spook alley. But the before was a time of visioning the after. And some of our prayers are like the gamblers', "Give me the money I made you promise not to give me if I asked for it." What does a true friend do in such a case? God will honor our first request, to let us go59through it; and He will provide us (let Him) with the way to make it bearable. More, to make it productive.

The Punitive Theory

Now, let me mention the theory about evil that we all theoretically reject. In practice it often still clings to us. We deny it of others, suspect it of ourselves. It's the so-called "punitive" theory of evil, to the effect that whenever someone suffers, it is because he deserves to. All misfortune is the product of sin. We "had it coming."

To be autobiographical for a moment, I recall an early clean-cut instance of temptation and submission. As a small fry, by jimmying my bank with a screwdriver I recovered my small fortune of seventeen cents, went to the store, and bought fig newtons. (You know, Augustine worries about the fact that he once stole pears. He spends a whole chapter on the question, what motivated him to steal? "Why did I do it?" My problem was figs.) While I was riding home on my tricycle-I must have been five or six-a hose or something in the sidewalk upset my bike; I tipped over and badly scuffed my knee. What was my first thought? Yes, you know very well. So with all of us. And I submit that though you are now mature and no longer believe that all mishaps and suffering are retribution, still the thought lingers. "What have I done to deserve this?" Sometimes that is an appropriate question, and there is an answer. But I want to talk about the instances where the answer is not that you have in fact deserved it, but something else.

Now, since I've mentioned a classical theory, let me mention three others, which, as I believe, are misleading, even or especially when they contain a kernel of genuine insight.

Is Evil "All in Your Mind"?

One theory which arises and is motivated by supreme reverence for the perfection of God is what is called the illusory theory; that all we call "evil" is but the phantom of our minds. It is not real. God, this view reasons, is perfect. Therefore, His creation is perfect. But there is nothing He did not create. Therefore, everything is perfect. This is the nerve of Christian Science, and ischaracteristic of certain kinds of absolute idealism and certain strains of Buddhism. All concrete suffering is addressed with: "It's all in your mind. You are a victim of error. If you saw aright, you would know that this world is perfect."

One reason why this will not hold up is that in a perfectly good universe even the illusion of evil would not be present. We are imperfect in seeing it otherwise. Admit that imperfection and then why not others? Some of us, in moments of puppy-love, may have heard impatient people say: "But you're not really in love. You just think you're in love." And we may have walked away saying to ourselves: "Maybe so. But to me it could not have more impact if it were real." Haven't you ever wanted to say in response to, "It is all in your mind," "I would rather have it almost anywhere else"? Some mental illness is more resistant to treatment than physical.

Now, there may be certain things we call evil that are not, and vice versa. But that theory is not adequate.

Is It "The Point of View"?

A second theory is the perspective theory, especially evident in Leibniz and satirized by the Voltaire of Candide, a book that is painfully funny. What does Leibniz say? He says, as Browning does at the end of his poem, "God's in his heaven, all's right with the world." Under the aspect of eternity, the view of God, the "evil" is acceptable because this is the "best of all possible worlds." Evil is "compossible" with good to achieve a greater good. To which Bertrand Russell replies, "How do we know that good is not in the world to achieve a greater evil?" This theory differs from the illusory theory because it implies that if you get out of perspective, evil is really there. There is common sense support for this. If the Venus de Milo was on a stand in your home, and you walked up to it and put your nose right against the base, you would see something, but it would hardly be beautiful. On the other hand, if you recede too far in the distance, you only see a gray cylinder on the horizon. Again, beauty is lost. But from the proper perspective the Venus de Milo is beautiful, even without her arms.

By the same token, a man with a magnifying glass can look at the nose of his girl. But he shouldn't, unless he wants to see a volcanic field. In aesthetics there is a famous theory by Bullough which talks about psychic distance. He uses a clever analogy. Suppose you suddenly see a fire on the dark horizon. You drive closer. The clouds hang over it in a majestic way, and the eerie colors of the flames play on people's faces and on the firemen with their hoses and ladders. This calls for a camera. It's magnificent. But if you happen to be the owner of the uninsured house, all of that beauty is lost on you. Perspective does make a difference.

One problem is: We don't have God's perspective. And Leibniz offers us few suggestions on how we can come closer to it.

The Privative Theory

Another view is the official theory of the Roman Catholic Church. It's called the privative theory. Essentially, it's an attempt to exonerate God from creating evil. It says that evil is not a positive reality, but is the absence of good. Now, that is a bit puzzling until you realize that the absence is not in vacuo, it is an absence in something. If, therefore, I call you evil, what I really mean on this theory is that you lack or are deprived of certain kinds of goodness. The devil is a privative being. He just isn't any good.

How satisfactory is that? Not very, I'm afraid, if what one wants is either comfort or conquest. For if anyone had said to me, as I lay in the hospital on one occasion, that I was not really experiencing pain but only the absence of pleasure, I would have wanted to throw him out as a mockingbird.

Evil does have positive effects, positive force in the world, like it or not. Hate begets hate, just as love begets love.

Privative evil (for example, ignorance) is only one kind of real evil.

The Instrumental Theory

This leads up to a view which, I think, is at the center of the restored gospel. It is sometimes technically called an instrumentaltheory. It does not say all pain is the result of transgression, nor deny its reality, nor resort to perspective or privation. Evil, suffering, and stress are seen as eternal. They will not be destroyed, but can be utilized. They can be instruments to something good. Indeed, the highest work of suffering is a work of perfection-godliness.

The Lord's Way

But let us bring this insight down to loam soil.

In the original of the letter Joseph Smith wrote from Liberty Jail (it belongs with Psalms-a masterpiece of religious writing) are several moving insights which precede the deeper one. For one thing, the Prophet is told that "thine adversity and thine afflictions shall be but a small moment" (D&C 121:7). That "small moment" turned out to be five more years of incredible struggle. But comparatively, it was a small moment. That, I submit, is a real force in facing suffering. To believe-better, to know-that this lonely or crushed or deprived or painwracked condition won't last forever, that it will somehow, somewhere be over, is a balm of comfort. Without it, certain kinds of suffering would indeed be unbearable.

Then the Lord says, "Thou art not yet as Job." Here we have the "It could be worse" appeal. Always it could be. Says a Persian legend, "I complained that I had no shoes until I saw a man who had no feet." A little bit of chiding comes through in the Lord's reminder and promise that, unlike the situation of Job, "Thy friends do stand by thee, and they shall hail thee again with warm hearts and friendly hands." (Vv. 9, 10.) Some friends are the wrong kind and add to our burden. They come in and say: "All right, Job. Let's have it! What have you done wrong?" "Job's comforters," they're called. No comfort. Job didn't have the memory of awful transgressions. The roof fell in on a loving, righteous man. That was redramatized in MacLeish's modern play JB. A literary critic said, "The thing that amazed me was to see JB, after it's all over, say, 'All right, let's start again,' not knowing but what the whole roof would fall in again." That is the tingle and threat of Job's life. And of ours. But those of us with faithful friends are always better off than he.63

Nietzsche is often classified as an anti-Christ. But Nietzsche saw some things more clearly than his religious friends. For several years he had a continual toothache. He talked about "eternal recurrence." And his attitude was heroic. He arose each morning, set his jaw, and said, "Once more." He had the courage to go on. He would not be weak, would not yield to it, and was "grateful for small mercies." That is Jobian trust.

There is an "if" clause in the Lord's answer. "If" what? "If thou endure it well" (D&C 121:8). The original, I'm impressed to say, says "If thou art faithful and endure it well." Faithful. Faith-full. That makes a great difference. "If thou art called to pass through tribulation" (D&C 122:5).

I know many people who comfort themselves with what technically is "Deism"-the absentee landlord conception of the Lord; that He "wound up" the universe and then turned His back on us, and consequences fall without intervention.

If that outlook helps anyone, I would be the last to seek to overturn it. It does seem to me that the message of this letter qualifies it, for the Lord says, "their bounds are set, they cannot pass" (v. 9). Who were bound? Joseph's enemies, his betrayers, his "false brethren"-all men. They could only go so far. Some will say such a promise is not made to us. But it is.

Indeed, promises have been given (yes, many are conditional) that require the Lord to be very close. One day when I was on an airplane we hit some terribly rough air. The wings were swaying, it seemed, like seagulls. Even the flight attendants became alarmed, and that only distressed the passengers more. I was reading, feeling very calm. When I asked myself why, it was because of a promise given me in a blessing that, in effect, while in the path of duty I would travel safely, "whether on land, sea, or air." Musing about that, it seemed to me apparent that either the Lord had adequate foreknowledge that no airplane (which must include this airplane) would crash with me aboard. Or, lacking that foreknowledge, He yet had such power that in the event such a disaster were imminent He would somehow intervene and prevent it.

Take either or both of those alternatives and apply them to the thousands (millions?) of inspired promises made to the Lord's covenant people (even scriptural generalizations such as "If you will ... then I will"). It means His power and knowledge in our lives are much more intimate and ever-present than we tend to64dream. He may, indeed, be closest when we suppose Him to be farthest away.

The Glorification of Experience

The most vital and, in some ways, miraculous insight of all (and the most trying, perhaps, to our faith and love) is this: that after describing a whole catalog of anguish which, either previously, then, or later, the Prophet faced, including betrayal, and having his young son thrust from him by the sword, and having "all the elements combine to hedge up the way" (have you ever felt like that, when everything goes wrong?), and seeing the heavens "gather blackness," and having "the very jaws of hell gape open the mouth," the Lord reveals the pearl of great price:

Know thou, my son, that all these things shall give thee experience, and shall be for thy good. The Son of Man hath descended below them all. Art thou greater than he? (D&C 122:7-8.)

What good, we may ask, could possibly be served by such affliction?

Brigham Young said of Joseph (and leaving out the fact that, as John Taylor wrote, he has done more, save Jesus only, for the salvation of man than any other man who ever lived) that he suffered more in thirty-eight years than many men could in one thousand; that loosing one thousand hounds on Temple Square after one jackrabbit "would not be a bad illustration of the situation of the times of the Prophet Joseph" (Journal of Discourses 10:315; see also 2:7); but that he was more perfected, more sanctified, more glorified because, in Joseph's words, "I have waded in tribulation lip-deep; but every wave of adversity which has struck me has only wafted me that much nearer to Deity."

The Prophet teaches and embodies this marvelously. Hence, it is not enough to endure stoically. Many religions and individuals have based themselves primarily on stoicism. Spinoza did. Under that discipline you endure only because you're saying to yourself, "It had to be." Why? "Stark necessity." That can keep you alive in a prison camp or in the loss of vital organs. It has been known to. "It has to be. Face it. It's necessary." That is resignation, a kind of65fatalism. But it's not enough. The greater thing is to endure suffering with faith in the Son of Man, which enables it to yield its perfect result, which means the fulness of the powers of godliness.

Now, let me briefly address two immediate objections. It has been said that too easily this view of suffering slips into asceticism; that is, to the notion that the more one suffers, the better he is. Soon he is led to take the initiative: to deny himself, to sit on nails, to refuse himself normal appetites. Elements of asceticism can be found in both Catholic and Protestant traditions, and even more in Eastern religions. Hence the New Yorker magazine cartoons showing emaciated men reclining on stones or nails. Do we take the position that this is desirable? No. Mormonism is not ascetic. It does not recommend that you suffer by your own hand.

I want to mention one anecdote: A brother, who shall remain nameless, during the Zion's camp episode deliberately sought to be bitten by a snake, thus to exercise faith and fulfill the promise of the New Testament that if believers should take up any deadly serpent it would not harm them (see Mark 16:18). He was rebuked by the Prophet. The point that emerged was that if, in the line of one's calling, one is in fact bitten, he can expect relief. But one who deliberately seeks it is entitled to no such promise. And so it is, I submit, in all forms of human affliction. Suffering ought to be the by-product of purposeful service, not a self-obsessed way of life.

A second objection, more difficult to remove, is that if this is the purpose of mortality, this coping with opposition, how is it that so few really do triumph? How is it that so many are themselves overcome? Instead of their souls developing, they shrink; instead of their characters being made into steel, they are made into a tormented shambles; instead of taking on the fluids of godliness, they take on the acids of degradation. That is a hard, hard question. It is even harder if we point to innocent suffering. In children's hospitals, for example, some of the patients are well below the age of accountability, with congenital maladies-no arms, no eyes, and many other afflictions that few can bear to see. This is one of the most difficult realities to reconcile with meaning and purpose, and with God's love.

But regardless of purpose, I want to mention three solid facts that are worth remembering. I find them hidden in the Prophet's letter.66

The first point is that there are limits to what we can suffer; there is a cut-out point physically and psychically beyond which we lose full alert consciousness. There are kinds of cancer that attack the bone which could persist to unbearable scales of pain except for the fact that there are other organs in the body that, eventually, almost like a fuse, break the circuit. I am among those who are grateful that that is so.

Second, pain does not compound. When it is over, it is over. That's not true of some other kinds of evil, but it's true of pain. Emily Dickinson years ago wrote a poem that fits here. I don't understand the words and yet I understand her. Two lines are indelible. She says: "After great pain, a formal feeling comes. / The nerves sit ceremonious, like tombs." In the next stanza is the phrase, "quartz-like contentment." She is describing the glory of relief. Pain once past does not compound. It is simply over.

Then third, as C. S. Lewis reminds us, it is important to remember that no one is suffering all the pain. We can talk about the fact that if we count right now the number of people in our office or other place of employment, each is suffering a certain amount. We'll call that amount X. If you multiply X by the number of people there are in the world, you come up with four billion X, shall we say. Then add the whole animate creation-the animals, the sparrows, and the insects. William James once said, "This universe will never be all good so long as one cockroach suffers the pangs of unrequited love." Now you have multiple billion X. The Prophet said God desires the happiness of all His creatures. And think of all that pain! But notice: no one is suffering multiple billion X. Each is only suffering his own X.

Only if we could see the outcome, even for the most bitter among us, could we estimate how wise-as well as brave-we were to enter mortality. The miracle is that the same thing-suffering-can have totally opposite effects, depending on how we respond to it.

I know a man who has received 3,200 blood transfusions. He is a hemophiliac, hospitalized with inner bleeding every three weeks. He tells me that each experience is like a "baptismal" ... "I come out of the hospital feeling like the blackboard has been wiped clean, anxious that it shall not be filled again." He copes with pain with an expression on his face that would convince a child he was praying. He can inspire a depressed soul, whether in67the hospital or out. He has not known a day or a night in fifteen years without pain-and I don't mean low-level aches like stiff muscles, pleasant pains. I mean the hydraulic pain of bone joints being forced apart by his own life-giving blood. Some other people I know have suffered far less but are bitter, cynical, hateful.

How can good and bad fruit come from the same experience? The divine and the devilish? It is the root of our spiritual nourishment that changes everything. That is the scale on which we came to be weighed.

Wrote B. H. Roberts, who identified with Joseph Smith as closely as did his blood brothers:

Some of the lowliest walks in life, the paths which lead into the deepest valleys of sorrow and up to the most rugged steeps of adversity, are the ones which, if a man travel in, will best accomplish the object of his existence in this world. ... The conditions which place men where they may always walk on the unbroken plain of prosperity and seek for nothing but their own pleasure, are not the best within the gift of God. For in such circumstances men soon drop into a position analogous to the stagnant pool; while those who have to contend with difficulties, brave dangers, endure disappointments, struggle with sorrows, eat the bread of adversity and drink the water of affliction, develop a moral and spiritual strength, together with a purity of life and character, unknown to the heirs of ease and wealth and pleasure. With the English bard, therefore, I believe: Sweet are the uses of adversity! (B. H. Roberts, The Gospel and Man's Relationship to Deity [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1950], pp. 289-90.)

Yes, sweet, but bittersweet. "No chastening for the present seemeth to be joyous, but grievous: nevertheless afterward it yieldeth the peaceable fruit of righteousness unto them which are exercised thereby" (Heb. 12:11).

As a little boy, I watched a favorite uncle bring in willows with cocoons on them. Later, we saw the slight opening in one and, boy-like, put our ears up against it to hear the seemingly audible groans and strains of the moth. It wanted out. And we wanted to help. We did not ask our wiser uncle. We just found some scissors and with one decisive snip we shed that moth of its confining coat. It lay there, and we waited for it to fly. But it never flew. It quivered and finally died.68

The mortal experience will enable us to fly if we will let it, help it, use it with faith in the Christ who "descended below all." The message of the modern prophets, to a man (and none of them, if you look closely, has been spared any of the vicissitudes), is this: that there is meaning and purpose in all things we suffer; that "all these things" can be for our good, however empty and barren they now appear. The elements of truth in the classical theories have been caught up in a greater whole. The Lord is not playing games with us. The outcome will far exceed the price; the "chastening" will be visioned as our blessing, the fiber of soul-quality will leave no regrets, only infinite and eternal gratitude, and the partnership we forged with Him before we entered this refining fire will loom as marvelous to us as does the face of a loving mother in the eyes of a child who has just emerged from his fever ... healed, alive, and prepared for life, eternal life, life like God's.

The Prophet Joseph Smith declared: "All your losses will be made up to you in the resurrection, provided you continue faithful. By the vision of the Almighty I have seen it." (Teachings, p. 296.)69
