Truman G. Madsen, Radiant Life ( 1994)

7

The Gospel and the Sabbath

The decision to write on this topic really goes back to many visits that my wife, Ann, and I have had in the homes of Orthodox Jewish people-mostly while we were in Israel. We noted how they observed the Sabbath, especially Shabbat Eve. That triggered in me a great interest in searching their lore for the roots of Sabbath observance.

I want to discuss first the origins of these sacred rites, and then four mighty metaphors. They are more than that to the Jew; they are mighty meanings of the Sabbath in their lives. Then we'll talk about startling parallels between what they teach and practice and what we in the Church teach and practice on this count. Then I'll share two or three powerful stories about the Sabbath. Then finally, I'll give a description of how the Jews actually bring into focus these great traditions.

Two cautions at the outset. The Jews do not agree on anything. They, themselves, have a saying: "Two Jews, three opinions." Also, it is important to know that though there is even today among the Orthodox a most scrupulous observance of the Sabbath day, they are by no means in the majority, even in Israel. What I am therefore describing applies to less than a majority in the contemporary world.

The other caution has to do with our understanding the difficulty the Master had in His own period among the Jews. One of70these difficulties arose from a too strict, too rulish, too self-destroying approach to the Sabbath. He had to say more than once that the Sabbath was made for man, not man for the Sabbath. Yet we can err in supposing that because, as we like to say, that is simply a relic of the law of Moses; we have somehow outgrown it. The truth may be that we are farther down the mountain than they in the full application of what is intended.

Let me start then with a reference to one of the classics in all Jewish literature, by Abraham Joshua Heschel. The title is simply The Sabbath. Heschel points out that the origin of the Sabbath is not, as some suppose, the commandment-namely, the fourth-in the Decalogue. It is in the creation narration itself. It is first clear from the records, he points out, that the use of the word holy does not occur in the creation narrative for any of the six days of creation. Each of them and what was done, the Lord pronounced to be good.

But on the seventh, and only then, does the word kaddish, meaning "holy," occur. There it says God himself sanctified the day. It also suggests, and we have other sources for this view, that somehow God or the gods themselves observe the Sabbath. Observe in the sense of keep, that is. And the commandment "Remember," as in "Remember the Sabbath day," is a Jewish phrase which doesn't exactly mean retain in your memory. It means, more accurately, "memorialize" this day. On the Jewish view (if there is an agreed one), God himself did some creating even on the seventh day. Namely, He created Menohah, which is approximately "tranquility." He left some things behind in terms of labor and creative work, but on the seventh day He created tranquility. Then, say they, so must we.

Some have supposed that to say this day was sanctified or needs to be shows that in the divine plan there is something crucial about time and timing. Does it really matter? The question, of course, is raised most prominently in our generation by the Seventh Day Adventists. Does the exact time one designates for Shabbat really matter? Or does it only matter that in any given series of seven days one be a Sabbath?

Let me point out that we have reason to know that the Lord does care about time and timing. To illustrate this, Doctrine and Covenants section 77 (an interesting number in the present context) clearly teaches that just as there are seven days in our week,71which we call twenty-four-hour periods, so in the Lord's economy there are seven one-thousand-year periods. Six of those will constitute the more or less man-controlled history of this earth, but the seventh, as Joseph Smith put it once, will be tried by the Lord himself (see Teachings, p. 252).

The Millennium is a day-a one-thousand-year day, following six others of the same duration. If we had unerringly kept the calendar from the beginning, we would know exactly when the Messiah-for us, the Lord Jesus Christ-will come. He will come at the beginning of the seventh thousand-year period. It is expedient that we not know exactly when that is, but it will be then as He has announced.

The Jewish conclusion follows from this sort of reasoning. It is that, far from the Sabbath being a day of strict injunctions, which are joyless duties imposed on duties of the prior day; the Sabbath is the reward for, the outcome of, indeed the climax of all other preparatory creations. It is not an imposed stoppage. It is what all the preparation was designed for, and therefore it has great value. It was, indeed, made for man.

Some have pointed out that even one's ability to work on the six days is enhanced by not working on the seventh. The Jews have a tradition that Moses put that argument to the pharaoh and convinced him; and that therefore the children of Israel in bondage were permitted, on sheer economic grounds, to have one day in seven off. But for mainline Judaism that is beside the real point.

To make a man forget that he is the son of a king, said the Jews, is the worst thing the evil of the universe can achieve. The Sabbath is a day when every man is a king and every woman a queen.

One could argue that the things that might well have destroyed the Jews failed to do so because, if for no other reason, they kept the Sabbath-even in a small degree. They themselves say it isn't the case that the Jews have kept the Sabbath; rather, the Sabbath has kept the Jews. What could have destroyed them? Well, their last prophet, in their own view, was Moses, so they speak of all the others as lesser, and of the end of prophecy. With the loss of a living prophet they lost someone in charge-what we would refer to as a priesthood bearer. No rabbi claims to have the ancient priesthood. They lost their kingdom-they lost the privilege of72which David is to them the highest symbol, of having a king who was somehow both a spiritual and a temporal exemplar. They lost their temple-it was destroyed and crushed-and finally even lost their land and were dispersed in a hundred countries in the world. They almost lost their language. How have they survived? Well, many think it is because, even in the dispersion, they have retained this tradition of keeping the Sabbath.

A beautiful myth says that on the Sabbath day, in addition to your own soul, a second soul possesses your body-a good or better soul. And this is a symbolic way of saying that in every man and every woman there are two kinds of inclinations, good and bad. But on the Sabbath, somehow God sees fit to send an extra spirit, if you will, which lifts a man above his ordinary evil inclinations and spells peace.

They also have a story that whenever a Jew returns home from synagogue on Shabbat Eve, two angels follow him-one bad, one good. If when they reach his home all is prepared-the table set, the candles lit-then the good angel prays and says, "May this be the way the Sabbath will be in this home every week." The other angel, against his will, says amen. But if the man returns home and it's just as it always is, more or less in chaos and no effort has been made toward the Sabbath, then the evil angel prays that this may be the way it always is in this home; and the other angel, against his will, says amen.

They go farther in saying that the Sabbath outweighs all other commandments. In some of their literature, to keep the Sabbath is to keep the whole law and to break it is to break the whole law.

I turn now to more on what I call the metaphors. Note that nothing I say will list things you ought to stop doing or start doing on your own Sabbath. What I hope to do is to stir a new attitude, a new feeling, whatever you do. For the Jew, to miss the feeling is to miss it all, and some of us Latter-day Saints are missing it all. Here are four ways in which they teach by metaphor.

First, as I've indicated, they see the Sabbath as a sanctuary in time. Now, it's true they have strict requirements, and even now in Israel there are hospitals which are so prepared, organized, and planned, that they keep the Sabbath. If you care enough, it can be done. But all that discipline-all that "thou shalt not"-is seen as an instrument to joy. A disciplined joy, indeed, but nevertheless73joy and celebration. Mind, says one of the great rabbis, is established by joy; by melancholy it is driven into exile. It is a sin, according to Judaism, to be sad on the Sabbath. If that's startling language, I'll startle you further. The Talmud says that we will be held personally accountable before the judgment of God for every legitimate Sabbath pleasure we did not enjoy. We are commanded to have joy. To miss the joy is to miss it all.

This joyous note is marked among them by special things: by special dress, by a special tablecloth in the evening, by special food-sumptuous food, in fact. Then there are the twisted loaves. One tradition says the two loaves wrapped in one symbolize the word for "remember the Sabbath" and also the word for "keep the Sabbath." Others say it symbolizes the law and the prophets. There may be other possibilities, but all point to exhilaration. Except in certain offshoot groups of Jewish tradition, there is nothing we can find that is puritanical-if by puritanical we mean with H. L. Mencken that a Puritan lives in mortal dread that somewhere, sometime, somebody is enjoying himself. The Jews talk about the joy of the commandment. This is in their hearts. This is on their lips. And if I can put it in modern language, they make a production out of it.

Second, they speak of the Sabbath as a feast. And they remind themselves over and over that when Moses had the children of Israel in the wilderness a double portion of manna was given just before the Sabbath, but none on the Sabbath, so that the day was recognizable in two ways-by what was absent and what was present. Jews serve the most beautiful meal of the week on Shabbat Eve. The mother often has to prepare for as much as two days before, and one of the traditional dishes is a kind of stew which stays simmering all night long the night before the Sabbath and then needs only to be served. The feast is itself a form of ritual, and it requires special preparations and special activities. It is, to quote one writer, a palace in time. Something of the same spirit attends America's Thanksgiving dinner. It involves, for one thing, the bringing in of the stranger or of the poor. (This is why Ann and I had such firsthand and close experiences. We were foreigners, and were invited for that very reason.) "Come and share our Shabbat." It is a feast even for the poorest man in the poorest ghetto. Why? Well, because even if he is poor and cannot afford the twisted74loaves and a little wine and the meat and the fish and the candles, the synagogue in that area will see that he has them. That's a requirement. So on that particular day even a poor man is rich.

The third metaphor has roots in the Jews' mystical tradition, but it has biblical precedent. They talk about the Sabbath as heaven on earth; as-if you want to be specific and mathematical-one-sixtieth of paradise. You have a foretaste of paradise. The seventh day, some legends say, is the reflection of the seventh heaven, the highest heaven. By the way, they also say having dreams is one-sixtieth of being a prophet. They believe that this is cosmic, that nature herself celebrates the Sabbath. In the Church we have a hymn titled "Come Away to the Sunday School." One of the lines is "Nature breathes her sweetest fragrance on the holy Sabbath day." That's the Jews' feeling. Even the rivers don't work on the Sabbath. They are accustomed to throw up rocks and dirt, so they may be very calm on the Sabbath. Even hell celebrates the Sabbath. People who have been tormented in hell are, for purposes of the Sabbath day, released. The hosts of heaven celebrate the Sabbath. They gather and they sing and they feel tranquility.

All the miracles of the six days of creation, say the Jews, are somehow available to us, or should be, on the seventh day. And all creation "resolves itself into melody if we have ears to hear."

Finally, they speak of the Sabbath as a queen, as a bride. How did that get started? Well, here are two traditions. According to Rabbi Simeon, the Sabbath said unto the Holy One (their word for Adoni, the Lord) "O master of the universe, every living thing created has its mate, and each day has its companion, except me [this is the Sabbath speaking]. I am alone." The Holy One replied, "Israel will be your mate." So, on their view, Israel cries out to the queen or the bride and says, "Come, holy Sabbath." He who prays on the eve of the Sabbath and recites the verses that begin, "The heavens and the earth were finished"-the scriptures say he is become a partner with the Holy One in creation.

Now, the tradition goes further. The Sabbath is meaningful to God. The world would not be complete if the six days did not culminate at the Sabbath, but they compare this to a king who has made a bridal chamber, has plastered it, painted it, adorned it. Now what does the chamber lack? Obviously, a bride. What did the universe still lack? The Sabbath. Imagine a king who made a ring. What did it lack? A signet. What did the universe lack? A 75Sabbath. So the Sabbath is a bride. Its celebration is like a wedding, and the bride is to come lovely and bedecked and perfumed.

There's a subheading to their argument: sanctification. We're taught that the Lord sanctified the Sabbath (Gen. 2:3; Moses 3:3; D&C 77:128) and in Jewish thought, sanctification is associated with marriage. The symbolism is clear. Why do the typical celebrants of the Sabbath among the Hasidic Jews link myrtle with the Sabbath? When going out to invite friends to a wedding, the groom carries myrtle. What is myrtle? Well, the poet Judah Halevi makes the point that hadas, the Hebrew word for myrtle, was the original name of Esther, whose beauty was legendary.

An overhead awning of myrtle is erected for the bride during the canopy ceremony of marriage. The old man who in a Jewish story was running at twilight to welcome the Sabbath and carrying two bunches of myrtle was asked why. He's supposed to have replied, "One is for remember and one is for keep." I don't know how close the Greeks are to the Jews on this, but in Greek mythology myrtle was Aphrodite's tree-a special plant and a symbol of love.

On one point there is tremendous overlap. Most traditions about God and creation hold that He did it, finished it, and in effect abandoned it. There was no more creative work for God to do. Sometimes in Jewish parlance, you ask what God has been doing since He finished the creation. They answer, "making marriages." For most Christians, it's all over. Yet Jews speak of continual creation for God. So do we Latter-day Saints, do we not?

Just lift one sentence from the New Testament: "I go to prepare a place for you" (John 14:2). That is further labor. We overlap on the notion that even heaven will involve work, problems, and-dare I say it?-yes, busyness of a kind. It was a great surprise to Wilford Woodruff, in one of his frequent glimpses of the spirit world, to have a conversation with the Prophet Joseph Smith. The Prophet said he was in a hurry. It troubled Elder Woodruff, so he asked the Prophet why. "I expected my hurry would be over when I got [to the Spirit world]." The Prophet explained: "We are the last dispensation and so much work has to be done [to prepare to go to earth with the Savior], and we need to be in a hurry in order to accomplish it." (G. Homer Durham, ed. The Discourses of Wilford Woodruff [Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1969], pp. 288-89.) Yet there is a kind of rest-peace and joy-76 that can occur even in the midst of such concern. Hence the one kind of work that Orthodox Jewry will permit its rabbis to do on the Sabbath is work for God. None other.

On the idea of the Sabbath as bride, I have a letter from a friend-a Jewish mother-who visited my wife and me and mentioned that she'd had chats with the rabbi out of the campaigns for what a woman should or should not be doing, and that she'd been completely satisfied with what he taught her. So I asked her, "What does it mean in your tradition for the woman to be the queen of the Sabbath?" Here are a few sentences from her reply. "The mother is responsible for the atmosphere of piety and reverence and for the teaching of Jewish ideals. She prepares the Shabbat dinner" (by the way, the men are encouraged to help and we've seen them do it), "and gathers her children around while she pronounces the blessing over the lights. The woman prepares the home for each festival. She creates the mood of joy. She is general counselor. The Talmud says no matter how short your wife is, lean down and take her advice. And for husbands-another Talmudic statement-but how can a man be assured of having a blessed home? Answer: By respecting his wife." (I love all these old sayings, subtle stories, and yiddish theater.) Then she goes on. "The woman sets the spiritual tone. She is the most responsible for her children. It is an enormous responsibility and a joy to have." Well, that's from a Jewish mother. The Jewish mother has great influence and power in the home.

Now I shift to some parallels. Be honest about the kinds of predicament we frequently are in when the Sabbath begins, and you can ask how anyone can really let go wholeheartedly. We have read together, Ann and I, a famous novel by Herman Wouk, The Caine Mutiny, and more recently his two books which have been compared to Tolstoy, War and Remembrance and The Winds of War. Herman Wouk is a playwright and therefore on Friday has often been in that situation which characterizes Broadway opening plays-rehearsals; the play tottering toward probable disaster, and so on. But at the first sign of a star (the Jewish Sabbath begins when you can see two stars in the evening) he abandons his play and as an Orthodox Jew goes home, where he finds his children (whom he hasn't been noticing lately) in their best bib and tucker, finds his wife with everything prepared. He describes it as77like coming home from the wars. He knows that from sundown to sundown it is "time out," and no one who respects him can get to him-the telephone is off, so is the television; nothing mechanical is supposed to be utilized in a strict Orthodox home. One of his friends, a producer, said to him one day after this had been repeated many times, "I do not envy you your religion, but I do envy you your Sabbath."

Let's consider some of the pressures that are upon us just as we enter the Sabbath, and show how both Judaism and, I suggest, Mormonism have a response. Suppose you are poor. Well, as I've said, in Judaism the poor are invited in, and if they lack, they are provided with the essentials of Sabbath devotion. In several places in the Doctrine and Covenants, Latter-day Saints are taught not to be so concerned about riches per se. "He that hath eternal life is rich. Seek not for riches but for wisdom." (D&C 6:7; 11:7.) The Sabbath is the day when wisdom can be reenthroned. Suppose you have failed or had setbacks during the week. The Jewish teaching is that the Sabbath will renew your perspective, and your failure will seem somewhat trivial in relationship to the ultimate plans and purposes and promises of God.

But suppose you are sinful. Judaism says that the Sabbath is not a day for confession and for mourning.

There we split a little. We have in D&C 59 of the Doctrine and Covenants a commandment-the whole section has the flavor of Sabbath observance-to confess our sins one to another and before the Lord. That has come to mean not detailing our actual transgressions, but the acknowledgment of need, and that we are sinful (and just by coming to church we acknowledge it). Well, presumably if you are mourning for your own sins or for the loss of a loved one you should keep that private on Sunday, because you are to have a glad heart on that day. We are so commanded. If we do this, says D&C 59, "with a glad heart and a cheerful countenance-not with much laughter, for this is sin-but with a glad heart," then are the promises fulfilled. I know people who have occasionally tried to impress others with how sad they look because they have fasted all that time, but our revelation says that fasting and prayer are "rejoicing and prayer." That comes as news to most children. But the intent is the same, I believe, as the Jewish intent that fasting ought to be feasting on the Spirit. Going78without food combined with a prayerful heart is supposed to contribute to that kind of feasting. It it doesn't, you have missed the joy and have missed it all.

But suppose you are condemned. Well, in their tradition you're out of prison for that day, and even in prison the glory can surround you. But suppose your soul is itself deeply wounded. Join the club. We're commanded to come to church with a broken heart and a contrite spirit. If you trace the roots of that phrase, you will find they are, in one word, "buffeted." Come, acknowledging it if you've been beaten down this week. You always have, but if you'll come with a proper spirit you will be healed and renourished.

But suppose you are rushed, and there are projects and pressures and commitments and so on. The Jewish view is to stop, slow down, be quiet, and you'll have greater strength to carry on. Our version of that-it's also an Old Testament phrase-is "Be still and know that I am God" (D&C 101:16). We can't really know that when the din is as strong in our ears as it usually is. I sometimes think that the very volume of some contemporary music-and I hesitate to use the word music for what I'm describing-is exactly designed to quiet and muffle the scream of our inner world and our life and conscience. As if we could drown it out with the noise.

But suppose we are at war? In Jewish thinking, war justifies bending the Sabbath. The Jews have been taken advantage of occasionally by enemies who said: "Ah-ha! we know how to get to the Jews. We'll attack, and they won't fight on Shabbat." So they do fight. And they do fight if necessary on Yom Kippur, as the Egyptians found out some years ago. But their commitment arises from the conviction that there are emergencies. Nevertheless, much of their Sabbath celebration, in the past, has been in the midst of crisis. Ann and I have been to Israel many times. Hardly a time, prior to the time we departed, have we not been counseled by friends: "Don't go! This is the worst possible time. There's a crisis over there." Of course, they're always right. In Israel they live in the midst of such crisis, but they keep the Sabbath. It would not be wrong to say they keep it precisely in part because it is a crisis world in which they live, and on the Sabbath they close out that world-the jungle, the bombs, the guns. They pull the79drapes and it is not proper to talk about war or politics, even to think about them, during the time of rejoicing.

But suppose all of your machines have broken down? The mechanical ox is in the mire? Well, one of the blessings they claim of the Sabbath is that you get back to the simple elements of life for God's earth as it is and for the most elemental way of living.

What if you are filled with anger? Their answer: You shall kindle no fire, and that, of course, is literal fire; but they go on, not even the fire of righteous indignation. Peace. And so we have been counseled, "Renounce war and proclaim peace" (D&C 98:16), especially on the day of peace.

But suppose you are bitter and unforgiving. Come to the sweets and taste and forgive. We have done that as a church. There is a jubilee year in traditional Jewry when whoever is imprisoned or has debts and so on is forgiven and released. By the way, no interest is charged on the Sabbath in strict Jewish reckoning.

But what if your animals are in need? Their answer is, let them rest.

An offshoot group, not strictly the Orthodox, going back to the fifteenth century are convinced that joy is the giant cure-all; that if you can be enthusiastically happy, then all evils somehow are walked under your feet. If you can't, then no other solution will ultimately do. Two men from this group were arguing about who was the greatest miracle worker among the rabbis, and one of them had a rabbi who, he thought, qualified. This rabbi was going along a highway when a storm gathered. He had clothing on that he wanted preserved, and also he didn't want to drown; so by use of his great power he caused that, though there was rain to the right of him and rain to the left of him, where he was traveling there was no rain.

The other man was not impressed. "That's nothing," he said. "My rabbi was on the way to a distant town on Friday, which he thought he could reach before sundown (when the Sabbath began). But the driver had miscalculated, and now, suddenly, dusk was falling. He saw he was in danger, God forbid, of violating the Sabbath; whereupon, he performed his miracle. He put forth his hands, and behold it was Sabbath to the right of him and Sabbath to the left of him, but in the center there was no Sabbath-it was the middle of the week."80

A second story: A poor man was the Sabbath guest of a rich one. He ate so voraciously and with such vigor that perspiration streamed down his face. "My friend," said his host, "why do you work so hard?" "Because," he replied, "I'm trying to fulfill the commandment 'in the sweat of thy face shalt thou eat thy bread.' "

Then there is the delightful story of a maker of books whose name, allegorically, was Shabbati. His family and he were so poor that they did not have anything for the Sabbath, but they were too proud to go to their neighbors, who would have been under obligation either to invite them or to provide them with the essentials. He went home late from the synagogue so nobody could even inquire of his situation.

When he arrived home, there was the Sabbath table fully prepared-everything in order; the candles lighted, and his wife looking fresh and delightful. How did it happen? Well, his wife had found an old garment and also some gold buttons. She had hastened to the market and turned in the buttons for their worth in money and had prepared the Sabbath meal. He was so delighted at this that he took his wife in his arms. (This is how he reported it in confessing to his rabbi). "Master, I could not contain myself. Tears fell from my eyes. I praised the Lord. I praised Him again and again. We began to sing. I forgot the majesty of the Sabbath. I took my wife by the hand, led her out, and we danced in our little house. Then we sat down to eat, but I was so overcome with the fish course that I jumped up, took her in my arms, and danced again. Then we ate the soup. I danced a third time, and cried for happiness. But oh, Master, it came to me afterwards that perhaps our dancing and laughter had disturbed the sublimity of God's Sabbath. If we have sinned, we have come to ask for penance."

What did the rabbi reply? "Know that all the hierarchy of heaven sang and laughed and was joyful and danced hand in hand with this aged man and his wife when they were happy on the Sabbath Eve. And when you heard my laughter"-the rabbi had laughed three times himself, to the great shock of many-"it was because I was with them in spirit when they went out to dance, and I danced and sang with them."

That's not a Puritan Sabbath. But you may find such celebration and rejoicing in the Nauvoo period of Mormon history.

Now finally, how is it done in practice? Ann and I were invited81into many Jewish homes, and I'll give you a description that's mostly of one home. Let me just say as the preface that most of the Christian writers I have read tend to suppose that heaven is an effortless place, and usually their descriptions of hell are far more interesting. But these persons we visited had put in great labor and preparation to make the Sabbath a creative experience. In the home of an Orthodox rabbi who had four lovely daughters and whose synagogue we had earlier attended, we saw the essential components-his wife, his children, the lights, the twisted loaves, the meat, and the gefilt, fish. We saw the kipah or kipot (the latter would be the plural). These are the little skull caps, which an Orthodox Jew wears everywhere but which others wear in synagogue and on sacred occasions. We were given our own. If it seems strange to you that a person would cover his head in reverence rather than uncover it, just think a little more deeply about your own experience in the temple.

After the evening had come-the two stars could be seen-we witnessed the tablecloth, the beautiful chollah. We learned that there had been a ritual bath for some family members, not just a usual bath but a Shabbat bath. We listened to their songs. Some do not sing well, but they make a joyful noise. We thought we could detect certain overtones of Russian music and Eastern European music, and that's understandable because the majority who escaped the Holocaust and came to Israel have such roots. It sounded almost like a Russian cossack chorus. Their music is the kind that leads you to respond to the rhythm, to clap, to motion. For them the ultimate outcome of good music is dance. We witnessed the prayers, the ceremonial lighting of the candles (in one other home we attended, they sang a transition hymn that starts on a worldly level and then moves into a reverent attitude). We partook of each of the cups of wine, which in our case was grape juice. This has to be a product of the vine, but it can be raisin juice or grape juice or wine-any of the three. With each of these came a certain ceremonial prayer.

As he broke the bread, the father, who was also a rabbi, handed it to us. You have to somehow be in touch as he is in touch. We saw the use of the ritual salt, based on Leviticus-"With all thine offerings thou shalt offer salt." We saw how very congenial was the discussion between parents and children. It's the children's day; they know they have their parents on this day,82if on no other. On this particular evening we did not hear the reading of Prov. 31, but in another home we did, and that's often a ritual-the famous verses about who can find a virtuous woman, who is more precious than rubies. In one home I was asked to read that, and in the presence of the woman to whom these passages were applied I was moved more than I can describe. There are Jewish mothers, I'm told, who resent the reading of those words because they think it is sop, as it were, of comfort after neglect and hostility all week; then suddenly the husband waxes poetic and gives them their just due.

There is an intimacy we observed even in their feeling for the divine, though they're very careful, out of long philosophical tradition, to keep God distant. And yet some rabbis do not feel bad about referring to God as Daddy; and they're not talking about big daddy or Daddy Warbucks. It's a matter of the intimate warmth of filial love. In one home we witnessed a blessing pronounced upon the youngest son, and this is also ceremonial and traditional. And the blessings were of Ephraim and Manasseh. Latter-day Saints will recognize that. The blessings of Ephraim and Manasseh! A Jew pronouncing such a blessing upon his youngest son or grandson? Yes. That's a tradition.

In one home we heard the hymn that is used at the end of the Sabbath, on Saturday night. It's a prayer for the immediate return of Elijah. Their tradition is that Elijah can't come on Friday because everybody's too busy preparing for the Sabbath. He can't come on the Sabbath because that's a day of rest. But the tradition is that he will come on the day after Shabbat. Just for interest, if you'll read Doctrine and Covenants section 110 and check the date you'll find it was April 3, 1836, when Elijah came to the Kirtland Temple. That was a Passover Sunday, the day after the Jewish Shabbat.

At the end of the day, the Jews have a little ceremony-you taste something special, you smell something special. And now the Sabbath queen leaves and you're back to the work week.

All this moved us. Through the warp and weft of my comments you see that there's a creative idea here-an act of creation is involved in making the Sabbath what the Sabbath ought to be. If a person doesn't do this, for him the day is not a Sabbath at all. Also, through what I've described, there emerges a balance of solemnity on the one hand and pleasure on the other-even very83worldly pleasure, if you want to say it that way. Should we be embarrassed by that or troubled by it? Not, I think, if you read D&C 59, which promises not only blessings from above and revelations in their time-which you would expect from Sabbath observance-but also, on the condition that we do it in rejoicing, very earthly blessings. The promise, precisely worded, is "the fulness of the earth is yours." It names houses, gardens, barns, orchards, vineyards. Those are all temporal, down-to-earth realities. And then the senses-to strengthen the body, to enliven the soul, to please the eye, to gladden the heart, for taste and for smell, and so forth. All these are physical, yet they have spiritual counterparts. The wholeness of Sabbath worship is holiness. It involves all of man-body and spirit-and that insight is in authentic Judaism.

It's not uncommon among us, I'm afraid, to think of the Sabbath in a negative way, as a set of tough requirements-perhaps to avoid desecrating it. What I would hope has emerged here is the other side-the beautiful, joyful, happiness-giving effect of sanctifying the day as partners with the Creator. I think it is common to think that if we don't do certain things, there will be positive rewards-that we will be rewarded for sacrifice, for suffering, for service-but very uncommon to think that God will reward us for rejoicing, for enjoying, and for feeling pleasure. The Jewish tradition is, I repeat, that God will in fact reward and compound the very pleasures of the Sabbath. Otherwise it would be as if, beaten and tattered, invited in from afar to a magnificent feast, one refuses to partake of it.

A parable puts it thus: A man who has earned seven coins and is carrying them along the streets sees a poor beggar and out of compassion gives him six coins. Then as he continues walking down the street, he discovers that the beggar has followed him and stolen the seventh one. God has given us six days for labor. It is a terrible mistake to steal the seventh day, which is both His and ours-the very climax and meaning of what has gone before.

I submit that the Sabbath is a time whose idea has come.8485
