Truman G. Madsen, Radiant Life ( 1994)

8

The Awesome Power of Married Love

These days we see around us an increasing disintegration not only of such family solidarity as once existed, but even in the rejection of the idea of family. Articles are published that say the family is long gone. It is outmoded. But it is interesting to contemplate this fact: that though divorce has never been more frequent, remarriage has never been more frequent; and that people who have struggled and felt that they have failed, and have been estranged and divorced, are trying again and again, suggesting that for all the propaganda to the contrary there is a strong, lasting thirst for the fulfillments that marriage promised. And I am convinced that in the Church-though there is so much anguish and in many marriages struggle-we at least have a greater vision of the possibilities and a greater set of helps to reach toward them than any people in the world.

Now the opening question: What is love? "The awesome power of love" is a phrase from an anthropologist named Ashley Montague. He tells of an orphanage, a foundling home in New York, where orphaned children were taken. Their mortality rate-just the sheer life-and-death struggle-was appalling; two out of three died before the end of the first year.

But then a flourishing contrast was noticed in one particular section of the orphanage: none of the children there seemed to have the struggles to live that the others did. And so, as scientists86will, the authorities began various sorts of observation, asking themselves questions as they went along. What could be the reason? Were they eating something different? Were they getting a different kind of nurturing? What was the story?

Well, by accident, which often happens in science (they call it serendipity) they discovered the explanation. There was on that particular wing of the orphanage-hospital a scrub woman whom everyone knew as Old Anna. Her task was to clean the floors. She was as big as a streetcar, but she loved little children. Though she had been forbidden to do it, when no one was looking she would pick them up and hold them. She would sometimes even strap them two at a time on her big hips, and then as she worked on the floor she would lean over and talk to them. She loved them. Those children lived. They ate more. They slept better. They were healthier. And the mortality rate in that wing was well down.

The next question was how to clone Old Anna. They couldn't, of course. But this story underlines that love, whatever it is, is powerful. And after much reading and much talking with knowledgeable people, I have concluded that Paul's definition is the one that does the most to help us understand the nature of love-it is a "fruit of the Spirit" (Gal. 5:22). But I would even go so far as to say that love is the Spirit; that the very love that God has for us is manifested most powerfully through the Spirit. I have always believed this, but let me share by paraphrase something that says it better than I could.

Elder Parley P. Pratt describes the effect of his spending several days with the Prophet in Philadelphia, which is, interestingly, the City of Love. He says the Prophet "lifted a corner of the veil and [gave] me a single glance into eternity."

During these days, Elder Pratt recorded,["[the Prophet] taught me many great and glorious principles. ... I received from him the first idea of eternal family organization. ... It was from him that I learned that the wife of my bosom might be secured to me for time and all eternity; and that the refined sympathies and affections which endeared us to each other emanated from the fountain of divine eternal love." (Autobiography of Parley P. Pratt [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1938], p. 297.)

In clarifying this important subject, the Prophet in effect inverted everything Parley P. Pratt and other early converts had87believed about marriage and family when they joined the Church. That the Fall, for example, was really Eve's betrayal of Adam. That's a standard view still in the wider Christian world. This erroneous concept labels women as inferior. That's just for openers. They also believed that the body, being matter, was intrinsically evil, so using two bodies in the procreative act, using them as instruments, had to be wrong-in any case an embarrassment. Why hadn't God arranged it so that children could be brought into the world in some other way? Third, there was the belief that marriage was of the earth, earthy, and perhaps a compromise with the devil. And finally, in the life to come all earthly marriage relationships would be done away.

What Joseph Smith did was to invert or turn around, not just contradict, all four of those. Number one, the Fall was in fact a knowing and wise decision of both Eve and Adam in order to make possible the very conditions that would build and perpetuate family. Number two, the body is not intrinsically evil, but is-and this is one of the most sacred words in our vocabulary-a temple. Yes, it can be abused and distorted, but as God intends it to be, it can be glorified and hallowed.

Third, marriage, far from being a compromise of the world and of the devil, is properly the highest ordinance of the kingdom of God, reserved for the highest sanctuary room in the temple-the sealing room. And finally, far from its all being done away hereafter, only for the righteous and the sanctified will the privilege of everlasting marriage and family be granted. The others will be the lonely and the estranged, at least in the full sense of their possibilities. Having been taught by the Prophet, Parley P. Pratt wrote: "I had loved before, but I knew not why. ... I could now love with the spirit and with the understanding also." That is the blessing of the Restoration. If we can only begin to glimpse that, it gives us the bearings upon which to shape our course.

On one occasion Brigham Young was approached by two women who were asking for a divorce, and he gave an idealistic response. He said to them: "If that dissatisfied wife would behold the transcendent beauty of person, the Godlike qualities of the resurrected husband she now despises, her love for him would be unbounded and unutterable. Instead of despising him, she would feel like worshipping him. He is so holy, so pure, so perfect, so88filled with God in his resurrected body. There will be no dissatisfaction of this kind in the resurrection of the just. The faithful elders will have then proved themselves worthy of their wives, and are prepared then to be crowned gods, to be filled with all the attributes of the gods that dwell in eternity. Could the dissatisfied ones see a vision of the future glorified state of their husbands, love for them would immediately spring up within you, and no circumstance could prevail upon you to forsake them." (Church Historical Department document Ms/d/1234 box 49/FD8.) Now, it also works the other way around, that if the husband could only see his wife in her glorified condition, he would be so moved he would feel to worship. You might pause and say, "Wait, wait, wait. We are talking idolatry. We are not supposed to worship each other." In the ultimate scheme of things we will feel to do so when the person is worthy of it.

But Brother Brigham was also practical-he had one foot in this world and one in the next. It is said that a woman came to him one day and said, "Brother Brigham, my husband told me to go to hell," and Brigham said, "Sister, don't go."

We live in a world where there is much clamor and struggle and anguish respecting the role of woman. I heard of a man who literally dragged his wife, I mean bodily dragged her, into a stake president's office, sat her down, and said, "Now, President So-and-So, you tell my wife to honor my priesthood, and then our problems will be solved." This good stake president had his scriptures ready. He opened them to Doctrine and Covenants section 121, verse 37, and said, "Brother, according to what I read here, you have no priesthood."

Elder James E. Talmage wrote: "In the restored Church of Jesus Christ, the Holy Priesthood is conferred, as an individual bestowal, upon men only, and this in accordance with Divine requirement. It is not given to woman to exercise the authority of the Priesthood independently; nevertheless, in the sacred endowments associated with the ordinances pertaining to the House of the Lord, woman shares with man the blessings of the Priesthood. When the frailties and imperfections of mortality are left behind, in the glorified state of the blessed hereafter, husband and wife will administer in their respective stations, seeing and understanding alike"-oh, hasten the day!-"and co-operating to the full in the government of their family kingdom. Then shall woman be recompensed in rich89measure for all the injustice that womanhood has endured in mortality. Then shall woman reign by Divine right, a queen in the resplendent realm of her glorified state, even as exalted man shall stand, priest and king unto the Most High God." And then he adds in full confirmation of what Brother Brigham said: "Mortal eye cannot see nor mind comprehend the beauty, glory, and majesty of a righteous woman made perfect in the celestial kingdom of God." (In Young Woman's Journal, October 1914, pp. 602-3.)

Now, some are going to say, "I don't quite understand, because we are taught, aren't we, that the spirit we leave this life with we will have in the next life, and everything we take there by the way of failure and sin is going to be perpetuated. So what you're saying sounds like it's sort of a magical cure-all."

This quotation does not say that it is all automatic. According to Elder Bruce R. McConkie there is a fallacy in the Church, and that is that in order for us to be worthy of a celestial resurrection we must be perfect before we leave this life. It is false. While each of us is expected to make all the progress possible in mortality, we cannot be fully perfected in this world. There will be more to be done in the spirit world, but in the glorious celestial resurrection much improvement will take place. And that vision-that really it is going to happen and if we live consistently it will happen-can make a lot of difference during the hours of discouragement and despair. There are problems in some marriages and in some families that will not all be resolved here, and it is pointless to hope that they will. But it is not pointless to have long-range faith that as you continue doing your all, they will be resolved, and that's the promise that these prophets have given us.

Latter-day Saints who have really embarked in the service of God have a celestial homesickness. The words of the hymn "O My Father" turn out to be the most requested words of all the mail that has ever come to Temple Square in Salt Lake City. Even in the secular world-people out there who have never heard of the understanding of the family that we have-even they sense in those words something poignantly nostalgic, "Father, Mother, let me come and dwell with thee." Eliza R. Snow wrote the words to this hymn, of course. Zina Diantha Huntington, who at age eighteen lost her mother under very trying circumstances in Nauvoo, went to the Prophet and expressed an ultimate concern: "Will I know my mother as my mother when I get over on the other90side?" And the Prophet replied: "Certainly you will. More than that, you will meet and become acquainted with your eternal Mother, the wife of your Father in Heaven." Such an idea had never entered her head, and she burst out, "And have I, then, a Mother in Heaven?" He replied: "You assuredly have. How could a Father claim His title unless there were also a Mother to share that parenthood?" The record continues: "It was about this time that Sister Snow learned the same glorious truth from the same inspired lips, and at once she was moved to express her own great joy and gratitude in the moving words of the hymn, 'O My Father.' " (Recollection of Susa Young Gates, in History of the Young Ladies MIA [Salt Lake City: Deseret News, 1911], p. 16.)

We don't know how extensive and detailed the organization of the family was in the premortal life, but we were family there. We were a family. And according to George Q. Cannon (see Utah Genealogical and Historical Magazine 21:124) and Orson F. Whitney (see Improvement Era 13:100-1), who gave this a lot of thought, it may well be that some of the kinships we feel for each other here are but the trailing of the impressions and expressions of those former associations.

I once had the opportunity to ask a related question to Elder Joseph Fielding Smith. I was at the Church offices doing some research when I ran into his wife. Since she was going into his office, which was then in the Historical Department, she took me with her. "Let's go see Daddy," she said. I knew who Daddy was. As the great Church scripturalist, he overawed me. He looked up with a smile and said, "Brother Madsen, you can have one question." So I asked, "Brother Smith, do you think marriages are made in heaven?" Well, I had him over a barrel-his wife was standing right there. And he hesitated, so she kind of punched him. "Daddy, Daddy, don't you think our marriage was made in heaven?" Now, he had to be honest. So he said, "Well, it's in heaven now."

The Church has never given sanction to the idea that somehow all Latter-day Saint marriages were predetermined in heaven, but there is an interesting Jewish tradition that answers the question "What has God been doing since the creation?" with "Making marriages."

In this church we know, as others in the religious world don't know, that we didn't begin our existence or our family consciousness in this world.91

Many of us have heard the statement made-and ascribed to either Joseph Smith or Brigham Young-to the effect that if a person could see the glory of the telestial kingdom he would commit suicide to get there. If only we could get the fundamental doctrines across to Church members as rapidly as we get across rumors, everyone would be saved. Am I saying that's a rumor? Well, I am saying this, that over a period of many years I have combed everything Joseph Smith said and wrote, and I can't find it. Hugh Nibley has done the same with Brigham Young's words, and he can't find it. It is hard to prove a negative, of course. What I can say is that we have found a statement from Joseph via Wilford Woodruff that says something else that is close, and I suspect it is the origin of the alleged statement (see Diary of Charles C. Walker, August 1837, in Church Historical Department). Elder Woodruff said the Prophet taught this, roughly: that if we could see what is beyond the veil we couldn't stand to stay here in mortality for five minutes. And I suggest from the context that he was not talking about the telestial kingdom. He was talking about what it was like to be in the presence of God and the family.

Speaking of homesickness, the Lord's anesthesia is our amnesia. We would not stand this operation except for the fact that the curtain has been drawn over our past. So we do not know our name and rank and serial number. We have no specific memories of our premortal lives. Patriarchs give us a glimpse under inspiration. We have forgotten so we will stay here and tough out the spook alley. That is not a bad metaphor, because there was complete understanding before we got into this tunnel of why and what it would lead to. That's why we had the courage to shout for joy at the prospect (see Job 39:7), which in light of present circumstances is astonishing. We were able to envision what it could lead to because there we were in the presence of it. We would come back, should we be so blessed, and be like our Father and our Mother.

For some years now I have been much involved in studying Jewish lore, and for a semester I taught at Haifa University. It has been exciting to find specific instances of the fact that we in the Church have much in common with the great mainstream tradition of Judaism respecting the family. The Jews speak of some kind of premortal arrangements. They speak of the fall of man in positive terms, as we do. Yes, it brought bitter conditions, but as92the language of Genesis says, the curse is "for [our] sake" (3:17). And yes, we have the promise of difficulty and pain in childbirth, but says the promise, "they shall be saved in child-bearing" (JST 1 Tim. 2:15). Not easy, but fruitful.

Further, the Jews say that somehow Adam was originally two bodies, and the Lord took off one to make Eve. They say that Abraham was promised above all else that he would have a posterity that was not just as numerous as the stars but also would shine like the stars-not just quantity but quality too. Abraham's willingness to go on Mount Moriah and offer his only son-they call that the akeda. That means the binding. Their legend says that Isaac asked to be bound, so that he would not involuntarily prevent his father from sinking a knife. They say that Abraham's and Isaac's response was the greatest willingness and sacrifice in history, and therefore the place which had been flat before became a mountain after; God exalted the place. They say that Sarah didn't date her life until after the birth of Isaac. They say that every line in her face disappeared after Isaac was born. They say that the reason why murder is so wrong is that it destroys not just a life but a race. They say that the notion that somehow marriage is against the will of God is contrary to the truth; that getting married is one of the chief things God wants us to do, and that the heavens rejoice over a marriage where there is a genuine exchange of love. Finally, in their traditions, it is not inappropriate to call the Lord what I mentioned Jesse Evans called her husband-not just Father, but Daddy. That's what Abba means in Hebrew.

Well, some of that has echoes in our hearts. Yet I was quoting not from Mormon sources but Jewish ones.

Now, one other glimpse far beyond in an exchange of letters between Heber C. Kimball and his wife, Vilate, that reflects love at their mature level, after they had been through all that occurred from New York to Nauvoo. She was writing to him while he was away on the next to last of his several missions. (It is a paradox that this marvelous church that is so inclined to glorify and celebrate family has often required that members leave the immediate family to go and serve the wider family.) She wrote in part: "Let your heart be comforted, and if you never more behold my face in time, let this be my last covenant and testimony unto you: that I am yours in time and throughout all eternity. This blessing has been sealed upon us by the Holy Spirit of promise, and cannot be93broken only through transgression, or committing a grosser crime than your heart or mine is capable of."

Heber was so moved that he wrote a reply which became a prayer. It asked that they could live together and die together because, said he, "Thou, O God, knowest we love each other with pure hearts." (Life of Heber C. Kimball, pp. 334-35.)

The last prophecy Heber C. Kimball uttered was made as he walked along behind Vilate's casket and said, "I shall not be long after her." And he wasn't.

One of the consequences of such unifying love under the power of the Holy Spirit is that it makes separation almost like amputation. Yet in the vision of what ultimately can be and will be, and in the knowledge that there is yet to be some relationship in the spirit world, we can abide here in love and hope.

President Spencer W. Kimball, himself a great example in this matter, taught the Church much. Let me say that I once sat with him in a ticklish situation of marriage counseling. He drew two overlapping figures that were somewhat like circles, but the overlap in the center was a larger area than the two ends that didn't overlap. And his point was that differences-man, woman, husband, wife-maybe are no-man's-lands or no-woman's-lands. These he and Camilla just never entered and learned not to try to. We should acknowledge that. That's an individual problem. Perhaps it will be resolved eventually, but when you find out that there are some areas in which you just are not overlapping, then endure them.

For example, I know a man who insists on making pancakes on Saturday morning. Maybe his wife wants to suggest the proper bowl, and perhaps a little less flour, or some other idea that might improve the pancakes. He almost drives her out with a hatchet. "Now, now-this is mine!" So she has learned to just sleep a little longer and then come down and eat the pancakes. That's a non-overlap area.

On the other hand, in every marriage there are happy places where the two overlap, and those are to be cherished.

President Kimball enunciated three principles in this connection. One is humor. Forgiveness is next-a hard one. And he also talked a lot about coping and overcoming selfishness, about developing unselfishness! He said that giant strides could be made in most households if we would really cultivate these three qualities.

94 First, then, humor. It is one of the most powerful ways of stimulating thinking. Think of that. But that's not the reason why I am recommending it. I am recommending it as the oil that smooths the frictions of life, and especially in the home. I am not talking about the humor that portrays something sacred. We have been warned against that. If you laugh at sacred things, make light of them, you will lose the Spirit. I am talking about the humor that laughs at oneself, that acknowledges one's foibles and finds them funny instead of tragic.

One of the best examples I know is President Hugh B. Brown, to whom I was close in his last years. His dear wife was post-stroke paralyzed in those years and at the final stages could not even speak. They had a nurse in the home during the last year or so. One day in his late eighties, after taking a bath (his annual bath, he jested) President Brown climbed out and began to work on the ring around the tub. Suddenly he got a stitch in his back; he couldn't stand up. Problem: Should he call the nurse? He tried several things. Nothing worked. And then it occurred to him that if he crawled on his hands and knees, he could perhaps roll onto the bed. So he started crawling. As he did so, it became clear to him what he might look like from the point of view of a spectator. He started to laugh, and that made his back hurt more. Now, I suppose that you could tell that story and get people to weep if you left out the humor. They would see it as a tragic situation-that poor old man. But he handled it with humor.

He was sometimes delightfully clever even in those late years. On one occasion Elder Boyd K. Packer took him by the arm as he was struggling with those bad legs. "Brother Brown, can I be your cane?" He replied quickly, "Yes, if I am Abel."

He was walking down the aisle with an aged sister when she said, "Oh, President Brown, I have always wanted you to speak at my funeral." He responded, "Sister, if you want me to speak at your funeral, you'd better hurry."

Some might think: Wait a minute; can a person laugh about something as serious as death? Yes. There he was in bed (this really happened, his daughter told me the story); he had had a kind of stroke, and the doctor summoned the family, suggesting that he probably wouldn't make it through the night. So there they were gathered solemnly around his bed. But at about 5:00 a.m. he started to rally. He got better! Still better! Finally he opened an95eye, only one, and he surveyed the situation. They saw a slight curl on his lip, and he said, "I fooled you, didn't I?"

What's wrong with that? Nothing, that is joie de vivre, and only one who has spirituality and vision can have that kind of sweet, self-deprecating humor.

Let me say to the men, instead of getting rigid and defensive when you've made a foolish mistake, laugh at yourself, acknowledge it. Your wife will agree with you. It's wholesome. It blows the pretenses away. It cleans out the carburetor in your life. You laugh with each other. I am not talking about pointing a finger at her and laughing at her. That's wrong. Don't do that in public or in private. But laugh at yourself.

We all catch ourselves in stupidities at times. They occur frequently in my house. My children all know that I am supposed to be able to put a lecture together, but nevertheless I make language mistakes. Sometimes I fluff a whole line-really mess it up. For instance, "The queen showed up with a twenty-one-sun galute and wore her gownless evening strap." So my daughter always says, "All right, Dad, get out of that one," and then I try. They know what's going on, and they laugh and then I laugh. And of course, that lubricates. Now, in our families we need more of it. Is that compatible with spirituality? It is, and maybe good, clean humor and true spirituality require each other.

Let me suggest an even closer example of this. I wish I knew it was true. It's an apocryphal story, I'm afraid, but I want it to be true. It goes as follows: A young man goes one day to see Elder Harold B. Lee when he is President of the Church. He walks in and solemnly announces: "I have had a revelation for the Church, and I am here to tell it to you so you will tell the Church. It is that the Church is mistaken in asking converts to wait a year before receiving the temple endowment. Now you know." How would you handle that if you were the President? In our story, President Lee says: "I am not going to question your religious experience, but I have noticed something since you came in. You haven't smiled once. And anyone who takes himself that seriously is not likely to be receiving much revelation."

Think about it. It is the case that humor enables us to have a proper perspective and to acknowledge our finitudes and our failures and get past them. But being rigid and solemn and unyielding-that is the way to a dreary life and an early grave.96

Elder LeGrand Richards was proof of what I am saying. The man's face was almost frozen in a smile before he was gone. What a delightful human being! Somebody asked him how he accounted for his longevity. (By the way, he attended the fiftieth wedding anniversary of his daughter. Figure that out. "Why don't we invite the folks over for our fiftieth wedding anniversary?") "Brother Richards, how have you managed to live so long?" He said, "I've never worried." Think of that. We all worry. Some people don't worry because they just don't know what's going on. Elder Richards didn't worry because he did know what was going on. Testimony, faith, insight, prophetic glimpses-he could cope, therefore, in ways that others couldn't, and he laughed at himself. Delightful! So cultivate humor; restore it to your home if it's been lost.

About forgiveness. A tough line from the Doctrine and Covenants talks about patiently bearing attacks from one's enemies (see D&C 98:23-24). You say: "Wait a minute, we're talking about the home. We don't have any enemies at home." Is that so? Sometimes our hardest struggles to eliminate friction are with the people we love or are trying to love. And though the revelation was given in the context of the brutal persecutions the Saints endured during the Missouri period, surely the spirit of it must carry over to all situations of potential hostility. Bear it patiently, the scripture says, even if the person who is hurting you hasn't shown the first sign of repentance. Now the exact language. Suppose you don't do that. Suppose you seek revenge for the hurt, even slightly in the tone of your voice or whatever? What then? The suffering you are going through "shall be accounted unto you as being meted out as a just measure unto you." What? The wrongs this person has done to me for forty years are going to be accounted a just judgment unless I've borne it patiently? That's what it says. Think of it.

It isn't an easy thing to do, but the commandment of the scriptures is that we are to forgive everyone-even those who are still hurting us. The opposite of it is to keep a laundry list of grievances and in the high pitch of an argument to bring them all up in serial form. That is not Christlike. Further, the person who will suffer the most is the person who does not forgive (see D&C 64:9). That is a law. So forgive. The person may or may not deserve it. Forgive anyway. How? Well, the scriptures give us one97clue. Jesus said, "Pray for your enemies" (3 Ne. 12:44). I have italicized the for. It's easy enough to pray against, as in "Lord, come down in judgment on this fiend and let there not be a grease spot left." That's not praying for. That's seeking vengeance. We must pray for, and the more we pray for, the more we find ourselves feeling forgiving. And then a special blessing comes to us. We accept that we are forgiven of the Lord. Otherwise, we cannot be. I submit that it is psychologically impossible to really believe that you are forgiven of the living God if you are still nurturing unforgiveness toward others. And that's what the Lord's Prayer says. I am going to put it negatively, so it will strike you. "Father, don't forgive me one inch more than I am willing to forgive others." That's what it says. Forgive us as we forgive others. If that's how much forgiveness we are going to receive, some of us are in trouble. As Joseph said, we haven't forgiven seventy times seven; perhaps we haven't even forgiven once (see Teachings, p. 238).

Third point. President Kimball talks about selfishness. Selfishness? What is that? Well, partly because of our culture, partly because of human nature, we suppose that we are entitled to more than we're getting. That's the real bottom line for a Latter-day Saint. It isn't just that we are all frustrated-all of us are. Perhaps no one in this world receives enough love. But it isn't just that, it's that we feel in our heart of hearts that we are entitled to more, and that hurts. Promises of the scriptures are constantly before us: If you do this and this, then this will be the result. Perhaps it doesn't seem to be working for us. Instead of getting better, it is getting worse. So we say, "I'm entitled." President Kimball's point is that we have to learn there is meaning even in suffering; and we have to learn to care enough for blessedness that we postpone some kinds of happiness. But isn't blessedness happiness? Of a sort, yes, but we learn by the example of Jesus Christ that to bring about the happiness of others one must sometimes go through lots of unpleasant experiences. And we aspire to be Christlike. Well, is there a meaning in suffering?

A convert to the Church named Benjamin Crue was for a time at the City of Hope Hospital in Duarte, California, as the head of their chronic pain center. Fifteen different experts focused on one patient each time-psychiatrists, surgeons, neurologists, pharmacologists, even people whose training was in physiological psychology.98Here were patients for whom no effort to reduce or remove pain had worked.

Benjamin Crue told me they learned something fundamental from their observations. They learned that when a person has chronic pain, unless he has at least one "significant other" in his life (a term used for someone about whom he cares and who cares about him), nothing we do really helps much with the pain. He told me this because of a sentence in my book that says love is the lasting therapy; a thing I believe, but had no evidence for. Now he gave me the evidence. He said that on the other hand, if there is such a person, even if it is only one-the person really cares about the sufferer and vice versa-then either he can cope with the pain or there can be substantial reduction in it. That's the power of love.

What is unbearable in life, I think, is the sense that what we are doing and suffering is meaningless-that there will be no adequate outcome from it, only more pain; that it all somehow is ended at death. But the gospel teaches us that, depending on us and our relationship with the Lord, even our worst struggles can be sanctifying, glorifying, and perfecting. It is a strange thing, is it not, that the same phenomenon-namely, pain-can have opposite effects, depending on one's attitudes and responses. For some it can lead to bitterness, the shriveling of the soul, hostility, and shaking the fist at God and all men; and to others it can lead to deeper love, deeper compassion, a more radiant exposure and expression, and eventually exaltation. Said Joseph Smith, "Men have to suffer that they may come upon Mount Zion and be exalted above the heavens" (Teachings, p. 323). Now, you may say, "Didn't Jesus Christ suffer so we wouldn't have to?" Yes, certain kinds of suffering He tempered or removed, including the suffering for sin. But once we take upon us His name our problems aren't all over. They are only beginning, for we are counseled to lose ourselves. And that's not selfish.

The question is frequently asked, Is marriage for procreation only? Answers come from the prophets. Let me read three. Joseph F. Smith speaking: "The relationship of man and wife is not only the sole means of race perpetuation, but for the development of the higher faculties and nobler traits of human nature, which the love-inspired companionship of a man and a woman can alone insure" (Improvement Era 20:739). Elsewhere the same prophet:99"Sexual union is lawful in wedlock, and if participated in with right intent is honorable and sanctifying" (Gospel Doctrine [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1977], p. 309). Parley P. Pratt: "The union of the sexes is ... also for mutual affection and cultivation of those eternal principles of never-ending charity and benevolence which are inspired by the Eternal Spirit; also for mutual comfort and assistance in this world of toil and sorrow and for mutual duties toward their offspring" (Key to the Science of Theology [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1978], p. 105). The Doctrine and Covenants says of such a marriage as we are here describing, "It shall be visited with blessings and not cursings, and with my power, saith the Lord, and shall be without condemnation on earth and in heaven" (D&C 132:48). What a glorious truth! The giving of love by each partner in a marriage can itself be sanctifying to both the giver and the receiver. And what a glorious principle it is that ultimately we will be capacitated to give in fullness and receive in fullness!

That leads me to another glimpse beyond. The season of the dedication of the Kirtland Temple saw a great outpouring of the Spirit. In a Thursday fast meeting a man and a woman, apparently not husband and wife, stood up spontaneously, sang together a song in tongues, and then sat down; a song that they had never heard before so far as they knew, and words they did not fully understand. An interpretation was given by the gift of the Spirit. (See Edward W. Tullidge, Women of Mormondom [New York, 1877], pp. 208-9.) Think just for a moment of such a harmony of soul that two people who did not know each other until that situation, at least not in any depth, are literally transformed and are symphonically one. What a glimpse of possibilities!

Now, a few things about how love can find a way.

I had an uncle who had Parkinson's disease-he was in constant motion. His wife had arthritis and insomnia. When they climbed in bed at night he put his hand under her neck-a perfect vibrator-and slowly she relaxed and went to sleep. Then he pulled his hand over, and he went to sleep and the jiggle stopped. Love finds a way.

Many years ago President David O. McKay was being wheeled by President Tanner from his room in the hotel around to the elevators. When they reached the elevators he said, "Oh, I'm sorry, we must go back." President Tanner asked no questions and100immediately pushed him back. What was the problem? He hadn't kissed Emma Ray good-bye. He was then ninety-three. Still some sizzle at ninety-three. Love finds a way.

Two other examples. In a ward I was in was a woman who had two children. Both were boys, and after age two both developed a rare disease in which every life process somehow reverses. I was asked to give a blessing to the second child, who had by that time lived to be twenty-one but was nothing but skin and bones-not even enough muscle left for lungs-and he shortly died. Because of the care her sons needed she hardly left that house, or even that room, for twenty-one years; and yet she and her husband were the most exciting youth leaders in the stake, had the most radiant kinds of personality, and were full of fun and games as well as wisdom. Love finds a way.

Years ago Elder Charles A. Callis went down to the southern states to organize the first stake there. With him was Elder Harold B. Lee, who also was a member of the Twelve. Elder Callis said of the first location that he could stay in a motel but would prefer to go back to a little old chapel-home where he and his wife had been accustomed to stay. This was one of those inseparable links after some fifty years, his wife having died. So he slept there while Brother Lee slept in a motel. The next day they came together. Traveling in a car, they had stopped and were waiting for a traffic light to change when Elder Callis turned and said, "Brother Lee, last night my wife came to me" and his head went down and he was gone from this life. Brother Lee organized the stake; then he gathered together Brother Callis's personal effects. And as he was walking out of that chapel-home he heard Brother Callis's voice say, "Well done, my boy." I heard Brother Lee say that the power of such love is what the gospel is all about. And he shook my lapels once when I was an aspiring young bishop, and said, "Brother Madsen, the most important work the Lord has given you to do is in the walls of your own home, and don't you forget it."

I recall a meeting at which Elder A. Theodore Tuttle was presiding. It was a big meeting-regional meeting, conference, priesthood meeting, I don't remember which. At about five minutes to nine, Elder Tuttle said: "Brethren, let's have closing prayer and adjourn. There are other things to consider, but let's adjourn, because one of you may have a date with your wife to go out and get101a malt, and nothing we can do here is more important than that." The gospel teaches that the Church is the instrument to the glorification of the family, not the other way around. And we all need to keep that in mind.

It is a deep conviction of mine that the vision of eternal family life that has been revealed through the Prophet Joseph Smith is true. When President Kimball gave an address in which he talked about how difficult marriage is-he spoke for sixty minutes on how tough the drudgery and the diapers and the rest can be-he tried to alert those young people who were thinking in terms of "butterfly wings and honey" that once you get the woman off the pedestal and on the budget, reality sets in. He warned them they were wrong if they expected that just the initial flash of romance and love would somehow perpetuate their marriage for the rest of their lives. No, they were going to have to go and get more and more of love, and then bring it home. And where do you get that? In the temple, for one place, and by serving each other and receiving the Spirit; the more you increase in the Spirit, the more you increase your power to love and be loved. Nevertheless, having talked mainly in warning terms, even negative ones, about the realities, he uttered this sublime, positive sentence: "Marriage can be more an exultant ecstasy than the human mind can conceive" (BYU Speeches of the Year, 1976, p. 146).

Ecstasy is a strong word. I suspect most of us, in this world, only taste it, but that is the word. The Lord promises us a fulness of the glory of the Father, which is equivalent to the fulness of joy, and that is worth giving everything for.

I have already mentioned that remarkable man Brother LeGrand Richards. I wrote him because I didn't believe the story. (It was subsequently published in his biography.) I now have a letter which I will preserve to the end of my days. It tells of his proposal to Ina, made after his first mission. He was walking along with her, and everything was well between them, when he said, "Ina, there is someone who will always come before you." She gasped. She cried out, and she ran. She bolted, as women do to cover the tears. When LeGrand caught up with her, he stopped her and said: "Wait, wait, you don't understand. On my mission there were times when the Lord was so close that I felt I could almost reach out and touch Him. He has to be the foundation of our lives; but, Ina, if you want to be second, I want to marry102you." Now, I ask my female readers, is that an ideal proposal? Is that a highly romantic way to go about proposing to a girl? A girl said to me once, "I want a boy to say to me some day 'I love you so much I would go to hell for you.' " I couldn't resist saying, "What about going to heaven?"

The truth is that love should be triangular. If both partners, husband and wife, are really committed to the Lord Jesus Christ, then the love across the bottom of that triangle will flow powerfully. If either one of them or both is not, there will be problems. That's why the temple marriage is so different from eloping to Reno. The temple requires that you first make unconditional covenants with Christ, and then you can be trusted to kneel down and make unconditional covenants with each other. That is not required in Reno. Sometimes young people ask why, really what difference does it make? So much stress on going to that one building; why can't we go somewhere else? (By the way, President Lee taught that if you do have to go somewhere else, the second most sacred place on earth is . . .what? You don't go to the chapel or the reception center; you go to the home. That's the second most sacred place.)

Now, what I have testified over and over to young people is this: that it isn't just that when you go to the house of the Lord for your wedding certain things are said about forever; that's important, all-important, but that's talking about the quantity of the relationship. If it isn't of sufficient quality, however, there won't be that quantity. The temple ceremony is designed to give you the keys and powers of the transforming quality of love that will make that love worth perpetuating forever. You may say, "Just going through a ceremony surely doesn't do that." It does. I am troubled with people who disparage ceremony. The ceremony in this case is a channel, and all that precedes it-the whole temple ceremony, Elder Eldred G. Smith has said-is a temple wedding ceremony. Everything that precedes it and up through it is there to give to you divine powers, or at least to bestow them in the embryonic stage. And yes, returning and returning to the temple increases and increases those powers and one's understanding and perception of them. To deny these things is like saying you don't think that just taking an ordinary man and putting your hands on his head and saying a few words is going to make any difference in his life. The answer is, it does. There is a tangible mantle that goes103with ordination and receiving the Holy Ghost and being called to positions of responsibility, and there is a tangible power from the Almighty God that is supposed to come to us through His temples to powerfully enrich our marriages. If you lack this conviction or feel that it has diminished, then I plead with you to do the things that will restore it and increase it. And if you say, "I don't love him or her anymore," then do the things that will cultivate love. They are clearly set out in the gospel of Jesus Christ.

The Lord who lives and loves is a Father and is not companionless. And His concern, His work and His glory, is that we should share in the fulness of eternal life that He enjoys.104105
