Truman G. Madsen, Radiant Life ( 1994)

9

Elijah and the Turning of Hearts

There is something in the scriptures about an offering to be offered up one day by some specific persons, namely the sons of Levi. Puzzlement. Who are they? What is the offering?

In early 1847 Brigham Young was ill at a place called Winter Quarters. He had been prayerful and his feelings were mixed. He still was deeply grieved at the loss of his closest earthly friend, Joseph Smith, and was burdened heavily with the kingdom and its leadership. He was puzzled over the question of adoption. Some of the Saints whose own literal forebears showed a lack of interest or even deep hostility regarding the Church wished they could be grafted into a faithful family. Some such ordinances were performed. Now Brother Brigham was praying about it.

He had a dream in which he saw the Prophet Joseph Smith. Some beautiful passages demonstrate that Brother Brigham wanted to join the Prophet. If you think that wasn't sincere and lasting, you should know that his last words on earth, thirty years later, would be one word three times repeated-"Joseph, Joseph, Joseph."

After this 1847 interchange and the assurance the Prophet there gave him that he must live on, Brigham inquired about adoption and the Prophet replied. In the account there are seven different ways in which he says, "Tell the people to get and keep the Spirit of the Lord."106

There is a marvelous statement about how we know the spirit received is the Spirit of the Lord, for Joseph says at one point, "They can tell the Spirit of the Lord from all other spirits; it will whisper peace and joy to their souls; it will take malice, hatred, strife and all evil from their hearts; and their whole desire will be to do good, bring forth righteousness and build up the kingdom of God." Then the interesting conclusion: "Be sure to tell the people to keep the Spirit of the Lord; and if they will they will find themselves just as they were organized by our Father in Heaven before they came into the world. Our Father in Heaven organized the human family [in the premortal councils], but they are all disorganized and in great confusion." (Manuscript History of Brigham Young, 1846-1847, February 23, 1847.) So much for Brigham Young's glimpse of the crucial nature of the Spirit in finding ourselves united in a family relationship.

But now to the scriptures for a moment. It could be said that the earliest and latest revelations in the Doctrine and Covenants touch on this theme, the first being section two (which was actually given before section one). That is the revelation or statement of Moroni to the Prophet Joseph Smith in 1823. It says that Elijah will be sent. And what for? To "plant in the hearts of the children the promises made to the fathers, and the hearts of the children shall turn to their fathers" (JS-H 1:39). Elijah will be among those who participate in the most glorious family reunion in all history. It could be called a sacramental wedding breakfast to be held following the Lord's second coming. (See D&C 27:5-14.)

Elijah did come. He came to the Kirtland Temple on April 3, 1836. (See D&C 110:13-16.) Jewish literature is replete with the promise and expectation of Elijah's coming. That is the last promise of the Old Testament, in the last verses of Malachi. And it is Jewish tradition that on the second night of Passover they must leave open the door and place at the table head an empty chair and a goblet full of wine in the expectation that Elijah may come. It is interesting, especially in light of that Jewish tradition, that April 3, 1836, was the second day of Passover. The symbolism is beautiful. Elijah comes, as they expect, to a home. He comes to a goblet of wine-the sacramental wine. He comes to turn hearts, which is more than changing minds-he turns hearts to hearts.107He somehow bridges some gap, some alienation, some separation that has occurred in the human family.

No subject preoccupied the Prophet Joseph Smith more than this one. In his later years he spoke at least eight times pleading with the Saints to ponder and pray over this principle. We ordinarily say that Elijah did something pertaining to the dead or work for the dead. A half truth. In the first place, no one is really dead. Those who are in the spirit world are, as we are taught by the prophets, more alive than some of us here. Elder Melvin J. Ballard used to say that they have "every feeling intensified" spiritually. And as for their being dead and gone, no, they are not gone either. The prophets teach us that the spirit world is not in some remote galaxy; it is here, it is near. And as the Prophet put it, speaking of their feelings for us, those who are bound to us somehow by the anxieties of their forebearing, "their bowels yearn over us" (Teachings, p. 159). He said they "are not idle spectators" in the last days (Teachings, p. 232). He explained, "Enveloped in flaming fire, they are not far from us, and know and understand our thoughts, feelings, and motions [one account says emotions], and are often pained therewith" (Teachings, p. 326). And he could have added, "rejoiced therewith." When the scriptures say, "All eternity is pained," that is, I take it, a metaphor for the pain of these spirits. Similarly when they say, "the heavens weep for joy."

So Elijah does have something to do with them. But the Prophet taught that he also has something to do with us, with the living. Had he not come, the whole earth would be cursed; or in another version, the earth would be utterly wasted at Christ's coming. Wasted, I take it, means at least two things. It would be in a sense a waste if this earth, created by our Father and His Son as the dwelling place of their family, turned out to be a house barren. Not a home. Not a place of genuine familial love. In that sense it would have been a waste to create it. But second, were there not a family welded and united and full of love for Christ, it would be the case that all mankind, unable to endure His presence, would be laid waste at His coming. Thank God for the restoration of the power to prepare such a family. That conferral came through Elijah.

The Prophet said, speaking of this, "How shall God come to108the rescue of this generation?" And he answered, "He will send Elijah." (Teachings, p. 323.)

Well, that generation may have been a difficult one, but this generation in which you and I live is in some ways a worse one. Constantly students ask me around the country, "Do you think the world is getting better or worse?" And I always answer, "Yes." The wheat is getting "wheatier" and the tares are getting "tarier"-and rapidly.

How can a mere prophet change a whole generation, and an ancient prophet at that? Well, we can know a few things about him. Know that his name is interesting-El-i-yah: literally, in Hebrew, "My God is Jehovah." But more than that, it symbolizes the sealing or the union of father and son. Know that he conferred keys, and we understand, if only dimly, that means authority-priesthood authority. There are men on the earth today who hold those keys by direct line of ordination. Every marriage in this Church that is binding both here and hereafter has been performed under those keys and their delegated authorities. Second, Elijah had a revelatory function. There is a spirit that is somehow emanating through him and his work and ministry which has reached out far beyond the bounds of this Church, turning hearts and not just heads. And one account says that it was his function to reveal to us "the covenants of the fathers in relation to the children, and the covenants of the children in relation to the fathers"-perhaps pointing to something that happened prior to mortality. Elijah is also an exemplar of what is his mission, for it is not yet over. As a translated being, one not yet subject to death, he had the unique privilege of ministering to the Master and the three Apostles on the Mount of Transfiguration (see Matt. 17:1-8) in an experience which we are told we cannot yet fully understand, the fulness of the account having been reserved for the future. A Jewish apocalyptic tradition says that those two prophets who are to one day testify in the streets of Jerusalem to prepare the hearts of the Jews to be turned to the prophets (see D&C 98:16-17), and are then to literally be killed and lie in the streets-martyrs just prior to the coming of the Messiah-are Elijah and Enoch. Elijah has been patient through millennia awaiting the opportunity to bring earth and heaven back together, to tie together the old and new worlds, to take the estranged and the alienated and the embittered and somehow transform their109hearts, and to prepare all of the family who will to be family, welding them indissolubly in order to greet the Christ.

Let us draw a few personal and emotional implications from this. Feeling, after all, centers in the heart, and the role here is not one of mere intellect. It is a matter of feeling something inside. The Prophet said on one occasion to the Relief Society that he grieved that they were not exhibiting greater union of feeling among them. And he went on to say, "By union of feeling we obtain power with God" (History of the Church 5:23). When he introduced the ordinance of the washing of feet in Kirtland among the brethren, he taught them that this ordinance-an essential one-was to enhance the union of feeling and affection among them, that their faith might be strong (see History of the Church 2:309). And repeatedly the Lord has said in modern revelation that He reveals himself by His Spirit to the mind and the heart. "Behold, I will tell you in your mind and in your heart by the Holy Ghost which shall come upon you and which shall dwell in your heart" (D&C 8:2), an impressive blending of intellect and sentiment.

Now, we need not dwell on the point that in our culture the family is coming unglued. There are those who hold that the great wave of the future, a better future as they see it, is to totally abandon the notion of united families-and they recommend it. One can call attention to devastating statistics outside the Church, but I want to talk strictly about inside it. One of our statistics, and I am only approximating, is that there are well over 600,000 children in this Church who are being raised by a single parent. There are delinquent fathers. There are delinquent children. Just from conversation in my own office over the years on the BYU campus I have heard sentences that tell it all. For example, "My mother gave me five hundred dollars and told me to go away." Or: "I couldn't possibly tell my father. He would kill me." Or again, "My mother has been divorced three times." Or again, "No one in my family cares anything for the Church." Or again, "Just before I left for my mission my father threatened to take my life." Or again, "I don't dare go home."

Robert Frost saw it clearly on the home. He said, "Home is where, when you get there, they have to take you in." Would that it were so. Many who are joining the Church in this generation are doing so at the cost of never being permitted through that110door of home again. My own great-grandfather wrote a letter from Nauvoo. He was a squire-a kind of amateur attorney-who had loved the Mormon people but had never joined them. And his motivation was elementary: he had a wife and a son, and both of them said that if he ever did, that would be the end; they would never speak to him again. The letter to Brigham Young says, "Is this what the Lord requires of me?" And Brigham Young's answer, in a word, was "yes." My great-grandfather joined the Church, and his wife and his son kept their word.

Yes, we are in a real world. And the alienation, the pain, the hostility, the torment, the trauma, even in some Latter-day Saint homes, is a long distance from Elijah, who said he would turn hearts toward and not away. Is there hope? There is.

Let's discuss now not what one needs to do but what one needs to feel. First there is forgiveness. We are glib, I think, in quoting the passages that talk about our needing to forgive, and even to forgive all people. They are there. One of the strongest passages is in the context of the Prophet Joseph and his own weaknesses, his pleading with his brethren to forgive him, pleading as the revelation does; and then going on to say that if they don't, there remaineth in them the greater sin (see D&C 64:9). Strong language, saying that one's refusal to forgive a sinner is a worse sin than whatever sin the sinner has committed. Well, forgiveness is the very nature of Christ's way. I suggest that it may be difficult to forgive your enemies, but it is even more so to forgive your loved ones who have sometimes manifested hate-and you have too, in response. It is harder to forgive your loved ones because you care about them and you have to go on living with them, or struggling to, and they can go on hurting you over the years and the decades. But our hearts will never turn to our fathers in the way this spirit of which we have been testifying motivates us to do unless we forgive.

You see, we have inherited all kinds of things. There is a standard procedure for students with bad report cards. They can go home and say: "Look, Mom," or "Look, Dad." "Which do you think it is, heredity or environment?" And their parents can say, "Neither of the above." The fact is that we willingly chose to come into the world, likely in this time and circumstance. And when a young person says to his parents in deepest animosity, "I didn't ask to be born," if they give the proper, prophetic answer111they will say: "Oh yes, you did. You not only asked for it, you prepared for it, trained for it, were reserved for it." I am saying that both he and they are mutually involved.

And by the way, that's a snarl word in our generation. Involved. No one wants to get involved, in anything. Do your own thing. Be yourself. But you and I and all of us are involved. It was collusion. And therefore, as you look back at the seventy or so forebears-and that's what it would take at fifty years each, only seventy to get you back to Abraham-you might recognize that you have inherited the blood of generations. And blood may be not a correct word scientifically, but it stands in the scriptures for seed, which is specifically the heredity, the inheritance of tendencies, and all of us have them. And so you have the blood of this generation, from which we must become clean-"clean from the blood of this generation" (D&C 88:85). If you are, you will be clean from the blood of every generation, because it is compounded and accumulated into now. And that includes the blood of some degeneration.

So perhaps you do have problems that you can blame on ancestors, and if you forgive that and choose to stand close to the Lord in the process of purifying your life, that will affect your whole family in both directions. You are not alone. There is no way you can regain solitary and neutral ground. You are in it-in involvement. And this, I take it, is one of the profound meanings of that long, laborious allegory in the book of Jacob, the allegory of the tame and wild olive trees. If you take a wild branch and graft it in to a tame one, if the branch is strong enough it will eventually corrupt and spoil the tree all the way to the roots. But if you take a tame branch and graft it in to a wild tree, in due time, if that branch is strong enough, it will heal and regenerate to the very roots. You will then have been an instrument in the sanctification even of your forebears.

Do these considerations ever sober us in moments when we suppose either that no one cares for us or that whether they care or not, our life makes no difference? To be that kind of branch and achieve that kind of transformation backward and forward is perhaps the greatest achievement of this world. But to do it one must be great, one must be linked, bound to the Lord Jesus Christ. One must be mighty. One must be something of a savior. And that is exactly what the Prophet Joseph Smith said we are-112 "saviors on Mount Zion" (Teachings, p. 330). And how are we to be saviors on Mount Zion? he asked once in a discourse. He answered by saying that we do so by (first building then) going into the temples of the Lord, and in our own first person presence, going through all the temple ordinances for and in behalf of loved ones who have passed on. This can "redeem them that they ... may be exalted to thrones of glory." And it will help "fulfill the mission of Elijah." (Teachings, p. 330.) Yes, saviors, redeemers of our families.

We have many examples in our history. I chose this one not because it is exceptional but because it isn't. Erastus Snow, given a blessing by the Prophet Joseph Smith, was told in effect: "Brother Erastus, your father knows nothing of the gospel of Jesus Christ, but the Lord God will be your Father and He will watch over you. And if you will walk in the full path of righteousness, the time will come when you will save all of your kindred flesh; and in due time, if you are worthy, these blessings which I pronounce upon you will be confirmed upon you by your own father. And then your joy will be full."

The capacity to forgive comes only through the capacity for loving the Lord Jesus Christ. And He taught us how. He said, "Pray for your enemies." That's different, I remind you, than praying against your enemies. If you want to know how you can turn feelings of hostility into feelings of forgiveness and love, that's the how. You pray for them. You may choke in the effort, but as you keep going, the time comes when you mean it. And then you not only mean that you want to forgive, and feel it, but you even find yourself praying that He will forgive. And you look with compassion instead of spite at the whole traditional mix that has made you what you are and to some degree what you aren't. So much for forgiveness.

Now, the other is even harder. The word is sacrifice. And we know that the family of man was taught from Adam down to make external sacrifice with the firstlings, the firstborn. These were consumed, burned on an altar, all to typify and prepare for the coming of the living sacrifice, who was Christ himself. We now know that when the Lord appeared to the Nephites He said, in substance: "No longer will I accept burnt offerings. From now on I will accept only your hearts. You must bring to me the sacrifice of a broken heart and a contrite spirit." (See 3 Ne. 9:19-20.) 113We use the term "broken heart" to mean radically frustrated in a romance. That meaning is accepted, but in the scriptural usage a broken heart is a malleable, meltable, moveable heart, and a contrite spirit is an honest, acknowledging spirit that says, "I am, in fact, dependent on what I am in fact dependent on." There is not self-deprecation here, only honesty: "I need help." And when that is acknowledged, help comes.

I suggest that one sacrifice the sons of Levi and the daughters of Levi are to offer in the end is the willingness to give themselves in the cause of saviorhood and to care more about family and the preservation and intensification of family than they care about anything else in this world. That has costs. Some things have to be given up. Some things have to be postponed. And the focus is sacrifice. I have to say honestly, I believe it is painful. I have to say I believe that there are many among us who are easily pulled in other directions. And I have to say I consider that a tragedy. I occasionally hear housewives say that they are "mere housewives." What have you done in the last twenty years? Oh, nothing-just fed my family three meals a day and more or less kept them together. Is that all? President Lorenzo Snow said with power on one occasion that if a woman raised a righteous family she would be exalted in the celestial kingdom (cited by Leroy C. Snow in a Snow family reunion program). Our generation is making attractive every other thing but. That is not the gospel of Jesus Christ.

So I plead with you, be forgiving and be sacrificial.

Flying in from the Far East some time ago, I found on the plane a young man obviously recognizable as a Mormon Elder. We chatted. I didn't at first tell him who I was or that I really already did think the Mormon church was great. But I soon learned that there were three things a little unusual about him. First, his father had died while he was on his mission. When I was myself a mission president, I prayed every night and every morning for two things. One, that I would not have to send any missionary-male or female-home in disgrace. And two, that I would not have to send an Elder or a Sister home dead. In a way that's an unfair prayer, because I suspect that, with tens of thousands of young people out in the real world, in the long run there is no way to avoid some lapsings. But I so prayed. I had not foreseen another difficulty, and that was to have to call in a missionary and tell him that one or the other of his parents-or in one case both-were gone.114

Well, this Elder on the plane had lost his father. His father had not been particularly faithful in the Church. His mother had taken up the burden, and of course, as required, had sent the monthly check. The second thing was that he had let his mother know he was coming home, but he hadn't told her when. And the third thing was that he hoped to go to BYU. As I got off the plane, and I was first off, I saw a face and something told me that this was his mother. I restrained myself from telling her that her son was on the plane. I went to a position where I could see both her face and his. He got off and walked along a bit casually, carrying cameras and briefcase. And then he saw her. There was recognition, gratitude, forgiveness for whatever may have been amiss in the past, and a total royal embrace. That's it. That's everything.

It is precisely that kind of embrace and reunion which you and I were sent into the world to make possible with loved ones in a future existence. It will not be possible except we are repentant and have faith in the Lord Jesus Christ sufficient to enable us to forgive and to sacrifice. That is our mission and our commission.

Occasionally when I have been in Jerusalem I have tried to picture in my weakness what He promises us will happen there one day. Mount Olivet, or the Mount of Olives, is the place from which He ascended. It is the place of His greatest suffering. It is the place where there was a garden, Gat shemen; in Hebrew, Garden of Oil Press, where, as it were, He trod the olive press to produce the oil of healing, the balm, the peace. That place today, if you study it carefully, is a place of everything except reunion. It is a place of destruction. Graves are everywhere. Shattered things are everywhere. Barbed wire, glass, the droppings of animals, everything you can name. And hostility and bitterness is symbolized on that very mount in the fact that different faiths, each with its own claim, build churches, build basilicas, and then each refuses to acknowledge the existence of the other. There are machine gun remnants. There is a monument to a place where paratroopers in the Six-Day War were gunned down by the dozens. War is what is symbolized there.

Yet the promise of the Lord Jesus Christ is that He will descend to that mount (see D&C 45:48). His foot will touch it. It will then cleave in twain, and there will be an earthquake. Dramatic, but true-an earthquake covering the whole earth. And there will be a transformation of the earth, preparing it for its115terrestrial condition. As He descends with His worthy hosts, the privilege will also be given to those who remain here to be caught up together to meet Him. We will not have to simply remain and wait, but as in every genuine effect of true love, we will want to take our own steps toward the full embrace.

Thus it is our privilege and calling to become in our own limited way redemptors of the human family, ours and His. It is impossible to love Him truly and not love what is His; and God assigned Him all of us. And it is not possible for us to really love ourselves unless we love what is truly us, and that is the whole house of Israel in which we belong. As we learn to do this and accordingly act as saviors, we will be helping to fulfill the great mission of Elijah.116117
