Spencer W. Kimball, Miracle of Forgiveness ( 1969)

Chapter One

This Life Is the Time

—For all contracts that are not made unto this end have an end when men are dead. —Doctrine & Covenants 132:7 For behold, this life is the time for men to prepare to meet God— —Alma 34:32

It is the destiny of the spirits of men to come to this earth and travel a journey of indeterminate length. They travel sometimes dangerously, sometimes safely, sometimes sadly, sometimes happily. Always the road is marked by divine purpose.

The journey leads through infancy with its carefree activities but rapid learning; through childhood with its little disappointments and stubbed toes, its injured feelings, its keen excitements; through youth with its exuberance, its likes and dislikes, its fears and hopes and intensities; through the young married period with its responsibilities, its competitions, its ambitions, its family-rearing, its accumulating; and through older age with its achievements, culminations, goal-reaching, relaxation and retirement.

Throughout the entire journey there is opportunity for learning and growth and development toward the final goal. We see some people who merely travel, having no aim, direction, destination or purpose. Without road maps to guide them, they just travel along the way and in varying degrees pick up such things as will please the eye, tickle the vanities, satisfy hungers, quench thirsts, satisfy passions. And when the end of life draws nigh they have traveled but are little if any closer to their proper destination than when they started. Regrettably, some have totally lost their way.

Life's Divine Purpose On the other hand, there are some who chart their courses, make wise, right decisions, and in large measure achieve their goals and reach their happy destinations. In doing this they are cooperating with the Creator in his stated purpose of life: "For behold, this is my work and my glory-to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man." (Moses 1:39.)

Since immortality and eternal life constitute the sole purpose of life, all other interests and activities are but incidental thereto. And since those objectives are the work and glory of God, they are the proper work of man also and are the major reason for his coming to earth. Of the two elements, the one great blessing-immortality-comes to man without his effort, as a gift from the Almighty. The other-eternal life-is a cooperative program to be developed by the Lord and his offspring on earth. It thus becomes the overall responsibility of man to cooperate fully with the Eternal God in accomplishing this objective. To this end God created man to live in mortality and endowed him with the potential to perpetuate the race, to subdue the earth, to perfect himself and to become as God, omniscient and omnipotent.

Our Father then sent to the earth a line of prophets to keep man in remembrance of his duties and his destiny, to warn him of dangers, and to point the way to his total victory. It appears that the spiritual perceptions of many peoples have been inadequate to a full understanding of God's purposes, and he has accordingly had them taught at lower levels. This is apparently what Alma meant when he said: For behold, the Lord doth grant unto all nations, of their own nation and tongue, to teach his word, yea, in wisdom, all that he seeth fit that they should have... (Al. 29:8.)

Unfortunately, God's people have too often rejected his way, to their own destruction. But the Lord has never permitted such people to be destroyed, nor permitted them to fail to reach their goal, without having taught them and warned them. For example, of the Jews it is recorded: "... and never hath any of them been destroyed save it were foretold them by the prophets of the Lord." (2 Ne. 25:9.)

The scriptures point clearly to the high purpose of man's existence. Abraham and Moses particularly were explicit on this matter, as is revealed by records made available to us through the modern Prophet Joseph Smith. That Prophet, having learned the drama and purpose of it all from the ancient records as well as from heavenly visitations, continued to receive through direct revelation further light and truth respecting man's great potential. Through him God has abundantly confirmed that man is the supreme creation, made in the image and similitude of God and his Son, Jesus Christ; that man is the offspring of God; that for man, and man alone, was the earth created, organized, planted and made ready for human habitation; and that, having within him the seeds of godhood and thus being a god in embryo, man has unlimited potential for progress and attainment.

Significance of Belief in God This book presupposes a belief in God and in life's high purpose. Without God, repentance would have little meaning, and forgiveness would be both unnecessary and unreal. If there were no God, life would indeed be meaningless; and as with the antediluvians, the Babylonians, the Israelites and numerous other peoples and civilizations, we might find justification in an urge to live only for today, to "eat, drink and be merry," to dissipate, to satisfy every worldly desire. If there were no God there would be no redemption, no resurrection, no eternities to anticipate, and consequently no hope.

But there is a God, and he is loving, kind, just and merciful. There is a never-ending existence. Man will suffer or enjoy his future according to his life's works in mortality. Consequently, since mortal life is but a speck compared to the infinite duration of eternity, man should take great care that his present insures him joy and development and happiness for his eternal future.

Our Pre-mortal Understanding In the record of an outstanding vision, Abraham amplified for us the purposes of God in creating the world and placing us upon it.

Now the Lord had shown unto me, Abraham, the intelligences that were organized before the world was; and among all these there were many of the noble and great ones. (Abraham 3:22.)

In the council in heaven, the Lord clearly outlined the plan and its conditions and benefits. The earth was to be not only a place of residence for man but also a school and a testing-ground, an opportunity for man to prove himself. Agency would be given man so that he could make his own choices.

Life was to be in three segments or estates: pre-mortal, mortal, and immortal. The third stage would incorporate exaltation-eternal life with godhood-for those who would fully magnify their mortal lives. Performance in one estate would vitally affect the succeeding estate or estates. If a person kept his first estate, he would be permitted the second or the mortal life as a further period of trial and experience. If he magnified his second estate, his earth experience, eternal life would await him. To that end men go through the numerous experiences of earth life-"to see if they will do all things whatsoever the Lord their God shall command them." (Abraham 3:25.)

We mortals who now live upon this earth are in our second estate. Our very presence here in mortal bodies attests the fact that we "kept" our first estate. Our spirit matter was eternal and co-existent with God, but it was organized into spirit bodies by our Heavenly Father. Our spirit bodies went through a long period of growth and development and training and, having passed the test successfully, were finally admitted to this earth and to mortality.

One definite purpose of our spirits coming to this earth and assuming the mortal state was to obtain a physical body. This body was to be subject to all the weaknesses, temptations, frailties and limitations of mortality, and was to face the challenge to overcome self.

While we lack recollection of our pre-mortal life, before coming to this earth all of us understood definitely the purpose of our being here. We would be expected to gain knowledge, educate ourselves, train ourselves. We were to control our urges and desires, master and control our passions, and overcome our weaknesses, small and large. We were to eliminate sins of omission and of commission, and to follow the laws and commandments given us by our Father. That the effort involved dignifies and ennobles man has been recognized by the world's great thinkers. Dante, for example, put it this way: "Consider your origin; you were not formed to live like brutes, but to follow virtue and knowledge." [^1]

We understood also that after a period varying from seconds to decades of mortal life we would die, our bodies would go back to Mother Earth from which they had been created, and our spirits would go to the spirit world, where we would further train for our eternal destiny. After a period, there would be a resurrection or a reunion of the body and the spirit, which would render us immortal and make possible our further climb toward perfection and godhood. This resurrection has been made available to us through the sacrifice of the Lord Jesus Christ, the Creator of this earth, who performed this incomparable service for us-a miracle we could not perform for ourselves. Thus the way was opened for our immortality and-if we prove worthy-eventual exaltation in God's kingdom.

The Gospel Our Map To pinpoint a destination not previously visited we usually consult a map. As a second great boon to us the Lord Jesus Christ, our Redeemer and Savior, has given us our map-a code of laws and commandments whereby we might attain perfection and, eventually, godhood. This set of laws and ordinances is known as the gospel of Jesus Christ, and it is the only plan which will exalt mankind. The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is the sole repository of this priceless program in its fulness, which is made available to those who accept it.

In order to reach the goal of eternal life and exaltation and godhood, one must be initiated into the kingdom by baptism, properly performed; one must receive the Holy Ghost by the laying on of authoritative hands; a man must be ordained to the priesthood by authorized priesthood holders; one must be endowed and sealed in the house of God by the prophet who holds the keys or by one of those to whom the keys have been delegated; and one must live a life of righteousness, cleanliness, purity and service. None can enter into eternal life other than by the correct door Jesus Christ and his commandments.

Jesus made this very clear in these words: Verily, verily, I say unto you, He that entereth not by the door into the sheepfold, but climbeth up some other way, the same is a thief and a robber. (John 10:1.) I am the door: by me if any man enter in, he shall be saved, and shall go in and out, and find pasture. (John 10:9.)

And Jacob, the prophet theologian, warned: O then, my beloved brethren, come unto the Lord, the Holy One. Remember that his paths are righteous. Behold, the way for man is narrow, but it lieth in a straight course before him, and the keeper of the gate is the Holy One of Israel; and he employeth no servant there; and there is none other way save it be by the gate; for he cannot be deceived, for the Lord God is his name. (2 Ne. 9:41.)

The Straight Way We must not be surprised that God's requirements for eternal rewards are precise and invariable, since even man's society and government operates on such a basis. For instance, returning from abroad to the land of our nativity we must meet certain requirements and have evidence thereof in the form of passports, visas, doctors' certificates as to health and vaccinations, birth certificates and other documents. One cannot receive salary without having met satisfactorily the conditions of his employment. One cannot ride the bus, train, or plane without having paid his fare, and at the station or airport he must show evidence of it. One cannot become a citizen of any country without having met the requirements laid down by the laws of that nation. One cannot expect a degree from any college without having paid his tuition and fees, done his residence work, and shown proof of his having met the requirements. God's eternal rewards will similarly be dependent upon man's compliance with the required conditions.

Prevalence of Procrastination One of the most serious human defects in all ages is procrastination, an unwillingness to accept personal responsibilities now. Men came to earth consciously to obtain their schooling, their training and development, and to perfect themselves, but many have allowed themselves to be diverted and have become merely "hewers of wood and drawers of water," addicts to mental and spiritual indolence and to the pursuit of worldly pleasure.

There are even many members of the Church who are lax and careless and who continually procrastinate. They live the gospel casually but not devoutly. They have complied with some requirements but are not valiant. They do no major crime but merely fail to do the things required-things like paying tithing, living the Word of Wisdom, having family prayers, fasting, attending meetings, serving. Perhaps they do not consider such omissions to be sins, yet these were the kinds of things of which the five foolish virgins of Jesus' parable were probably guilty. The ten virgins belonged to the kingdom and had every right to the blessings-except that five were not valiant and were not ready when the great day came. They were unprepared through not living all the commandments. They were bitterly disappointed at being shut out from the marriage-as likewise their modern counterparts will be.

One Church member of my acquaintance said, as she drank her coffee: "The Lord knows my heart is right and that I have good intentions, and that I will someday get the strength to quit." But will one receive eternal life on the basis of his good intentions? Can one enter a country, receive a scholastic degree, and so on, on the strength of good intent unsupported by appropriate action? Samuel Johnson remarked that "hell is paved with good intentions." The Lord will not translate one's good hopes and desires and intentions into works. Each of us must do that for himself.

Only the Valiant Exalted One may be saved in any one of three kingdoms of glory-the telestial, the terrestrial, or the celestial-but one can reach exaltation only in the highest of the three heavens or degrees in the celestial glory. Paul told the Corinthians that: There are also celestial bodies, and bodies terrestrial: but the glory of the celestial is one, and the glory of the terrestrial is another. There is one glory of the sun, and another glory of the moon, and another glory of the stars: for one star differeth from another star in glory. So also is the resurrection of the dead... (1 Cor. 15:40-42.)

And through the Prophet Joseph Smith came amplification of Paul's statement: In the celestial glory there are three heavens or degrees; And in order to obtain the highest, a man must enter into this order of the priesthood [meaning the new and everlasting covenant of marriage]; And if he does not, he cannot obtain it. He may enter into the other, but that is the end of his kingdom; he cannot have an increase. (D&C 131:1-4.)

Only the valiant will be exalted and receive the highest degree of glory, hence "many are called, but few are chosen." (D&C 121:40.) As the Savior put it, "... strait is the gate, and narrow the way, which leadeth unto life, and few there be that find it." And conversely, " ... wide is the gate, and broad is the way, that leadeth to destruction, and many there be which go in thereat." (Matt. 7:13, 14.)

It is true that many Latter-day Saints, having been baptized and confirmed members of the Church, and some even having received their endowments and having been married and sealed in the holy temple, have felt that they were thus guaranteed the blessings of exaltation and eternal life. But this is not so. There are two basic requirements every soul must fulfill or he cannot attain to the great blessings offered. He must receive the ordinances and he must be faithful, overcoming his weaknesses. Hence, not all who claim to be Latter-day Saints will be exalted.

But for those Latter-day Saints who are valiant, who fulfill the requirements faithfully and fully, the promises are glorious beyond description: Then shall they be gods, because they have no end; therefore shall they be from everlasting to everlasting, because they continue; then shall they be above all, because all things are subject unto them. Then shall they be gods, because they have all power, and the angels are subject unto them. (D&C 132:20.)

Dangers of Delay Because men are prone to postpone action and ignore directions, the Lord has repeatedly given strict injunctions and issued solemn warnings. Again and again in different phraseology and throughout the centuries the Lord has reminded man so that he could never have excuse. And the burden of the prophetic warning has been that the time to act is now, in this mortal life. One cannot with impunity delay his compliance with God's commandments.

Note Amulek's words, especially those forceful statements involving timing, which are in italics: Yea, I would that ye would come forth and harden not your hearts any longer; for behold, now is the time and the day of your salvation; and therefore, if ye will repent and harden not your hearts, immediately shall the great plan of redemption be brought about unto you. For behold, this life is the time for men to prepare to meet God; yea, behold the day of this life is the day for men to perform their labors.

And now, as I said unto you before, as ye have had so many witnesses, therefore, I beseech of you that ye do not procrastinate the day of your repentance until the end; for after this day of life, which is given us to prepare for eternity, behold, if we do not improve our time while in this life, then cometh the night of darkness wherein there can be no labor performed.

Ye cannot say, when ye are brought to that awful crisis, that I will repent, that I will return to my God. Nay, ye cannot say this; for that same spirit which doth possess your bodies at the time that ye go out of this life, that same spirit will have power to possess your body in that eternal world. (Al. 34:21-34. Italics added.)

Even if we leave aside the many scriptures which bear similar testimony, reading and prayerfully meditating upon this one brings an awe-inspiring conviction of the need to repent-now!

From the modern apostle Melvin J. Ballard we obtain an emphasis of Amulek's expression in these terms: ...But this life is the time in which men are to repent. Do not let any of us imagine that we can go down to the grave not having overcome the corruptions of the flesh and then lose in the grave all our sins and evil tendencies. They will be with us. They will be with the spirit when separated from the body. This life is the time to repent. That is why I presume it will take a thousand years after the first resurrection until the last group will be prepared to come forth. It will take them a thousand years to do what it would have taken but three-score and ten to accomplish in this life. [^2]

President Joseph F. Smith's revelation of 1918 contains these words: "... the dead had looked upon the long absence of their spirits from their bodies as a bondage." [^3] Another quotation from Elder Ballard amplifies President Smith's thought: ...When we go out of this life, leave this body, we will desire to do many things that we cannot do at all without the body. We will be seriously handicapped, and we will long for the body; we will pray for that early reunion with our bodies. We will know then what advantage it is to have a body. Then, every man and woman who is putting off until the next life the task of correcting and overcoming the weakness of the flesh are sentencing themselves to years of bondage, for no man or woman will come forth in the resurrection until they have completed their work, until they have overcome, until they have done as much as they can do. [^4]

Eternal Marriage Now for Latter-day Saints Nowhere is the time element more fully stressed than in the matter of eternal marriage. It is true that a merciful Father makes special post-mortal provision for these who do not hear the gospel in this life, but for Latter-day Saints the time is now. Read the word of the Lord respecting the marriage covenant: ... I reveal unto you a new and an everlasting covenant; and if ye abide not that covenant, then are ye damned; for no one can reject this covenant and be permitted to enter into my glory. (D&C 132:4.)

That covenant is celestial marriage.

Relative to this subject, in our own dispensation the Lord enlarges somewhat on a statement he made to the people in Palestine: For strait is the gate, and narrow the way that leadeth unto the exaltation and continuation of the lives, and few there be that find it, because you receive me not in the world neither do ye know me. But if ye receive me in the world, then shall ye know me, and shall receive your exaltation; that where I am ye shall be also.

This is eternal lives-to know the only wise and true God, and Jesus Christ, whom he hath sent. I am he. Receive ye, therefore, my law.

Broad is the gate, and wide the way that leadeth to the deaths; and many there are that go in thereat, because they receive me not, neither do they abide in my law. (D&C 132:22-25. Italics added.)

How impressive the Lord makes the time element! Why should he so emphasize it over and over if there were no significance to it? Would these phrases in the world and out of the world mean that one could go haphazardly through the years of mortality "eating, drinking, and being merry," ignoring all the commandments and failing to keep his life clean and still receive the blessings?

Judgment According to Knowledge Knowledge of the gospel has come to many men and women in this life together with adequate opportunity to live it. Such will be judged by the gospel law. Should one not have had opportunities to hear and understand the gospel in this mortal life, that privilege will be given him hereafter. Judgment is according to knowledge and compliance.

Latter-day Saints are in the first category. Having been blessed with the gospel privileges they are and will be judged on gospel criteria. Where the law is, it is a serious error not to comply with it, as the following scriptures emphasize: Jesus said unto them, If ye were blind, ye should have no sin: but now ye say, We see; therefore your sin remaineth. (John 9:41.) If I had not come and spoken unto them, they had not had sin: but now they have no cloke for their sin. (John 15:22.) And that servant, which knew his Lord's will, and prepared not himself, neither did according to his will, shall be beaten with many stripes. But he that knew not, and did commit things worthy of stripes, shall be beaten with few stripes. For unto whomsoever much is given, of him shall be much required—. (Luke 12:47-48.)

Jacob's words to his people might have been spoken directly to us: But wo unto him that has the law given, yea, that has all the commandments of God, like unto us, and that transgresseth them, and that wasteth the days of his probation, for awful is his state! (2 Ne. 9:27.)

Some Opportunities End at Death Thus for us who know but do not comply, the opportunities for certain limitless blessings have an end when death closes our eyes.

And after that you have received this, if you keep not my commandments you cannot be saved in the kingdom of my Father. (D&C 18:46.)

King Benjamin's graphic statement is indeed a sobering thought: Therefore if that man repenteth not, and remaineth and dieth an enemy to God, the demands of divine justice do awaken his immortal soul to a lively sense of his own guilt, which doth cause him to shrink from the presence of the Lord, and doth fill his breast with guilt, and pain, and anguish, which is like an unquenchable fire, whose flame ascendeth up forever and ever. Mos. 2:38.)

This is the state of those who knowingly fail to live the commandments in this life. They will bring upon themselves their own hell.

Blessings of Repentance and Forgiveness Our loving Father has given us the blessed principle of repentance as the gateway to forgiveness. All sins but those excepted by the Lord-basically, the sin against the Holy Ghost, and murder-will be forgiven to those who totally, consistently, and continuously repent in a genuine and comprehensive transformation of life. There is forgiveness for even the sinner who commits serious transgressions, for the Church will forgive and the Lord will forgive such things when repentance has reached fruition.

Repentance and forgiveness are part of the glorious climb toward godhood. In God's plan, man must voluntarily make this climb, for the element of free agency is basic. Man chooses for himself, but he cannot control the penalties. They are immutable. Little children and mental incompetents are not held responsible, but all others will receive either blessings, advancements, and rewards, or penalties and deprivation, according to their reaction to God's plan when it is presented to them and to their faithfulness to that plan. The Lord wisely provided for this situation and made it possible that there might be good and evil, comfort and pain. The alternatives give us a choice and thereby growth and development.

Help from the Holy Ghost In the life of everyone there comes the conflict between good and evil, between Satan and the Lord. Every person who has reached or passed the age of accountability of eight years, and who with a totally repentant heart is baptized properly, positively will receive the Holy Ghost. If heeded, this member of the Godhead will guide, inspire, and warn, and will neutralize the promptings of the evil one. The Lord made this very clear: Therefore, as I said unto mine apostles I say unto you again, that every soul who believeth on your words, and is baptized by water for the remission of sins, shall receive the Holy Ghost. (D&C 84:64.)

On this we have also the classic words of Moroni: And by the power of the Holy Ghost ye may know the truth of all things. (Moro. 10:5)

Take the Uncrowded Path In summary, the way to eternal life is clear. It is well marked. It is difficult. Evil and good influences will be ever present. One must choose. Generally the evil way is the easier, and since man is carnal that way will triumph unless there be a conscious and a consistently vigorous effort to reject the evil and follow the good.

But remember that he that persists in his own carnal nature, and goes on in the ways of sin and rebellion against God, remaineth in his fallen state and the devil hath all power over him. (Mos. 16:5.)

This earth life is the time to repent. We cannot afford to take any chances of dying an enemy to God.

Accordingly it is important that all the sons and daughters of God upon this earth may "see with their eyes and hear with their ears and understand with their hearts" the purpose of life and their responsibilities to themselves and their posterity, and that they may determine to walks the uncrowded path which is strait and which is narrow. The time to quit evil ways is before they start. The secret of the good life is in protection and prevention. Those who yield to evil are usually those who have placed themselves in a vulnerable position.

Blessed and fortunate indeed are those who can resist evil and live all the days of their lives without yielding to temptation. But for those who have fallen, repentance is the way back. Repentance is always in order, even in the eleventh hour, for even that delayed action is better than none at all. The thief on the cross who said, "Lord, remember me when thou comest into thy kingdom" was far better off than the one who threw into the Lord's teeth, "If thou be the Christ, save thyself and us." (Luke 23: 39, 42.)

As we have seen, one can wait too long to repent. Many of the Nephites did. Of these, Samuel the Lamanite said: But behold, your days of probation are past; ye have procrastinated the day of your salvation until it is everlastingly too late, and your destruction is made sure; yea, for ye have sought all the days of your lives for that which ye could not obtain; and ye have sought for happiness in doing iniquity, which thing is contrary to the nature of that righteousness which is in our great and Eternal Head. (Hel. 13:38. Italics added.)

Again, observe the emphasis in the words italicized. And let us not suppose that in calling people to repentance the prophets are concerned only with the more grievous sins such as murder, adultery, stealing, and so on, nor only with those persons who have not accepted the gospel ordinances. All transgressions must be cleansed, all weaknesses must be overcome, before a person can attain perfection and godhood. Accordingly the intent of this book is to stress the vital importance of each of us transforming his life through repentance and forgiveness. Future chapters will deal with the various aspects of this subject in greater detail.

Oliver Wendell Holmes said: "Many people die with their music still in them. Why is this so? Too often it is because they are always getting ready to live. Before they know it, time runs out." Tagore expressed a similar thought in these words: "I have spent my days stringing and unstringing my instrument, while the song I came to sing remains unsung."

My plea therefore is this: Let us get our instruments tightly strung and our melodies sweetly sung. Let us net die with our music still in us. Let us rather use this precious mortal probation to move confidently and gloriously upward toward the eternal life which God our Father gives to those who keep his commandments.

---
Notas:
[^1] Dante, Divine Comedy.
[^2] Melvin J. Ballard, "Three Degrees of Glory."
[^3] Joseph F. Smith, Gospel Doctrine (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1966), p. 475.
[^4] Melvin J. Ballard, "Three Degrees of Glory."
