Spencer W. Kimball, Miracle of Forgiveness ( 1969)

Chapter Two

No Unclean Thing Can Enter

—All men, everywhere, must repent, or they can in nowise inherit the kingdom of God, for no unclean thing can dwell there, or dwell in his presence— —Moses 6:57

AS WE DISCUSSED IN CHAPTER 1, THE ROAD OF LIFE is plainly marked according to the divine purpose, the map of the gospel of Jesus Christ is made available to the travelers, the destination of eternal life is clearly established. At that destination our Father waits hopefully, anxious to greet his returning children. Unfortunately many will not arrive.

The reason is forthrightly stated by Nephi-"... There cannot any unclean thing enter into the Kingdom of God ..." (1 Ne. 15:34.) And again, "... no unclean thing can dwell with God..." (1 Ne. 10:21.) To the prophets the term unclean in this context means what it means to God. To man the word may be relative in meaning-one minute specks of dirt does not make a white shirt or dress unclean, for example. But to God who is perfection, cleanliness means moral and personal cleanliness. Less than that is, in one degree or another, uncleanliness and hence cannot dwell with God.

Were it not for the blessed gifts of repentance and forgiveness this would be a hopeless situation for man, since no one except the Master has ever lived sinless on the earth. Naturally, there are all degrees of sin. At worst, the deep sinner is in the thrall of Satan. As Jesus put it, his "whole body [is] full of darkness." The Savior went on to express the impossibility of serving God, of being close to him, under these circumstances: No man can serve two masters: for either he will hate the one, and love the other; or else he will hold to the one, and despise the other. Ye cannot serve God and mammon. (Matt. 6:24.)

We Belong Where We Serve Sin, then, is service to Satan. It is a truism that men are "his whom they list to obey." Many scriptures affirm this statement. Jesus pointed to this truth when he said to the Jews, "Whosoever committeth sin is the servant of sin." (John 8:34.) Paul, writing to the Romans, said: Neither yield ye your members as instruments of unrighteousness unto sin: but yield yourselves unto God, as those that are alive from the dead, and your members as instruments of righteousness unto God. For sin shall not have dominion over you. Know ye not, that to whom ye yield yourselves servants to obey, his servants ye are to whom ye obey; whether of sin unto death, or of obedience unto righteousness? (Rom. 6:13, 15-16.)

Peter too emphasizes this bondage: For when they speak great swelling words of vanity, they allure through the lusts of the flesh, through much wantonness, those that were clean escaped from them who live in error. While they promise them liberty, they themselves are the servants of corruption: for of whom a man is overcome, of the same is he brought in bondage. (2 Pet. 2:18-19.)

It might be observed that the term lust is not necessarily limited in its connotation to sexual desire. It can imply any fleshly or worldly appetite or urge carried to excess. Satan will eagerly use other urges which suit his purpose, as well as sexual ones, in an effort to enslave men until, as Mormon put it: They are led about by Satan, even as chaff is driven before the wind, or as a vessel is tossed about upon the waves, without sail or anchor, or without anything wherewith to steer her; and even as she is, so are they. (Morm. 5:18.)

Reality of Satan In these days of sophistication and error men depersonalize not only God but the devil. Under this concept Satan is a myth, useful for keeping people straight in less enlightened days but outmoded in our educated age. Nothing is further from reality. Satan is very much a personal, individual spirit being, but without a mortal body. His desires to seal each of us his are no less ardent in wickedness than our Father's are in righteousness to attract us to his own eternal kingdom. A glimpse of Satan's tactics, as well as a terrifyingly accurate character sketch, is given us by Nephi in this prophecy respecting our own day: For behold, at that day shall he rage in the hearts of the children of men, and stir them up to anger against that which is good. And others will he pacify, and lull them away into carnal security, that they will say: All is well in Zion; yea, Zion prospereth, all is well-and thus the devil cheateth their souls, and leadeth them away carefully down to hell. And behold, others he flattereth away, and telleth them there is no hell; and he saith unto them: [ am no devil, for there is none-and thus he whispereth in their ears, until he grasps them with his awful chains, from whence there is no deliverance. Yea, they are grasped with death, and hell; and death, and hell, and the devil, and all that have been seized therewith must stand before the throne of God, and be judged according to their works, from whence they must go into the place prepared for them—. (2 Ne. 28:20-23.)

Yes, the devil is decidedly a person. He is also clever and trained. With thousands of years of experience behind him he has become superbly efficient and increasingly determined. Young people often feel and say, when governing hands are outstretched to them, "I can take care of myself." In fact even more experienced adults cannot afford to be sure of their resistance to Satan. Teenage girls or boys certainly need to be properly fortified and protected if they are to cope with the efficient, highly-trained, superior powers which are ever alert to opportunities for temptation.

It is a smart person, young or old, who will accept advice and counsel from experienced people who know the pitfalls, the crumbling walls, and the cracking dams which bring on destruction.

Old Sins, New Names Sins may be classified in many categories. They range from the simple improprieties and indiscretions to the shedding of innocent blood and the sin against the Holy Ghost. There are sins against ourselves, sins against our loved ones, sins against our fellowmen, sins against our communities, sins against the Church, sins against humanity. There are sins which are known to the world and others which are so carefully hidden that the sinner is the only mortal being who knows of the error.

Sometimes a new generation gives old sins new names-often designations which remove any implication of sin-and as one reads the long scriptural list of transgressions he does not recognize them by their modern names. But they are all there in the scriptures, and are all here and practiced in our own day.

Sometimes a person, not discovering in the scriptures the modern name for the particular sin or perversion of which he is guilty, eases his conscience by trying to convince himself that, after all, it is not too bad because it is not specifically prohibited. For instance, the word petting may never be found in the scriptures but the act of petting is repeatedly condemned. Likewise other sins and perversions may not be named in the scriptures by their modern appellations, but a careful scrutiny of the scriptures will reveal that all these things were done to their shame by the

Romans and the Corinthians and the Ephesians and the children of Israel and other peoples throughout the ages.

Then again, in interviewing young people and sometimes older ones, I find that many do not know the meaning of the names of the sins in the old scriptures. One young man said, "I know what adultery is, but what is this fornication and is it wrong?" A prominent social worker said that there were many young people who had grown to maturity physically yet had never been told in plain terms that sexual relations outside of marriage were deep sins. Accordingly, though it is an unpleasant discussion, this book will discuss such subjects in subsequent chapters.

Scriptural List of Sins Since the scriptural catalog is so complete, particularly in the writings of the early-day apostles, let us list the sins the scriptures describe. For example, Paul's prophecy to Timothy about the conditions of our own day has been fulfilled with depressing precision.

This know also, that in the last days perilous times shall come. For men shall be lovers of their own selves, covetous, boasters, proud, blasphemers, disobedient to parents, unthankful, unholy, Without natural affection, trucebreakers, false accusers, incontinent, fierce, despisers of those that are good, Traitors, heady, highminded, lovers of pleasures more than lovers of God; Having a form of godliness, but denying the power thereof: from such turn away. For of this sort are they which creep into houses, and lead captive silly women laden with sins, led away with divers lusts. (2 Tim. 3:1-6.)

Paul warned the Romans of similar sins: ... Uncleanness through the lusts of their own hearts, to dishonour their own bodies between themselves: Who ... worshipped and served the creature more than the Creator... ... God gave them up unto vile affections: for even their women did change the natural use into that which is against nature: And likewise also the men, leaving the natural use of the woman, burned in their lust one toward another; men with men working that which is unseemly. Backbiters, haters of God, despiteful, proud, boasters, inventors of evil things, disobedient to parents. ... Covenantbreakers, without natural affection, implacable, unmerciful: Who knowing the judgment of God, that they which commit such things are worthy of death, not only do the same, but have pleasure in them that do them. (Rom. 1:24-27, 30-32.)

A few more types of sin are mentioned in Paul's words to the Corinthians: ... Neither fornicators, nor idolaters, nor adulterers, nor effeminate, nor abusers of themselves with mankind, Nor thieves, nor covetous, nor drunkards, nor revilers, nor extortioners, shall inherit the kingdom of God. (1 Cor. 6:9-10.)

John the Revelator catalogues the transgressions which will merit the second death: But the fearful, and unbelieving, and the abominable, and murderers, and whoremongers, and sorcerers, and idolaters, and all liars, shall have their part in the lake which burneth with fire and brimstone: which is the second death. (Rev. 21:8.)

Sexual sin receives repeated condemnation in the scriptures. To get our definitions clear, let us realize that heterosexual intercourse is the sin of fornication when committed by the unmarried and is adultery when indulged in by married people outside of their marriage covenants. Both are grievous sins in God's sight. Wrote Paul: Know ye not that your bodies are the members of Christ? shall I then take the members of Christ, and make them members of an harlot? God forbid. What? know ye not that he which is joined to an harlot is one body? for two, saith he, shall be one flesh. Flee fornication. (1 Cor. 6:15-16, 18.)

In other epistles Paul makes additional emphasis and lists further sins. (See Rom. 1:24-32; 1 Cor. 3:16-17; 6:9-10; 10:8; Eph. 5:3-7; Gal. 5:19-21; Col. 3:5, 7-8; 1 Thess. 4:3-5.)

As we read the scriptures quoted or referred to above, we observe that they list virtually all the modern transgressions, though sometimes under ancient names. Let us review the lengthy list: Murder, adultery, theft, cursing, unholiness in masters, disobedience in servants, unfaithfulness, improvidence, hatred of God, disobedience to husbands, lack of natural affection, high-mindedness, flattery, lustfulness, infidelity, indiscretion, backbiting, whispering, lack of truth, striking, brawling, quarrelsomeness, unthankfulness, inhospitality, deceitfulness, irreverence, boasting, arrogance, pride, double-tongued talk, profanity, slander, corruptness, thievery, embezzlement, despoiling, covenant-breaking, incontinence, filthiness, ignobleness, filthy communications, impurity, foolishness, slothfulness, impatience, lack of understanding, unmercifulness, idolatry, blasphemy, denial of the Holy Ghost, Sabbath breaking, envy, jealousy, malice, maligning, vengefulness, implacability, bitterness, clamor, spite, defiling, reviling, evil speaking, provoking, greediness for filthy lucre, disobedience to parents, anger, hate, covetousness, bearing false witness, inventing evil things, fleshliness, heresy, presumptuousness, abomination, insatiable appetite, instability, ignorance, self-will, speaking evil of dignitaries, becoming a stumbling block; and in our modern language, masturbation, petting, fornication, adultery, homosexuality; and every sex perversion, every hidden and secret sin and all unholy and impure practices.

These are transgressions the Lord has condemned through his servants. Let no one rationalize his sins on the excuse that a particular sin of his is not mentioned nor forbidden in scripture.

Purity Essential to Eternal Life Whoever else suffers, every sin is against God, for it tends to frustrate the program and purposes of the Almighty.

Likewise, every sin is committed against the sinner, for it limits his progress and curtails his development.

In our journey toward eternal life, purity must be our constant aim. To walk and talk with God, to serve with God, to follow his example and become as a god, we must attain perfection. In his presence there can be no guile, no wickedness, no transgression. In numerous scriptures he has made it clear that all worldliness, evil and weakness must be dropped before we can ascend unto "the hill of the Lord." The Psalmist asked: Who shall ascend into the hill of the Lord? or who shall stand in his holy place?

And he answered the question: He that hath clean hands, and a pure heart; who hath not lifted up his soul unto vanity, nor sworn deceitfully. (Ps. 24:3-4.)

Writing of his vision of the celestial city, John said: And there shall in no wise enter into it any thing that defileth, neither whatsoever worketh abomination, or maketh a lie: but they which are written in the Lamb's book of life. (Rev. 21:27.)

After enumerating many sins, Paul told the Galatians: ... As I have also told you in time past, that they which do such things shall not inherit the kingdom of God. (Gal. 5:21.)

From the beginning God has left no doubt in the minds of his people that only the clean and pure will inherit his kingdom. To Adam he gave the commandment: Wherefore teach it unto your children, that all men, everywhere, must repent, or they can in nowise inherit the kingdom of God, for no unclean thing can dwell there, or dwell in his presence... (Moses 6:57.)

Numerous scriptures attest to the same principle that only the pure can dwell with God. (For example, see Mos. 2:37; Al. 21:37; Titus 1:15-16.) It can be no other way, for "... to be carnally-minded is death, and to be spiritually-minded is life eternal." (2 Ne. 9:39.) Jesus himself expressed the thought superbly in the Beatitudes-"Blessed are the pure in heart: for they shall see God." (Matt. 5:8.) Purity of heart means perfection; and the perfect will not only see God but will have friendship with him.

This concept that sin estranges one from God, and if not repented of will keep us from his presence, is not confined to the ancient prophets. The modern Prophet Joseph Smith similarly saw sin as a major obstacle to salvation and godhood. He said on one occasion: ... If you wish to go where God is, you must be like God, or possess the principles which God possesses, for if we are not drawing towards God in principle, we are going from him and drawing towards the devil. Yes, I am standing in the midst of all kinds of people. Search your hearts, and see if you are like God. I have searched mine, and feel to repent of all my sins. We have thieves among us, adulterers, liars, hypocrites. If God should speak from heaven, he would command you not to steal, not to commit adultery, not to covet, nor deceive, but be faithful over a few things. As far as we degenerate from God, we descend to the devil and lose knowledge, and without knowledge we cannot be saved, and while our hearts are filled with evil, and we are studying evil, there is no room in our hearts for good, or studying good— [^1]

Need Is Discipline When I was a young boy I took care of a Jersey bull which became vicious and charged me several times. All I needed to do to halt his attack was to jerk the chain attached to the ring in his nose and he became docile and manageable. As he became less tractable, I added a long bamboo pole fastened to the ring in his nose. I now had him totally under subjection, for I could hold him back or lead him forward. He was under my control.

So does sin, as a ring in the nose, have the sinner under subjection. So is sin like handcuffs on the wrists, a ring in the nose, and slave bands around the neck.

But to carry the analogy further, my bull, had he been human, might have disciplined himself. Then with no ring in the nose he would have controlled his own actions. So it is with human sin-self-control, self-mastery, can be substituted for the dominion of sin, and the sinner can move by his own agency toward God rather than under the control of sin toward Satan.

The term may not be popular in this age of license and lack of restraint, but what is needed is self-discipline. Can we imagine the angels or the gods not being in control of themselves in any particular? The question is of course ludicrous. Equally ridiculous is the idea that any of us can rise to the eternal heights without disciplining ourselves and being disciplined by the circumstances of life. The purity and perfection we seek is unattainable without this subjection of unworthy, ungodlike urges and the corresponding encouragement of their opposites. We certainly cannot expect the rules to be easier for us than for the Son of God, of whom it is recorded: Though he were a Son, yet learned he obedience by the things which he suffered; And being made perfect, he became the author of eternal salvation unto all them that obey him. (Heb. 5:8-9.)

"Unto all them that obey him"-these are the operative words for us. And obedience always involves self-discipline. So does repentance, which is the way to annul the effects of a previous lack of obedience in one's life. The dividends from both obedience and repentance amply repay the effort.

Repentance the Only Way Repentance is ever the key to a better, happier life. All of us need it, whether our sins are the grievous ones or the more commonplace. Through repentance we perceive more clearly the contrasts of Paul's statement: "For the wages of sin is death; but the gift of God is eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord." (Rom. 6:23.) Through repentance we may be sanctified from all sin, and enjoy the words of eternal life in this world, and eternal life in the world to come, even immortal glory." (Moses 6:59.)

And there is no other way.

Joseph Smith, Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, selected and arranged by Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1938), pp. 216-217.

---
Notas:
[^1] Dante, Divine Comedy.
