Spencer W. Kimball, Miracle of Forgiveness ( 1969)

Chapter Three

None Righteous, No, Not One

The greatest of all faults is to be conscious of none. —Carlyle

WHEN WE HEAR SERMONS DECRYING TRANSGRESSION and urging the need for repentance, most of us are peculiarly apt at applying the point exclusively to others. Someone said that we spend too much time confessing other people's sins. Apparently it is much easier to see those sins than our own, and to walk complacently through life without acknowledging our own need to mend our ways.

All Are Sinners Yet everyone sins in some degree, and hence no one may properly call others to repentance without including himself. Thus we read in John's writings: If we say that we have no sin, we deceive ourselves, and the truth is not in us. If we say that we have not sinned, we make him a liar, and his word is not in us. (1 John 1:8, 10.)

Likewise the Psalmist sang: The fool hath said in his heart, There is no God. They are corrupt, they have done abominable works, there is none that doeth good. The Lord looked down from heaven upon the children of men, to see if there were any that did understand and seek God. They are all gone aside — there is none that doeth good, no, not one. (Ps. 14:1-3.)

Other scriptures have a similar emphasis: For there is not a just man upon the earth, that doeth good, and sinneth not. (Eccles. 7:20.) Who can say, I have made my heart clean, I am pure from sin? (Prov. 20:9.) Wherefore, as by one man sin entered into the world, and death by sin; and so death passed upon all men, for that all have sinned. (Rom. 5:12.)

The Prophet Joseph Smith in his prayer of dedication of the Kirtland Temple implored: "O Jehovah, have mercy upon this people, and as all men sin forgive the transgressions of thy people, and let them be blotted out forever." (D&C 109:34.)

It was because of the universality of sin, the seriousness of sin, and the nearness of the end of the world, that the Lord revealed to his latter-day Prophet, Joseph Smith, the instruction, "Say nothing but repentance unto this generation." (D&C 6:9.)

One of the oft-told stories about the late President J. Golden Kimball concerns his witticism to the effect that "the Brethren cannot cut me off the Church I repent too often." Here is a great lesson, if it is correctly interpreted. There is never a day in any man's life when repentance is not essential to his well-being and eternal progress.

But when most of us think of repentance we tend to narrow our vision and view it as good only for our husbands, our wives, our parents, our children, our neighbors, our friends, the world anyone and everyone except ourselves. Similarly there is a prevalent, perhaps subconscious, feeling that the Lord designed repentance only for those who commit murder or adultery or theft or other heinous crimes. This is of course not so. If we are humble and desirous of living the gospel we will come to think of repentance as applying to everything we do in life, whether it be spiritual or temporal in nature. Repentance is for every soul who has not yet reached perfection.

Church Members Need Repentance Another misconception some Latter-day Saints have is that repentance is only for the person who does not belong to the Church of Jesus Christ. This notion ignores not only gospel doctrine and common sense, but also specific revelations to the Prophet Joseph Smith in which the Lord took more than one occasion to chastise the saints and call them to repentance for their wrong-doings. In Kirtland, for example, he spoke out against offenders within the Church and told them pointedly: Behold, I, the Lord, am not well pleased with many who are in the Church at Kirtland; For they do not forsake their sins, and their wicked ways, the pride of their hearts, and their covetousness, and all their detestable things, and observe the words of wisdom and eternal life which I have given unto them. Verily I say unto you, that I, the Lord, will chasten them and will do whatsoever I list, if they do not repent and observe all things whatsoever I have said unto them. (D&C 98:19-21.)

A few months later the Lord mentioned specific sins of which the Missouri saints had been guilty: Behold, I say unto you, there were jarrings, and contentions, and envyings, and strifes, and lustful and covetous desires among them; therefore by these things they polluted their inheritances. (D&C 101:6.)

Even those in the school of the prophets needed chastisement and repentance: Nevertheless ... contentions arose in the school of the prophets; which was very grievous unto me, saith your Lord; therefore I sent them forth to be chastened. (D&C 95:10.)

And Emma, the Prophet's wife, by revelation was called to repentance: And again, verily I say, let mine handmaid forgive my servant Joseph his trespasses; and then shall she be forgiven her trespasses ... (D&C 132:56.)

Even Prophets Not Perfect Even the Prophet Joseph Smith, great as he was, was not perfect and the Lord had to call him to repentance: "And now I command you, my servant Joseph, to repent and walk more uprightly before me, and to yield to the persuasions of men no more." (D&C 5:21.)

The young Prophet needed repentance as all men do. He was honest in his confessions of weakness. In his teens when he had been lonely in the intense persecution following his glorious vision, he was left to all kinds of temptations. He says: ... I frequently fell into many foolish errors, and displayed the weakness of youth, and the foibles of human nature; which, I am sorry to say, led me into divers temptations, offensive in the sight of God. (Joseph Smith 2:28.)

While Joseph was human and therefore fallible, he was free from major sins, and he hastens to make clear: ... In making this confession, no one need suppose me guilty of any great or malignant sins. A disposition to commit such was never in my nature. But I was guilty of levity, and sometimes associated with jovial company, etc., not consistent with that character which ought to be maintained by one who was called of God as I had been— (Joseph Smith 2:28.)

There are enemies to God's cause who have tried to make much of this statement, but good men recognize it as a simple and honest confession which is consistent with the character of a great though still imperfect man.

Important to our consideration is the Prophet's acknowledgment of his errors, and his repentance and his prayers for forgiveness: "In consequence of these things," he wrote, "I often felt condemned for my weakness and imperfections." And on that special night, as probably numerous times before, he knelt at his bed. As he described it: "... I betook myself to prayer and supplication to Almighty God for forgiveness of all my sins and follies, and also for a manifestation to me, that I might know of my state and standing before him ..." (Joseph Smith 2:29.)

Every person is subject to error if he is not always watchful, for victory over Satan is attained only by constant vigilance. In the Doctrine and Covenants the Lord makes clear that no man is immune from temptations, and not even a prophet may trifle with sacred things. He warns: For although a man may have many revelations, and have power to do many mighty works, yet if he boasts in his own strength, and sets at naught the counsels of God, and follows after the dictates of his own will and carnal desires, he must fall and incur the vengeance of a just God upon him. (D&C 3:4.)

The reprimand continues: Behold, thou art Joseph, and thou wast chosen to do the work of the Lord, but because of transgression, if thou art not aware thou wilt fall. (D&C 3:9.)

Remember that the transgression of which the young Prophet was guilty was not murder, nor sexual sins, nor cursing, nor any of the acts usually called sins. He had but yielded to the powerful persuasion of his friend and benefactor, Martin Harris, to trust in the hands of that man the English translation of the sacred Book of Mormon writings, which became lost through this error.

But remember, God is merciful; therefore, repent of that which thou hast done which is contrary to the commandment which I gave you, and thou art still chosen, and art again called to the work; Except thou do this, thou shalt be delivered up and become as other men, and have no more gift. (D&C 3:10-11.)

The Lord's chastisement of Joseph Smith recalls that administered to another prophet, the great Moses. Because of a momentary sin, committed under stress (see Numbers 20:9-12), Moses was deprived of the great opportunity and blessing of leading the children of Israel into the promised land after their forty years of wandering in the wilderness.

If even the Lord's chosen prophets are not immune from the need to repent, what of the rest of us? Clearly, repentance is for all Latter-day Saints as well as others.

Sins Among the Saints It is my pleasure to go often into the homes of the leaders in the missions, wards, and stakes of Zion. I am deeply appreciative of the fact that most of our people are trying to live the commandments of the Lord.

But I also find parents who have lost the natural affection for their children. I find children who disown their parents and evade responsibility for them in their parents' old age. I find husbands who desert their wives and their children, and who use almost every pretext to justify such action. I find wives who are demanding, unworthy, quarrelsome, uncooperative, and worldly, and who thereby provoke their husbands to similar responses. I find husbands and wives, living under the same roof, who are selfish, unbending, and unforgiving, and who with their misunderstandings have hardened their hearts and poisoned their minds and the minds of their children.

I find those who gossip and hear false witness against their neighbors. I find brethren who hale each other into the courts on trivial matters which could have been settled by themselves outside of legal channels. I find blood brothers and sisters who fight over inheritances and bring each other into the courts of the land, dragging before the public the most intimate and personal family secrets, leaving nothing sacred, showing little regard for each other but only for what financial gain they might acquire by such selfish action.

In an eastern city I saw one family split wide apart-half of the brothers and sisters on one side, and half on the other in a most disgraceful feud. At the funeral services half of them sat on one side of the aisle and half on the other. They would not speak to each other. The property involved was worth only a few thousand dollars, and yet because of it blood brothers and sisters became avowed enemies.

I have seen people in wards and branches who impugn the motives of the authorities and of each other and make them an "offender for a word," for things which have been said or thought or were imagined to have been. I have seen branches broken wide apart by people who say unkind things about each other, who brought into their meetings the spirit of Lucifer instead of the Spirit of Christ.

There are those who accept no responsibility and give no time to Church service, but who are constant critics of those who do. There are some who are guilty, and worldly, and give lip service only. There are those who hypocritically make pretensions and fail to live up to them, those who are intolerant and prejudiced, those who are unkind to their families.

For these and other unmentioned eccentricities, sins and transgressions, all stand in need of repentance. Following chapters will say more about the sins which threaten us as individuals, as a church, and as a society. After that we will consider the means of repentance and the miracle of forgiveness which God performs on those who truly repent.
