Spencer W. Kimball, Miracle of Forgiveness ( 1969)

Chapter Four

These Things Doth the Lord Hate

These six things doth, the Lord hate: yea, seven are an abomination unto him: A proud look, a lying tongue, and hands that shed innocent blood, An heart that deviseth wicked imaginations, feet that be swift in running to mischief, A false witness that speaketh lies, and he that soweth discord among brethren. —Proverbs 6:16-19

THE CURSE OF THE EARTH IS SIN. IT COVERS EVERY AREA. It takes on numerous forms and dresses itself in many kinds of apparel, depending on factors such as the stratum of society in which it is operating. But whether man calls it convention or business, or uses any other euphemism, if it offends God's law it is sin.

Some would categorize as minor the sins discussed in this chapter, but when not repented of they will still keep us from eternal life. Perhaps most of us have our share of them. Here they are treated only briefly and with no thought that the list is exhaustive.

Idolatry From Mount Sinai came God's unalterable command: Thou shalt have no other Gods before me. Thou shalt not make unto thee any graven image, or any likeness of any thing that is in heaven above, or that is in the earth beneath, or that is in the water under the earth:

Thou shalt not bow down thyself to them, nor serve them (Ex. 20:3-5. Italics added.)

This proscription embraces not only images in the form of God or of man, but the likeness of anything which is earthly in any form. It would include both tangible and less tangible things, and everything which entices a person away from duty, loyalty, and love for and service to God.

Idolatry is among the most serious of sins. There are unfortunately millions today who prostrate themselves before images of gold and silver and wood and stone and clay. But the idolatry we are most concerned with here is the conscious worshiping of still other gods. Some are of metal and plush and chrome, of wood and stone and fabrics. They are not in the image of God or of man, but are developed to give man comfort and enjoyment, to satisfy his wants, ambitions, passions and desires. Some are in no physical form at all, but are intangible.

Many seem to "worship" on an elemental basis they live to eat and drink. They are like the children of Israel who, though offered the great freedoms associated with national development under God's personal guidance, could not lift their minds above the "flesh pots of Egypt." They cannot seem to rise above satisfying their bodily appetites. As Paul put it, their "God is their belly." (Phil. 3:19.)

Modern idols or false gods can take such forms as clothes, homes, businesses, machines, automobiles, pleasure boats, and numerous other material deflectors from the path to godhood. What difference does it make that the item concerned is not shaped like an idol? Brigham Young said: "I would as soon see a man worshipping a little god made of brass or of wood as to see him worshipping his property. [^1]

Intangible things make just as ready gods. Degrees and letters and titles can become idols. Many young men decide to attend college when they should be on missions first. The degree, and the wealth and the security which come through it, appear so desirable that the mission takes second place. Some neglect Church service through their college years, feeling to give preference to the secular training and ignoring the spiritual covenants they have made.

Many people build and furnish a home and buy the automobile first-and then find they "cannot afford" to pay tithing. Whom do they worship? Certainly not the Lord of heaven and earth, for we serve whom we love and give first consideration to the object of our affection and desires. Young married couples who postpone parenthood until their degrees are attained might be shocked if their expressed preference were labeled idolatry. Their rationalization gives them degrees at the expense of children. Is it a justifiable exchange? Whom do they love and worship-themselves or God? Other couples, recognizing that life is not intended primarily for comforts, ease, and luxuries, complete their educations while they move forward with full lives, having their children and giving Church and community service.

Many worship the hunt, the fishing trip, the vacation, the weekend picnics and outings. Others have as their idols the games of sport, baseball, football, the bullfight, or golf. These pursuits more often than not interfere with the worship of the Lord and with giving service to the building up of the kingdom of God. To the participants this emphasis may not seem serious, yet it indicates where their allegiance and loyalty are.

Still another image men worship is that of power and prestige. Many will trample underfoot the spiritual and often the ethical values in their climb to success. These gods of power, wealth, and influence are most demanding and are quite as real as the golden calves of the children of Israel in the wilderness.

Rebellion A common sin is rebellion against God. This manifests itself in wilful refusal to obey God's commandments, in rejection of the counsel of his servants, in opposition to the work of the kingdom-that is, in the deliberate word or act of disobedience to God's will.

A classic example of rebellion against God is Judas Iscariot, who actually betrayed his Lord to murderers. Another example is King Saul. Strong and capable, originally filled with high potential, this chosen young man became proud and rebellious. We find the Prophet Samuel's rebuke to the self-centered, egotistical ruler: ... When thou wast little in thine own sight, wast thou not made the head of the tribes of Israel, and the Lord anointed thee king over Israel? Wherefore then didst thou not obey the voice of the Lord? ... Hath the Lord as great delight in burnt offerings and sacrifices, as in obeying the voice of the Lord? Behold, to obey is better than sacrifice, and to hearken than the fat of rams. For rebellion is as the sin of witchcraft, and stubbornness is as iniquity and idolatry. Thou hast rejected the word of the Lord... (1 Sam. 15:17, 19, 22-23.)

Of the Book of Mormon people, who were rapidly sinking in wickedness, it is recorded: Now they did not sin ignorantly, for they knew the will of God concerning them, for it had been taught unto them; therefore they did wilfully rebel against God. (3 Ne. 6:18.)

Latter-day Saints are similarly blessed with light and knowledge. They are equally condemned of the Lord if they rebel against the revealed truths of the gospel.

Among Church members rebellion frequently takes the form of criticism of authorities and leaders. They "speak evil of dignities" and "of the things that they understand not," says Peter. (2 Pet. 2:10, 12.) They complain of the programs, belittle the constituted authorities, and generally set themselves up as judges. After a while they absent themselves from Church meetings for imagined offenses, and fail to pay their tithes and meet their other Church obligations. In a word, they have the spirit of apostasy, which is almost always the harvest of the seeds of criticism. Unless they repent they shrivel in the destructive element they have themselves prepared, poison themselves with mixtures of their own concocting; or as Peter puts it, they "perish in their own corruption." Not only do they suffer but their posterity also. In modern times the Lord has described their fate in these words: Cursed are all those that shall lift up the heel against mine anointed, saith the Lord, and cry they have sinned when they have not sinned before me, saith the Lord. But those who cry transgression do it because they are the servants of sin, and are the children of disobedience themselves. And those who swear falsely against my servants. Their basket shall not be full, their houses and their barns shall perish, and they themselves shall be despised by those that flattered them. They shall not have right to the priesthood, nor their posterity after them from generation to generation. (D&C 121:16-18, 20-21.)

Such people fail to bear testimony to their descendants, destroy faith within their own homes, and actually deny the "right to the priesthood" to succeeding generations who might otherwise have been faithful in all things.

One is reminded of how the Lord showed his displeasure at rebellion against his servant Moses when he upbraided Aaron and Miriam and afflicted the latter with leprosy. (See Num. 12:1-10.) Moses was the Lord's anointed. To criticize and complain against the servant was rebellion against the Master.

One would wish that the rebellious would stop and ask themselves questions such as: "Do my philosophy and my critical efforts bring me closer to Christ, to God, to virtue, to prayer, to exaltation?" "What have I gained by my criticism peace, joy and growth, or merely satisfaction to my pride?" "What have I gained by my sin other than immediate carnal satisfaction?"

In cases where the rebellious exercise repentance, that repentance may be sparked in various ways. Some men come to recognize their sins from introspection while others must be brought to their knees by outside forces. Many, having realized their transgressions, begin their repentance in secrecy. Others must be apprehended and chastised and punished before they begin their transformation. Some even need to be disciplined by forced inactivity, dis-fellowshipping, or even excommunication before they realize their plight and the need to transform their lives. None of us should resent being reminded of our responsibilities and being called to repent of our sins. The Lord may choose to chasten us in this way or some other, but it is all for our own good. ... My son, despise not thou the chastening of the Lord, nor faint when thou art rebuked of him: For whom the Lord loveth he chasteneth, and scourgeth every son whom he receiveth. If ye endure chastening, God dealeth with you as with sons; for what son is he whom the father chasteneth not? (Heb. 12:5-7.)

One of the Church authorities spoke to a certain stake conference kindly and plainly but in strong terms calling attention to some of the weaknesses common to the people of that community. Commenting on the talk someone made the remark: "I suppose he is the only one who will reach the heights. He will be mighty lonesome." The person could appropriately have said: "That was a just criticism and I will move forward to correct my ways." Instead he manifested the spirit of rebellion against legitimate correction. No doubt he is one of those who would say, if a scriptural rebuke were referred to: "But that was Christ or the old prophets; anyone would accept rebuke or criticism from them." This overlooks the Lord's statement that what is given the people "... whether by mine own voice or by the voice of my servants, it is the same." (D&C 1:38.)

A prevalent form of rebellion is the "higher criticism" which is the delight of those Church members who become proud of their intellectual powers. Reveling in their supposed superiority they argue back and forth, analyze with their unaided intellect what can only be discerned by the eye of faith, and challenge and debunk such Church doctrines and policies as do not pass their critical examination. In all this they undermine the faith of those less qualified in knowledge and logic, sometimes apparently gaining pleasure from this result. But the Lord's word to such people is still what it was two thousand years ago: ... Except ye be converted, and become as little children, ye shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven. Woe unto the world because of offenses! for it must needs be that offenses come; but woe to that man by whom the offence cometh! (Matt. 18:3, 7.)

One punishment for the rebel against truth is that he loses the power to perceive the truth. Hear these words of Jacob: But behold, the Jews were a stiffnecked people; and they despised the words of plainness, and killed the prophets, and sought for things that they could not understand. Wherefore, because of their blindness, which blindness came by looking beyond the mark, they must needs fall—. (Jac. 4:14. Italics added.)

Traitors What shall be said of those members who press so hard and publicize their criticisms of the Church that they give encouragement to its enemies and embarrass its leadership and the other faithful members? Being "false to an obligation or duty" is one definition of a traitor and surely baptized members have an obligation to support the Church and further its ends.

What could be more despicable than a traitor to a friend, a church, a nation, or a cause? Paul thought this defection ugly enough that he included it in his prophecy of latter-day sins. (See 2 Tim. 3:4.) The traitor often works in the dark, deceitfully. The quislings, the Benedict Arnolds, the John C. Bennetts, the William Laws and the Francis and Chauncey Higbees does anyone love or admire them? We are not without traitors in the Church today, those who would destroy that which is good to win their own selfish earthly rewards or to accomplish their base schemes.

Sabbath-Breaking We have become a world of Sabbath breakers. On the Sabbath the lakes are full of boats, the beaches are crowded, the shows have their best attendance, the golf links are dotted with players. The Sabbath is the preferred day for rodeos, conventions, family picnics; and ball games are played on the sacred day. Even the "stranger that is within thy gates" is pressed into service. "Business as usual" is the slogan for many, and our holy day has become a holiday. And because so many people treat the day as a holiday numerous others cater to the wants of the fun-lovers and money-makers.

Sabbath-breakers too are those who buy commodities or entertainment on the Sabbath, thus encouraging pleasure palaces and business establishments to remain open-which they otherwise would not do. If we buy, sell, trade or support such on the Lord's day we are rebellious as the children of Israel, the dire consequences of whose transgressions against this and other commandments should be a permanent warning to us all.

Although Israel's swift and severe punishment for infractions is not exacted today, this does not lessen the seriousness of the offense to the Lord for violating his day. The importance of honoring the Sabbath was reiterated in our day to the Prophet Joseph Smith in revelation from the Lord: And that thou mayest more fully keep thyself unspotted from the world, thou shalt go to the house of prayer and offer up thy sacraments upon my holy day.

It should be noted that this is a "thou shalt" command. For verily this is a day appointed unto you to rest from your labors, and to pay thy devotions unto the Most High; Nevertheless thy vows shall be offered up in righteousness on all days and at all times; But remember that on this, the Lord's day, thou shalt offer thine oblations and thy sacraments unto the Most High, confessing thy sins unto thy brethren, and before the Lord. And on this day thou shalt do none other thing, only let thy food be prepared with singleness of heart that thy fasting may be perfect, or, in other words, that thy joy may be full. (D&C 59:9-13.)

Note here that while the Lord lays stress upon the importance of the Sabbath day and its proper observance, he requires of his people "righteousness on all days and at all times."

Lovers of Money The possession of riches does not necessarily constitute sin. But sin may arise in the acquisition and use of wealth. Paul implied this distinction in his statement to Timothy: For the love of money is the root of all evil: which while some coveted after, they have erred from the faith, and pierced themselves through with many sorrows. But thou, O man of God, flee these things; and follow after righteousness, godliness, faith, love, patience, meekness. (1 Tim. 6:10-11.)

Book of Mormon history eloquently reveals the corrosive effect of the passion for wealth. Each time the people became righteous, they prospered. Then followed the transition from prosperity to wealth, wealth to the love of wealth, then to the love of ease and luxury. They moved then into spiritual inactivity, then to gross sin and wickedness, then on to near destruction by their enemies. This caused them to repent, which brought back righteousness, then prosperity, and the cycle had begun all over again.

Had the people used their wealth for good purposes they could have enjoyed a continuing prosperity. But they seemed unable for a sustained period to be simultaneously wealthy and righteous. For a limited time some people can "hold the line," but they deteriorate spiritually when money is abundant. The writer of Proverbs says: A faithful man shall abound with blessings: but he that maketh haste to be rich shall not be innocent. (Prov. 28:20.)

John warned against love for worldly things: Love not the world, neither the things that are in the world. If any man love the world, the love of the Father is not in him. For all that is in the world, the lust of the flesh, and the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life, is not of the Father, but is of the world. And the world passeth away, and the lust thereof: but he that doeth the will of God abideth for ever. (1 John 2:15-17.)

President Brigham Young expressed his fears that the riches of the world would canker the souls of his people in our own dispensation, when he said: Take courage, brethren ... plow your land and sow wheat, plant your potatoes. It is our duty to preach the Gospel, gather Israel, pay our tithing and build temples. The worst fear I have about this people is that they will get rich in this country, forget God and His people, wax fat, and kick themselves out of the Church and go to hell. This people will stand mobbing, robbing, poverty, and all manner of persecution and be true. But my greatest fear is that they cannot stand wealth.

Brigham Young also warned that Latter-day Saints who turn their full attention to money-making soon become cold in their feelings toward the ordinances of the house of God. They neglect their prayers, become unwilling to pay any donations; the law of tithing becomes too great a test for them; and they finally forsake their God. They fall under Jacob's stricture: But wo unto the rich, who are rich as to the things of the world. For because they are rich they despise the poor, and they persecute the meek, and their hearts are upon their treasures; wherefore, their treasure is their God. And behold, their treasure shall perish with them also. (2 Ne. 9:30.)

The Lord required the rich young ruler to divest himself of his wealth. (Luke 18:22.) Undoubtedly he read the thoughts of the rich young man and was able to discern that his treasure was his god. The young man seemed willing to do almost anything for the opportunity to serve the Lord and to be exalted-except to give up his riches.

The gracious Creator assures us that the earth and all good things in it are for man.

... The fulness of the earth is yours, the beasts of the field and the fowls of the air, and that which climbeth upon the trees and walketh upon the earth; yea, and the herb, and the good things which come of the earth... Yea, all things which come of the earth... are made for the benefit and the use of man... And it pleaseth God that he hath given all these things unto man; for unto this end were they made to be used, with judgment, not to excess, neither by extortion. (D&C 59:16-18, 20)

How gracious and kind of our loving and provident Lord! Clearly he does not delight in poverty or suffering, in want or deprivation. He would want all men to enjoy everything created, if man could only do so without the loss of dependence and worthiness, if he could only prevent himself from straying from the Creator to the creature.

Stealing The sin of stealing is very much with us in modern America. What an indictment of a people who generally live in plenty! The scripture reads: Men do not despise a thief, if he steal to satisfy his soul when he is hungry; But if he be found, he shall restore sevenfold; he shall give all the substance of his house. (Prov. 6:30-31.)

In some Eastern countries, where poverty is the rule and suffering and starvation a common spectre, some theft and dishonesty can be understood though not reconciled or excused-but in the Western world where most people are getting the necessities of life and even some luxuries, there is no justification for stealing. Yet robberies are reported constantly in our large cities and thievery is common. Homes must be bolted, cars locked, bicycles chained to trees. Thieves resort to extortion, blackmail, and even kidnapping.

Can anyone truthfully claim that he did not know stealing was wrong? Possessiveness seems to be a basic impulse in humans, but while a child may want other children's toys, he soon comes to know that they are not his. Small thefts grow into larger ones unless the desire is curbed. Parents who "cover up" for their children, excuse them and pay for their misappropriations, miss an important opportunity to teach a lesson and thereby do untold damage to their offspring. If the child is required to return the coin or the pencil or the fruit with an appropriate apology, it is likely that his tendencies to steal will be curbed. But if he is lionized and made a little hero, if his misappropriation is made a joke, he is likely to continue in ever-increasing thefts. Most burglars and hold-up men would not have become so if they had been disciplined early.

The thief generally finds his loot not worth the cost when he is caught and suffers punishment. A man who defrauded his employer's firm of several thousands of dollars and fled, and was hunted almost all the way around the world, finally returned to his home and surrendered himself to the authorities. He was almost penniless. He could not account for his actions, other than that he was too weak to resist the temptation. "No amount of money is worth it, whether it be $10,000 or $10 million," he said. "Almost every hour of every day during the past months I have wanted to stop running," he told the authorities. "You cannot realize the agony of running and running and running and always knowing there is no stopping ... The price I pay is heavy-all I got out of it wasn't worth the worry and fear, and the humiliation my family has suffered."

This urge to take another's property is exhibited in many forms-theft, bribery, driving hard bargains, evasion of income taxes, extortion, covetousness, greedy court actions, misrepresentations which seek to take something for nothing, and so on. Anyone who practices any such form of dishonesty needs to repent, develop a clear conscience, and be free from fetters, chains, worries, and fears.

Unholy Masters Paul speaks of "unholy masters" and surely has reference to those who would defraud servants or employees and would not properly compensate for labors done or goods furnished. He likely has in mind men who are unkind, demanding and inconsiderate of their subordinates.

And, ye masters, do the same things unto them, forbearing threatening: knowing that your Master also is in heaven; neither is there respect of persons with him. (Eph. 6:9.)

In short, the employer should treat his employees according to the golden rule, remembering that there is a Master in heaven who judges both employer and employee. Paul likewise enjoined a lofty standard upon employees: Servants, be obedient to them that are your masters according to the flesh in singleness of your heart, as unto Christ; Not with eyeservice, as menpleasers; but as the servants of Christ, ... With good will doing service, as to the Lord, and not to men... (Eph. 6:5-6.)

We may take this to mean, in modern terms, that the servant and employee should consistently give honest service, full and complete, and do for his employer what he would want an employee to do for him if he himself were the employer. Any other course calls for repentance.

Improvidence In close relationship to the matters of employers and employees is the sin of being improvident. Man has the moral obligation and responsibility not only of providing for himself and being a profitable servant but also of caring and providing for his own family. "The sluggard will not plow," says Proverbs, "by reason of the cold; therefore shall he beg in harvest, and have nothing." (Prov. 20:4.) Likewise Paul: "But if any provide not for his own, and specially for those of his own house, he hath denied the faith, and is worse than an infidel." (1 Tim. 5:8.)

False Witness The sin of false witness is committed in many ways. Guilty ones are gossipers and bearers of tales, whisperers, those destitute of truth, liars, quarrelers, deceitful persons. Sometimes these weaknesses are thought of as minor, yet they break hearts, destroy reputations and wreck lives. To such offenders, Paul said: Let all bitterness, and wrath, and anger, and clamour, and evil speaking, be put away from you, with all malice: And be ye kind one to another, tenderhearted, forgiving one another, even as God for Christ's sake hath forgiven you. (Eph. 4:31-32.)

Included in this group of sinners are those mentioned by Paul: flatterers, double-tongued, slanderers, filthy communicators, those who are envious, spiteful, jealous, bitter, biters and devourers of each other, defilers, revilers, evil speakers, provokers, haters, inventors of evil things, stumbling blocks.

Of course, no one sees himself in this category. It is always the other person who gossips, invents tales, slanders, and is double-tongued. But are not we all guilty to some degree and do not all of us need introspection, self-analysis and then repentance?

People often bear false witness with malicious intent. For instance, election candidates sometimes arrange for the "whisperer," the clever one who makes no formal accusation but by innuendos and half-truths and subtle suggestion quietly undermines an unsuspecting opponent. Often they come on the eve of the election, too late to be answered. Such so-called "mud-slinging" should be beneath the dignity of honorable men. Base emotions like jealousy, covetousness, envy, and vengefulness sometimes prompt the same kind of false accusations in everyday life, which are left to fester while the victim is ignorant of the attack.

Another aspect of false witness is the "debate"-not the formal debate in high school or college forensics but that of the egotist who feels compelled to debate and argue every situation. In politics or religion or any other field he will fight hard and long to gain a point regardless of where truth stands. There are those who argue even the wrong side in order to win the debate, or for a fee.

In the Church we have teachers who develop in a class an argument which they call discussion and, on pretense of getting participation, damage the faith of class members. I heard of one teacher who proposed to his class during a lesson on the divinity of Christ's mission that he, the teacher, would take the position that Christ was an impostor and his work a fake. The class was to defend Christ's divinity. Being so well prepared and with his class taken unawares, the teacher proved by logic that Christ was a fraud or at least, when the class was dismissed some vital questions were unanswered and the issue was still undetermined. The man loved to debate, to argue. But his witness was false.

With the false witness can be classed the flatterer, the insincere, the liar, the gossip. Of such Isaiah wrote "Wo unto them that call evil good, and good evil, that put darkness for light, and light for darkness, that put bitter for sweet, and sweet for bitter!" (2 Ne. 15:20.) Such things the Lord hates.

These six things doth the Lord hate: yea, seven are an abomination unto him: A proud look, a lying tongue, and hands that shed innocent blood, An heart that deviseth wicked imaginations, feet that be swift in running to mischief, A false witness that speaketh lies, and he that soweth discord among brethren. (Prov. 6:16-19.)

One is reminded of what Diogenes said in answer to the question, "What animal has the most disastrous bite?" He replied: "Of tame animals, the flatterer, of wild ones, the slanderer."

Lies and gossip which harm reputations are scattered about by the four winds like the seeds of a ripe dandelion held aloft by a child. Neither the seeds nor the gossip can ever be gathered in. The degree and extent of the harm done by the gossip is inestimable.

Vulgarity Paul called it filthy communication. In this category of sin could also be foolish talking, profanity, taking the name of the Lord in vain, lewd talking. Would this not also include pornography with its viciousness, its deliberate purpose of defiling youth?

As regards profanity or taking the name of the Lord in vain, the names of Deity should be used only in prayer or in dignified address or speech, and certainly never in needless or careless utterance. To use the usual swear words is bad enough-they brand one as crude and careless but to use profanely any of the names of our Lord is absolutely inexcusable. Should one ever slip in this way he should repent in "sackcloth and ashes," the same as if he had committed any one of the other serious sins. Closely linked to this cursing is being ungodly, irreverent, profane, idolatrous or blasphemous, denying the Holy Ghost, "speaking evil of dignities."

In the category of taking the name of the Lord in vain, we might include the use by unauthorized persons of the name of Deity in performing ordinances. In modern scripture the Lord warned: Wherefore, let all men beware how they take my name in their lips— For behold, verily I say, that many there be who are under this condemnation, who use the name of the Lord, and use it in vain, having not authority. (D&C 63:61-62.)

Presumptuous and blasphemous are they who purport to baptize, bless, marry, or perform other sacraments in the name of the Lord while in fact lacking his specific authorization. And no one can obtain God's authority from reading the Bible or from just a desire to serve the Lord, no matter how pure his motives.

Word of Wisdom Violation Drinking is a curse of our day as Paul's writings indicate it was in his day. To drink the forbidden alcoholic beverages is a sin for us who have made covenants with God and have been commanded to abstain. No one will ever become an alcoholic who never breaks the law of the Lord concerning drinking.

As in the days of Noah, we are "eating and drinking, marrying and giving in marriage." (Matt. 24:38. ) Our numerous dinners and banquets are often spiced with liquor, on which fellowship and entertaining depend so completely in some circles. Liquor is common in train and plane. To many, the cocktail hour is indispensable. Service clubs, business organizations, and government budgets provide for it.

What an indictment when social life in courts and banquet halls and embassies is centered around alcohol, and when deals and even treaties are consummated over a liquor serving! How barren the host who can entertain only by serving liquor to guests, and how desolate the guest who cannot have a good time without liquor!

Drinking curses all whom it touches-the seller and the buyer and the consumer. It brings deprivation and sorrow to numerous innocent ones. It is associated with graft, immorality, gambling, fraud, gangsterism, and most other vices. In its wake come wasted money, deprived families, deteriorated bodies, reduced minds, numerous accidents. It has everything against it, nothing for it, yet states sell it and receive revenue from it, and it has become an accepted "normal" part of modern life.

Using this tool of Satan is especially a sin to all Latter-day Saints who know the law of the Word of Wisdom. Given as a Word of Wisdom and not by commandment in 1833, it was declared a commandment in 1851 by a prophet of God. It should be considered in that light and, if violated, repented of as with other sins of major seriousness. The poison, bad enough itself, is secondary to the disobedience of the commands of God. To know the law and not abide by it, is sin. The Redeemer warned: And take heed to yourselves, lest at any time your hearts be overcharged with surfeiting, and drunkenness, and cares of this life, and so that day come upon you unawares. (Luke 21:34.)

Relative to using tobacco, the Lord revealed in 1833: And again, tobacco is not for the body, neither for the belly, and is not good for man, but is an herb for bruises and all sick cattle. (D&C 89:8.)

This is categorical. In recent years science has established to the satisfaction of all reasonable men that tobacco is injurious to man's health. Common sense forbids its use. Much more important, the use of it by members of the Lord's Church is in violation of the commands of God and should be repented of as with other serious sins.

The use of tea and coffee also is forbidden by the Lord, and true followers of the Master will greatly desire to please him by living this and all his commandments. In addition to those items specifically covered in the Word of Wisdom, wise people will avoid other destructive substances. The world may say that smoking and social drinking and tea and coffee are normal, but thanks be to the Lord that in this case, as in many others, the Church of the Lord has different "norms."

Drug Habits Often more injurious even than the costly, harmful and obnoxious practice of drinking is the drug habit. The stories of the "dope racket" found in our newspapers and magazines are shocking. One report showed that New York City had thousands of teen-age drug addicts. Despite local, national, and international efforts to curb the distribution of such narcotics, a U. S. Senate crime investigating committee found such drugs easy to get in most of the nation's cities.

One should shun this habit as he would any deadly plague. Young people as well as older ones should beware of tampering with such injurious habits as glue-sniffing, taking LSD, smoking marijuana cigarettes, and so on. These are not only sinful in and of themselves, but will lead to more serious drug habits and to the addict's spiritual, moral, and physical downfall. All such narcotic habits should be repented of and ever after shunned. Even sleeping pills, tranquilizers and such which were thought to be harmless have sometimes brought injury and death; these might well be limited or avoided and, if used at all, taken only under the strict supervision of a reputable physician.

Covenantbreakers Akin to many of the other sins is that of the covenant-breaker. The person baptized promises to keep all the laws and commandments of God. He has partaken of the sacrament and re-pledged his allegiance and his fidelity, promising and covenanting that he will keep all God's laws. Numerous folks have gone to the temples and have re-covenanted that they would live all the commandments of God, keep their lives clean, devoted, worthy, and serviceable. Yet many there are who forget their covenants and break the commandments, sometimes deliberately tempting the faithful away with them.

Of those who break covenants and promises made in sacred places and in solemn manner, we can apply the Lord's words as follows: ... a wicked man, who has set at naught the counsels of God, and has broken the most sacred promises which were made before God, and has depended upon his own judgment and boasted in his own wisdom. (D&C 3:12-13.)

Haters of God Another of the sins named by Paul is committed by "haters of God." To hate God is the direct antithesis of the commandment, "Thou shalt have no others gods before me." Many men become haughty when they get a little smattering of knowledge and they rationalize themselves out of their belief in God. Since all that we have to enjoy and profit by comes from the true and living God, any who have become estranged from their Lord, even in the slightest, have a need for deep repentance to bring about a reconciliation with him.

Paul fiercely denounced those who "served the creature more than the Creator," the "haters of God." There were in those days, as today and among our own people, groups who deny "the Lord that bought them" with his own blood, and yet claim membership in his Church and in their hypocrisy and egotism pretend allegiance. There are those who receive the benefits of the Church while not only failing to make any contributions to it but actually being destructive of it and its standards. Those hypocritical unbelievers use their powers to destroy rather than to build up.

Ingratitude Ingratitude is a distressing sin which kindles the Lord's anger. (See D&C 59:21.) It is often manifest in "disobedience to parents," which Paul condemns. Many young people demand and receive much from parents and then show little or no gratitude, as though the parents owed it to them without any consideration or appreciation on their part. There must have been children in Paul's day who thanklessly took for granted their many blessings and opportunities, for he continued to warn the saints at Rome and others against this weakness.

When the Savior healed the ten lepers and only one thanked him, he pointed out the nine ingrates as a lesson to all when he said, "Were there not ten cleansed?" (Luke 17:17.) Adults as well as the youth are often guilty, being disobedient and unthankful to their Heavenly Father who gives them all. Many fail to show their gratitude through service, through family prayers, through the payment of their tithes, and in numerous other ways God has a right to expect.

Unmercifulness Lack of mercy also is a weakness of serious proportions. Paul linked it with many of the sins we generally regard as more serious. The Lord said, "Blessed are the merciful: for they shall obtain mercy." (Matt. 5:7.) He underlined the point with the parable of the unmerciful servant who, though forgiven ten thousand talents of debt, would not forgive his own debtor who owed him but a hundred pence. The penalty for his harshness was very severe. (Matt. 18: 23-35.)

Anger Paul warns against the wrathful those who become angered when things go wrong. When they are released from Church positions, they sometimes become angry and will not return to other service but pout and complain and are fiercely critical of all that is done by those who have offended them. Sometimes their anger reaches implacable hatred and bitterness, and they and their loved ones suffer in faith and activity, and sometimes in membership and salvation. There are many who might today have been active and faithful in the Church but who are on the outside because some progenitor-a father, a grandfather or great-grandfather-became embittered and apostatized.

God Abhors Sin "These six things doth the Lord hate." Yes, because they are sins he hates them. For the same reason he hates all the transgressions discussed in this chapter, and all others too. Although he loves the sinner, he "cannot look upon sin with the least degree of allowance." (D&C 1:31.) As sinners we will better appreciate his love and kindness if similar abhorrence for sin impels us to transform our lives through repentance.

Journal of Discourses, 6:196.

---
Notas:
[^1] Dante, Divine Comedy.
