Spencer W. Kimball, Miracle of Forgiveness ( 1969)

Chapter Five

The Sin Next to Murder

—These things are an abomination in the sight of the Lord; yea, most abominable above all sins save it be the shedding of innocent blood or denying the Holy Ghost. —Alma 39:5

THERE ARE SINS WHICH ARE SO SERIOUS THAT WE know of no forgiveness for them. These we will discuss in greater detail in a later chapter. There are also sins which approach the unforgivable ones in seriousness but seem to come in the category of the forgivable. These are the diabolical crimes of sexual impurity. In varied form they run from aberrations involving self-abuse, sex stimulation, and self-pollution to abhorrent and unnatural practices involving others. Whether named or unnamed in scriptures or the spoken word, any sexual act or practice which is "unnatural" or unauthorized is a sin.

It is unfortunate that Church leaders must discuss these sins of corruption but they would be under condemnation if they failed to warn and forewarn and protect and fortify. To educate the people in moral matters certainly is the duty of the spiritual advisors even though it is often repugnant and unpleasant. As in previous ages, God's people must never be left with the excuse that they did not know.

Sexual Sin Defiles Transgression and uncleanness and filth are found in all sexual sins. In clarifying a parable, the Savior said: ... Out of the heart of men, proceed evil thoughts, adulteries, fornications, murders, Thefts, covetousness, wickedness, deceit, lasciviousness, an evil eye, blasphemy, pride, foolishness: All these evil things come from within, and defile the man. (Mark 7:21-23.)

It is not the soil of earth or the grease on a person's hands that defile him; nor is it the fingernails "edged in black," the accumulated perspiration from honest toil, or the body odor resulting from heavy work. One may bathe hourly, perfume oneself often, have hair shampooed frequently, have fingernails manicured daily, and be a master at soft-spoken utterances, and still be as filthy as hell's cesspools. What defiles is sin, and especially sexual sin.

Next to Murder in Seriousness The enormity of this sin is underlined by numerous scriptures, and particularly by Alma's words to his immoral son: Know ye not, my son, that these things are an abomination in the sight of the Lord; yea, most abominable above all sins save it be the shedding of innocent blood or denying the Holy Ghost? (Al. 39:5.)

The Lord apparently rates adultery close to premeditated murder, for he said: "And again, I command thee that thou shalt not covet thy neighbor's wife; nor seek thy neighbor's life." (D&C 19:25.)

To a young man seeking help who had allowed himself to indulge heavily in fornication but was not quite yet repentant, I wrote: ... Your sin is the most serious thing you could have done in your youth this side of murder—. Your last experience in immorality was far more obnoxious than the first. You had been to the temple and had made solemn vows of chastity before God and holy angels. You made covenant that you would never have such ungodly relations. You had already done it and then did it again with that solemn promise on your lips.

The grievousness of the sin enhances the difficulty of repenting. Sometimes offenders reach the point of no return and cannot repent, for the Spirit of the Lord will not always strive with man. Esau sold his birthright for "one morsel of meat." Many young people sell their birthrights or put them in serious jeopardy for one hour in dark places, one unwarranted thrill, one exciting experience in a car or in a harlot's bed. One sad experience may not totally destroy, for repentance is in order, but one experience of fornication can break down the bars, blast and scar a life, and start a soul on a lifetime of regret and anguish.

Dangers to Youth This area of conduct presents a tremendous temptation, especially to the youth of this age of loose talk and loose action on college campuses and elsewhere which favor premarital sex experience. How can one believe deeply in God and his scriptures and yield to unchastity? It is wholly wrong. President David O. McKay has pleaded: ... Your virtue is worth more than your life. Please, young folk, preserve your virtue even if you lose your lives. Do not tamper with sin ... do not permit yourselves to be led into temptation. Conduct yourselves seemly and with due regard, particularly you young boys, to the sanctity of womanhood. Do not pollute it.

Another modern prophet, President Heber J. Grant, has stressed the Word of Wisdom in this connection, not merely for its intrinsic importance but because of what it often leads to.

Nearly always those who lose their chastity first partake of those things that excite passions within them or lower their resistance and becloud their minds. Partaking of tobacco and liquor is calculated to make them a prey to those things which, if indulged in, are worse than death itself. There is no true Latter-day Saint who would not rather bury a son or a daughter than to have him or her lose his or her chastity-realizing that chastity is of more value than anything else in all the world. [^1]

The Apostle Paul taught continence for the unmarried. "For I would that all men were even as I myself ... I say therefore to the unmarried and widows, It is good for them if they abide even as I." (1 Cor. 7:7-8.) Taking such statements in conjunction with others he made it is clear that he is not talking about celibacy, but is urging the normal and controlled sex living in marriage and total continence outside marriage. (There is no real evidence that Paul was never married, as some students claim, and there are in fact indications to the contrary.)

Premarital heterosexual intercourse is usually in the category of fornication which is illicit sexual intercourse between the unmarried. Adultery is usually defined as this act when committed by married people other than with their respective marriage partners. The Bible seems often to use the terms adultery and fornication interchangeably.

The sin of fornication is well known, and the scriptures from beginning to end decry this act of defilement. Yet many modern writers, even those of prominence and including some ministers of religion, have stated that there could be no harm if two consenting parties engage in premarital sexual experience. Our civilization is certain to disintegrate, however, when a practice like this moves toward being universal. No nation can long continue to exist on such an irresponsible philosophy. Broken homes, illegitimacy, venereal diseases, and emotional disturbances connected with such developments are certainly not the exclusive concern of "two consenting adults." The Lord knew this and gave commandments accordingly, and all rationalizations contrary to these are sinfully wrong.

Yet we have too many young people in the Church who do not give God's law on physical intimacy its proper priority. One survey revealed that seven out of nine girls who lost their virtue suffered that loss in cars after dances and parties. In another survey, in which seminary teachers asked students to place certain commandments of the Lord in the order of their importance, the Word of Wisdom placed first and chastity fifth. Yet another survey showed that ten of twelve students had petted to the point that they considered their virtue lost. It is hoped that these surveys were not typical of all of our youth.

Many rationalize that this attraction of two unmarried people is love, and they seek thereby to justify their intimate relations. This is one of the most false of all of Satan's lies. It is lust, not love, which brings men and women to fornication and adultery. No person would injure one he truly loves, and sexual sin can only result in injury.

The importance of continence in the unmarried is underlined by the divine approval given it in the vision to John the Revelator, in which he saw the Lamb of God standing on Mount Sion and with him 144,000 having the Father's name written in their foreheads. Of these the voice from heaven said: "These are they which were not defiled with women; for they are virgins and in their mouth was found no guile: for they are without fault before the throne of God." (Rev. 14:4-5.)

Steps to Fornication Among the most common sexual sins our young people commit are necking and petting. Not only do these improper relations often lead to fornication, pregnancy, and abortions all ugly sins but in and of themselves they are pernicious evils, and it is often difficult for youth to distinguish where one ends and another begins. They awaken lust and stir evil thoughts and sex desires. They are but parts of the whole family of related sins and indiscretions. Paul wrote as if to modern young people who deceive themselves that their necking and petting are but expressions of love: "Wherefore God also gave them up to uncleanness through the lusts of their own hearts, to dishonour their own bodies between themselves." (Rom 1:24.) How could the evils of petting be more completely described?

Too often, young people dismiss their petting with a shrug of their shoulders as a little indiscretion, while admitting that fornication is a base transgression. Too many of them are shocked, or feign to be, when told that what they have done in the name of petting was in reality fornication. The dividing line is a thin, blurry one, and Paul probably referred to these sins ranging from petting to fornication when he said: "For it is a shame even to speak of those things which are done of them in secret." (Eph. 5:12.) And the Lord perhaps was referring to this evil when in our own time he was reiterating the Ten Commandments: "... Neither commit adultery, nor kill, nor do anything like unto it." (D&C 59:6.)

Our young people should know that their partners in sin will not love or respect them if they have freedom in fondling their bodies. Such a practice destroys respect, not only for the other person but for self. It destroys the ultimate respect for virtue. And it ignores the oft-repeated prophetic warning that one should give his or her life rather than to yield to loss of virtue.

Too many have lost themselves completely in sin through this doorway of necking and petting. The devil knows how to destroy our young girls and boys. He may not be able to tempt a person to murder or to commit adultery immediately, but he knows that if he can get a boy and a girl to sit in the car late enough after the dance, or to park long enough in the dark at the end of the lane, the best boy and the best girl will finally succumb and fall. He knows that all have a limit to their resistance.

Those who have received the Holy Ghost after baptism certainly know that all bodily contacts of this kind are pernicious and abominable. They recognize too that the God of yesterday, today, and tomorrow continues to demand continence and to require that people come to the marriage altar as virgins, clean and free from sex experience.

Almost like twins, "petting" and especially "heavy petting" and fornication are alike. Also like twins, the one precedes the other, but most of the same characteristics are there. The same passions are aroused and, with but slight difference, similar bodily contacts are made. And from it are likely to come the same frustrations, sorrows, anguish, and remorse.

All those who have slipped into the disgraceful and most reprehensible habit of transgressing through petting should immediately change their lives, their habits, and their thought patterns, repent sorely in "sackcloth and ashes," and by confession get so far as possible a clearance from the Lord and the leaders of his Church so that a measure of peace may accompany them through their lives. To those who have been properly taught and who have properly appraised the evils and have restrained and protected themselves from these foul acts, God bless them and help them to continue their virginity and cleanness, that they may never have the remorse and anguish which has or will come to their brothers and sisters who have indulged.

The Curse of Adultery Through Moses came the solemn command, "Thou shalt not commit adultery." (Ex. 20:14.) This act between married people is a most heinous transgression, so serious that it has been the subject of sermons by prophets and leaders in all gospel dispensations. The death penalty was exacted for it in the days of Israel, as it was also for many of the sex sins so common in today's society. Perhaps in no other way could such sin be controlled. Generations of slavery had not helped Israel much in climbing toward exaltation. They were weak and needed to be disciplined. In all the lands into which they came they found the same cursed practices idolatry and adultery, intermingled and closely related. "The adulterer and the adulteress shall surely he put to death." (Lev. 20:10.)

Apparently the death penalty was still on the law books in the days of Christ, for the scribes and Pharisees brought to the Lord the woman taken in adultery, seeking to trap him. They said Moses had commanded that such a person should be stoned to death, and asked him what he had to say of the matter. With his usual sublime understanding he put the tempters to rout and sent the woman to repent of her sin. (See John 8:1-11.)

James E. Talmage wrote: —The woman's accusers were "convicted by their own conscience"; shamed and in disgrace they slunk away—. They knew themselves to be unfit to appear either as accusers or judges—. "When Jesus had lifted up himself, and saw none but the woman, he said unto her, Woman, where are those thine accusers? hath no man condemned thee? She said, No man, Lord. And Jesus said unto her, Neither do I condemn thee: go, and sin no more." [^2]

Note that the Lord did not forgive the woman of her serious sin. He commanded quietly, but forcefully. "Go, and sin no more." Even Christ cannot forgive one in sin. The woman had neither time nor opportunity to repent totally. When her preparation and repentance there complete she could hope for forgiveness, but not before then.

According to a celebrated statistic quoted in a magazine article, more than half the nation's married men and over a quarter of its married women are untrue to their marriage vows. They are guilty of the notorious sin of adultery, which is encouraged by the approval and the "fun" image given to it in movies and on television. The article spoke of fifteen million divorced persons living in the United States and said there are 100,000 new divorces annually, creating 800,000 more divorced persons. Of these millions of divorced persons, many are opportunists and are on the prowl. Millions of married people, many of them unhappy, are the victims. Since divorce is often hard, inconvenient, or slow to get, impatient ones commit adultery; thus more homes are broken, more unhappy families result, and the population of divorced men and women climbs constantly.

Some point to the 400,000 new divorces annually and see this as dramatic evidence of the sexual needs of the couples concerned. They note that many live the double life because they find that supporting a second family is intolerable, so the illegal romances go forward and the marriages stand as unhappy ones. But whatever the rationalizations and arguments, there are no circumstances which justify adultery. Regardless of what the world does, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints must continue to fortify its people against sin and to stand firm for total fidelity and solid home and family life.

Warning to Working Wives A word of warning is in order about wives going out to work. They leave their husbands each day and work often in the presence of other men where they are exposed to flirtations, displays of interest and affection, and confidences all in a situation freed from family concerns and thus inducing the relaxation in which romantic attractions can develop. This setup can be fraught with danger to the home.

Of course it is recognized that some widows and occasionally wives with families at home must work to support their families. But this ought not to be done where avoidable. Mothers of unmarried children should come home and, where necessary, let standards of living and luxury reduce to a point where the salary of the husband will suffice. The numerous luxuries are far too costly when a marriage and children's welfare are on the scales. The point is underlined in a sermon by Elder Boyd K. Packer: ... I would go back to the home that has a mother there. I ask you ... what good is a big picture window and the lavish appointments and the priceless decor in a home if there is no mother there? The mother as a mother, not as a breadwinner, is an essential figure in this battle against immorality and wickedness. I would also go back to the family where children were accountable and where father was the head of the family. Would you think me naive if I were to propose that this battle ultimately will be won on such simple grounds as the children coming in after school to homemade bread and jam and Mama there? Or on such grounds as Daddy and Mama taking their youngsters to Sacrament meeting? Or that tender hug as they are put to bed and Daddy and Mama saying, "We need you in this family. You are a part of us, no matter what your troubles are, you can come home."

Avoid Even the Thought The final act of adultery is not the only sin. For any man or woman to begin to share affection or romantic interest with any other than the spouse is an almost certain approach to ultimate adultery. There must be no romantic interest, attention, dating, or flirtation of any kind with anyone so long as either of the participating people is still legally married, regardless of the status of that marriage. Indeed, even the thought of adultery is sinful, as Jesus emphasized: Ye have heard that it "as said by them of old time, Thou shalt not commit adultery: But I say unto you, That whosoever looketh on a woman to lust after her hath committed adultery with her already in his heart. (Matt. 5:27-28.)

And again, when Jesus amplified this thought to the Nephites: Behold, I give unto you a commandment, that ye suffer none of these things to enter into your heart For it is better that ye should deny yourselves of these things ... than that ye should be cast into hell. (3 Ne. 12:29-30.)

The Adulteress One of the most inspiring of the Old Testament stories is the experience of our ancestor, Joseph a youth who set a great example to young and old. He stood tall and stalwart as he resisted his evil temptress. Exerting the wiles of a wicked, voluptuous woman, displaying all her advantages of high station, beauty, and political power, she did everything she could to attract the handsome young leader. When all else failed she attempted force and intimidation and blackmail. But Joseph stood his ground. He refused to yield to her pleadings. Her clothing, or lack of it, her perfumes, her sexy advances, her pleadings all these bombarded a clean young man willing to suffer any penalty in order to keep his virtue. When all her womanly wiles failed, and he attempted to escape from her, she held to his clothes and tore them off his body, with lies of deceit she reported the incident, reversing the guilt to him. Joseph was thrown into prison to suffer unjustly for the very crime he had resisted to the end. (See Gen. 3:9.)

Long afterwards, the writer of the Proverbs, knowing that this type of woman exists in all generations of time, warned man against her.

Lust not after her beauty in thine heart; neither let her take thee with her eyelids. For by means of a whorish woman a man is brought to a piece of bread: and the adulteress will hunt for the precious life. Can a man take fire in his bosom, and his clothes not be burned? Can one go upon hot coals, and his feet not be burned? So he that goeth in to his neighbour's wife whosoever toucheth her shall not be innocent. (Prov. 6:25-29.)

And again the wise Solomon warned: And, behold, there met him a woman with the attire of an harlot, and subtil of heart. So she caught him, and kissed him, and with an impudent face said unto him, I have decked my bed with coverings of tapestry, with carved works, with fine linen of Egypt. I have perfumed my bed with myrrh, aloes, and cinnamon. Come, let us take our fill of love until the morning: let us solace ourselves with loves. For the goodman is not at home, he is gone a long journey: With her much fair speech she caused him to yield, with the flattering' of her lips she forced him. He goeth after her straightway, as an ox goeth to the slaughter—. ... As a bird hasteth to the snare, and knoweth not that it is for his life. ... Many strong men have been slain by her. Her house is the way to hell, going down to the chambers of death. (Pro. 7:10, 13, 16-19, 21-23, 26-27.)

How much double standard was tolerated in those days we do not know, but certainly today there is no such double standard in the eyes of God, and men are often the greater offenders. Every man who compromises with decency and commits the heinous crimes will be dealt with by the Lord as severely as will the woman. And be it remembered that even though the blow often seems to fall most heavily upon the woman, no man will escape the total penalties of suffering and torture and remorse and deprivations.

Excommunication the Penalty For the benefit of Latter-day Saints the Lord has given us a direct and well-defined statement on adultery.

... If a man receiveth a wife in the new and everlasting covenant, and if she be with another man, and I have not appointed unto her by the holy anointing she hath committed adultery and shall be destroyed. If she be not in the new and everlasting covenant, and she be with another man, she has committed adultery. And if her husband be with another woman, and he was under a vow, he hath broken his vow and hath committed adultery. (D&C 132:41-43.)

The penalty in this life is similarly clearly defined: Thou shalt not commit adultery and he that committeth adultery, and repenteth not, shall be cast out. (D&C 42:24.)

To be "cast out" is to be excommunicated. Excommunication hangs over the head of the adulterer on a very tiny thread, like Damocles' sword. The sin is forgivable providing the repentance is sufficiently comprehensive. "But if he doeth it again, he shall not be forgiven, but shall be cast out." (D&C 42:26.)

Love in Marriage No men or women will bring on themselves this blight of adultery if they will strictly keep the law which follows: Thou shalt love thy wife [husband] with all thy heart, and shalt cleave unto her [him] and none else. (D&C 42:22. Italics added.)

There are many aspects to love in marriage, and sex is an important one. Just as married partners are not for others, they are for each other. Paul knew the approaches to adultery and the ways to avoid them: —Let every man have his own wife, and let every woman have her own husband. Let the husband render unto the wife due benevolence: and likewise also the wife unto the husband. The wife hath not power of her own body, but the husband: and likewise also the husband hath not power of his own body, but the wife. Defraud ye not one the other, except it be with consent for a time, that ye may give yourselves to fasting and prayer; and come together again, that Satan tempt you not for your incontinency. (1 Cor. 7:2-5.)

Even though sex can be an important and satisfactory part of married life, we must remember that life is not designed just for sex. Even marriage does not make proper certain extremes in sexual indulgence. To the Ephesian saints Paul begged for propriety in marriage: "So ought men to love their wives as their own bodies. He that loveth his wife loveth himself." (Eph. 5:28.) And perhaps the Lord's condemnation included secret sexual sins in marriage, when he said: "... And those who are not pure, and have said they were pure, shall be destroyed, saith the Lord God." (D&C 132:52.)

Speaking of normal and controlled sex life in marriage, President J. Reuben Clark said in his address to the MIA Conference in 1954: You newlyweds have gone into the House of the Lord, you have been sealed with the holy spirit of promise. You, groom, have the priesthood. Through that sealing your bride has the blessings of the priesthood, not the priesthood itself. By virtue of the fact that you have the priesthood, you become the head of the family. What kind of a head of a family are you going to be? If I might make a very trite statement, the bride has not become your chattel by marriage to you; she is a complement of you in the family. For that purpose, she was created, that the two of you might go forward in a life that shall answer to the commandment given to you when you were married, "Multiply and replenish the earth," one of the great commandments given to Adam in the beginning—. If you will observe, you grooms, that one principle, it will tend to bring into your home more of happiness and contentment and peace than any other one thing of which I can think. How are you going to be the head of the family? You should be the head of the family in patience, in forbearance, in forgiveness, in kindness, in courtesy, in consideration, in respect and in all the other Christian virtues. You should be the head of the family in devotion and loyalty. If you are that kind of a head of a family, there will be nothing but happiness even as they bring further responsibilities.

In this comment President Clark was emphasizing the position of the husband. It goes almost without saying that the wife has responsibilities of equal importance to be a kind, considerate helpmeet to her husband.

Choose Righteousness and Peace It is well to remember that, awful, horrible and serious as adultery and other sexual sins are, the Lord has kindly provided forgiveness on condition of repentance commensurate with the sin. But where these sins are concerned, even more than with less grievous ones, prevention is so much better than cure. Being warned, let us keep well away from the first step-the romantic thought outside of our marriage relationship, the drink which dulls the judgment and releases the inhibitions, the boy-and-girl "talk" in the parked car after the dance, and so on.

Preventing sexual and other sins will put us ultimately in the blessed condition Alma described: And may the Lord bless you, and keep your garments spotless, that ye may at last be brought to sit down with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and the holy prophets who have been ever since the world began, having your garments spotless even as their garments are spotless, in the kingdom of heaven to go no more out. (Al. 7:25.)

With this as the long-term goal, and with the assurance of peace of mind in this life, all the best motivations are on the side of righteousness.

Heber J. Grant, Gospel Standards, compiled by G. Homer Durham (Improvement Era, 1941), p.55.

James E. Talmage, Jesus the Christ (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1962), p. 406.

---
Notas:
[^1] Dante, Divine Comedy.
[^2] Melvin J. Ballard, "Three Degrees of Glory."
