Spencer W. Kimball, Miracle of Forgiveness ( 1969)

Chapter Six

Crime Against Nature

—Their women did change the natural use into that which is against nature: And likewise also the men, leaving the natural use of the woman, burned in their lust one toward another; men with men working that which is unseemly— —Romans 1:26-27

Youth come into contact early with masturbation. Many would-be authorities declare that it is natural and acceptable, and frequently young men I interview cite these advocates to justify their practice of it. To this we must respond that the world's norms in many areas-drinking, smoking, and sex experience generally, to mention only a few-depart increasingly from God's law. The Church has a different, higher norm.

Thus prophets anciently and today condemn masturbation. It induces feelings of guilt and shame. It is detrimental to spirituality. It indicates slavery to the flesh, not that mastery of it and the growth toward godhood which is the object of our mortal life. Our modern prophet has indicated that no young man should be called on a mission who is not free from this practice.

While we should not regard this weakness as the heinous sin which some other sexual practices are, it is of itself bad enough to require sincere repentance. What is more, it too often leads to grievous sin, even to that sin against nature, homosexuality. For, done in private, it evolves often into mutual masturbation-practiced with another person of the same sex and thence into total homosexuality.

Sin of the Ages Homosexuality is an ugly sin, repugnant to those who find no temptation in it, as well as to many past offenders who are seeking a way out of its clutches. It is embarrassing and unpleasant as a subject for discussion but because of its prevalence, the need to warn the uninitiated, and the desire to help those who may already be involved with it, it is discussed in this chapter.

This perversion is defined as "sexual desire for those of the same sex or sexual relations between individuals of the same sex," whether men or women. It is a sin of the ages. It was present in Israel's wandering days as well as after and before. It was tolerated by the Greeks. It was prevalent in decaying Rome. The ancient cities of Sodom and Gomorrah are symbols of wretched wickedness more especially related to this perversion, as the incident of Lot's visitors indicates. (See Gen. 19:5.) So degenerate had Sodom become that not ten righteous people could be found (see Gen. 18:23-32), and the Lord had to destroy it. But the revolting practice has persisted. As far back as Henry the Eighth this vice was referred to as "the abominable and detestable crime against nature." Some of our own statutes have followed that apt and descriptive wording.

Sin in sex practices tends to have a "snowballing" effect. As the restraints fall away, Satan incites the carnal man to ever-deepening degeneracy in his search for excitement until in many instances he is lost to any former considerations of decency. Thus it is that through the ages, perhaps as an extension of homosexual practices, men and women have sunk even to seeking sexual satisfactions with animals.

Unnatural and Wrong All such deviations from normal, proper heterosexual relationships are not merely unnatural but wrong in the sight of God. Like adultery, incest, and bestiality they carried the death penalty under the Mosaic law.

If a man also lie with mankind, as he lieth with a woman, both of them have committed an abomination: they shall surely be put to death—. And if a man lie with a beast, he shall surely be put to death: and ye shall slay the beast. And if a woman approach unto any beast, and lie down thereto, thou shalt kill the woman, and the beast: they shall surely be put to death—. (Lev. 20:13, 15-16.)

The law is less severe now, and so regrettably is the community's attitude to these grave sins-another evidence of the deterioration of society. In some countries the act per se is not even illegal. This "liberalizing" process is reflected in the United States by communities of homosexuals in our larger cities who demand acceptance of their deviate beliefs and practices as "normal," who sponsor demonstrations and draw up petitions to this end, who are formally organized, and who even print their own perverted journals. All this is done in the open, to the detriment alike of impressionable minds, susceptible urges, and our national decency.

But let us emphasize that right and wrong, righteousness and sin, are not dependent upon man's interpretations, conventions and attitudes. Social acceptance does not change the status of an act, making wrong into right. If all the people in the world were to accept homosexuality, as it seems to have been accepted in Sodom and Gomorrah, the practice would still be deep, dark sin.

Those who would claim that the homosexual is a third sex and that there is nothing wrong in such associations can hardly believe in God or in his scriptures. If God did not exist, such an unnatural and improper practice might be viewed differently, but one could never justify it while accepting the holy scriptures.

That which breaketh a law, and abideth not by law, but seeketh to become a law unto itself and willeth to abide in sin, and altogether abideth in sin, cannot be sanctified by law, neither by mercy, Justice, nor judgment. Therefore, they must remain filthy still. (D&C 88: 35.)

Paul pinpointed the problem relating to all sexual sins and perversions when he wrote: Know ye not that ye are the temple of God, and that the Spirit of God dwelleth in you. If any man defile the temple of God, him shall God destroy; for the temple of God is holy, which temple ye are. (1 Cor. 3:16-17.)

Threat to Family Life Of the adverse social effects of homosexuality none is more significant than the effect on marriage and home. The normal, God-given sexual relationship is the procreative act between man and woman in honorable marriage. It was so expressed and commanded to the first man and woman on the earth: So God created man in his own image, in the image of God created he him; male and female created he them. And God blessed them, and God said unto them, Be fruitful, and multiply, and replenish the earth—. (Gen. 1:27-28.) Therefore shall a man leave his father and his mother, and shall cleave unto his wife, and they shall be one flesh. (Moses 3:24.)

Marriage is ordained of God to men, and Paul tells Timothy that those who forbid to marry have departed from the faith and have given heed to seducing spirits and doctrines of devils. (1 Tim. 4:1, 3.) "Neither is the man without the woman, neither the woman without the man, in the Lord." (1 Cor. 11:11.) The concept has been reiterated in our own dispensation: And again, verily I say unto you, that whoso forbiddeth to marry is not ordained of God for marriage is ordained of God unto man. Wherefore, it is lawful that be should have one wife, and they twain shall be one flesh, and all this that the earth might answer the end of its creation. (D&C 49:15-17.)

The institution of marriage is further elevated in the 132nd Section of the Doctrine and Covenants, wherein the Lord makes clear that only through the eternal union of man and woman can they achieve eternal life. As an example, he says that the wife is given to the man "to multiply and replenish the earth, according to my commandment, and to fulfil the promise which was given by my Father before the foundation of the world, and for their exaltation in the eternal worlds, that they may bear the souls of men; for herein is the work of my Father continued, that he may be glorified." (D&C 132:63.) Such references of course relate to celestial marriage.

In this context, where stands the perversion of homosexuality? Clearly it is hostile to God's purpose in that it negates his first and great commandment to "multiply and replenish the earth." If the abominable practice became universal it would depopulate the earth in a single generation. It would nullify God's great program for his spirit children in that it would leave countless unembodied spirits in the heavenly world without the chance for the opportunities of mortality and would deny to all the participants in the practice the eternal life God makes available to us all.

As Grievous as Adultery Because of the seriousness of this sin it carries a heavy penalty for the unrepentant. The offender may realize that dis-fellowshipment or excommunication is the penalty for heavy petting, adultery, fornication and comparable sins if there is not adequate repentance, yet he often supposes that because his acts have not been committed with the opposite sex he is not in sin. Let it therefore be clearly stated that the seriousness of the sin of homosexuality is equal to or greater than that of fornication or adultery; and that the Lord's Church will as readily take action to disfellowship or excommunicate the unrepentant practicing homosexual as it will the unrepentant fornicator or adulterer.

Church Program for Assistance Recognizing the seriousness of this problem in modern society and the need which offenders have to be assisted back to normal living, the Church has appointed two of its General Authorities to help on a Church level. Under the direction of the two Brethren many have been helped in faraway places, as well as in areas near the Church headquarters, through the bishops and stake presidents concerned. The success of this rehabilitation program has become known to the police, the courts and the judges, who refer many cases directly to the two Brethren, sometimes on a probation basis.

Curable and Forgivable-With Effort After consideration of the evil aspects, the ugliness and prevalence of the evil of homosexuality, the glorious thing to remember is that it is curable and forgivable. The Lord has promised that all sins can be forgiven except certain ones enumerated, and this evil was not among those named. Thus it is forgivable if totally abandoned and if the repentance is sincere and absolute. Certainly it can be overcome, for there are numerous happy people who were once involved in its clutches and who have since completely transformed their lives. Therefore to those who say that this practice or any other evil is incurable, I respond: "How can you say the door cannot be opened until your knuckles are bloody, till your head is bruised, till your muscles are sore? It can be done."

Of course it is not to be had merely for the asking. It involves mastering self. Plato had a word to say on this: "The first and greatest victory is to conquer yourself; to be conquered by yourself is of all things most shameful and vile."

Our ills are usually of our own begetting. They must be corrected by ourselves. Man is the master of his destiny, be it good or bad. Man has the inherent capacity to heal himself physically. A doctor may cleanse a wound, sew it up, bandage it well, but the natural power of the body must do the healing. Likewise, a healing process in the spirit and mind must come from within from self-will. Others may help to cauterize the wound, suture it, and provide a clean, proper environment for the healing, but the body, with the aid of the Spirit, must heal itself. Accordingly some totally conquer homosexuality in a few months, others linger on with less power and require more time to make the total comeback. The cure is as permanent as the individual makes it and, like the cure for alcoholism, is subject to continued vigilance.

Men have come to their Church leaders dejected, discouraged, embarrassed, terrified, and have gone out later full of confidence and faith in themselves, enjoying self-respect and the confidence of their families. In some cases, wives have come in to express tearful thanks for bringing their husbands back to them. They have not always known what the problem was, but they had sensed it and realized they had lost their husbands. Men have come first with downward glances and have left the final interview months later looking the interviewer straight in the eye. After the first interview, some have admitted: "I'm glad I was arrested. I have tried and tried to correct my error but knew I'd have to have help and had not the courage to ask for it."

Of all the numerous people who have come through this special Church program, very few have been excommunicated. (These few were belligerent and rebellious and unyielding, and practically demanded such action.) Our method is one we think would be approved by the Savior. We remind the person of his likeness to and affinity with God: And I, God created man in mine own image, in the image of mine Only Begotten created I him; male and female created I them. (Moses 2:27.)

The Lord said unto Enoch: Behold these thy brethren; they are the workmanship of mine own hands, and I gave unto them their knowledge, in the day I created them; and in the Garden of Eden, gave I unto man his agency. (Moses 7:32.)

This kind of approach of helpfulness, not condemnation; of understanding, not accusations; of sympathy, not threats-this has brought many men to their knees in surrender and gratitude and helped them back to normality. With this inspiration a person has new hope. If he is in the image of God he is impelled to reach upward, for he must now be like God whose son he is. He has new handholds. He is no longer low and degenerate. He must climb up.

Continued contact seems to be helpful. To have the man return to report success in his efforts or even to tell of partial failure is helpful, and to these continuing visits much credit is due for recoveries. An additional strength comes from the realization that they will be making reports, and people thus control themselves and their thoughts a day at a time, a week at a time; and soon the months have passed and their thoughts are under control and their actions are above reproach.

Thus our approach is a positive one, dwelling upon the glories of the gospel and all its blessings, the happiness of proper family life, the joy in individual cleanliness. Its success is reflected in the numerous lives blessed with complete recovery.

Acceptance of Personal Responsibility Vital As with any other sin, forgiveness and recovery are dependent upon the offender's repentance, which begins with recognition of the sin and acceptance of personal responsibility for it. There are those who are deeply entrenched in the habit and have no apparent desire to cleanse themselves and build toward a moral life. They are belligerent and totally uncooperative.

One young man persistently lied. He kept insisting that he be told who had reported on him. It was made clear to him that the important thing was not who reported but how soon he placed himself in the way of spiritual medication. As he left the room, he was told kindly, "You apparently do not wish to discuss the problem tonight. You will before long, and you Bill find the door open and our hearts warm toward you." Several months passed and we heard nothing from him; then the phone rang one day, and there he was asking for an appointment. He came to see us and he unburdened his soul voluntarily, relief settled down upon him, and he began his comeback.

Next in seriousness to nonrecognition of the sin is the attempt to justify oneself in this perversion. Many have been misinformed that they are powerless in the matter, not responsible for the tendency, and that "God made them that way." This is as untrue as any other of the diabolical lies Satan has concocted. It is blasphemy. Man is made in the image of God. Does the pervert think God to be "that way"?

To those weaklings who argue this way, James answers: Blessed is the man that endureth [i.e., resisteth] temptation: for then he is tried, he shall receive the crown of life, which the Lord hath promised to them that love him. Let no man say when he is tempted. I am tempted of God: for God cannot be tempted with evil, neither tempteth he any man: But every man is tempted, when he is drawn away of his own lust and enticed. Then when lust hath conceived, it bringeth forth sin: and sin, when it is finished, bringeth forth death. Do not err, my beloved brethren. (Jas. 1:12-16.)

Sometimes not heavenly but earthly parents get the blame. Granted that certain conditions make it easier for one to become a pervert, the Second Article of Faith teaches that a man will be punished for his own sins. He can, if normal, rise above the frustrations of childhood and stand on his own feet.

The soul that sinneth, it shall die. The son shall not bear the iniquity of the father, neither shall the father bear the iniquity of the son—. (Ezek. 18:20.)

A man may rationalize and excuse himself till the groove is so deep he cannot get out without great difficulty. But temptations come to all people. The difference between the reprobate and the worthy person is generally that one yielded and the other resisted. And if the yielding person continues to give way he may finally reach the point of "no return." The Spirit will "not always strive with man." (D&C 1:33.)

Some say that marriage has failed. And while the number of divorces causes us to fear and admit it partly to be true, the principle of marriage is right. Some have changed their desires and yearnings and have convinced themselves that they are different and have no desire toward the opposite sex. This is quite understandable if the person has permitted himself to move in the other direction and has lavished his interests, desires, affections, and passions upon one of his own sex for long enough. It becomes ingrown. But let this individual repent of his perversion, force himself to return to normal pursuits and interests and actions and friendships with the opposite sex, and this normal pattern can become natural again.

No Turning Back It is imperative that when one has once put his feet on the path to recovery and mastery there must be no turning back. "No man," said the Savior, "having put his hand to the plough, and looking back, is fit for the kingdom of God." (Luke 9:62.)

Yet Satan will not readily let go. Rather, he will probably send a host of new temptations to weaken the resolve of the repentant one. Luke is explicit as he draws the picture: When the unclean spirit is gone out of a man, he walketh through dry places, seeking rest; and finding none, he saith, I will return unto my house whence I came out. And when he cometh, he findeth it swept and garnished. Then goeth he, and taketh to him seven other spirits more wicked than himself; and they enter in, and dwell there: and the last state of that man is worse than the first. (Luke 11:24-26.)

The repenting one must avoid every person, place, thing or situation which could bring reminders of the sordid past. He must avoid pornography in any form-any stories or pictures or records which stimulate the passions. He should part company with "... the prince of this world" (the devil John 14:30) and all such associates. He should make new friends, establish new locations and begin a totally new life. He must apply Paul's counsel: Now we command you, brethren, in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye withdraw yourselves from every brother that walketh disorderly—. (2 Thess. 3:6.)

He should do whatever might be necessary to make the break-a clean-cut break-so he can start anew. To those who protest at the cost or inconvenience I quote: For what is a man profited, if he shall gain the whole world, and lose his own soul? or what shall a man give in exchange for his soul? (Matt. 16:26.)

The Sweet Taste of Freedom Many testimonial letters of gratitude have come to the Church offices expressing the joy of conquest and victory and the satisfactions from successful accomplishment. One from a young man is revealing. His deviation had come when he was only a ten-year-old boy and was the result of curiosity. But he could not wholly eradicate the memory of it. He wrote: As I grew older I was too ashamed to tell anyone until I approached the missionary age. I knew it was not so serious as a childish act but nevertheless it was a burden through all the years and I had a guilty conscience. When I was interviewed for my mission, I received the blessed peace I should have had through all the years, for my kindly bishop cleared the slate and commended me for the many years of cleanliness. How grateful I was for the privilege of placing my burden on the bishop's shoulders. I felt well and clean.

Another young man who had waded in deep waters wrote: I am still laboring and adjusting to the new mental attitudes which have been formed during the past year—. I have been quite happy and content. There are still struggles, but through it all I can look back and see slow but sure improvement. I can never fully express my gratitude for the help the Church has given me. At last, I am free from the fetters of such a damning slavery. Thanks sincerely.

Frequently, in their confessions, these men, relieved from some tension and happy in their prospects of a new life, are eager that their former tempters and associates also be helped. They have encouraged these people to seek help, and if they wish to receive help through the Church program it is gladly given. As has been said, the approach is kindly and not accusing. The person is permitted to tell his own story in his own way and then he is helped in a confidential way to transform himself.

God Loves the Sinner In a nutshell, the Church program is like this: 1. The Malady: Mental and physical sin. 2. The Vehicle: The Church and its agencies and programs. 3. The Medication: The gospel of Jesus Christ with its purity, beauty, and rich promises. 4. The Cure: Proper attitudes and self-mastery through activity and good works.

Bishops and stake and mission presidents must be alert and watchful and treat with kindness but firmness all such offenders whose offenses come to their knowledge. In the careful and searching interviews the leaders give, these weaknesses are likely to be revealed. Many yielding to this ugly practice are basically good people who have become trapped in sin. They yield to a kind, helpful approach. Those who do not must be disciplined when all other treatments fail.

Remember, the Lord loves the homosexual person as he does all of his other children. When that person repents and corrects his life, the Lord will smile and receive him.
