Spencer W. Kimball, Miracle of Forgiveness ( 1969)

Chapter Seven

Sins of Omission

A wrongdoer is often a man that has left something undone, not always he that has done something. —Marcus Aurelius

THUS FAR WE HAVE DISCUSSED PRINCIPALLY THE SINS of commission-wrong acts done, wrong thoughts entertained, and so on. This chapter is concerned with that other category of sin, sins of omission failure to do what is right.

The effect of both types of sin can be serious, not only intrinsically but because each type leads naturally to and reinforces the other. For instance, the wrong act of fishing on Sundays involves omitting attendance at Sacrament meeting; conversely, simple non-attendance can, over a period, condition a person to spend Sunday in non-Sabbath pursuits like fishing. Either way Satan wins.

Action for Righteousness People tend often to measure their righteousness by the absence of wrong acts in their lives, as if passivity were the end of being. But God has created "things to act and things to be acted upon" (2 Ne. 2:14), and man is in the former category. He does not fill the measure of his creation unless he acts, and that in righteousness. "Therefore to him that knoweth to do good and doeth it not," warns James, "to him it is sin." (Jas. 4:17.) And who "knoweth to do good" better than Latter-day Saints?

Reinforcing this concept is the Lord's word that the saints had "sinned a very grievous sin" in not following through on the command to build the Kirtland Temple. (D&C 95:3.)

Evils of Spiritual Apathy Jacob was thinking partly of sins of omission when he uttered the solemn words: But wo unto him that has the law given, yea, that has all the commandments of God, like unto us, and that transgresseth them, and that wasteth the days of his probation, for awful is his state! (2 Ne. 9:27. Italics added.)

Waste is unjustified, and especially the waste of time limited as that commodity is in our days of probation. One must live, not only exist; he must do, not merely be; he must grow, not just vegetate. John the Revelator recorded for us significantly: Blessed are they that do his commandments, that they may have right to the tree of life, and may enter in through the gates into the [eternal] city. ( Rev. 22:14. Italics added.)

Through that same apostle and prophet came the condemnatory words of the Lord to the Laodiceans, perhaps directed against the same kind of indifference, of apathy in spiritual matters, that we find among some Church members today: I know thy works that thou art neither cold nor hot: I would thou wert cold or hot.

So then because thou art lukewarm, and neither cold nor hot, I will spue thee out of my mouth. (Rev. 3:15-16.)

The symbolism of the barren fig tree (Matt. 21:19) is eloquent. The unproductive tree was cursed for its barrenness. What a loss to the individual and to humanity if the vine does not grow, the tree does not bear fruit, the soul does not expand through service!

In this connection, that father and mother may be in serious sin who make no effort to live the principles of the gospel, who fail to give service, who do not attend their meetings and carry out their other duties in the kingdom. They set an improper example for their children, who consequently will very often follow in the parental footsteps of neglect. It is frequently difficult for the parents to recognize the effects of their example until the damage is done, until the barrenness of their spiritual tree is plain for all to see. On such parents will be a dreadful responsibility.

To be passive is deadening; to stop doing is to die. Here then is a close parallel with physical life. If one fails to eat and drink, his body becomes emaciated and dies. Likewise if he fails to nourish his spirit and mind, his spirit shrivels and his mind darkens. Charles Steizle has pointed this out in graphic words: What must I do to be damned? Nothing. That's all. You're damned condemned if you just sit still. That is the law of this physical world. If you sit still long enough you'll never get up again. If you never lift your arm, you'll soon be unable to raise it at all. If you remain in darkness and never use your eyes, you'll soon become blind. It is the law in the mental world. If you never exercise your brain never read, study, nor talk to anyone, never permit anyone to talk to you your mind will became blank maybe you'll become insane. The most horrible punishment that could be inflicted upon you is not twenty years of hard labor, but twenty years of solitary confinement. It's the law in the spiritual world. Simply shut your heart to all truth, and after a while you won't be able to believe anything-that is the severest penalty for not accepting truth. The process of disintegration and death begins when a man shuts himself out from the forces that make for life. The body and mind and spirit are kept alive through constant constructive use. [^1]

Of the spiritual apathy which this condition represents, President David O. McKay has spoken as follows: The peril of this century is spiritual apathy. As the body requires the sunlight, good food, proper exercise, and rest, so the spirit of man requires the sunlight of the Holy Spirit; proper exercise of the spiritual functions; avoiding of evils that affect spiritual health, which are more ravaging in their effects than typhoid fever, pneumonia, or other diseases that attack the body.

As I have interviewed numerous young men for missions, I have asked them what grades they received in their college or in high school. Many times they have rather sheepishly admitted they could have done better. To be mediocre when only application and diligence would have netted superiority is an error akin to sin. It recalls the comment by Arnold Bennett: The real tragedy is the tragedy of the man who never in his life braces himself for his one supreme effort, who never stretches to his full capacity, never stands up to his full stature.

Parenthetically, it is pleasing to note that many of those same young men, stimulated in the mission field, fired with purpose, went back to the same college and received high grades.

We Covenant to Act To be baptized is to enter into a covenant of commission. But to fail to be baptized when one is convinced the work is divine is a sin of omission, and penalties will be assessed for failure to meet this requirement. Tens of thousands of people having heard the gospel have failed to be baptized, giving trivial excuses. This is a most serious sin. The Lord told Nicodemus that he and others would not even see the kingdom of God if they rejected the required baptism.

The covenants we make with God involve promises to do, not merely to refrain from doing, to work righteousness as well as to avoid evil. The children of Israel made such covenants through Moses, saying, "All that the Lord hath spoken we will do" (Exodus 19:8, italics added), though hardly was Moses' back turned until they had broken their promise through wrongdoing. In the baptismal waters we give a similar undertaking and we repledge it in the ordinance of the sacrament. Not to honor these pledges, to refuse to serve or to accept responsibility and do less than one's best at it, is a sin of omission. Nor can we with impunity seek to cancel such obligations, as one misguided man supposed he could when he wrote to me as follows: I will appreciate it if you will remove my name from the roster of the Church. I find the restrictions and the requirements of the Church too great. I am unable to forego the four no's-tea, coffee, tobacco and liquor. To refuse those things I desire causes me more anxiety than I am able to cope with. And my personality requires acceptance from the crowd, and I feel unaccepted when unable to partake of the pleasures of my companions. Also, I find that I cannot give from three to five hours on Sunday and one-tenth of my earnings. This is against my basic nature-but some people overcome it.

Failure to act after one has made the covenant to do so, the shirking of responsibility in the kingdom, brings inevitable condemnation. This situation brings to mind the Savior's parable of the two sons.

But what think ye? A certain man had two sons; and he came to the first, and said, Son, go work to day in my vineyard. He answered and said, I will not: but afterward he repented, and went. And he came to the second, and said likewise. And he answered and said, I go, sir: and went not. Whether of them twain did the will of his father? They say unto him, The first. Jesus saith unto them, Verily I say unto you, That the publicans and the harlots go into the kingdom of God before you. (Matt. 21:28-31.)

Declining to serve when called may constitute a sin of omission as well as one of commission. Certainly it is a sin of omission to accept responsibility, to covenant with the Lord, and then fail to do the work as well as possible. Such a person is not following the light he sees, a sin which the Savior condemned in the Pharisees and by implication in all men who wilfully choose darkness or a lesser light: And Jesus said, For judgment I am come into this world, that they which see not might see; and that they which see might be made blind. And some of the Pharisees which were with him heard these words, and said unto him, Are we blind also? Jesus said unto them, If ye were blind, ye should have no sin: but now ye say, We see; therefore your sin remaineth. (John 9:39-41.)

Melchizedek Priesthood holders and those who have received their temple endowments have made further and specific pledges to do, to work righteousness. The Lord has expressed the mutual pledges between our Heavenly Father and the priesthood holders as an "oath and covenant," which is discussed in a later chapter. Suffice to say here that one breaks the priesthood covenant by transgressing commandments-but also by leaving undone his duties. Accordingly, to break this covenant one needs only to do nothing.

Many Opportunities for Omission Clearly the potential for sins of omission is as broad as the converse opportunity for righteousness. Let us consider some examples.

The home teacher who is assigned the responsibility of teaching families must not fail to teach or to fulfill his assignment. The penalty is more severe than he thinks. He will be held accountable for difficult situations which arise in an assigned family and which with diligence he could have controlled.

Tithing is a law of God and is required of his followers. To fail to meet this obligation in full is to omit a weighty matter. It is a transgression, not an inconsequential oversight.

The Sabbath is a holy day in which to do worthy and holy things. Abstinence from work and recreation is important but insufficient. The Sabbath calls for constructive thoughts and acts, and if one merely lounges about doing nothing on the Sabbath, he is breaking it. To observe it, one will be on his knees in prayer, preparing lessons, studying the gospel, meditating, visiting the ill and distressed, sleeping, reading wholesome material, and attending all the meetings of that day to which he is expected. To fail to do these proper things is a transgression on the omission side.

Marriage is another example. The Lord has said that man is not without the woman, nor the woman without the man in the Lord. In other words, to marry is an obligation as well as an opportunity. Every normal person should find a proper mate and be sealed for eternity in the temple of the Lord. Failure to do so is disobedience and a sin of omission, unless every proper effort is made.

Once the marriage covenant is made, it is conceivable that a man might never be guilty of violence or of infidelity and yet could fail of the greatest blessings possible because of his failure in his covenant marriage. He should strive to be the perfect husband and the perfect father, and positively do all things to make his family relationships as the Lord would have them be. Similar requirements are made of the wife.

To carry the responsibility further, the command to multiply and replenish the earth and subdue it comes from the Lord also. To refuse to bear or refrain from the bearing of children is an error of omission. Of course, the mere bringing of children into the world does not fulfill the obligation. Nor have parents met all their responsibilities when they feed and clothe and give schooling and entertainment to their offspring. The great parental responsibility is not met unless fathers and mothers do all in their power to train their children to pray and walk uprightly before the Lord, giving proper example and positive verbal teaching. The daily family life, if well charted and regulated, supplemented by the twice-daily family kneeling prayer and the home teaching and home evening, is almost certain to bring up the children to become stalwart sons and daughters of God and eligible for exaltation and eternal life. Any selfishness on the part of parents which would deprive the children of this training would be a sin of omission and answerable to the Great Judge when the time of judgment comes.

To proselyte and warn our neighbors of the divinity of the gospel is a command reiterated by the Lord: ". . . It becometh every man who hath been warned to warn his neighbor." (D&C 88:81.) More recently the living Prophet has emphasized "Every member a missionary." To sit passively by enjoying all the benefits of the gospel and the Church and not share them with others of God's children constitutes a serious sin of omission.

Likewise, failing to fast is a sin. In the 58th chapter of Isaiah, rich promises are made by the Lord to those who fast and assist the needy. Freedom from frustrations, freedom from thralldom, and the blessing of peace are promised. Inspiration and spiritual guidance will come with righteousness and closeness to our Heavenly Father. To omit to do this righteous act of fasting would deprive us of these blessings.

Consider the Ten Commandments. Some are negative, some are positive. This is significant. It is not sufficient to refrain from making other gods of stone or wood or gold, but one must actively love and serve the true and living God with total heart, might, mind and strength.

Inherent in the "thou shalt not" is the inference "thou shalt." It is not enough not to worship the man-made creations, but it is incumbent upon man to bow down in humility to our Father in heaven and serve him. It is not enough not to curse and blaspheme the name of Deity and think of him irreverently, but man must call upon his name frequently in personal, family and public prayers in reverence and adoration. We should speak often of him and his program. We should read of him and his works.

It is not sufficient that we do not kill or commit murder, but we should protect others from such crimes. Not only is suicide a crime, but one is obligated to protect and save and prolong his own life. Not only shall we not take life, but it is obligatory upon us to give life, both by bearing children into mortality and by leading people toward eternal life by teaching, proselyting and influencing them strongly toward that end.

It is not good enough merely to refrain from injuring parents; we must honor them. Nor is it sufficient to refrain from adultery. One must be positive and keep hands clean and heart pure and thoughts above reproach. Not only shall we not steal, but we shall protect others' possessions. We employ law enforcement officers, we cooperate with them and the judges; we help to develop a world where vice is unprofitable, uncomfortable and disappointing. Not only should we never bear false witness against neighbors, but the scriptures tell us we should love our fellowmen, serve them, speak well of them, build them up.

As to coveting, the Lord has made it clear that not only should we not lust for something belonging to another, but we should gladly share our own possessions. Our welfare work, our fast offerings, our tithing program, our missionary work-all these have in them this element of sharing the benefits with those less fortunate.

Excuses Irrelevant Many and varied are the excuses for sins of omission, and they are all irrelevant. One is unwillingness to get involved. In a now-famous incident of a few years back, many people in New York City witnessed the fatal stabbing of a young woman who was screaming for help, but not one person made any effort to help her or even to alert the police. Similarly, many people will pass the scene of an accident without determining whether they can relieve the suffering of the injured or report to the patrolman.

In the parable of the Good Samaritan the priest and the Levite were base sinners. They found a person in dire distress, needing help they could have given him, but they crossed the street and avoided involvement. Had he died, some of the responsibility would have been theirs. His extra suffering due to their passing him by and leaving him without succor would also be laid to their charge.

Pilate attempted to wash from his hands the responsibility of defending the Christ or at least of insuring justice. He had said to the clamoring mob, "I find in him no fault at all." Yet he had the Master scourged and permitted the soldiers to injure the Lord with the crown of plaited thorns, ridicule him, place on him a purple robe, and strike him and taunt him. Of what avail was the water in the basin? How could Pilate cleanse himself of responsibility of the crucifixion by publicly washing his hands or by announcing: "I am innocent of the blood of this just person: see ye to it."? (Matt. 27:24.)

Likewise the Church member who has the attitude of leaving it to others will have much to answer for. There are many who say: "My wife does the Church work!" Others say: "I'm just not the religious kind," as though it does not take effort for most people to serve and do their duty. But God has endowed us with talents and time, with latent abilities and with opportunities to use and develop them in his service. He therefore expects much of us, his privileged children. The parable of the talents is a brilliant summary of the many scriptural passages outlining promises for the diligent and penalties for the slothful. (See Matt. 25:14-30.) From this we see that those who refuse to use their talents in God's cause can expect their potential to be removed and given to someone more worthy. Like the unproductive fig tree (see Matt. 21:18-20) their barren lives will be cursed. To them on judgment day will come the equivalent of these devastating words: . . . Thou wicked and slothful servant . . . Thou oughtest therefore to have put my money to the exchangers—. Take therefore the talent from him, and give it unto him which hath ten talents—. And cast ye the unprofitable servant into outer darkness: there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. (Matt. 25:26-29, 30.)

Repentance Relevant Yes, sins of omission have much in common with those of commission. As we have seen, one common feature is their potential for damning the sinner. Equally true but more encouraging is that, like the positive wrongdoer, the slothful or inadequate servant can repent, exchange apathy for diligence, and receive God's forgiveness. And if he will do this without procrastinating there awaits for him the Lord's great eternal reward: Well done, thou good and faithful servant: thou hast been faithful over a few things, I will make thee ruler over many things: enter thou into the joy of thy Lord. (Matt. 25:21.)

Charles Steizle, Utah Labor News, December 12, 1937.

---
Notas:
[^1] Dante, Divine Comedy.
