Spencer W. Kimball, Miracle of Forgiveness ( 1969)

Chapter Ten

Repent or Perish

—Except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish. —Luke 13:3

REPENTANCE IS THE KEY TO FORGIVENESS. IT OPENS the door to happiness and peace and points the way to salvation in the kingdom of God. It unlocks the spirit of humility in the soul of man and makes him contrite of heart and submissive to the will of God.

"Sin is the transgression of the law" (1 John 3:4.), and for such transgression a punishment is affixed under eternal law. Every normal individual is responsible for the sins he commits, and would be similarly liable to the punishment attached to those broken laws. However, Christ's death on the cross offers us exemption from the eternal punishment for most sins. He took upon himself the punishment for the sins of all the world, with the understanding that those who repent and come unto him will be forgiven of their sins and freed from the punishment.

Message of the Ages In these circumstances it is not surprising that through his prophets a loving God has constantly emphasized the call to repentance. It would be interesting if we could have a recording of each dispensation of the gospel in sequence, and hear the pleas and commands for repentance repeated through six millennia. It would be impressive to see the speaker and to hear the intonation of his voice-loud, penetrating, soft, pleading, warning, calling. They would be portentous words.

We would hear the voice of Jacob discharging the responsibility which weighed heavily upon him: ". . . It must needs be that I teach you the consequences of sin." (2 Ne. 9:48.) And from Mars Hill, where the sophisticated Athenians were debating over their numerous gods, we would hear Paul's words denouncing their deities and explaining their "unknown god": "And the times of this ignorance God winked at; but now commandeth all men every where to repent." (Acts 17:30.)

There would be also the voices of Adam, Noah, Lehi, Alma, Abraham and Isaiah and many others, all like a John the Baptist preaching in the wilderness: "—Bring forth—fruits meet for repentance." (Matt. 3:8.) And prominent would be the voice of Jesus Christ himself giving priority to this all-important call as he ushered in the dispensation of the meridian of time with the words, "Repent: for the kingdom of heaven is at hand." (Matt. 4:17.)

Penalties for Unrepentant The prophetic message has always carried the same penalty, for no one can reject with impunity the call from the God of law and justice. Hence the alternative the Lord has given-repent or perish!

Abinadi gives solemn warning: But behold, and fear, and tremble before God, for ye ought to tremble; for the Lord redeemeth none such that rebel against him and die in their sins; yea, even all those that have perished in their sins ever since the world began, that have wilfully rebelled against God, that have known the commandments of God, and would not keep them; these are they that have no part in the first resurrection. (Mos. 15:26. Italics added.)

That endless misery and suffering await the unrepentant sinner is amply attested in the holy scriptures. For instance: And if their works are evil they shall be restored unto them for evil. Therefore, all things shall be restored to their proper order, every thing to its natural frame-mortality raised to immortality, corruption to incorruption-raised to endless happiness to inherit the kingdom of God, or to endless misery to inherit the kingdom of the devil, the one on one hand, the other on the other. (Al. 41:4.)

Perhaps the best summation of the multitude of scriptures warning of the penalties visited upon the unrepentant is the comparison the Lord makes between these penalties and his own sacrificial suffering: Therefore I command you to repent-repent, lest I smite you by the rod of my mouth, and by my wrath, and by my anger, and your sufferings be sore-how sore you know not, how exquisite you know not, yea, how hard to bear you know not. For behold, I, God, have suffered these things for all, that they might not suffer if they would repent; But if they would not repent they must suffer even as I; Which suffering caused myself, even God, the greatest of all, to tremble because of pain, and to bleed at every pore, and to suffer both body and spirit. (D&C 19:15-18. Italics added.)

Civilizations Destroyed Through Sin One would have thought that all the pleadings and warnings the Lord has made through his prophets over the centuries would induce a high general level of righteousness. Unfortunately this is not so. Apparently it is easier for man to sin than to live a life of righteousness; therefore, greater effort needs to be put forth to avoid evil and conform our lives to the elevating principles of the gospel. This is understandable, since . . . the natural man is an enemy to God, and has been from the fall of Adam, and will be, forever and ever, unless he yields to the enticings of the Holy Spirit, and putteth off the natural man and becometh a saint through the atonement of Christ the Lord, and becometh as a child, submissive, meek, humble, patient, full of love, willing to submit to all things which the Lord seeth fit to inflict upon him, even as a child doth submit to his father. (Mos. 3:19.)

This ascendancy of the natural man, this rejection of God's call to repentance, has caused the destruction of entire civilizations. In the early generations it is true that those who were sufficiently righteous followed Enoch to a translated life; but only eight, Noah and sons and their four wives, were preserved later through the great flood, all others being drowned. In their debauchery, the unrepentant Babylonians lost their kingdom, and the individuals of the nation placed their souls in serious jeopardy when they did not repent. Likewise Sodom and Gomorrah, the cities of the plain, were destroyed. They had their chance also to repent but ignored the warning voices of the prophets who came to them.

Can one ever forget the tribulations of the tribes of Israel as the foreign nations came upon them and despoiled their cities and their country, ravished their women, blinded their king and took them captive to serve as slaves? Their temple was defiled, their sacred vessels expropriated, their national identity terminated. We read with sad hearts of the song of regret and anguish and loneliness sung by the Jewish survivors: By the rivers of Babylon, there we sat down, yea, we wept, when we remembered Zion. We hanged our harps upon the willows in the midst thereof. For there they that carried us away captive required of us a song; and they that wasted us required of us mirth, saying, Sing us one of the songs of Zion. How shall we sing the Lord's song in a strange land? If I forget thee, O Jerusalem, let my right hand forget her cunning. If I do not remember thee, let my tongue cleave to the roof of my mouth; if I prefer not Jerusalem above my chief joy. (Ps. 137:1-6.)

Even then, when the exiles were later allowed to return to their native land, the lesson was unheeded, evil dominated the lives of the people, and all the warnings and threats were as nothing. The Jews even rejected and crucified their Lord and Master. Then the heavy weight of the penalties finally came upon them through the Roman legions who crushed them, destroyed their palaces, and killed and scattered the people.

And what of the plight of the posterity of Lehi, who seemingly quickly forgot their afflictions after they had been relieved from them? Persisting in their wickedness, they needed to be chastised numerous times and were finally cut off. We seem to hear the moaning of Mormon as he might weep for them: O ye fair ones, how could ye have departed from the ways of the Lord! O ye fair ones, how could ye have rejected that Jesus, who stood with open arms to receive you! Behold if ye had not done this, ye would not have fallen. But behold, ye are fallen, and I mourn your loss. (Morm. 6:17-18.)

My wife and I spent a holiday one year down in Maya land. We were days in ChichÃ©n Itz and Uxmal climbing the old pyramids and the ruins of an ancient civilization. As we ascended those steep steps, felt our way through those dark passages, and looked out over that vast area, the thought continued to come to me: Why, why aren't these Mayan Indians still building temples and other magnificent structures?

We went into some of the little Mayan homes of today. They are small houses, elliptical in shape, twice as long as they are wide-and having only dirt floors. They are made of sticks plastered with mud. They have thatched roofs made from the grasses that grow in the ubiquitous jungles.

Again, I wondered: Why do they grovel in the earth today when in the long-ago-past they had their observatories and looked into the heavens? The answer comes ringing back with great force: Because they forgot the purpose of life! They forgot the thing for which they had come to earth and they dwelt in the earth and lived an earthy life. And the time came when God could not tolerate it longer and they were permitted to be decimated and destroyed.

When we went abroad, among the interesting things we saw in Italy was the city of Pompeii. When I had been a boy in my early teens I had read from my father's library The Last Days of Pompeii. It intrigued me. I read it many times. So when we crossed the border into Italy that day, one of my greatest anticipations was to see Pompeii.

After spending some days among the ruins of Rome we went down to Naples, to climb Vesuvius and to see Pompeii. We went as high on the mountain as we could go in a taxi and then climbed the rest of the way to the top. We stood in the crater and less than a yard under our feet was the boiling, seething mass of lava. We could feel its fiery breath; we could see its rich color. Vesuvius was still active. And then we remembered that back in A.D. 79 the Lord permitted it to "blow its top" literally and figuratively.

This city of Pompeii, as we came to know by first-hand observation, was a worldly city. The politicians, the wealthy, the socialites, came from Rome to Pompeii near the coast of the Mediterranean. There they spent their money and time in lavish and riotous living.

The city of Pompeii has now been excavated. The stone roads show the marks of chariot wheels. The roads are lower than the sidewalks and we could see where the hubs of the chariots had worn into the stones at the corners of the blocks. We went into their bakeries where the food had been prepared. We went into their homes where they had lived. We went into their theaters and into their baths. Their empty brothels and houses of prostitution were locked with padlocks and carried signs in Italian, "For Men Only." These places of shame stood after nineteen centuries, a witness of their degradation; and on the walls in these buildings, in color still preserved for these nearly two millennia, were the pictures of every vice that could be committed by human beings-all the vicious sins that have accumulated since Cain began his evil ways.

Then I came to realize why Pompeii was destroyed. There came a time when it just had to be destroyed. And as Vesuvius erupted, it blew up, and the ashes went into the sky for miles and miles millions of tons of them. The lava flowed down the edge of that conical structure and pushed before it everything in its path, burning the vineyards, the orchards, and some of the homes. It destroyed everything in its path, and some little cities were completely burned or covered out of existence.

But Pompeii did not all burn. It was not in the way of the lava flow, but the cinders and ashes in the air gradually settled, covering the city completely. The people in their buildings were choked to death. Their bodies were later found clasping each other in deadly embrace. Cats and dogs were there in the buildings. They were found as they died covered with ashes, so that when the excavation was completed, the houses and contents were in place. There had been no general fire, but many of the roofs had burned off. Pompeii was destroyed. I think I know why. It was because of its wickedness and depravity. I think Pompeii must have been in much the same lamentable situation as Sodom and Gomorrah long before it.

Modern Sinners Invite Similar Penalties It seems strange that with all these historical examples of peoples who were destroyed because of unrepented sin, so many pursue a similar course today, including many in America. Yet the promise has been given to the great nations of the Americas that they shall never fall if they will but serve God. Those in the service of the Lord in those nations are but a token number. The devil reigns; sin is rampant in political, religious and social circles. Evil is called good, and good evil.

"Let us eat, drink and be merry, for tomorrow we may die," has been the theme song of the worldly wise since time began. "Let's live it up" is a more modern interpretation. It means, have fun today and let tomorrow take care of itself. There are the fun lovers who sit at the banquet table, drink their liquor in their homes and clubs, violate the moral laws. Then there is another class of people who have an obsession to accumulate worldly wealth, even at great costs of spirituality and morality. To such the Lord gave the parable of the rich fool: And he spake a parable unto them, saying, The ground of a certain rich man brought forth plentifully: And he thought within himself, saying, What shall I do, because I have no room where to bestow my fruits? And he said, This will I do: I will pull down my barns, and build greater; and there will I bestow all my fruits and my goods. And I will say to my soul, Soul, thou hast much goods laid up for many years; take thine ease, eat, drink, and be merry. But God said unto him, Thou fool, this night thy soul shall be required of thee: then whose shall those things be, which thou hast provided? So is he that layeth up treasure for himself, and is not rich toward God. (Luke 12:16-21.)

Some are deceived by the prosperity of the wicked. They argue that many people gain their riches through crime, and that by ignoring the Lord's commandments they show a constant profit. This concept wrongly focuses on the short-term. The wicked may appear to be temporarily triumphant, as those seemed who crucified the Master, but the Savior's Parable of the Tares allows for this situation. Like the tares, the wicked are allowed to ripen for eventual destruction.

Sin Brings Natural Consequences Should there be readers who think of the Lord as an angry, cruel God who brings vengeance on people for not complying with his laws, let them think again. He organized a plan which was natural-a cause-and-effect program. It is inconceivable that God would desire to punish or to see his children in suffering or pain or distress. He is a God of peace and tranquility. He offers joy and growth and happiness and peace. Through Ezekiel the Lord asks: "Have I any pleasure at all that the wicked should die? saith the Lord God: and not that he should return from his ways, and live?" (Ezek. 18:23.) And the Psalmist adds: "Let the wicked fall into their own nets ." (Ps. 141:10.)

Yes, causes inevitably bring effects. One may avoid high tension wires, having been told they are dangerous, or he may touch them and suffer the consequences. Similarly, one may learn by obeying God's laws gracefully or he may learn by suffering. And this applies in any era-4000 B.C., 2000 B.C., in the Savior's time, or in the twentieth century.

Many people have a difficult time in assuming the blame for their misfortunes. There must always be a scapegoat. If they fall, they look about to see who pushed them. If they fail, they assess the failure to others who prevented them or did not help them. Thus if what they call "bad luck" attends them, they are prone to blame fortune rather than themselves. And in the ultimate, the Lord gets blamed for many of our woes and seldom gets thanked for our achievements.

Two Book of Mormon prophets help to set the record straight on this. Alma told his son, Corianton: ". . . And thus they stand or fall; for behold, they are their own judges, whether to do good or do evil." (Al. 4:17.) And from Mormon we learn that "it is by the wicked that the wicked are punished." (Morm. 4:5.)

But however he tries, a man cannot escape the consequences of sin. They follow as the night follows the day. Sometimes the penalties are delayed in coming, but they are as sure as life itself. Remorse and agony come. Even ignorance of the law does not prevent, though it may mitigate, the punishment. Remorse may be pushed aside with bravado and brainwashing, but it will return to prick and pinch. It may be drowned in alcohol or temporarily shocked into numbness in the increasing sins which follow, but the conscience will eventually awaken, and remorse and sorrow will be followed by pain and suffering and finally torture and distress in the exquisite degree spoken of by the Lord in the passage quoted previously in this chapter. And the longer repentance is pushed into the background the more exquisite will be the punishment when it finally comes to the fore.

The words of Alma give us what is perhaps the best scriptural account of the exquisite suffering of the sinner.

But I was racked with eternal torment, for my soul was harrowed up to the greatest degree and racked with all my sins. Yea, I did remember all my sins and iniquities, for which I was tormented with the pains of hell; yea, I saw that I had rebelled against my God, and that I had not kept his holy commandments. Yea, and I had murdered many of his children, or rather led them away unto destruction; yea, and in fine so great had been my iniquities, that the very thought of coming into the presence of my God did rack my soul with inexpressible horror. Oh, thought I, that I could be banished and become extinct both soul and body, that I might not be brought to stand in the presence of my God, to be judged of my deeds. And now, for three days and for three nights was I racked even with the pains of a damned soul. (Al. 36:12-16.)

If men would only let their sins trouble them early when the sins are small and few, how much anguish would be saved them! Those who have never suffered the pain and "gnashing of teeth" which the sinner goes through would hardly understand. Church leaders have many come to them who are beginning to have a realization of the seriousness of their errors. To see them mentally writhe and seethe in their suffering is to know something of what the Lord meant when he said their sufferings would be sore and exquisite. Unfortunately, many transgressors sear the conscience and continue on in their sins until a judgment day comes.

Unfortunately too, the natural consequences of sin are not confined to the transgressor. One of the saddest features of wrongdoing is that it grievously affects the lives of those who love the wrongdoer innocent children, dutiful wife, wronged husband, and aged parents. All such suffer the penalties.

Consequences Are Inescapable That person who attempts to escape from reality and to avoid the penalties, to avoid coping with the situation, is somewhat like that escapist who had committed serious crime and was incarcerated in the penitentiary with a life sentence. He felt he had been very clever in his manipulations and that only through some error or trick of fate had he been caught.

In the long, merciless hours behind the bars, he planned his escape. With much organization and effort he created a tiny saw, and with this he worked almost ceaselessly in the dead of night until he eventually sawed a bar through. He waited until what he thought was a propitious moment in the stillness of the night to pull the bar aside and to squeeze his body out through the aperture, and as he cleared the bars the thought came into his mind, "Ah, at last I am free!" And then he realized that he was only in the inner passageways, and he had not yet freed himself.

He stealthily moved down the hallway to the door and stood in the darkness of the corner until the guard came along. He knocked the guard unconscious and took his keys and opened the door. As he got a breath of the cool outside air the thought came to him again, "I am free! I am clever. No one can hold me; no one can force me to pay the penalties." As he quietly stepped out he noted that he was still in the outer courts of the prison compound. He was still a prisoner.

But he had planned well. He found a rope, threw it over the wall and got the end caught, and pulled himself up by the rope to the top of the wall. "At last I am free," he thought, "I do not need to pay penalties. I am clever enough to evade the pursuers." About this time the lights went on from the wall towers, and guns began to shoot, and the alarm was given. He dropped quickly down on the outside in the dark and ran for cover. As he got farther from the prison he heard the bloodhounds baying, but his scent was lost for the dogs as he waded a distance in the creek.

He found a hiding place in the city until his pursuers had lost his tracks.

Eventually he found his way out into the eastern part of the state and hired himself out to a stockman, herding sheep. He was far out in the hills. No one had seemed to recognize him. He changed his appearance by letting his hair and beard grow. The months passed. At first he reveled in his freedom and prided himself on his cunning-on how he had eluded all pursuers and now had no witnesses and no accusers, and he was free and did not have to answer to anyone. But the months were barren and stale, the sheep were monotonous, time was limitless; his dreams would never terminate. He came to realize that he could not get away from himself and his accusing conscience. He came to know that he was not free, that he was in fact in fetters and bondage; and there seemed to be ears that heard what he said, eyes that saw what he did, silent voices that were always accusing him of what he had done. The freedom in which he had reveled had changed to chains.

Finally this escapist left his sheep, went into town and terminated his employment. Then he found his way back to the big city and to the officers of the law and told them he was ready to pay so that he could be free.

This man learned the cost of sin. Many do not learn that cost in this life, simply because the payments may be deferred. What effect would it have if the payments were always "in cash"? A thoughtful comment whose authorship I do not know considers that point: I am convinced that if each thing we did wrong had a price tag on it, the world would experience a phenomenal change. That is to say, if we could see what each such wrongdoing is costing, we might think twice before committing the act. Unfortunately, we often have only a vague notion of the terrible cost or allow Satan to sugar-coat our concept of circumstances. But, let us stop and look at some of these prices. It is quite certain that if all rewards for goodness were immediately available and all the penalties for evil were immediately assessed and suffered there would seldom be a second evil-but then, that would tamper with one's precious free agency.

We might add that one's position makes no difference to the inescapability of the consequences of sin. In the Church, the bishop, the stake president, the apostle-all are subject to the same laws of right living, and penalties follow their sins just as for the other members of the Church. None are exempt from the results of sin, as regards either Church action against the offender or the effects of sin upon the soul.

Do Not Die in Sin When we think of the great sacrifice of our Lord Jesus Christ and the sufferings he endured for us, we would be ingrates if we did not appreciate it so far as our power made it possible. He suffered and died for us, yet if we do not repent, all his anguish and pain on our account are futile. In his own words: For behold, I, God, have suffered these things for all, that they might not suffer if they would repent; But if they would not repent they must suffer even as I. Which suffering caused myself, even God, the greatest of all, to tremble because of pain, and to bleed at every pore, and to suffer both body and spirit. (D&C 19:16-18.)

Abinadi expressed the danger of delaying repentance: But remember that he that persists in his own carnal nature, and goes on in the ways of sin and rebellion against God, remaineth in his fallen state and the devil hath all power over him. Therefore, he is as though there was no redemption made, being an enemy to God; and also is the devil an enemy to God. (Mos. 16:5.)

This only underlines the vital importance of repenting in this life, of not dying in one's sins. In an interview with a young man in Mesa, Arizona, I found him only a little sorry he had committed adultery but not sure that he wanted to cleanse himself. After long deliberations in which I seemed to make little headway against his rebellious spirit

I finally said, "Goodbye, Bill, but I warn you, don't break a speed limit, be careful what you eat, take no chances on your life. Be careful in traffic for you must not die before this matter is cleared up. Don't you dare to die." I quoted this scripture: Wherefore, if they should die in their wickedness they must be cast off also, as to the things which are spiritual, which are pertaining to righteousness; wherefore, they must be brought to stand before God, to be judged of their works. . . . And there cannot any unclean thing enter into the kingdom of God; wherefore there must needs be a place of filthiness prepared for that which is filthy. (1 Ne. 15:33-34.)

A slow death has its advantages over the sudden demise. The cancer victim who is head of a family, for instance, should use his time to be an advisor to those who will survive him. The period of inactivity after a patient learns there is no hope for his life can be a period of great productivity. How much more true this is of one who has been involved in deliberate sin! He must not die until he has made his peace with God. He must be careful and not have an accident.

The Way from Sin The saddest part about sinning, perhaps, is that our wrongdoing grievously affects the lives of others. Innocent children, wronged wives, parents, husbands all feel the keenness of the sorrow. Elder Adam S. Bennion felt this in respect to one of his friends. I heard him tell the story when I was very young and it has clung to me all through the years. His former friend was in death row in the penitentiary. Brother Bennion visited him and, before leaving, asked him this question: "What message may I take from you to the young people in Zion?" The answer was quick and positive. "Tell them," said the doomed man, "to keep their lives so full of good works that there will be no room for evil."

Fortunately, for most of us there is a way out from the pall of sin. A wise and a just God has provided a way whereby the moral deterioration that comes to human beings because of sin can be eliminated. In other words, the Great Physician has made the remedy of repentance adequate to counteract the sickness of sin.

The story is told of a vessel stranded off the coast of South America whose Captain signalled to a passing ship to share their water with his passengers as they were suffering from thirst. The passing ship signalled back telling him to let down his bucket into the water in which they were floundering, because they were in the mouth of the Amazon River and the water was fresh.

The message of the ages to all people stranded in their sins is that they are in friendly territory and all they need to do is to let down their buckets and have their thirst quenched. The Master is ready always to listen to the cry of a repentant person and let him drink of the fountain of life freely.
