Spencer W. Kimball, Miracle of Forgiveness ( 1969)

Chapter Eleven

Conviction-the Awakening

The awakening of the conscience is the grandeur of the soul.-Charles A. Callis

REPENTANCE IS A KIND AND MERCIFUL LAW. It is far-reaching and all-inclusive. Contrary to common thinking it is composed of many elements, each one indispensable to complete repentance. This is well brought out in the following definition by President Joseph F. Smith: True repentance is not only sorrow for sins, and humble penitence and contrition before God, but it involves the necessity of turning away from them, a discontinuance of all evil practices and deeds, a thorough reformation of life, a vital change from evil to good, from vice to virtue, from darkness to light. Not only so, but to make restitution, so far as it is possible, for all the wrongs we have done, to pay our debts, and restore to God and man their rights-that which is due them from us. This is true repentance, and the exercise of the Bill and all the powers of body and mind is demanded, to complete this glorious work of repentance—. [^1]

There is no royal road to repentance, no privileged path to forgiveness. Every man must follow the same course whether he be rich or poor, educated or untrained, tall or short, prince or pauper, king or commoner. "For there is no respect of persons with God." (Rom. 2:11.) There is one way only. It is a long road spiked with thorns and briars and pitfalls and problems. It is a way which must be kept open, otherwise the wasteland, the badland, will invade it again and take over, just as the forest has invaded flourishing cities and cultivated areas of bygone days.

The First Step Before the many elements of repentance are set in motion there has to be a first step. That first step is the turning point at which the sinner consciously recognizes his sin. This is the awakening, the conviction of guilt. Without this there can be no true repentance because there is no acknowledgment of sin.

There are many souls too stubborn to admit their sins even to themselves. They have no escape. They have yet much to learn. Of such people, Jeremiah asks the searching question: Were they ashamed when they had committed abomination? nay, they were not at all ashamed, neither could they blush: therefore they shall fall saith the Lord. (Jer. 6:15.)

This failure to recognize our faults holds us back, makes life stagnant. The Prophet David O. McKay expresses the thought in these words: What progress can there be for a man unconscious of his faults Such a man has lost the fundamental element of growth, which is the realization that there is something bigger, better, and more desirable than the condition in which he now finds himself. In the soil of self-satisfaction, true growth has poor nourishment. Its roots find great succor in discontent. "Our pleasures and our discontents Are rounds by which we may ascend."

Heaven pity the man who is unconscious of a fault! Pity him also who is ignorant of his ignorance! Neither one is the road to salvation.

When we have become aware of the gravity of our sin, we can condition our minds to follow such processes as will rid us of the effects of the sin. Alma tried to convey this to Corianton when he said: ". . . Let your sins trouble you, with that trouble which shall bring you down unto repentance . . . Do not endeavor to excuse yourself in the least point . . ." (Al. 42:29-30.)

The Stirrings of Conscience To avoid the unpleasant recognition of their sins, many rationalize. Some blame God or his laws for their downfall, and by eliminating God and his Church from their lives they seem to think they will get relief. But rationalizing and minimizing sin betrays disregard for or ignorance of the scriptures and the program of God, for Samuel the Lamanite said: "And if ye believe on his name ye will repent of all your sins, that thereby ye may have a remission of them through his merits." (Hel. 14:13.) Someone has said: "Rationalizing is the bringing of ideals down to the level of one's conduct. Repentance is the bringing of one's conduct up to the level of his ideals."

However much the lips may deny the sin it is difficult to escape the accusations of the conscience. Many times I have had people say to me, "I have never done anything wrong," when in reality they were deep in transgressions which they had not catalogued. People generally know when they are doing wrong. Certainly all people who possess the Holy Ghost and who live worthy of its promptings will know when they enter the portals of sin. Moroni says: . . . By the power of the Holy Ghost ye may know the truth of all things." (Moro. 10:5.) Until and unless one has seared his conscience this influence is a dependable guide.

The birth or rebirth of conscience is effected by teaching and training. Parents must train their children to know the Lord and his laws. To be sorry for sin one must know something of its serious implications, and to learn this too we have the scriptures, the Church leaders, and teachings of parents. It is a grave matter if parents fail to instruct their children, as the Lord tells us in Doctrine and Covenants 68:25-28. Likewise we are to be exhorted constantly by our leaders: "But exhort one another daily, while it is called To day; lest any of you be hardened through the deceitfulness of sin." (Heb. 3:13.)

Even very small children when properly taught in righteous homes come to know good from evil to a considerable degree, and the Lord says that when children are eight years old they are accountable for their acts and thoughts. At that point, in the providence of God children may be baptized and receive the Holy Ghost, thus opening the way to receive the guidance, comfort and truth promised through that heavenly influence. And as the child grows, his conscience is stimulated and his knowledge of right and wrong developed by the family home evening, the home teaching program, and the other organizations and programs of the Church.

How wonderful that God should endow us with this sensitive yet strong guide we call a conscience! Someone has aptly re-marked that "conscience is a celestial spark which God has put into every man for the purpose of saving his soul." Certainly it is the instrument which awakens the soul to consciousness of sin, spurs a person to make up his mind to adjust, to convict himself of the transgression without soft-pedaling or minimizing the error, to be willing to face facts, meet the issue and pay necessary penalties and until the person is in this frame of mind he has not begun to repent. To be sorry is an approach, to abandon the act of error is a beginning, but until one's conscience has been sufficiently stirred to cause him to move in the matter, so long as there are excuses and rationalizations, one has hardly begun his approach to forgiveness. This is what Alma meant in telling his son Corianton that "none but the truly penitent are saved." (Al. 42:24.)

The Holy Ghost can play an important role in convincing the sinner of his error. He helps in making known "the truth of all things" (Moro. 10:5); in teaching all things and bringing all things to one's remembrance (John 14:26); and in reproving the world of sin (John 16:8).

Sorrow Not Enough Often people indicate that they have repented when all they have done is to express regret for a wrong act. But true repentance is marked by that godly sorrow that changes, transforms, and saves. To be sorry is not enough. Perhaps the felon in the penitentiary, coming to realize the high price he must pay for his folly, may wish he had not committed the crime. That is not repentance. The vicious man who is serving a stiff sentence for rape may be very sorry he did the deed, but he is not repentant if his heavy sentence is the only reason for his sorrow. That is the sorrow of the world.

The truly repentant man is sorry before he is apprehended. He is sorry even if his secret is never known. He desires to make voluntary amends. The culprit has not "godly sorrow" who must be found out by being reported or by chains of circumstances which finally bring the offense to light. The thief is not repentant who continues in grave offenses until he is caught. Repentance of the godly type means that one comes to recognize the sin and voluntarily and without pressure from outside sources begins his transformation. Paul put it this way to the Corinthian saints: Now I rejoice, not that ye were made sorry, but that ye sorrowed to repentance: for ye were made sorry after a godly manner, that ye might receive damage by us in nothing. For godly sorrow worketh repentance to salvation not to be repented of: but the sorrow of the world worketh death. (2 Cor. 7:9-10.)

How Wrong Is Wrong? Sometimes we hear a youth in the Church say with regard to sex sins, "I did not know it was wrong." This is unthinkable. Where were the teachings of the home, of Primary, of Sunday School, of MIA, and so on. Where were the whisperings of conscience, the guidance of the Holy Ghost to which he was entitled until he drove that Spirit away by sin? Some at least of these influences and promptings must have lingered in his heart to tell him that the act was wrong! Even if he did not know hob wrong it was he knew it was sin. Otherwise, why would he hide the act and keep secret the error?

I had a young couple come to me with a problem. In the interview I said to them: "Yes, it is wrong for two members to marry out of the temple. But the thing which you did which prohibited you from going into the temple was infinitely worse." And the very fact that they still expected and insisted on an early entrance into the temple was an indication that they had not yet come to a realization of the seriousness of their sin.

This transgression of which they were guilty is not merely a breach in etiquette. It is not only bad manners and a thing that "just is not done." It is breaking a law of God, a law that always since the beginning has been named by the Lord as most heinous. This is not something that can be set aside with a brushing-off gesture, or even with feigned sorrow, or even with a determination never to repeat the error. This is the violation of a fundamental law.

Apparently these two young people had been taught through the years, quite properly, that they must be married in the temple. But they had not grasped the point that failure to do this at this time was a small error compared to the sin of fornication, and that the value of their temple marriage could be jeopardized by unrepentant sex sin. That heinous sin concerned them only little. Their values were distorted. There are many like them who, when the sin is as long as a mile, call it a yard, when the sin is as heavy as a ton, they call it a pound, when the sin is as voluminous as a hundred-gallon drum, they call it a pint. The soft-pedaling process is a damaging one, for it keeps people from repentance. And until there is real repentance there can never be forgiveness.

"You mean that we cannot be married in the temple?" the couple asked. And I replied with a question, "Do you honestly think you should be permitted in the temple after such a despicable transgression? Do you not realize what you have done? If I were to give you the total responsibility with freedom to go, would you go? If you committed murder and then merely felt a little sorry, would you feel that you should be permitted immediately all privileges of freedom you formerly possessed, merely because you intended never to repeat the act? Do you think you should pay no price? no penalty? no adjustment? Analyze it. Do you think you yourselves would be better off if you went free?"

If adultery or fornication justified the death penalty in the old days, and still in Christ's day, is the sin any less today because the laws of the land do not assess the death penalty for it? Is the act less grievous? There must be a washing, a purging, a changing of attitudes, a correcting of appraisals, a strengthening toward self-mastery. And these cleansing processes cannot be accomplished as easily as taking a bath or shampooing the hair, or sending a suit of clothes to the cleaners. There must be many prayers, and volumes of tears. There must be more than a verbal acknowledgment. There must be an inner conviction giving to the sin its full diabolical weight. "My sins are disgusting-loathsome" one could come to think about his baser sins, like the Psalmist who used these words: "My wounds stink and are corrupt because of my foolishness." (Ps. 38:5.)

There must be increased devotion and much thought and study. There must be a re-awakening, a fortification, a re-birth. And this takes energy and time and often is accompanied with sore embarrassment, heavy deprivations and deep trials, even if indeed one is not excommunicated from the Church, losing all spiritual blessings.

Another young couple showed a similar unawareness of the gravity of sin, and especially of sexual sin. They came to me in June, having become formally engaged with a ring the previous December, and in the six months' interval their sexual sin had been repeated frequently. In June they went to their respective bishops seeking recommends to the temple. The girl's bishop, knowing that she had always been active, did not searchingly question her as to cleanliness, and a recommend was soon tucked away in her purse for use in the planned June marriage. The bishop of the other ward questioned the young man carefully and learned of the six months of transgression.

In my office the couple frankly admitted their sin and shocked me when they said: "That isn't so very wrong, is it, when we were formally engaged and expected to marry soon?" They had no comprehension of the magnitude of the sin. They were ready to go into the holy temple for their marriage without a thought that they were defiling the Lord's house. How lacking was their training! How insincere was their approach! They were very disturbed when their marriage had to be postponed to allow time for repentance. They had rationalized the sin nearly out of existence. They pressed for a date, the first possible one they could set up and on which they could plan their temple marriage. They did not understand that forgiveness is not a thing of days or months or even years but is a matter of intensity of feeling and transformation of self. Again, this showed a distortion of attitude, a lack of conviction of the seriousness of their deep transgression. They had not confessed their serious sin. They had but admitted it when it had been dug out. There is a wide difference between the two situations.

This couple seemed to have no conception of satisfying the Lord, of paying the total penalties and obtaining a release and adjustment which could be considered final and which might be accepted of the Lord. I asked them the question: "As you weigh this transgression, do you feel that you should be excommunicated from the Church?" They were surprised at such a question. They had thought of their heinous sin as nothing more than an indiscretion. They had been born and reared in the Church and had received the gift of the Holy Ghost at eight years of age. But in the successive nights of their perfidy they had driven the Holy Spirit away. They had made him, unwelcome. They were not listening to his promptings. It is inconceivable that they did not know how wrong their sin was but they had convinced themselves against the truth. They had seared their consciences as with a hot iron.

Conviction Opens Door to Repentance When we come to recognize our sin sincerely and without reservations, we are ready to follow such processes as will rid us of sin's effects. Enos sets us a good example. As he began to realize his true status before his Maker, he pondered upon his condition how he had been born in the faith and trained by a good father who had taught him righteousness and the nurture and admonitions of the Lord. When he found himself far out of hearing, deep in the forest where he was alone with himself, he began to convict himself of his sins. Eternal life began to loom up as something much to be desired, and he says: ". . . the words [of] . . . eternal life, and the joy of the saints, sunk deep into my heart, and my soul hungered . . ."

Now that he had convinced himself that he was in desperate straits, he began to put his mind in order. ". . . I kneeled down before my Maker," he said, "and I cried unto him in mighty prayer and supplication for mine own soul . . ."

The sincerity of his change of heart is manifested in his extended efforts to make his adjustment and get forgiveness: ". . . And all the day long did I cry unto him; yea, and when the night came I did still raise my voice high that it reached the heavens." (Enos 3-4.)

When this spirit is in the transgressor and he has placed himself at the mercy of the Lord, he begins to receive the relief which will eventually develop into total repentance.

Young Alma was so deep in his sin that it was most difficult for him to humble himself toward repentance, but when his experiences broke down his resistance, softened his rebellion and overcame his stubbornness, he began to see himself in his true light and appraise his situation as it really was. His hard heart was softened. His repentance was being born. Listen to his words of confession. Though these words of Alma are used in this book in connection with other phases of the gospel, they are repeated here as an indication of conviction of guilt: But I was racked with eternal torment, for my soul was harrowed up to the greatest degree and racked with all my sins. Yea, I did remember all my sins and iniquities, for which I was tormented with the pains of hell; yea, I saw that I had rebelled against my God, and that I had not kept his holy commandments. Yea, and I had murdered many of his children, or rather led them away unto destruction; yea, and in fine so great had been my iniquities, that the very thought of coming into the presence of my God did rack my soul with inexpressible horror. Oh, thought I, that I could be banished and become extinct both soul and body, that I might not be brought to stand in the presence of my God, to be judged of my deeds. And now, for three days and for three nights was I racked, even with the pains of a damned soul. (Al. 36:12-16.)

Conviction brought "sorrows to repentance" through torment-racking memory. His sin pains were exquisite and bitter. Alma had convinced himself.

The great assurance came to him that his repentance had been accepted, and a great peace came to his soul: For, said he, I have repented of my sins, and have been redeemed of the Lord; behold I am born of the Spirit. And the Lord said unto me: marvel not that all mankind, yea, men and women, all nations, kindreds, tongues and people, must be born again; yea, born of God, changed from their carnal and fallen state, to a state of righteousness, being redeemed of God, becoming his sons and daughters; . . . (Mos. 27:24-25.)

How far would Enos and Alma have progressed without this recognition of their sinful state? A young man was brought to me by his worried father to consider the sex perversions to which the youth was addicted. The young man was not convinced that his practice was so wrong. He had read in books published by deviates that it was a normal activity. The scriptures meant little to him he felt that they did not specify as forbidden the particular thing he was doing. He thought his father was old-fashioned and was not up on the newer trends. He had talked to other deviates who had convinced him that he belonged to a third sex-a normal situation. Generally, we can easily believe the things we wish to believe. For four hours we considered the matter from every point of view-logic, common sense, scripture and finally the young man admitted he was convinced. Now, but not until now, could he move forward toward repentance.

Humility the Key Of course, even the conviction of guilt is not enough. It could be devastating and destructive were it not accompanied by efforts to rid oneself of guilt. Accompanying the conviction, then, must be an earnest desire to clean up the guilt and compensate for the loss sustained through the error.

The recognition of guilt should give one a sense of humility, of a "broken heart and a contrite spirit," and bring him to the proverbial "sackcloth and ashes" attitude. This does not mean that one must be servile and self-effacing to the destructive point, but rather one must have an honest desire to right the wrong.

Conviction would incorporate within it the recognition that the broken law was God's law, that all his laws are designed for the ultimate benefit and glory of man, and that in his loving omniscience God knows what is best for each of us. Then with respect and reverence and a developing love for God we generate a desire to please him and eventually to be like him and near him. This gives the incentive and willingness to move along the path which will accomplish those purposes, including doing whatever is necessary to get the forgiveness which will make possible the eventual realization of these goals. This is true humility in the context of conviction of guilt.

This humility needs to be voluntary, as it normally will be when the offender becomes convinced of his sin without outside pressures.

Yea, he that truly humbleth himself, and repenteth of his sins, and endureth to the end, the same shall be blessed-yea, much more blessed than they who are compelled to be humble— Therefore, blessed are they who humble themselves without being compelled to be humble—. (Al. 32:15-16.)

Whatever our predispositions when influenced by the pride of our hearts, the person convinced of his sin and suffering godly sorrow for it in humility is reduced or rather in this case elevated to tears. Thus he expresses anguish for his folly and for the grief it has brought to the innocent. Those who have not been through the experience may not comprehend this reaction, but the scriptural writers with their deep insight understood that there is a healing balm in tears for the humble soul who is reaching toward God. Jeremiah wrote: "Oh that my head were waters, and mine eyes a fountain of tears, that I might weep day and night . . . (Jer. 9:1.) The Psalmist cried in his anguish: "I am weary with my groaning; all the night make I my bed to swim; I water my couch with my tears." (Ps. 6:6.) And again he pleaded: "Turn thee unto me, and have mercy upon me; for I am desolate and afflicted." (Ps. 25:16.)

Test of Conviction A total return to the spiritual experiences seems a vital step to repentance. Loss of faith runs parallel to loss of virtue and righteousness. "Whom we serve, we love." We hate those we ignore, whose laws we break. Many seem to feel that if they eliminate God and his Church from their lives they can solve their problems, little realizing that by so doing they are discarding the life-saving apparatus and the "iron rod" that could save them.

There is a good verbal test to apply to determine the depth of one's conviction of sin and hence of his start on the road to repentance. A brother who had committed heinous transgressions was trying to tell me he had repented. I was far from convinced and I asked him some questions. Long before I ceased asking the questions his head dropped and he admitted that he had hardly begun his repentance. He had not thought it so all-inclusive. These were the questions.

Do you wish to be forgiven?

Could you accept excommunication for the sin if deemed necessary? Why do you feel you should not be excommunicated? If you were, would you become bitter at the Church and its officers? Would you cease your activities in the Church? Would you work your way back to baptism and restoration of former blessings even through years?

What have you done to prove your repentance? How much did you pray before the sin? How much during? How much since your admission of it?

How much did you study the scriptures before your trouble? How much since?

Are you attending meetings? paying tithing?

Have you told your wife or parents? Have you confessed your total sins?

Are you humble now? Is it the result of "being forced to be humble"?

Have you wrestled with your problems as did Enos? Has your soul hungered for your soul's sake? Did you "cry unto him" a day-long prayer and into the night and raise your voice high that it reached the heavens, as did Enos?

How much have you fasted?

How much suffering have you endured? Is your guilt "swept away"?

Take the First Step The implications of these questions are not pretty, not pleasant as Satan makes the sin appear to be. But they are inevitable implications when the first steps of repentance from grievous sin are taken, and some of them as in the instance of Enos apply to all of us who are still short of sanctification.

That is why, through the great gospel message, our loving Father makes this emphasis: Abstain from grievous sin. Repent of it if you have committed it. Steadily and consistently repent of and conquer your sins and weaknesses, and thus receive the forgiveness which will ease and beautify the upward journey.

And the first step in all this is awareness of one's sins.

Smith, Gospel Doctrine, pp.100-101.

---
Notas:
[^1] Dante, Divine Comedy.
