Spencer W. Kimball, Miracle of Forgiveness ( 1969)

Chapter Thirteen

Lifting Burdens through Confession

... I, the Lord, forgive sins, and am merciful unto those who confess their sins with humble hearts.—Doctrine & Covenants 61:2

The confession of sin is a necessary element in repentance and therefore in obtaining forgiveness. It is one of the tests of true repentance, for, "By this ye may know if a man repenteth of his sins behold, he will confess them and forsake them." (D&C 58:43. Italics added.)

Confession Required Now, as Formerly Elders Ezra Taft Benson and Mark E. Petersen of the Council of the Twelve, in a study made for the Brethren, expressed themselves as follows with regard to confession: It seems to be clearly set forth in the New Testament and in modern scriptures that acknowledgment of sin is an important condition to receiving forgiveness and making restitution. The Apostle James admonished the saints to "confess your faults one to another, and pray for one another." (Jas. 5:16.) The Apostle Paul counseled the Romans as follows: "For with the heart man believeth unto righteousness; and with the mouth confession is made unto salvation." (Rom. 10:10.) Several of the revelations in the Doctrine and Covenants refer to the obligations of those who have sinned, to confess their evil deeds. In Section 59, in which the Lord gives counsel regarding the keeping of the Sabbath Day holy, he mentions the offering of oblations and sacraments "unto the Most High, confessing thy sins unto thy brethren, and before the Lord." (D&C 59:12.) However, Section 42 seems to carry the fullest instruction on this matter found in the holy writ. In this revelation men are not only commanded to love their wives and "cleave unto her and none else," but are condemned for looking "upon a woman to lust after her." The sins of adultery and fornication are emphasized and the principles of confession and forgiveness set forth.

Perhaps confession is one of the hardest of all the obstacles for the repenting sinner to negotiate. His shame often restrains him from making known his guilt and acknowledging his error. Sometimes his assumed lack of confidence in mortals to whom he should confess his sin justifies in his mind his keeping the secret locked in his own heart.

Notwithstanding the difficulty the repenting sinner may experience, the requirement remains, as the Lord has emphasized to his Church in modern days: And him that repenteth not of his sins, and confesseth them not, ye shall bring before the church, and do with him as the scripture saith unto you, either by commandment or by revelation. (D&C 64:12. Italics added.)

It has been so in all dispensations of the gospel. The Book of Mormon provides us concrete, specific examples. Directly from God, Alma received instructions on dealing with the repentant sinner in the Church, on which point it was later recorded: And whosoever repented of their sins and did confess them, then, he (Alma) did number among the people of the church; And those that would not confess their sins and repent of their iniquity; the same were not numbered among the people of the church, and their names were blotted out. (Mos. 26: 35-36.)

And under the pattern established following the Savior's personal ministrations on the American continent the same pattern of Church discipline prevailed: And they were strict to observe that there should be no iniquity among them; and whoso was found to commit iniquity, and three witnesses of the church did condemn them before the elders, and if they repented not and confessed not, their names were blotted out, and they were not numbered among the people of Christ. (Moro. 6:7. Italics added.)

Major Sins Confessed to Church Authority Knowing the hearts of men, and their intents, and their abilities to repent and regenerate themselves, the Lord waits to forgive until the repentance has matured. The transgressor must have a "broken heart and a contrite spirit" and be willing to humble himself and do all that is required. The confession of his major sins to a proper Church authority is one of those requirements made by the Lord. These sins include adultery, fornication, other sexual transgressions, and other sins of comparable seriousness. This procedure of confession assures proper controls and protection for the Church and its people and sets the feet of the transgressor on the path of true repentance.

Many offenders in their shame and pride have satisfied their consciences, temporarily at least, with a few silent prayers to the Lord and rationalized that this was sufficient confession of their sins. "But I have confessed my sin to my Heavenly Father," they will insist, "and that is all that is necessary." This is not true where a major sin is involved. Then two sets of forgiveness are required to bring peace to the transgressor one from the proper authorities of the Lord's Church, and one front the Lord himself. This is brought out in the Lord's clarification of Church administration as he gave it to Alma: Therefore I say unto you, Go and whosoever transgresseth against me, him shall ye judge according to the sins which he has committed; and if he confess his sins before thee and me and repenteth in the sincerity of his heart, him shall ye forgive, and I will forgive him also. (Mos. 26:29. Italics added.)

From this, and from the Lord's word to modern Israel-"—confessing thy sins unto thy brethren, and before the Lord" (D&C 59:12)-it is plain that there are two confessions to make: one to the Lord and the other to "the brethren," meaning the proper ecclesiastical officers. From the following scriptural passages it might be argued that the confession is to be to the Lord, but in none of them is there evidence that the confession is not also to be made to the local authorities.

—I, the Lord, forgive sins unto those who confess their sins before me and ask forgiveness, who have not sinned unto death—. (D&C 64:7. Italics added.) If we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness. (1 John 1:9)

Confession to Be Complete In a statement to the Roman saints Paul underlines that the heart should be totally involved in the vocal confession from the lips: "For with the heart man believeth unto righteousness; and with the mouth confession is made unto salvation." (Rom. 10:10. Italics added.) Thus one must not compromise or equivocate he must make a clean, full confession. When the apples in a barrel rot, it is not enough to throw away half of the spoiled apples from the barrel and replace them with fresh apples on top. This would result in all the apples rotting. Instead it would be necessary to empty the barrel and completely clean and scrub-perhaps disinfect the entire inside. Then the barrel could be safely filled again with apples. Likewise in clearing up problems in our lives it is well also to go to the bottom and confess all the transgressions so that repentance begins with no half-truths, no pretense, no unclean residue.

The Prophet Joseph Smith counseled: Again, let the Twelve and all Saints be willing to confess all their sins, and not keep back a part: and let the Twelve be humble, and not be exalted, and beware of pride, and not seek to excel one above another, but act for each other's good, and pray for one another, and honor our brother or make honorable mention of his name, and not backbite and devour our brother. [^1]

Voluntary Confession Is Best It follows that the ideal confession is voluntary, not forced. It is induced from within the offender's soul, not sparked by being found out in the sin. Such confession, like the voluntary humility of which Alma spoke (Al. 32: 13-16), is a sign of growing repentance. It indicates the sinner's conviction of sin and his desire to abandon the evil practices. The voluntary confession is infinitely more acceptable in the sight of the Lord than is forced admission, lacking humility, wrung from an individual by questioning when guilt is evident. Such forced admission is not evidence of the humble heart which calls forth the Lord's mercy: "... For I, the Lord, forgive sins, and am merciful unto those who confess their sins with humble hearts." (D&C 61:2. Italics added.)

The wicked Cain denied his guilt when first accused. He never did confess his grievous sin, but finally admitted it after he was discovered. Even when he was confronted with his dastardly act he still tried to evade it by saying, "Am I my brother's keeper?"

Years ago, a missionary in South America wrote a long letter of confession. He had broken the law of chastity. No one but the young girl and himself knew of the transgression, but he had promptly gone to his mission president and confessed it in total.

This missionary had been a member of the Church but a few months, and his many years of adulthood while "of the world" had produced a weakness hard to overcome. He quoted, "The spirit is willing but the flesh is weak." He did not excuse himself, nor claim any special immunities, nor rely on extenuating circumstances. He said: "I knew I had to pay the full penalty, I knew that in life or death I had to answer for the sin. I wanted to get it over with and be on my way to eventual forgiveness. I would rather confess, take my punishment, and get back as soon as possible on the road to forgiveness, and I did not want my eternity cluttered with these blemishes."

He was excommunicated from the Church. After what seemed an eternity to him, through his faithfulness and repentance he was baptized and finally his priesthood and temple blessings were restored to him. He found peace through complete repentance of which his total, voluntary confession was a vital part.

Unfortunately, many have to be brought to the involuntary or forced admission of sin. This comes when circumstances and information point to the guilt of the person who is seeking to hide his sin. It often precedes his final admission, and has led through the path of lies, then excuses after his lies have collapsed. This course heaps further sins upon him.

One young man came to me to be interviewed for a mission. He admitted nothing wrong except what he called a "little" masturbation. I had him come again. In the meantime, his conscience had pricked "a little." The next week he admitted he had done a "little" petting, nothing more. In subsequent visits he admitted one error after another, until finally he had admitted fornication.

Even making the admission upon confrontation is better than continuing to lie and evade the truth. In fact, many of those forced sooner or later to admit their sins do come to a full, sincere repentance and a humble desire to receive forgiveness. This again involves the same steps to repentance, with conviction, abandonment of sins, and confession, as fundamental to the process.

Confession to God's Servants In the Book of Mormon the following warning is given: And wo unto them that seek deed to hide their counsel from the Lord! And their works are in the dark: and they say: Who seeth us, and who knoweth us? ... But behold, I will show unto them, saith the Lord of Hosts, that I know all their works... (2 Ne. 27:27.)

Previously in this book is discussed the principle that we can hide nothing from God. True, it is possible sometimes, by lying and evasion and half-truth, to conceal the truth from God's servants on earth, but to what purpose? It will be impossible to lie to God on judgment day, so the unrepented sins will certainly be revealed then. Far better to confess them and forsake them now, and be rid of their burden!

How can one lie to the Lord or to his servants, especially when he may come to know that the Lord's servants may discern his lie? Section 1 of the Doctrine and Covenants reads: "And the rebellious shall be pierced with much sorrow; for their iniquities shall be spoken upon the housetops, and their secret acts shall be revealed." (D&C 1:3.) The commandment says, "Thou shalt not lie." Jacob proclaimed, "Wo unto the liar, for he shall be thrust down to hell." (2 Ne. 9:34.) And through the Prophet Joseph Smith the Lord gave the warning: "... And those who are not pure, and have said they were pure, shall be destroyed, saith the Lord God." (D&C 132:52.)

Those who lie to Church leaders forget or ignore an important rule and truth the Lord has set down: that when he has called men to high places in his kingdom and has placed on them the mantle of authority, a lie to them is tantamount to a lie to the Lord; a half-truth to his officials is like a half-truth to the Lord; a rebellion against his servants is comparable with a rebellion against the Lord; and any infraction against the Brethren who hold the gospel keys is a thought or an act against the Lord. As he expressed it: "For he that receiveth my servants receiveth me; and he that receiveth me receiveth my Father. (D&C 84:36-37.)

And he made it explicit again when he said: What I the Lord have spoken, I have spoken, and I excuse not myself: and though the heavens and the earth pass away, my word shall not pass away, but shall all be fulfilled, whether by mine own voice or by the voice of my servants, it is the same. (D&C 1:38. Italics added. See also 3 Ne. 28:34.)

In connection with men's thoughts I discussed in a previous chapter the discernment often given to God's servants. If they are in sweet attunement, Church leaders are entitled ". . . to have it given unto them to discern . . . lest there shall be any among you professing and yet be not of God." (D&C 46: 27.) Not only the General Authorities but bishops and stake and mission presidents have often discerned situations and thereby been enabled to protect the Church and bring the sinner to repentance. Let me quote one instance.

I sat at my desk on one occasion to interview a prospective missionary. When we had covered finance and health and like matters, I approached the moral requirements. I asked him if he was virtuous and free from all immorality.

He replied that he was free from such sins and indiscretions. I had no clear reason to question his word, but a sort of depression and uneasiness weighed heavily upon me. I hesitated a moment then returned to ask again: "Have you been immoral in any way? I must know. This is the final interview." He looked me in the eye and again disclaimed any unworthiness.

I somehow knew that all was not in order with this young man. I folded up the papers, set them on the edge of my desk-unaccepted, unsigned-and said to him, "I will need to see you later." He left the room and I went on about my work. Some hours later, there was a knock on the door and he entered in tears. The recommendation forms were still on the desk untouched. When he ceased his sobbing, he blurted out, "You knew I lied to you. You knew that I was not worthy to fill a mission." It transpired that he had been immoral over a period and had committed fornication many times. He remained home, repented, transformed his life, and became a faithful member of the Church.

The Lord has planned an orderly process in this matter. It is the true way even though there have been distortions and spurious programs advanced. Some have complained at the need for confessing one's sins to Church authorities, stating that this is like the practices of other churches. In many areas in Church service, there are the genuine and the spurious. But the fact that there is priestcraft is no reason for discarding the true priesthood; because there is a distorted form of baptism is no reason for renouncing the true gateway to the Church; because there are presumptuous, spurious claims and practices is no reason for the Church to forfeit the true and correct.

Confession may be made to Church leaders in confidence. A church dignitary is not required by law to reveal in court those matters given to him in total confidence as a spiritual advisor. He will keep sacred the confidences given him. The bishop or stake president will guard confidence as carefully and resolutely as he would want another to guard his own confidences if the situation were reversed. For instance, it would be wholly unwarranted for the ecclesiastical officer to confide in his wife or friends the secrets of another's heart, at least without the direction and permission of the confider.

Confession to Other People While the major sins such as those listed earlier in this chapter call for confession to the proper Church authorities, clearly such confession is neither necessary nor desirable for all sins. Those of lesser gravity but which have offended others marital differences, minor fits of anger, disagreements and such-should instead be confessed to the person or persons hurt and the matter should be cleared between the persons involved, normally without a reference to a Church authority. And if one confesses his sins, there is an obligation on the part of the Church membership to accept and forgive, to eradicate from their hearts the memory of the transgression or ill feelings. The Lord said in modern revelation through Joseph Smith: And if thy brother or sister offend thee, thou shalt take him or her between him or her and thee alone; and if he or she confess thou shalt be reconciled. And if he or she confess not thou shalt deliver him or her up unto the church, not to the members, but to the elders—. And if thy brother or sister offend many, he or she shall be chastened before many. And if any one offend openly, he or she shall be rebuked openly, that he or she may be ashamed. And if he or she confess not, he or she shall be delivered up unto the law of God. If any shall offend in secret, he or she shall be rebuked in secret, that he or she may have opportunity to confess in secret to him or her whom he or she has offended, and to God—. And thus shall ye conduct in all things. (D&C 42:88-93.)

And to the Church in former days these words were given: "Confess your faults one to another, and pray one for another, that ye may be healed." (Jas. 5:16. Italics added.)

When one has wronged another in deep transgression or in injuries of lesser magnitude, he, the aggressor, who gave the offense, regardless of the attitude of the other party, should immediately make amends by confessing to the injured one and doing all in his power to clear up the matter and again establish good feelings between the two parties.

Confession Not to Be Repeated President Brigham Young spoke out on the matter of confession of sin as follows: I believe in coming out and being plain and honest with that which should be made public, and in keeping to yourselves that which should be kept. If you have your weaknesses, keep them hid from your brethren as much as you can. You never hear me ask the people to tell their follies... do not tell about your nonsensical conduct that nobody knows of but yourselves. [^2]

President Young's statement suggests that he was annoyed by many people coming to confess follies of a minor nature. In my own experience there have been those who seemed to have an obsession to confess their weaknesses, and time and time again they have returned to my office to add another little confession or another little detail of the earlier confession. Undoubtedly, President Young had people like this who would be willing to confess sins to be able to get an audience with the Prophet. His advice here is to keep to oneself follies which do not concern others. Certainly it is not necessary to parade one's minor errors. However, a major sin involves more than the two contracting parties. The law of God has been broken; the law of the Church has been involved. The transgressors have offended their God, the Church, the people of the Church. Thus the confession of major sins should be made to the appropriate Church leaders, while less grave sins should be confessed to the persons offended.

Generally it is unwise and quite unnecessary to confess the same sin over and over again. If a major transgression has been fully confessed to and cleared by the proper authority, the person may usually clear himself in any future interview by explaining that this is so and giving the authority's name. Providing there has been no repetition of the offense, nor a commission of any other serious transgression, usually the matter may be considered settled.

Peace Through Confession Confession brings peace. How often have people departed from my office relieved and lighter of heart than for a long time! Their burdens were lighter, having been shared. They were free. The truth had made them free.

Having warned of excruciating pain and punishments, the Lord said: "... Confess your sins, lest you suffer these punishments of which I have spoken ." (D&C 19:20.) There is substantial psychological strength in confession. Confession is not only the revealing of errors to proper authorities, but the sharing of burdens to lighten them. One lifts at least part of his burden and places it on other shoulders which are able and willing to help carry the load. Then there comes satisfaction in having taken another step in doing all that is possible to rid oneself of the burden of transgression.

Those who take the course of honest confession of their sin further the process of repentance, of adjustment in their lives, of reconciliation with God. To illustrate this I quote below a letter received from one young transgressor who, following excommunication, was finding his way back to the blessings of the gospel and the Church.

I am writing this letter hoping I may soon be rebaptized into the Church. I was excommunicated.

I was very sorry for my sins and sickened by them. I read a great deal in the Book of Mormon, seeking somewhat to justify myself not going to the mission president to confess. I read about Alma and Corianton and tried to convince myself that, since I had repented (I thought), I would not need to confess to anyone but God. I did pray a great deal. After everyone else had gone to bed, I would remain up reading and praying. Finally one night, a voice from within me said, "You know what you must do, so do it." A few days later at a conference, I confessed to the mission president—. I had no choice if I was to ever obtain forgiveness.

After I had confessed, even knowing I would be excommunicated, I felt an extremely sweet peace in my soul ... and I thank God ... that he gave me courage to do it. When I came home, humiliated and fearful, my family was extremely kind and understanding as was the bishop who ... gave me an opportunity to get up in priesthood meeting ... and ... ask ... forgiveness. It was extremely difficult ... but I am thankful I did it. Then the bishop told me I should ... shake hands with the people and not slink away. I'm thankful I did that also for it made things easier for me. They seemed to forgive me and they accepted me back. Their true Christianity helped me to have strength to go to all the meetings I could attend. Since this weekend was fast Sunday, I started fasting Friday after supper and Saturday I went into the mountains and spent about five hours by myself, thinking and praying, and I read part of the Book of Mormon, particularly the Book of Enos.

While praying aloud to my Father, I tasted the most bitter sorrow that I have ever felt. I had a slight indication of what it really is to suffer godly sorrow for sin—. I had pleaded that I would be forgiven for my sins and for being such a great cause of suffering to my family and to the Lord jesus Christ. I understood ever so vaguely that Christ did take upon himself my sins and He suffered untold sorrow for me. I begged for forgiveness, and for release from the deadening, prisoner-like effects of sin, and to know that I was forgiven.

I felt impressed ... that I would receive forgiveness if I did continue to be humble, fast, and pray. I fear I will have to suffer sorrow as I did yesterday many times again before all the evil effects of sin will be lifted out of me and I will feel that freedom that my spirit craves. I ask in all humility, realizing that the responsibilities of membership are great, that I might be accepted back into the Church and back onto the path I departed from. I know God lives and that his Son Jesus Christ really did take upon himself our sins and that he lives today. I know the Church was restored through the beloved joseph Smith and that all the keys remain with the Church today—. Sincerely,

P.S. I observe the Word of Wisdom and I have been giving my tithing to my mother. She pays it to the bishop in my father's name. I felt that the money was the Lord's and I could not steal it. I have also been clean in mind and act since my excommunication.

This young man had received a conviction of his guilt; he had abandoned the sin; he had confessed the transgression in the proper way. He was well on the way to complete forgiveness and to the peace of soul which it brings.

Smith, Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 155.

Journal of Discourses, Vol. 8, p.326.

---
Notas:
[^1] Dante, Divine Comedy.
[^2] Melvin J. Ballard, "Three Degrees of Glory."
