Spencer W. Kimball, Miracle of Forgiveness ( 1969)

Chapter Fourteen

Restitution

If the wicked restore the pledge, give again that he had robbed, walk in the statutes of life, without committing iniquity; he shall surely live, he shall not die. None of his sins that he hath committed shall be mentioned unto him— —Ezekiel 33: 15-16

IN PREVIOUS CHAPTERS WE HAVE TRACED SOME OF WHAT are perhaps the more obvious steps in repentance the awakening conviction of sin, the renouncing or abandoning of sin, the confession of sin. When a person has experienced the deep sorrow and humility induced by a conviction of sin; when he has cast off the sin and resolutely determined to abhor it henceforth; when he has humbly confessed his sin to God and to the proper persons on earth-when these things are done there remains the requirement of restitution. He must restore that which he damaged, stole, or wronged.

President Joseph F. Smith put restitution in its proper place as a part of the pattern of repentance. His statement is quoted previously in this book but is repeated here by way of emphasis: True repentance is not only sorrow for sins, and humble penitence and contrition before God, but it involves the necessity of turning away from them, a discontinuance of all evil practices and deeds, a thorough reformation of life, a vital change from evil to good, from vice to virtue, from darkness to light. Not only so, but to make restitution, so far as it is possible, for all the wrongs we have done, to pay our debts, and to restore to God and man their rights that which is due them from us. [^1]

Restitution Always Part of Repentance There are many scriptures which show that restitution is an important part of true repentance. Some of them even go so far as to prescribe the amount of restitution which should be made in return for a wrong. For example, Moses taught: If a man shall steal an ox, or a sheep, and kill it, or sell it; he shall restore five oxen for an ox, and four sheep for a sheep. If the theft be certainly found in his hand alive, whether it be ox, or ass, or sheep; he shall restore double. If a man shall cause a field or vineyard to be eaten, and shall put in his beast, and shall feed in another man's field; of the best of his own field, and of the best of his own vineyard, shall he make restitution. If fire break out, and catch in thorns, so that the stacks of corn, or the standing corn, or the field, be consumed therewith; he that kindled the fire shall surely make restitution. (Exod. 22:1, 4, 5, 6. Italics added.)

It is true that Moses was concerned with governing and controlling a population larger than many of our modern cities, and to that extent some think of his laws as being secular in purport. But observe that in the quotation which follows, the Lord equates actions against one's neighbor with committing "a trespass against the Lord" or, as he goes on to say, with sin. Thus the restoration spoken of was to be not merely a legal requirement for the maintenance of earthly justice but also part of the process of repentance from sin.

If a soul sin, and commit a trespass against the Lord, and lie unto his neighbor in that which was delivered him to keep, or in fellowship, or in a thing taken away by violence, or hath deceived his neighbor; Or have found that which was lost, and lieth concerning it, and sweareth falsely; in any of all these that a man doeth, sinning therein: Then it shall be, because he hath sinned, and is guilty, that he shall restore that which he took violently away, or the thing which he hath deceitfully gotten, or that which was delivered him to keep, or the lost thing which he found, Or all that about which he hath sworn falsely; he shall even restore it in the principal, and shall add the fifth part more thereto, and give it unto him to whom it appertaineth, in the day of his trespass offering. (Lev. 6:2-5.)

There is frequent mention of a four-fold restitution for wrongdoing. In a law given in previous gospel dispensations and reiterated in our own time the Lord provides as follows: And again, verily I say unto you, if after thine enemy has come upon thee the first time, he repent and come unto thee praying thy forgiveness, thou shalt forgive him, and shalt hold it no more as a testimony against thine enemy— And so on unto the second and third time; and as oft as thine enemy repenteth of the trespass wherewith he has trespassed against thee, thou shalt forgive him, until seventy times seven. And if he trespass against thee and repent not the first time, nevertheless thou shalt forgive him. And if he trespass against thee the second time, and repent not, nevertheless thou shalt forgive him. And if he trespass against thee the third time, and repent not, thou shalt also forgive him. But if he trespass against thee the fourth time thou shalt not forgive him, but shalt bring these testimonies before the Lord; and they shall not be blotted out until he repent and reward thee four-fold in all things wherewith he has trespassed against thee. And if he do this, thou shalt forgive him with all thine heart; and if he do not this, I the Lord, will avenge thee of thine enemy an hundred-fold. (D&C 98:39-45. Italics added.)

One may trespass in ignorance. Should anyone be in sin yet be unaware of the evil nature of his actions, he should be required to make restitution so far as possible when brought to a realization of his sin.

A classic example of restitution as part of repentance is that of Zacchaeus. This rich publican was small of physical stature but mighty in moral size. From his special vantage point in the sycamore tree he could see the Lord who was passing that way in the midst of a multitude. Not only was he to see the Master but to be actually his host, for the Savior commanded him to climb down in haste, "... for today I must abide at thy house." (Luke 19:5.)

The inhabitants of Jericho who saw this incident complained that Christ was to be guest in the home of a sinner. As if to reassure the Savior that his confidence was not misplaced: — Zacchaeus stood, and said unto the Lord; Behold, Lord, the half of my goods I give to the poor and if I have taken anything from any man by false accusation, I restore him fourfold. And Jesus said unto him, This day is salvation come to this house, forsomuch as he also is a son of Abraham. (Luke 19:8-9. Italics added.)

Complete Restitution Sometimes Impossible From these quotations and examples it is quite clear that the repentant sinner is required to make restitution insofar as it is possible. I say "insofar as it is possible" because there are some sins for which no adequate restitution can be made, and others for which only partial restitution is possible.

A thief or burglar may make partial restitution by returning that which was stolen. A liar may make the truth known and correct to some degree the damage done by the lie. A gossip who has slandered the character of another may make partial restitution through strenuous effort to restore the good name of the person he harmed. If by sin or carelessness the wrongdoer has destroyed property, he may restore or pay for it in full or in part.

If a man's actions have brought sorrow and disgrace to his wife and children, in his restitution he must make every effort to restore their confidence and love by an overabundance of filial devotion and fidelity. This is true also of wives and mothers. Likewise if children have wronged their parents, a part of their program of repentance must be to right those wrongs and to honor their parents.

As a rule there are many things which a repentant soul can do to make amends. "A broken heart and a contrite spirit" will usually find ways to restore to some extent. The true spirit of repentance demands that he who injures shall do everything in his power to right the wrong.

A man who had confessed infidelity was forgiven by his wife, who saw much in him to commend and believed in his total repentance. To him, I said: "Brother Blank, you should from this day forward be the best husband a woman ever had. You should be willing to forgive her little eccentricities, overlook her weaknesses, for she has forgiven you the ten-thousand-talent sin and you can afford to forgive numerous little hundred-pence errors."

No Adequate Restoration for Murder As to crimes for which no adequate restoration is possible, I have suggested in a previous chapter that perhaps the reason murder is an unforgivable sin is that, once having taken a life whether that life be innocent or reprobate-the life-taker cannot restore it. He may give his own life as payment, but this does not wholly undo the injury done by his crime. He might support the widow and children; he might do many other noble things; but a life is gone and the restitution of it in full is impossible. Repentance in the ordinary sense seems futile.

Murder is so treacherous and so far-reaching! Those who lose their possessions may be able to recover their wealth. Those defamed may still be able to prove themselves above reproach. Even the loss of chastity leaves the soul in mortality with opportunity to recover and repent and to make amends to some degree. But to take a life, whether someone else's or one's own, cuts off the victim's experiences of mortality and thus his opportunity to repent, to keep God's commandments in this earth life. It interferes with his potential of having "glory added upon [his head] for ever and ever." (Abraham 3:26.)

Restitution for Loss of Chastity Also far-reaching is the effect of loss of chastity. Once given or taken or stolen it can never be regained. Even in a forced contact such as rape or incest, the injured one is greatly outraged. If she has not cooperated and contributed to the foul deed, she is of course in a more favorable position. There is no condemnation where there is no voluntary participation. It is better to die in defending one's virtue than to live having lost it without a struggle.

As stated throughout this book, while one may recover in large measure from sexual sins they are nevertheless heinous, and because of their gravity the Lord has placed them very close to the unpardonable ones in order of seriousness.

The principle of restitution is brought into focus where two unmarried young people have entered into sin by which both lives are damaged, and especially if virtue has been taken. In such circumstances serious consideration should be given to a marriage which will hold the sin in one family. Why should they not marry when by their iniquitous act they have plunged themselves into an adult role?

This is especially true if pregnancy results from the sin. In this situation it is the girl who suffers most. She must not have an abortion, for that would add serious sin to serious sin. She carries most of the burdens, while the boy often goes penalty-free. The girl must go through the uncomfortable nine months with its distress, deprivations, limitations and embarrassments, and then the pain and expense of delivery and the difficult life afterward. It is a cowardly boy who would not propose marriage, pay the costs, share the deprivations and embarrassment. Yet many young men have walked away and abandoned the girl to all the devastating payments for the sin of them both. Parents frequently excuse the son on one pretext or another, and leave the girl to suffer for the sins of them both. Sometimes, parents of the boy curiously feel magnanimous when they offer to pay the actual financial costs of the delivery, not taking into account that the financial is a one-time experience, while the girl has the problems throughout her life, and they are heavy burdens.

To buy the girl off or abandon her to her lifelong problem is not courageous, nor fair, nor right. The time will come when every individual will pay full price, and perhaps with interest, every obligation incurred, even though it was hidden or covered at the time.

The young girl who sins should realize that all the sorrows, inconvenience and suffering she goes through incident to the carrying and bearing of a child do not fully constitute forgiveness for her sin. She must repent and make her proper adjustment. Let the boy realize too that none of the suffering of the girl minimizes his guilt, but rather magnifies it. For many reasons he may not be prepared to settle down to family life, but he has by his immoral act projected himself into adulthood and has brought upon himself responsibilities which he will do well to accept and discharge as honorably as he can. Like the girl, he needs to find his way to total repentance, and the road leads through acceptance of responsibility, not away from it.

The prophets understood clearly the weaknesses of men and the likelihood of their running away from their responsibilities in this area. Moses recorded the law: And if a man entice a maid that is not betrothed, and lie with her, he shall surely endow her to be his wife. (Exod. 22:16.)

And again: If a man find a damsel that is a virgin, which is not betrothed, and lay hold on her, and lie with her, and they be found; —She shall be his wife; because he hath humbled her, he may not put her away all his days. (Deut. 22:28-29.)

For the boy, perhaps the matter can be glossed over and covered up by parents who seek to avoid publicity and a scandal, but have they realized what they have done for their son's soul when he doubles his transgression by failing in his repentance? True repentance means restitution, meeting every obligation and restoring every damage so far as is possible. Yet it is strange how many times parents of the boy decide that the girl who was good enough for him to date suddenly became promiscuous and therefore is now unworthy of their son; strange also how few of the parents charge the boy with promiscuity and consequently encourage their son to pass up his responsibilities, even to his own detriment; strange how many parents charge the girl with having trapped their son and now rate their boy "holier than thou" and the girl not worthy of further consideration in the matter!

I have known many young couples who had been loose in morals and who, having prostituted each other's bodies found they were to become parents. In some instances, each party accused the other; each began to distrust the other; each began to hate the other. They both admitted their sin but now the boy was trying to "crawl out." His parents were encouraging him to get out of it. They knew the many problems which marriage brings.

In my office I talked to a partly-repentant young couple about marriage-a quiet, immediate marriage with no frills, no pomp and no publicity. They had moved to forfeit many of those things when they disregarded the law of chastity. He was quite willing to marry when the two came in alone at first, but when he came the second time he had been brainwashed by his parents and he would not consider it.

I urged marriage by the bishop at the home. The girl, beginning now to realize her predicament, was willing in spite of her fast-diminishing respect or affection for the weakening, selfish boy. Not so the boy! He asked: "Why? Why should we marry? How could we marry? I have no job. I haven't finished my education. Where would we live? How could I pay doctor and hospital bills? How could we get along without a car? How could we assume the responsibilities of a family and parenthood?"

Then I asked some questions: "Why did you precipitate yourselves into this demanding situation? Why did you do the act which would make you parents? Why did you engage in associations which demand home, employment, status? Your completely irresponsible act and your reaction to it brand you immediately as immature. You do not know the meaning of responsibility. You seem to be highly interested in yourself and your conveniences, and your desires. Are you going to run and leave the girl to carry your baby with all your penalties too? It is time you both grew up and matured and faced realities. This situation is not the intention of either of you but it is the result of your loose actions. You made the choice when you broke the law of chastity. You knew it was wrong. You knew this problem could result. Now if you are going to grow up and meet life's issues; if you are going to be fair and just; if you are going to start out a good life on a straight road, start now to meet your responsibilities. When you gave up your virtue that hour your freedom was replaced with tyrannical fetters (for transgression is a ball and chain, it is handcuffs, hard and heavy) you accepted shackles and limitations and sorrows and eternal regrets when you could have had freedom with peace.

"Today is a good day to start a new life of mature responsibility. Cease blaming others, start to accept your own responsibility. Make up your own mind. You brought this about together, now solve your problems together. Forgive each other and move along and make the best of a difficult situation, but do not run away from it.

"You two have committed a heinous sin. Do you wish to carry this terrible burden all your days or would you like to be forgiven for it? To be forgiven one must repent. Repentance means not only to convict yourselves of the horror of the sin, but to confess it, abandon it, and restore to all who have been damaged to the total extent possible; then spend the balance of your lives trying to live the commandments of the Lord so he can eventually pardon you and cleanse you."

Restoring and Forgiving I have known many young couples who slipped in their courtship and committed the serious sin, but who married and made a good life of it and largely "lived down" the embarrassment of their youth. In a difficult situation wherein complete restitution was impossible they did the best they could at that point and, having repented, were forgiven.

In the process of repentance we must restore completely where possible, otherwise restore to the maximum degree attainable. And through it all we must remember that the pleading sinner, desiring to make restitution for his acts, must also forgive others of all offenses committed against him. The Lord will not forgive us unless our hearts are fully purged of all hate, bitterness and accusation against our fellowmen.

Smith, Gospel Doctrine, pp.100-101.

---
Notas:
[^1] Dante, Divine Comedy.
