Spencer W. Kimball, Miracle of Forgiveness ( 1969)

Chapter Fifteen

Keeping God's Commandments Brings Forgiveness

Nevertheless, he that repents and does the commandments of the Lord shall be forgiven. —Doctrine & Covenants 1:32 And in nothing doth man offend God, or against none is his wrath kindled, save those who confess not his hand in all things, and obey not his commandments. —Doctrine & Covenants 59:21

In his preface to modern revelation, the Lord outlined what is one of the most difficult requirements in true repentance. For some it is the hardest part of repentance, because it puts one on guard for the remainder of his life. The Lord says: —I the Lord cannot look upon sin with the least degree of allowance; Nevertheless, he that repents and does the commandments of the Lord shall be forgiven. (D&C 1:31-32. Italics added.)

This scripture is most precise. First, one repents. Having gained that ground he then must live the commandments of the Lord to retain his vantage point. This is necessary to secure complete forgiveness.

No step in the process of repentance is universally easy, which is one reason why it is preferable to stay clear of the chains of sin. The degree of difficulty in each step varies with the participant.

Devotion and Effort Required Under the humiliation of a guilty conscience, with perhaps the possibility of detection and consequent scandal and shame, with a striving spirit urging toward adjustment-with such motivation the first steps of sorrow, abandonment, confession and restitution may be less difficult for some. But keeping God's commandments is a challenge to the faith and will power of the most resolute soul.

Doing the Lord's commandments, as the above scripture requires, is an effort extending through the balance of life. "Unto the end" is a phrase used often in the scriptures, and it means, literally, to the end of life. This phrase now takes on new and added meaning and significance to the repentant one: "... He only is saved who endureth unto the end." (D&C 53:7.) And again: "If thou wilt do good, yea, and hold out faithful to the end, thou shalt be saved in the kingdom of God." (D&C 6:13. Italics added.)

Since all of us sin in greater or lesser degree, we are all in need of constant repentance, of continually raising our sights and our performance. One can hardly do the commandments of the Lord in a day, a week, a month or a year. This is an effort which must be extended through the remainder of one's years. To accomplish it every soul should develop the same spirit of devotion and dedication to the work of the Lord as the bishop and the Relief Society president enjoy. Most often theirs is near total devotion.

This devotion needs to be applied as much in mental as in spiritual and physical effort. To understand the gospel so that true obedience can be intelligently given to its requirements takes time and application. The child born in the Church goes to Primary and Sunday School; later attends MIA and seminary and institute; works in scouting and exploring; later participates in Relief Society and much other specialized works, besides serving and attending and participating in other meetings and conferences, and all this in addition to the study of the gospel and many hours on his knees in prayer. The adult convert can make up much of this training by intensive study and pondering and prayer.

Yet many people expect to get a knowledge and understanding of the whole gospel plan and its eternities of implications and associations in a very short period of time. They are quite willing to go years and years with intense study to partly master one of the rudiments of total knowledge-to become a dentist, a doctor, a judge, a professor, a specialist in any line-yet many reject the gospel because it may not be discerned and understood in a few easy lessons. They are not "doing the commandments," hence they do not repent.

Repentance Must Be Wholehearted In connection with repentance, the scriptures use the phrase, "with all his heart" (see D&C 42:25). Obviously this rules out any reservations. Repentance must involve an all-out, total surrender to the program of the Lord. That transgressor is not fully repentant who neglects his tithing, misses his meetings, breaks the Sabbath, fails in his family prayers, does not sustain the authorities of the Church, breaks the Word of Wisdom, does not love the Lord nor his fellowmen. A reforming adulterer who drinks or curses is not repentant. The repenting burglar who has sex play is not ready for forgiveness. God cannot forgive unless the transgressor shows a true repentance which spreads to all areas of his life.

The Lord knows, as does the individual concerned, the degree of contrition exhibited, and the reward will be received accordingly, for God is just. He knows the heart.

He knows whether or not one is making but a show of repentance. Feigning repentance or bluffing is futile, for both the transgressor and the Lord know the degree of sincerity.

Bringing Gospel to Others Aids Repentance "Doing the commandments" includes the many activities required of the faithful, only a few of which are mentioned above. General good works and devotion accompanied by constructive attitudes are what is needed. In addition, a sound way to neutralize the effects of sin in one's life is to bring the light of the gospel to others who do not now enjoy it. This can mean working with both inactive members of the Church and nonmembers-perhaps more usually the latter. Note how the Lord has related the forgiveness of sins to the bearing of testimony respecting the latter-day work: For I will forgive you of your sins with this commandment-that you remain steadfast in your minds in solemnity and the spirit of prayer, in bearing testimony to all the world of those things which are communicated unto you. (D&C 84:61). Italics added.)

The Lord seemingly is disappointed with many who fail to bear their testimonies, as he says: But with some I am not well pleased, for they will not open their mouths, but they hide the talent which I have given unto them, because of the fear of man. Wo unto such, for mine anger is kindled against them. (D&C 60:2.)

This failure to bear testimony would be particularly serious with those who have deadly sins to overcome and neutralize. Of special note is the scripture given in 1831 through the Prophet Joseph Smith to himself and his associated elders en route to Zion. Addressing them, the Lord said: Nevertheless, ye are blessed, for the testimony which ye have borne is recorded in heaven for the angels to look upon; ... and your sins are forgiven you. (D&C 62:3.)

Here he promises a forgiveness of sins to those elders who had been valiant in proselyting and bearing testimony. The angels as well as the Father in heaven would certainly rejoice over those members who with great sincerity would overcome their sins and receive remission of them, partly through their efforts to raise the spiritual standard of their fellow creatures by bearing testimony of the restored gospel.

Another statement of the Lord-this one through James-reinforces the value of the testimony in overcoming sins. The testimony comes from study, prayer, and living the commandments, and the repetition of the testimony builds and stabilizes it. James says that through this missionary work of saving souls of others, one comes to the point of bringing salvation and sanctification to himself.

Brethren, if any of you do err from the truth, and one convert him; Let him know, that he which converteth the sinner from the error of his way shall save a soul from death, and shall hide a multitude of sins. (Jas. 5:19-20.)

Every person who is beginning the long journey of emancipating himself from the thralldom of sin and evil will find comfort in the thought expressed by James. We could expand it somewhat and remind the transgressor that every testimony he bears, every prayer he offers, every sermon he preaches, every scripture he reads, every help he gives to stimulate and raise others-all these strengthen him and raise him to higher levels.

The proper motivation for missionary work of any kind, as for all Church service, is of course love for fellowmen, but always such work has its by-product effect on one's own life. Thus as we become instruments in God's hands in changing the lives of others our own lives cannot help being lifted. One can hardly help another to the top of the hill without climbing there himself.

Not all of us can engage in full-time missionary work, where one might have opportunity to explain the gospel and bear testimony of its divinity many times every day. Nor can we all be formally set apart as stake missionaries, where opportunities like those of the full-time missionaries occur, though to a somewhat lesser degree. But what every member most definitely can do is follow President McKay's inspired slogan, "Every member a missionary." He can befriend and fellowship nonmember neighbors, friends and acquaintances, and by his interest and association strive to bring those nonmembers to the point where they will willingly receive the stake or full-time missionaries. No one needs to be concerned lest he cannot properly teach his friends the gospel. The set-apart missionaries are equipped to do that. What every member ought to do, by good example and by bearing testimony, is to portray to nonmembers the joys of gospel living and understanding, and thus help to bring them to the stage where they will accept more formal teaching.

In addition to the possibilities in missionary work, in areas such as quorum and auxiliary and committee work of the Church almost limitless opportunities are afforded to lift others, thus blessing oneself. Monthly there are testimony meetings held where each one has the opportunity to bear witness. To by-pass such opportunities is to fail to that extent to pile up credits against the accumulated errors and transgressions.

Faith and Works In view of the emphasis thus far made on the importance of good works in returning from sin and establishing a repentant life, it may be well to say a word about the idea of salvation by faith alone. Some people not of our Church like to quote, in support of that concept, the following words of Paul: For by grace are ye saved through faith; and that not of yourselves: it is the gift of God: Not of works, lest any man should boast. (Eph. 2:8-9.)

One of the most fallacious doctrines originated by Satan and propounded by man is that man is saved alone by the grace of God; that belief in Jesus Christ alone is all that is needed for salvation. Along with all the other works necessary for man's exaltation in the kingdom of God this could rule out the need for repentance. It could give license for sin and, since it does not require man to work out his salvation, could accept instead lip service, death-bed "repentance," and shallow, meaningless confession of sin.

Church members are fortunate indeed to have scriptures brought forth in this age which clarify this and other doctrinal questions beyond all doubt. One passage in the Book of Mormon, written perhaps with the same intent as Paul's statement above-to stress and induce appreciation for the gracious gift of salvation offered on condition of obedience-is particularly enlightening: For we labor diligently to write, to persuade our children, and also our brethren, to believe in Christ, and to be reconciled to God; for we know that it is by grace that we are saved, after all we can do. (2 Ne. 25:23. Italics added.)

And the Lord further emphasized the fact: And no unclean thing can enter into his kingdom; therefore nothing entereth into his rest save it be those who have washed their garments in my blood, because of their faith, and the repentance of all their sins, and their faithfulness unto the end. Now this is the commandment: Repent, all ye ends of the earth, and come unto me and be baptized in my name, that ye may be sanctified by the reception of the Holy Ghost, that ye may stand spotless before me at the last day. (3 Ne. 27:19-20.)

This makes clear the two facets, neither of which alone would bring the individual salvation the grace of Christ, particularly as represented by his atoning sacrifice, and individual effort. However good a person's works, he could not be saved had Jesus not died for his and everyone else's sins. And however powerful the saving grace of Christ, it brings exaltation to no man who does not comply with the works of the gospel.

Of course we need to understand terms. If by the word "salvation" is meant the mere salvation or redemption from the grave, the "grace of God" is sufficient. But if the term "salvation" means returning to the presence of God with eternal progression, eternal increase, and eventual godhood, for this one certainly must have the "grace of God," as it is generally defined, plus personal purity, overcoming of evil, and the good "works" made so important in the exhortations of the Savior and his prophets and apostles.

Few, if any, have understood these matters better than the Apostle Paul, who would have been surprised that any other construction should be put upon his words. Throughout his writings he stresses the importance of deeds of righteousness. He preaches against sin of any kind, urging repentance and indicating that forgiveness is a necessary element of salvation. He declares in his Epistle to the Romans that "the wrath of God is revealed from heaven against all ... unrighteousness of men." (Rom. 1:18.) He not only condemns all evil things but promises that God "will render to every man according to his deeds." (Rom. 2:6.) He promises eternal life to those "who by patient continuance in well doing seek for glory and honour and immortality." (Rom. 2:7.) He emphasizes, "For not the hearers of the law are just before God, but the doers of the law shall be justified." (Rom. 2:13.) And as discussed previously in this book, he points out specific sins in considerable number and calls on men to repent of them.

Repentant Life Seeks Perfection One could multiply references almost indefinitely but enough has been said to establish the point that the repentant life, the life which constantly reaches for perfection, must rely on works as well as on faith. The gospel is a program of action-of doing things. Man's immortality and eternal life are God's goals. (Moses 1:39.) Immortality has been accomplished by the Savior's sacrifice. Eternal life hangs in the balance awaiting the works of men.

This progress toward eternal life is a matter of achieving perfection. Living all the commandments guarantees total forgiveness of sins and assures one of exaltation through that perfection which comes by complying with the formula the Lord gave us. In his Sermon on the Mount he made the command to all men: "Be ye therefore perfect, even as your Father which is in heaven is perfect." (Matt. 5:48.) Being perfect means to triumph over sin. This is a mandate from the Lord. He is just and wise and kind. He would never require anything from his children which was not for their benefit and which was not attainable. Perfection therefore is an achievable goal.

The Savior voiced the same instruction to his Nephite leaders when he told them the requirements of the gospel: to be like himself. (3 Ne. 12:48.) The Savior had lived the commands of his gospel; now it was required of all men to likewise live the commandments. Nephi quoted the Savior along the same line: And also, the voice of the Son came unto me, saying: He that is baptized in my name, to him will the Father give the Holy Ghost, like unto me; wherefore, follow me, and do the things which ye have seen me do. (2 Ne. 31:12.)

The Lord amplified his statement somewhat to the Nephites when, after long dissertations on growing perfect through living the gospel, he asked his disciples the pertinent question: "Therefore, what manner of men ought ye to be?" He may have been merely trying to impress them further with the truth and reinforce it, or he may have been asking in order to note how well they had been grasping the vital truths he was teaching them. He did not wait for their response, but followed the question quickly with the answer: "Verily I say unto you, even as I am." (3 Ne. 27:27.)

Perfection really comes through overcoming. The Lord revealed through John: "To him that overcometh will I grant to sit with me in my throne, even as I also overcame, and am set down with my Father in his throne." (Rev. 3:21.)

It seems that evil is always about us. It has been speculated by one of the earlier Brethren that there are hundreds of evil spirits working against each of us. Accordingly, we must be alert constantly. We catalogue our weaknesses and move in against them to overcome them. Christ became perfect through overcoming. Only as we overcome shall we become perfect and move toward godhood. As I have indicated previously, the time to do this is now, in mortality.

Someone once said: "A fellow who is planning to reform is one step behind. He ought to quit planning and get on with the job. Today is the day." Certainly self-mastery is a continuous program, a journey, not a single start. Men do not suddenly become righteous any more than a tiny acorn suddenly becomes an oak. Advancement to perfection can nevertheless be rapid if one resolutely strides toward the goal.

Perspective Is Important In the march to perfection through the conquering of sin, it is important to have the right perspective. For example, some people get means and ends reversed. Many feel that the Word of Wisdom is for the principal purpose of increasing our health, increasing our mortal life, but a more careful study of the revelation (D&C 89) reveals that there is a deeper purpose. Of course, total observance will strengthen one's body, make it survive longer so that there will be a longer time in which to perfect the body and, especially, the spirit looking toward eternal status and eternal joys. The Lord made solemn promises to ". . . all Saints who remember to keep and do these sayings, walking in obedience to the commandments." (D&C 89:18. Italics added.) Here the commitments of the Lord were two-fold. First, he promised to such who obey that they shall "... receive health in their navel and marrow to their bones...," that as a consequence of good health physically they "shall run and not be weary, and shall walk and not faint." This is a glorious promise.

But the spiritual promises greatly exceed the physical. For those who observe these particular instructions and are obedient to all the Lord's commandments, the blessings really are increased and magnified. Such saints, he promises, shall be passed over by the angel of death and shall not be slain. This promise returns us to Exodus where we read that the Lord tested the faith of the children of Israel to see if they would follow the great Moses.

Now the promise in the revelation above quoted is similar and dissimilar to ancient Israel's test, as comparisons generally are. In both circumstances there would be the element of passover, the element of obedience of faith without knowing all the reasons why. The "obedience of faith" is basic. Without it the miracle cannot happen. Had Israel not obeyed, their firstborn sons would not have been protected.

For observing the Word of Wisdom the reward is life, not only prolonged mortal life but life eternal. No promise is made through the Word of Wisdom that the faithful observer will not die: "For as in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive." (1 Cor. 15:22.) With ancient Israel it was physical life or physical death. In our modern promise, it is spiritual life or spiritual death. If one ignores "thence sayings" and fails in "obedience to the commandments" his death is certain, but if he obeys implicitly, his eternal life through perfection is assured. The angel of death cuts one short of mortal life for disobedience; the angel of light makes the way clear for the spiritual life eternal.

Initiative Is With the Individual We have discussed elsewhere that other class of people who are basically unrepentant because they are not "doing the commandments." They are Church members who are steeped in lethargy. They neither drink nor commit the sexual sins. They do not gamble nor rob nor kill. They are good citizens and splendid neighbors, but spiritually speaking they seem to be in a long, deep sleep. They are doing nothing seriously wrong except in their failures to do the right things to earn their exaltation. To such people as this, the words of Lehi might well apply: O that ye would awake; awake from a deep sleep, yea, even from the sleep of hell and shake off the awful chains by which ye are bound, which are the chains which bind the children of men, that they are carried away captive down to the eternal gulf of misery and woe. (2 Ne. 1:13.)

The third chapter of the Book of Revelation contains these words of the Savior: Behold, I stand at the door, and knock: if any man hear my voice, and open the door, I will come in to him, and will sup with him, and lie with me. (Rev. 3:20.)

Holman Hunt, the artist, felt inspired to capture this stirring scripture on canvas. One day he was showing his picture of "Christ Knocking at the Door" to a friend when the friend suddenly exclaimed: "There is one thing wrong about your picture."

"What is it?" inquired the artist.

"The door on which Jesus knocks has no handle," replied his friend.

"Ah," responded Mr. Hunt, "that is not a mistake. You see, this is the door to the human heart. It can only be opened from the inside."

And thus it is. Jesus may stand and knock, but each of us decides whether to open. The Spirit is powerless to compel a man to move. The man himself must take the initiative. He must himself desire to repent and take the specific steps. He must, as Paul counseled, "put on the whole armour of God," and thus insure that he is "able to stand against the wiles of the devil." (Eph. 6:11.) That armor is incomplete without steadfast effort to live God's commandments. Without such effort repentance too is incomplete. And incomplete repentance never brought complete forgiveness.
