Spencer W. Kimball, Miracle of Forgiveness ( 1969)

Chapter Sixteen

Avoiding Pitfalls

Watch and pray, that ye enter not into temptation: the spirit indeed is willing, but the flesh is weak. —Matthew 26:41

PAUL SPEAKS IN THESE WORDS ABOUT THE NEED FOR raising positive, unequivocal voices in the cause of truth: For if the trumpet give an uncertain sound, who shall prepare himself to the battle? So likewise ye, except ye utter by the tongue words easy to be understood, how shall it be known what is spoken? for ye shall speak into the air. There are, it may be, so many kinds of voices in the world, and none of them is without signification. (1 Cor. 14:8-10.)

Trumpets have sounded, warnings have been given, voices have been recorded in the chapters of this book. Pitfalls which beset youth and others, lurking dangers and forbidden paths for all have been pointed out. To know where the danger is and to be able to recognize it in all of its manifestations provides protection. The evil one is alert. He is always ready to deceive and claim as his victims every unwary one, every careless one, every rebellious one. Paul warned the Ephesians, "For we wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against principalities, against powers, against the rulers of the darkness of this world, against spiritual wickedness in high places." (Eph. 6:12.)

Insidiousness of Sin Whether or not one is repenting from grave sin, the true spirit of repentance which all should exhibit embraces a desire to stay away from sin. One cannot simultaneously be repentant and flirt with transgression.

Sin, like a journey, begins with the first step; and wisdom and experience teach that it is easier to resist the first temptation than later ones, when a pattern of transgression has begun to develop. This is demonstrated in the story of the lark. Sitting in the high branches of a tree safe from harm, he saw a traveler walking through the forest carrying a mysterious little black box. The lark flew down and perched on the traveler's shoulder. "What do you have in the little black box?" he asked.

"Worms," the traveler replied.

"Are they for sale?"

"Yes, and very cheaply, too. The price is only one feather for a worm."

The lark thought for a moment. "I must have a million feathers. Surely, I'll never miss one of them. Here is an opportunity to get a good dinner for no work at all." So he told the man he would buy one. He searched carefully under his wing for a tiny feather. He winced a bit as he pulled it out, but the size and quality of the worm made him quickly forget the pain. High up in the tree again he began to sing as beautifully as before.

The next day he saw the same man and once again he exchanged a feather for a worm. What a wonderful, effortless way to get dinner!

Each day thereafter the lark surrendered a feather, and each loss seemed to hurt less and less. In the beginning he had many feathers, but as the days passed he found it more difficult to fly. Finally, after the loss of one of his primary feathers, he could no longer reach the top of the tree, let alone fly up into the sky. In fact he could do no more than flutter a few feet in the air, and was forced to seek his food with the quarrelsome, bickering sparrows.

The man with the worms came no more, for there were no feathers to pay for the meals. The lark no longer sang because he was so ashamed of his fallen state.

This is how unworthy habits possess us first painfully, then more easily, until at last we find ourselves stripped of all that lets us sing and soar. This is how freedom is lost. This is how we become enmeshed in sin.

Serious sin enters into our lives as we yield first to little temptations. Seldom does one enter into deeper transgression without first yielding to lesser ones, which open the door to the greater. Giving an example of one type of sin, someone said, "An honest man doesn't suddenly become dishonest any more than a clean field suddenly becomes weedy."

It is extremely difficult, if not impossible, for the devil to enter a door that is closed. He seems to have no keys for locked doors. But if a door is slightly ajar, he gets his toe in, and soon this is followed by his foot, then by his leg and his body and his head, and finally he is in all the way.

This situation is reminiscent of the fable of the camel and his owner who were traveling across the desert sand dunes when a wind storm came up. The traveler quickly set up his tent and moved in, closing the flaps to protect himself from the cutting, grinding sands of the raging storm. The camel was of course left outside, and as the violent wind hurled the sand against his body and into his eyes and nostrils he found it unbearable and finally begged for entrance into the tent.

"There is room only for myself," said the traveler.

"But may I just get my nose in so I can breathe air not filled with sand?" asked the camel.

"Well, perhaps you could do that," replied the traveler, and he opened the flap ever so little and the long nose of the camel entered. How comfortable the camel was now!

But soon the camel became weary of the smarting sand on his eyes and ears, and he was tempted to ask again: "The wind-driven sand is like a rasp on my head. Could I put just my head in?"

Again, the traveler rationalized that to acquiesce would do him no damage, for the camel's head could occupy the space at the top of the tent which he himself was not using. So the camel put his head inside and the beast was satisfied again-but for a short while only.

"Just the front quarters," he begged, and again the traveler relented and soon the camel's front shoulders and legs were in the tent. Finally, by the same processes of pleading and of yielding, the camel's torso, his hind quarters and all were in the tent. But now it was too crowded for the two, and the camel kicked the traveler out into the wind and storm.

Like the camel, Lucifer readily becomes the master when one succumbs to his initial blandishments. Soon then the conscience is stilled completely, the evil power has full sway, and the door to salvation is closed until a thorough repentance opens it again.

The Savior's Example The importance of not accommodating temptation in the least degree is underlined by the Savior's example. Did not he recognize the danger when he was on the mountain with his fallen brother, Lucifer, being sorely tempted by that master tempter? He could have opened the door and flirted with danger by saying, "All right, Satan, I'll listen to your proposition. I need not succumb, I need not yield, I need not accept-but I'll listen."

Christ did not so rationalize. He positively and promptly closed the discussion, and commanded: "Get thee hence, Satan," meaning, likely, "Get out of my sight-get out of my presence-I will not listen-I will have nothing to do with you." Then, we read, "the devil leaveth him."

This is our proper pattern, if we would prevent sin rather than be faced with the much more difficult task of curing it. As I study the story of the Redeemer and his temptations, I am certain he spent his energies fortifying himself against temptation rather than battling with it to conquer it.

Don't Flirt with Temptation Bringing this into practical, modern terms, what does the principle mean? Among other things it means that to be unequivocally a teetotaler, one does not frequent bars or taverns, one never takes the first drink. To avoid the tobacco habit, one does not tamper with it nor associate in his leisure hours with those who smoke. One may perhaps work with sex deviates and be little damaged, but to play and relax with them is to invite temptation which may eventually be overpowering.

It means that the boy who dates a girl of questionable morals, even just for once, is taking chances. He is dealing with a powerful temptation. The girl who has even one date with a vicious fellow is in danger. The youth who takes one cigarette or one drink is "playing with fire." The young person who begins to yield to sexual intimacies is in a perilous position. One step calls for another, and to turn back is not easy.

To emphasize further by analogy the dangers of flirting with temptation there is an oft-told story of three men who applied for the job of driving the coaches for a transportation company. The successful applicant would be driving over high, dangerous and precipitous mountain roads. Asked how well he could drive, the first one replied: "I am a good, experienced driver. I can drive so close to the edge of the precipice that the wide metal tire of the vehicle will skirt the edge and never go off."

"That is good driving," said the employer.

The second man boasted, "Oh, I can do, better than that. I can drive so accurately that the tire of the vehicle will lap over, half of the tire on the edge of the precipice, and the other half in the air over the edge."

The employer wondered what the third man could offer, and was surprised and pleased to hear, "Well, sir, I can keep just as far away from the edge as possible." It is needless to ask which of the men got the job.

Watch for Vulnerable Spots Carelessness about proximity to sin makes us vulnerable to Satan's wiles. The mythical Achilles was physically vulnerable only in the heel his mother had held as she dipped him in the magic river to immunize him against physical harm; and a poisoned arrow in this heel ended a life of great valor on the field of battle. Like Achilles, most of us have vulnerable spots through which disaster can overtake us unless we are properly safeguarded and immunized.

Even the giant Goliath had a vulnerable spot. Elder Sterling W. Sill, in one of his delightful addresses, told us about this. I quote him: In the historic battle of David and Goliath, the giant from Gath had covered himself with a heavy coat of mail weighing 5,000 shekels of brass. He had a helmet of brass upon his head and greaves of brass upon his legs. The staff of his spear was like a weaver's beam and his spear's head weighed six hundred shekels of iron. Goliath must have felt very confident of success as he went out to meet the son of Jesse who was not yet even of military age. But Goliath made the mistake of trusting in his strength rather than protecting his vulnerability. His giant body and huge legs were enclosed in brass, but his large, broad forehead was left uncovered. This was the place at which David successfully aimed his slingshot, and Goliath fell as Achilles had fallen, because he was assaulted where he was unprotected. [^1]

History provides many other examples of strength and pride, both individual and national, which succumbed to attack on the vulnerable spot. While these spots were often, on the surface at least, physical, Lucifer and his followers know the habits, weaknesses, and vulnerable spots of everyone and take advantage of them to lead us to spiritual destruction. With one person it may be thirst for liquor; another may have an insatiable hunger; another has permitted his sex urges to dominate; another loves money, and the luxuries and comforts it can buy; another craves power; and so on.

At the MIA June Conference of 1959, Elder Delbert L. Stapley of the Council of the Twelve made some comments which bear on this topic. Among other things he then said: Light dissipates and takes the place of darkness. The darkness cannot take the place of light. It is only when the light goes out, the darkness prevails—. To recognize inherent weaknesses and to do nothing to overcome them ... is an evidence of character instability.

Pitfall of Rationalization Some of the matters discussed in this chapter as pitfalls to watch for have been referred to elsewhere in the book. One such is the evil of rationalization. Perhaps Alexander Pope had this kind of mental dexterity in mind when he wrote, perceptively: Vice is a monster of so frightful mien, As to be hated needs but to be seen; Yet seen too oft, familiar with her face, We first endure, then pity, then embrace.

It is easy to rationalize oneself into sinful habits. For example, the person released from restraint, perhaps for the first time, thinks he will investigate some of the things he has heard about and try them out to satisfy his curiosity. Of course it is the forbidden things which seem to have the greatest appeal. He takes his first cigarette, his first drink. He enters into the various forbidden sexual fields. He tries his first theft or small robbery. He gambles just a little. He perhaps rationalizes that it is right to try just once, "just for the experience." He certainly never thinks he will go further into the sin, nor permit himself to repeat the acts. But even though these forbidden things are followed by feelings of regret and even of shame and sorrow, he has now become so good at rationalizing that he talks himself out of repenting.

When one falls into deep sin there apparently are only these two alternative courses available, to repent and do what is necessary to clean it all up or to rationalize away the consequences and the sting of conscience. Repentance seems a very difficult, long, agonizing process and is usually embarrassing. The rationalization road is much easier, temporarily. It hides transgressions. The conscience which at first agonized becomes more and more easily seared over until it retires to leave one at the full mercy of the evil, tempting powers. Clearly, the first step in rationalizing sin is a pitfall to avoid.

Pitfalls for Youth In this book I have deliberately made frequent reference to sexual sins, and this because of their gravity and prevalence. In the present chapter one could hardly fail to emphasize these errors in relation to avoiding pitfalls of sin, especially as they affect the youth of the Church in an era of increasing immorality, permissiveness and commercial enticement.

Our wise Creator fashioned the soul of man, the body and spirit, incorporating timed growth and desires and urges appropriate to the age reached so that there is a proper unfolding of life in a normal way. There is a time for infancy, with its total dependency on others, a time for childhood, with its carefree existence, a time for early youth, with its widening interests and responsibilities. There is a time for more mature youth, with its increasing decisions and accountabilities. There is a time for the young married, with their mutual responsibilities and broadening interests; a time for middle age, with its autumn harvesting of experience; a time for older folks in the winters by the fireside, with memories, happy associations and satisfactions. All these phases of growth, when pursued in harmony with the divine plan, lead the soul firmly and unwaveringly along the path to eternal life.

No stage in life is more significant to the end result than the years of youth. Decisions and activities of this period place what can be an ineradicable impress upon the future, particularly as it affects one's marriage and subsequent family life. Activities and associations at this point often are of vital influence.

The urge for group activity is normal to the younger set, when they are not prematurely and immaturely stimulated in other ways, and the recreational and social activities of the crowd can be wholesome and entertaining. Physical and moral safety is increased in the multiplicity of friends. Group homemade recreation activities can be not only great fun but most beneficial. Firesides may create friendships, and inspire the spirit and train the mind. Group picnics can discipline youth in gentle manners and fellowship and extend circles of intimate friends.

Sports can develop the body in strength and endurance. They can train the spirit to meet difficulties and defeats and successes, teach selflessness and understanding, and develop good sportsmanship and tolerance in participant and spectator. Drama can develop talent, teach patience, and foster fellowship and friendliness. Group music activities have similar effects, and also can soften and mellow the spirit and satisfy the aesthetic needs.

The properly conducted dancing party can be a blessing. It provides opportunity to spend a pleasant evening with many people to the accompaniment of music. It can create and develop friendships which will be treasured in later years. Alternatively it can become a restricting experience.

Well-ordered dances provide favorable places, pleasing times and auspicious circumstances in which to meet new people and to enlarge circles of friends. They can be an open door to happiness. In an evening of pleasurable dancing and conversation, one can become acquainted with many splendid young folk, every one of whom has admirable traits and may be superior to any one companion in at least some qualities. Here partners can begin to appraise and evaluate, noting qualities, attainments and superiorities by comparison and contrast. Such perceptive friendships can be the basis for wise, selective, occasional dating for those of sufficient age and maturity, this to be followed later in proper timing by steady dating, and later by proper courtship which culminates in a happy, never-ending marriage.

On the other hand, for a youth to dance all evening with one partner, which we might call "monopolistic" dancing, is not only anti-social but it circumscribes one's legitimate pleasures and opportunities. Also it can encourage improper intimacies by its exclusiveness. Dancing with dates, single or steady, should presuppose the exchange of partners, which we could call "multiple" dancing.

Serious minds will recognize the wisdom of this course. Young people who pair off early in dating and monopolistic dancing are opening wide one door into dangerous caverns and closing numerous doors which lead to interesting, wholesome, and progressive experiences.

To skip the proper, natural experiences of youth, or to ignore the warning signals, is to bring distortion in life with its troubles and tribulations, and to limit and damage, if not ruin, the later periods of the normal life and development.

To, be more specific, for children to receive undue untimely pressure to assume the role of youth; for the younger teen-ager to skip the days of that period and rush into the experiences of the later teen-age; or for the later teen-agers to enter into the marriage state before proper preparation these things bring frustration and the loss of an important part of one's life.

Dangers of Steady Dating Steady dating of people too young leads to, early marriage before adequate preparation is made for the future, before one's education is even near complete, and before the young life has had its many glorious training experiences.

Someone wrote an extended article entitled "Marriage Is Not for Children," which gave much evidence of the need for mature planning and charting for youth. It stated that up to 90 percent of the high school marriages end in divorce. It pointed out that very youthful marriages tend to terminate educational and vocational preparation of the participants and that resultant unemployment brings to the acute level the already serious problems of a youthful marriage.

Dating in the earlier teen-age years leads to early steady dating with its multiplicity of dangers and problems, and frequently to early and disappointing marriage. This too-young dating is not uncommon and is often done with parental approval. Yet it is near criminal to subject a tender child to the temptations of maturity. Early marriages, which are almost certain of failure, are usually the result of steady, early dating, whereas a proper preparation for marriage is a well-timed courtship.

My heart bleeds almost every day when I see the children involved in too early dating. Two parents came to me with a problem. They did not know what to do with their little girl. She was only sixteen years old, yet she was a "woman" who had been through deep sin, youthful marriage, humiliating childbirth, and searing divorce. What was left in life for her? Questions came to my mind such as: "Mother, where were you when she was dating steady at fourteen? Were you off to work or were you just asleep? Or were you trying to have another young romance for yourself, by proxy? Where were you when your little girl started dating?"

Automobile-Blessing and Curse Early dating usually demands a car and seems to imply exclusive mutual possessiveness in date and dance. What an erroneous and stultifying concept! In former days, youth walked with their dates; later they rode horseback or rode in carriages; but now they seem to need the automobile. Some girls are like the one who asked the boy who requested a date: "Do you have a car?" The answer was negative. She responded, "Come around again when you have one." I can only reflect that if a youth's desirability and popularity lie in dangling earrings, money to spend, and a glamorous car, indeed a thin and perishable veneer has been substituted for standards of basic goodness and character.

Since the ultimate goal in every young life should be successful and happy marriage and family life, the dating period becomes the important era in which to appraise and evaluate, and to find the companion who will be compatible, agreeable, and engaging, and has the other necessary qualities. Perhaps those with wealth, convertibles and feigned vivacity suffer the greatest disadvantage in the real courting values. Does not the young man with the most luxurious car have the greatest handicap? How can he determine how much of his popularity is the result of the car, and how much of his own personality and character? The girl who has wealth a luxurious car, and "money to burn" may have difficulty in knowing how much of her popularity is due to the veneer and how much to her own personal charm and loveliness.

The automobile may be a blessing or a curse like water which can save a dying man or drown him; like fire which can warm freezing bodies or burn them to death; like atomic power which can drive vessels or despoil cities. The car can transport its occupants to home, school or temple. It can also take them to remote places, to moral dangers where consciences are silenced, righteous inhibitions deadened and guardian angels anesthetized. In short order, the car can transport a couple, youthful or otherwise, great distances from safe harbors. It can impart dangerous privacy and stimulate temptation.

The car is properly for drivers mature in judgment. Lawmakers have sensed this in denying licenses to those under certain ages. Teen-age car accidents far exceed those for other ages. But these physical hazards are the lesser ones. The dead may live again, the crippled may be resurrected with whole bodies; but the blighted soul, the scarred life, the violated youth with virtue lost-these are the real tragedies.

Lane ends, canyon defiles, desert wastes, and quiet streets at late hours these are places where people discuss little of art, music, or gospel doctrines, but where they think often of baser things, talk in lower veins. And when talk wears thin there are things to do, the doing of which brings dust and ashes where roses should be blooming. In interviewing repenting young folks, as well as some older ones, I am frequently told that the couple met their defeat in the dark, at late hours, in secluded areas. Troubles, like photographs, are developed in the dark. The car was most often the confessed seat of the difficulty. It became their brothel. At first they intended no evil, but the privacy made easy the passionate intimacies which crept upon them stealthily as a snake slithers through the grass.

"Where have you been?" asked the fond parent. The answer was startling. "Up to a drive-in, the 'passion-pit,' and oh, boy, was that picture a hot number!" There in the car, in dark privacy, with suggestive, voluptuous acting on the screen, was Satan's near-perfect setting for sin. With outward appearances of decency and respectability, with an absence of holy influences and with legions of vicious, hovering tempters, even good youth are trapped into immoral acts which would at least be much less likely in the living room or in the formal theater on Main Street.

No one but the participants witnesses the sin done in the dark-no one on earth, that is. But the prophets have had a word to say about sin done in the dark. Job, for Instance, recorded the words of Eliphaz: "And thou sayest, How doth God know? can he judge through the dark cloud?" (Job 22:13.) Isaiah warned: "Woe unto them that seek deep to hide their counsel from the Lord, and their works are in the dark, and they say, Who seeth us? and who knoweth us?" (Isa. 29:15.) Likewise our Lord suggested that men "loved darkness rather than light, because their deeds were evil. For every one that doeth evil hateth the light." (John 3:19-20.)

Immodesty Other things besides cars and darkness encourage unchastity and immorality. One of them is immodesty. The young people today seem to talk about sex glibly. They hear it in the locker rooms and on the street, they see and hear it in shows and on television, they read it in the pornographic books everywhere. Those who do not resist this influence absorb and foster it. The spirit of immodesty has developed until nothing seems to be sacred.

One factor contributing to immodesty and the breakdown of moral values is the modern dress worn by our young women and their mothers. I see young women, and some older ones, on the streets wearing shorts. This is not right. The place for women to wear shorts is in their rooms, in their own homes, in their own gardens. I see some of our LDS mothers, wives, and daughters wearing dresses extreme and suggestive in style. Even some fathers encourage it. I wonder if our sisters realize the temptation they are flaunting before men when they leave their bodies partly uncovered or dress in tight-fitting, body-revealing, form-fitting sweaters.

There is no reason why a woman needs to wear an immodest gown because it is the style. We can be in style yet not be extreme. We can create styles of our own. A woman is most beautiful when her body is properly clothed and her sweet face adorned with her lovely hair. She needs no more attractions. Then she is at her best and men will love her for it. Men will not love her more because her neck is bare. Girls, if the young man is decent and worthy of you, he will love you the more when you are properly dressed. Of course, if he is a vicious man he will have other ideas.

It would almost seem that some phases of immodesty in dress, in both men and women, border on exhibitionism, the perverted behavior in which people satisfy their lustful desires in displaying their bodies to others. One has indeed slipped a long way down the ladder when he resorts to this detestable expression, though fortunately he can regenerate and restore and transform himself with total repentance, and can be forgiven. Still, no one but a depraved person could approve of the practice or grant its acceptance.

But is this ugly displaying of one's private body to others so far removed from those instances of men who do their yard work wearing only pants and shoes, and those who drive about in cars with the upper part of their bodies uncovered? Is this exhibitionism so different and far removed from that of those young and older women who resort to wearing tight-fitting clothes which accentuate the human body, and those who show their backs and bosoms and lower limbs? Style is blamed for these extremes, but we wonder again if there might not be some satisfactions, sexual and otherwise, in what seems a wanton disregard of modest decency. Are the very scant bathing suits worn for style or to shock or stir or tempt? Can there be in all these expressions total innocence and total modesty? There are laws against indecent exposure, but why jail the man who exhibits his body so very little more than the women who show so little less? Is it possible that in all these immodesties there might be at least some of the same desires which prompt the exhibitionist to uncover his body and flaunt it before people?

We cannot overemphasize immodesty as one of the pitfalls to be avoided if we would shun temptation and keep ourselves clean.

Lewdness, Written and Spoken Closely allied to the pitfall of immodesty, and partly springing from it, is that of pornography.

Pornography has become a most profitable business in the peddling of ugly, vicious, sexy magazines, books and pictures. There is an immense trade in such things, and very often the boys and girls of our high schools and of younger ages are the victims of this vicious business. Of recent years, this same lewdness has been found in the evil songs and stories put onto phonograph records. An editorial writer in the Deseret News wrote: The pernicious prongs of pornography, clawing into the phonograph records business presents a new and ugly angle to this nagging problem. Repressive action by aroused parents and organizations has greatly reduced the amount of obscene literature on the magazine racks hereabouts, but the filth peddlers seem to have found another alluring and remunerative field. In circulation now are upward of a score of recordings in songs and recitations containing the vilest material. One such record was discovered in her home by a zealous mother. The waxing had been hidden in the room of her daughter, age 15. It was placed in the hands of members of the Youth Protection Committee in consideration of its fight against pornography. It was so obscene that some of the listeners could bear to hear no more than one or two of the ten selections of the two sides of the record. Yet this filthy thing had been purchased by two 15-year-old girls at a supposed reputable music store.

Parents should be warned of these evils, and do all they can to protect their sons and daughters from a corruption which is designed to stimulate sex passions and open the doors to more serious offenses. By a cooperative effort, they can eradicate these things from the newsstands and from the mails, and bring to justice those who would sell the morals of a generation for personal gain.

Lewd talk and jokes constitute another danger which lurks seeking as its prey any who will entertain it as the first step to dirtying the mind and thus the soul.

A magazine told of an entertainer in a New York night club Mo was tipped off that police were going to tape his program. He had been "revving himself up to give the customers an hour of unleavened, four-letter words plus gross assaults on motherhood, the Testaments, Old and New, and vivid descriptions of the more basic physical and sexual processes. "Now he was warned by his boss to "take it easy." As a result the program was a solid hour of comedy without using "so much as darn," and was antiseptically clean. Someone commented that this entertainer could work clean, and the answer was: "Sure. His programs in night clubs and burlesque were clean and his take was $100 a week. But turning all his efforts to a filthy show, he gets $5,000 a week. So he peddles filth." The difference is $4,900 a week.

Who is to blame? The filth peddler, of course, but even more than this vulgar entertainer, the filth consumer, the public. So long as men are corrupt and revel in sewer filth, entertainers will sell them what they want. Laws may be passed, arrests may be made, lawyers may argue, courts may sentence and jails may harbor men of corrupt minds, but pornography and allied insults to decency will never cease until men have cleansed their minds and cease to require and pay for such vile stuff. When the customer is sick and tired of being drowned in filth by the comedians, he will not pay for that filth and its source will dry up.

Of course, only relatively few people get to the night clubs, but at the coffee break, in the locker room, at the banquet table, almost everywhere, there are vulgar people who prolong the life of the coarse and indecent by their retelling and their applause. But when there is no laugh to encourage, no ear to listen, no lips to applaud or repeat the vulgarity, the story-teller will tire of his unappreciated recitals.

Degrading Shows Other danger spots likely to have most appeal among the youth, and which should be shunned as one would shun a poisonous serpent, are undesirable movies and improper TV programs. Of such, a Deseret News editorial stated: Though it is heartening indeed to note the increasing volume of protests raised throughout the country against the undesirable movies and TV programs being meted out to the American public and particularly to the youngsters who make up a large part of the audiences for both, it is sickening to note the number of questionable productions still being made by the studios. Juvenile court judges, officers in anti-vice squads, and social workers are united in saying that a high percentage of the crimes of today are traceable to the low grade entertainment watched by so many of the younger generation. But because evil, with all the "Hollywood trimmings," glitters like gold, and because the suggestive is always attractive to many, the producers of these entertainments find it profitable to continue this line of shows.

After discussing this problem in some detail, the editorial concluded: There probably is not sufficient public resentment to force the movie and TV producers to clean up their own product because money talks louder than the protesting public. But certainly church and home can do something about teaching standards to their children. They surely can regulate what young people see by the persuasion which any good home can exercise. Good taste can be developed, and with it a desire to eliminate filthy entertainment, just as we would eliminate liquor, cigarettes, and petting from the lives of our youth.

Finest Youth Can Fall Now our Latter-day Saint boys and girls are the finest in the world. There is no group anywhere from ocean to ocean that can even compare with them. I believe practically all our boys and girls grow up with a desire to be righteous. I think they are fundamentally good. And yet, there are too many misfortunes among them. There are too many who have lost themselves.

The devil knows how to destroy them. He knows, young men and women, that he cannot tempt you to commit adultery immediately, but he knows too that he can soften you up by lewd associations, vulgar talk, immodest dress, sexy movies, and so on. He knows too that if he can get them to drink or if he can get them into his "necking, petting" program, the best boys and the best girls will finally succumb and will fall.

It is important to understand this pitfall. This subject is not easy to talk or to write about; but when bishops come to me with sad stories of broken homes, of frustrated lives, of heartbreak, sorrow, and remorse; when I interview people who have fallen into the trap, I say to them in near desperation: "What can we do? What can the Church do to help avoid this? What can we do to protect the next generation, the younger ones who are coming along? Tell me."

In reply, often the boy or girl will say, "We are not taught frankly enough. We get much sex education from many sources but it damages us. We hear the vulgar all the time. We need warnings-frank warnings." I sincerely hope that the warnings given in this book are frank and clear enough.

On the positive side, if our young people would avoid the pitfalls they would be firm in principle, not wobbly as the drunken man. They would enjoy their childhood and early teen-age with their folks at home, then for years the group activities. At dancing parties, they would exchange partners for the happiness of it, and the advantage of it. There would be no dating in early teens, only casual dating in middle teens, and no steady dating until they were ready to look for an eternal mate in proper marriage. Associations would be kept free from all improprieties. Kissing would be saved at least until these later hallowed courtship days when they could be free from sex and have holy meaning. And in all this they would preserve a healthy, constructive attitude toward home, school and Church and toward other people generally. Thus they would grow up free from the contaminations of the world.

Stay on the Lord's Side The difference between the good man and the bad man is not that one had the temptations and the other was spared them. It is that one kept himself fortified, and resisted temptation, and the other placed himself in compromising places and conditions and rationalized the situations. Hence it is obvious that to remain clean and worthy, one must stay positively and conclusively away from the devil's territory, avoiding the least approach toward evil. Satan leaves his finger prints. They are quite distinguishable to any who are warned. Accordingly, the danger sign is placed prominently where it is always visible to the educated eye. It is like the great hole once made in the street where I live. To drive the car through it would have been flirting with danger or a wreck. I noted that the neighbors' cars moved out of the street on the safe end and avoided the area where the danger lay. I did the same.

In this regard we cannot do better as a conclusion to this chapter than recall the frequent admonition of the late President George Albert Smith, who said: My grandfather used to say to his family, "There is a line of demarkation, well defined, between the Lord's territory and the devil's. If you will stay on the Lord's side of the line, you will be under his influence and will have no desire to do wrong; but if you cross to the devil's side of the line one inch, you are in the tempter's power, and if he is successful, you will not be able to think or even reason properly, because you will have lost the Spirit of the Lord. When I have been tempted sometimes to do a certain thing, I have asked myself, "Which side of the line am I on?" If I determined to be on the safe side, the Lord's side, I would do the right thing every time. Wo when temptation comes, think prayerfully about your problem, and the influence of the Spirit of the Lord will enable you to decide wisely. There is safety for us only on the Lord's side of the line.

Sterling W. Sill, The Way of Success (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1964), p.278.

---
Notas:
[^1] Dante, Divine Comedy.
