Spencer W. Kimball, Miracle of Forgiveness ( 1969)

Chapter Seventeen

Charting a Safe Course

When a man does not know which harbour he is making for, none is the right one. —Anonymous

IF WE WOULD AVOID THE DANGER SPOTS WHICH LEAD TO transgression and sorrow and to forfeiture of our chances for exaltation, the wise way is to chart the course of our lives.

Of course, we cannot know every circumstance of life or plan every detail in advance. But we can so chart a general course that there will be little or no deviation from the "strait and narrow way." Such planning involves establishing worthy ideals and goals. The person who has such goals and then works steadily toward them is the one most likely successfully to negotiate the hazards and bypass the pitfalls which would change the course from a road of happiness to a pathway of destruction.

Plan Early in Life Such planning must begin early, it has been said that "even the very longest journey begins with a single first step." So when that first step is made it must be on a properly charted course. Otherwise, habits come upon us unawares, and sin has us in its clutches before we realize it.

As well as establishing worthy goals, charting the course presents one from living an unplanned, haphazard life a tumbleweed existence. Over the Utah plains, upon the hillsides and along the fence-lines of the valleys, grows the tumbleweed. When mature and dry, the plant breaks from its roots and, as a rounded tangle of light stiff branches, rolls about like a ball. If the wind blows west, the weed rolls against the western fences. With each direction change in the wind, the rounded weed rolls with it, following lines of least resistance until stopped by fences or walls or ditch banks. As the wind blows down the road, the tumbleweeds go rolling like mammoth marbles thrown from a giant hand.

Many people, and particularly many of our youth, live a "tumbleweed" existence. They tend to follow leadership which is dominant and powerful, regardless of whether it is right or wrong. They want to know what the other "kids" are doing. What kind of sweaters are they wearing? What kind of shoes? Are the dresses long or short, tight or flaring? Do the leader girls wear their hair short, boyish or windswept, in pony tails or Italian or French styles? Do the boys preen before mirrors with their ducktail haircuts, their crewcuts and Mohawks, flattops and beatles, or hair dropped over the forehead?

These may be just minor things, but there are major and more hazardous areas in which our young people especially are led by their desire to keep up with the gang. What must one do to prevent being called a "square," a "sissy," a "drip"? Must the youth date early; enter into the kissing and necking practices; dance all evening with one partner?

The Smart Person Plans On the other hand, smart young people will discipline themselves early in youth, charting long-range courses to include all that is wholesome and nothing that is ruinous. The bridge builder, before starting construction, draws charts and plans, makes estimates of strains and stresses, costs and hazards; the architect, even before excavation, makes a blueprint of the building from foundation to pinnacle. Similarly the smart person will plan carefully and blueprint his own life from his first mental awakening to the end of life. "Just as a builder will wish his structure to stand through storm and disturbances of the elements, so the young and old alike will wish a life unharmed by adversities, calamities, and troubles throughout eternity. Having planned such a course, prudent men will gear their lives, activities, ambitions and aspirations so that they may have every advantage in total fulfillment of a righteous destiny."

Life gives to all the choice. You can satisfy yourself with mediocrity if you wish. You can be common, ordinary, dull, colorless; or you can channel your life so that it will be clean, vibrant, progressive, useful, colorful, rich. You can soil your record, defile your soul, trample underfoot virtue, honor, and goodness, and thus forfeit an exaltation in the kingdom of God. Or you can be righteous, commanding the respect and admiration of your associates in all walks of life, and enjoying the love of the Lord. Your destiny is in your hands and your all-important decisions are your own to make.

Of course, your choices will not be the right ones, the ones which carry you unhesitatingly along the path to the great eternal reward, unless they are made under the proper controls. In this matter the greatest control is self-control. The following comment, whose authorship I do not know, comes from a perceptive writer: The greatest battle of life is fought out within the silent chambers of the soul. A victory on the inside of a man's heart is worth a hundred conquests on the battlefields of life. To be master of yourself is the best guarantee that you will be master of the situation. Know thyself. The crown of character is self-control.

The world and its people need guidance and controls. Imagine an automobile in motion without a driver, a train without an engineer, a plane without a pilot at the controls. In this day of guided missiles, perhaps we should give more thought to guiding souls. To fire missiles into the air without guidance and controls could kill people, destroy property and spread terror, but its long-term effect would be relatively small compared to that of permitting souls to fire off and run without guidance and controls.

Thus our young people should drive down stakes early, indicating their paths. The stakes are of two kinds: "This I will do" and "This I will not do." These decisions pertain to general activities, standards, spiritual goals, and personal programs. They should include anticipations for marriage and family. Very early, youth should have been living by a plan. They are the wise young man and the wise young woman who will profit by the experience of others, and who early set a course in their education, a mission, the finding of a pure, clean sweetheart to be a life's companion, their temple marriage and their Church service. When such a course is charted and the goal is set, it is easier to resist the many temptations and to say "no" to the first cigarette, "no" to the first drink, "no" to the car ride which will take one into the dark, lonely and hazardous places, "no" to the first improper advances which lead eventually to immoral practices.

Charting Course Toward Marriage By the time our youth are old enough to comprehend and plan the charting of their lives the major decision of their lives marriage is but a few years hence. For this reason this chapter is concentrated upon the course toward and in marriage. And I might add here that, while its benefits are greatest if it begins early, planning is good for all stages of life.

Plans and decisions relating to marriage for a Church member should be geared to the goal of exaltation and to a program for the unborn children who can bring glory to the parents. When children come into a true Latter-day Saint home, through a marriage sealed by the Holy Spirit of Promise, into a home where there is peace and contentment, common ideals and common standards, life has great promise. Children who are fortunate enough to come into homes where the priesthood presides, where the Spirit of the Lord is ever present, where family prayers unite and, where real family love rules, are blessed indeed.

If couples live their married lives properly, training their children in the fear and admonition of the Lord as they themselves will live, it is quite unlikely that their home will produce delinquents, transgressors, or criminals. Most people agree that the problems in life start or get encouragement in the home. Wars would cease, criminal courts would close, jails and penitentiaries would remain largely unused, if all children were taught by the precept and example of worthy parents who loved each other and devoted themselves in total fidelity to each other.

Obviously then, of greatest importance are those acts which contribute to this happy condition. It is of vital significance for every youth to chart his course carefully to be sure there is no ugliness nor error in his life. The dating must be safeguarded, the courting, the marriage and the family life. There must be no mistake as to the persons courted, the protection of the process. The married life must be affectionate and kindly and selfless.

Folly of Inter-Faith Marriages Our youth often ask the vital question: "Whom shall I marry?" The proper answer to that question brings a proper answer to many others. If you marry the proper "whom," you are sure to marry in the proper "where," and you have an infinitely better chance of happiness here and in eternity. By far the greatest cause of unhappiness, broken homes, wrecked lives, sinfulness and sorrow among the Latter-day Saints is the failure to marry the right person in the right place by the right authority. This is evident in a survey made many years ago.

Approximately 1,500 marriages, involving 3,000 peoples most of whom were members of the Church, were considered in that survey. Of these 1,500 couples, nearly a thousand couples or 2,000 people married out of the temple, and some of them out of the Church. Through the years there has been much unhappiness in many of these out-of-faith, out-of-temple families, much disruption in the lives of parents, much frustration in the lives of many children who are growing tip without a religious concept of the truth. There were many broken homes-204 of the couples, involving 408 people, were divorced in fifteen years.

A few of these people, having suffered sorrow and disillusionment, may have learned their lessons and may have remarried within the Church and in the temple and to proper people, but many of them did not learn, remarried out of the Church, and continued their distress. Of the original 3,000 people, nearly 2,000 have lost their way. Their eyes have been covered with spiritual cataracts and they are groping in the fogs and mists, unable to see clearly. They are lost in the labyrinths, and many may never find themselves. The great majority of them have not yet, in the years that followed, recovered themselves but are still wandering and groping in spiritual darkness and marital discomfort. There is not here an implication that all members of the Church are worthy and nonmembers unworthy, but study continues to point out the error of marriage between persons of different faiths. Different standards, ideals, backgrounds and faiths increase the problems of marriage.

Mixed marriages with spouses of different faiths generally bring loss of spirituality; and divorce results very often, with much unhappiness even if there is no divorce. Even with people of faiths other than our own, studies have shown that mixed marriages make adjustment of religious tensions difficult and that frequently one or both partners give up religious practices altogether. As parents give up their religions, an increasing number of children are brought up without any kind of church attachment and the faith it could engender.

The Church member contemplating marriage outside the Church frequently thinks, "Oh, the religious aspect doesn't matter. We'll get along. We'll adjust. We'll each give a little. My spouse will permit me to do as I please, or I will make adjustment. We'll both live and worship according to our own patterns." This is a fallacy. So seldom does it work that it is too hazardous to take the chance. Some people say, "But I believe in being broad-minded about these matters." This is not broad-mindedness, but even if it were, to be broad-minded with the Lord's eternal program is somewhat like being generous with someone else's money.

Researchers seem to agree that even in marriages which do not dissolve, disagreement on religious matters is a definite cause of unhappiness. Many good men and women are lost to the Church and diverted from the straight and narrow path because of these ill-advised marriages. In the survey mentioned above, it was found that nearly half of those who married out of the Church lost their activity in the Church. Twice as many of these parties of mixed marriages are inactive in the Church as even those who married out of the temple but married within the Church. This is significant. Only about twenty-nine percent of the Church members who married members, even in civil marriage, were inactive, whereas about forty-six percent of the mixed-marriage people were inactive.

Marriage in the Church The counsel Church members have received on this is unequivocal. President Joseph F. Smith said: We say to our young people, "Get married, and marry aright. Marry in the faith, and let the ceremony be performed in the place God has appointed. Live so that you may be worthy of this blessing—. But do not marry those out of the Church, as such unions almost invariably lead to unhappiness—. I would rather go myself to the grave than to be associated with a wife outside the bonds of the new and everlasting covenant—. I would like to see Latter-day Saint men marry Latter-day Saint women; and Methodists marry Methodists, Catholics marry Catholics, and Presbyterians marry Presbyterians, and so on to the limit. Let them keep within the pale of their own faith and church—. [^1]

Paul told the Corinthians, "Be ye not unequally yoked together..." Perhaps Paul wanted them to see that religious differences are fundamental differences. Religious differences imply wider areas of conflict. Church loyalties and family loyalties clash. Children's lives are often frustrated. The nonmember may be equally brilliant, well trained and attractive, and he or she may have the most pleasing personality, but without a common faith, trouble lies ahead for the marriage. There are some exceptions but the rule is a harsh and unhappy one.

There is no bias nor prejudice in this doctrine. It is a matter of following a certain program to reach a definite goal. A fond and lovely Protestant wife says of her good Protestant husband, "But my husband is gracious, honorable, worthy, a good provider, and he is better than many members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. I am sure he will receive the blessings and we shall be united through eternity." There is no brief for the unfaithful members of the Church who fail in their obligations. They also will miss the eternal blessings that is sure-but the person who is not a member of the Lord's Church, who has not received the celestial ordinances, cannot receive the celestial kingdom. The Savior made this clear when he said: "Except a man be born of water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God." (John 3:5.)

Marrying outside the faith has always been forbidden. For example, the Lord inspired Abraham to marry a near relative rather than a Gentile. In respect of his son's bride, Abraham commissioned his servant to go on a long and uncomfortable journey to obtain a girl of Isaac's own faith: And I will make thee swear by the Lord that thou shalt not take a wife unto my son of the daughters of the Canaanites, among whom I dwell: But thou shalt go unto my country, and to my kindred, and take a wife unto my son Isaac. (Gen. 24:3-4.)

Likewise Isaac himself, saddened by his son Esau's marriages with Gentile women, forbade Jacob to do the same and sent him back to Haran to marry in the faith. (See Gen. 28:1-2.) Centuries later the Lord made specific commandment to the Israelites as follows: Neither shalt thou make marriages with [Gentiles]; thy daughter thou shalt not give unto his son, nor his daughter shalt thou take unto thy son. For they will turn away thy son from following me, that they may serve other gods—. (Deut. 7:3-4. Italics added.)

And in the meridian of time, as partially quoted above, the same word was given: "Be ye not unequally yoked together with unbelievers." (2 Cor. 6:14.)

Many times, women have come to me in tears. How they would love to be able to train their children in the gospel of Jesus Christ! But they are unable to do so because of religious incompatibility with a nonmember husband. How they would like to accept for themselves positions of responsibility in the Church! How they would like to pay their tithing! How they would appreciate going to the temple for their own endowments and to do work for the dead! How they wish they could be sealed for eternity and have the promise of having their own flesh and blood, their children, sealed to them for eternity! Sometimes it is men in this predicament. But they have locked the doors, and the doors have often rusted on their hinges.

Importance of Proper Dating Clearly, right marriage begins with right dating. A person generally marries someone from among those with whom he associates, with whom he goes to school, with whom he goes to church, with whom he socializes. Therefore, this warning comes with great emphasis. Do not take the chance of dating nonmembers, or members who are untrained and faithless. A girl may say, "Oh, I do not intend to marry this person. It is just a 'fun' date." But one cannot afford to take a chance on falling in love with someone who may never accept the gospel. True, a small percentage have finally been baptized after marrying Church members. Some good women and some good men have joined the Church after the mixed marriage and have remained devout and active. We are proud of them and grateful for them. They are our blessed minority. Others who did not join the Church were still kind and considerate and cooperative and permitted the member spouse to worship and serve according to the Church patterns. But the majority did not join the Church and, as indicated earlier, friction, frustration and divorce marked a great many of their marriages.

In isolated instances a lovely young woman might be so far removed geographically from other Church members that she would either have to marry out of the Church or stay unmarried. Some might feel justified in such circumstances in making an exception to the rule and marrying a nonmember but, justification or not, it is important to recognize that the hazards in such a marriage would remain. To minimize the dangers the girl should by all means make sure that she marries a man who is honorable and good, so that even if he cannot at present be brought to accept the gospel there is a fair chance of his being converted later.

Celestial Marriage the Way to Happiness In the preceding paragraphs I have assumed that marrying in the Church means marrying in the temple, as of course it should for all members who are able to reach a temple. The gateway to the green pastures of eternal bliss is temple marriage and righteous and abundant family life. The married life can be a continuously heavenly state or a perpetual torture, or anywhere between those two extremes. The successful marriage depends in large measure upon the preparation made in approaching it, which is important to our subject of charting a course. One cannot pick the ripe, rich, luscious fruit from a tree that was never planted, nurtured, nor pruned and was not protected against its enemies.

One study conducted among Church members revealed that there was only one divorce in every sixteen marriages which were sealed in the temple, while there was one divorce in every 5.7 marriages of those who were not sealed in the temple. This means that the person sealed in the temple has about 2-1/2 times better chance for successful marriage and consequent happiness than the one with a civil marriage. In other words, he has about 2-1/2 times the chance to continue with his or her mate through mortality in happiness and joy. Not only the ordinance itself, but also the preparation for the ordinance and the deep appreciation of it, help to achieve this end.

A basic reason for eternal marriage is that life is eternal; and marriage, to be in harmony with eternal purposes, must be consistent with life in duration. Marriage by civil officers, or by Church officers outside of the temples, is made for time only, "till death do you part" or "so long as you both shall live." It terminates with death. Only celestial marriage extends beyond the grave. Eternal marriage is performed by the prophet of the Lord or by one of the very few to whom he has delegated the authority. It is performed in holy temples erected and dedicated for that purpose. Only such marriage transcends the grave and perpetuates the husband-wife and parent-child relationships into and through eternity.

Exaltation in the celestial kingdom will be granted to those only who enter and faithfully observe the covenant of celestial marriage. Christ says in unmistakable terms: In the celestial glory there are three heavens, or degrees; And in order to obtain the highest, a man must enter into this order of the priesthood [meaning the new and everlasting covenant of marriage]; And if he does not, he cannot obtain it. He may enter into the other but that is the end of his kingdom; he cannot have an increase (D&C 131:1-4. Italics added.)

He cannot have an increase! He cannot have exaltation! That means worlds without end. After a person has been assigned to his place in the kingdom, either in the telestial, the terrestrial or the celestial, or to his exaltation, he will never advance from his assigned glory to another glory. That is eternal! That is why we must make our decisions early in life and why it is imperative that such decisions be right.

It will be remembered how the Lord answered the hypocritical Sadducees who, trying to trap him, propounded the difficult problem of the wife whose seven husbands predeceased her: "In the resurrection therefore, when they shall rise, whose wife shall she be of them? for the seven had her to wife." (Mark 12:23.) The Redeemer's answer was clear and concise and unmistakable: Do ye not therefore err, because ye know not the scriptures, either the power of God? For when they shall rise from the dead, they neither marry, nor are given in marriage; but are as the angels which are in heaven. (Mark 12:24-25.)

What does this answer mean? Elder James E. Talmage writes: The Lord's meaning was clear, that in the resurrected state there can be no question among the seven brothers as to whose wife for eternity the woman shall be, since all except the first had married her for the duration of mortal life only—. [^2]

The Lord makes clear, and attempts to convince his children here below, that they cannot afford to make an error in the matter of these eternal verities. He holds out promise of transcendent glory to those who abide by his laws.

If a man marry a wife by my word, which is my law, and by the new and everlasting covenant, and it is sealed unto them by the Holy Spirit of promise, by him who is anointed, unto whom I have appointed this power and the keys of this priesthood — it — shall be of full force when they are out of the world; and they shall pass by the angels, and the gods, which are set there, to their exaltation and glory in all things — which glory shall be a fullness and a continuation of the seeds forever and ever. Then shall they be gods, because they have all power, and the angels are subject unto them. (D&C 132:19-20. Italics added.)

Then as if to leave no possible doubt on the matter, the Lord continues: "Verily, verily, I say unto you, except ye abide my law ye cannot attain to this glory." (D&C 132:21.)

The Prophet Joseph Smith was given the same keys which Peter held. The Lord told him: "... Whatsoever you seal on earth shall be sealed in heaven; and whatsoever you bind on earth, in my name and by my word, saith the Lord, it shall be eternally bound in the heavens ." (D&C 132:46.)

Clearly, attaining eternal life is not a matter of goodness only. That is one of the two important elements, but one must practice righteousness and receive the ordinances. People who do not bring their lives into harmony with God's laws and who do not receive the necessary ordinances either in this life or (if that is impossible) in the next, have thus deprived themselves, and will remain separate and single in the eternities. There they will have no spouses, no children. If one is going to be in God's kingdom of exaltation, where God dwells in all his glory, one will be there as a husband or a wife and not otherwise. Regardless of his virtues, the single person, or the one married for this life only, cannot be exalted. All normal people should marry and rear families. To quote Brigham Young: "No man can be perfect without the woman, so no woman can be perfect without a man to lead her. I tell you the truth as it is in the bosom of eternity. If he wishes to be saved, he cannot be saved without a woman by his side."

Celestial marriage is that important.

To emphasize the beauty and wonder and glory of it, here is a word-picture by President Lorenzo Snow of the importance and blessing of celestial marriage: When two Latter-day Saints are united together in marriage, promises are made to them concerning their offspring that reach from eternity to eternity. They are promised that they shall have the power and the right to govern and control and administer salvation and exaltation and glory to their offspring, worlds without end. And what offspring they do not have here, undoubtedly there will be opportunities to have them hereafter. What else could man wish? A man and a woman, in the other life, having celestial bodies, free from sickness and disease, glorified and beautified beyond description, standing in the midst of their posterity, governing and controlling them, administering life, exaltation and glory worlds without end. [^3]

As you read this, can you conceive of the vastness of the program? Can you begin to comprehend it? Remember this: Exaltation is available only to righteous members of the Church of Jesus Christ; only to those who accept the gospel; only to those who have their endowments in holy temples of God and have been sealed for eternity and who then continue to live righteously throughout their lives. Numerous members of the Church will be disappointed. All will fail of these blessings who fail to live worthy lives, even though the temple ordinances have been done for them.

Dangers of Delaying Celestial Marriage Too often, people think that the decisions on celestial marriage can be postponed and taken care of later. Such thoughts are the tools of Satan. He delights in procrastination and uses it much. If he cannot convince people to ignore these important matters, these ordinances in celestial marriage, he will use the strategy of procrastination on the basis that it will achieve his ends eventually.

But the time to act is now. Any mistake will be a costly one. We must not let attractions of the moment bring disaster for the eternities. All contracts that are not made under the sealing power of the priesthood terminate when one is dead.

Of course, people who have never heard the gospel, have had no opportunity to accept it, will be given that privilege either in this life or the next. They may hear it in the spirit world, the necessary work may be done vicariously for them on the earth, and they may thus receive eternal marriage. But for us who have heard the word of the Lord, who have the scriptures, who have had the many witnesses, who have been informed-for us, tomorrow is so late! We may be angels if we are righteous enough. Even unmarried, we may reach the lower realms in the celestial kingdom, but there we will be ministering angels only, "... which angels are ministering servants, to minister for those who are worthy of a far more, and an exceeding, and an eternal weight of glory." The Lord continues: For these angels did not abide my law; therefore, they cannot be enlarged, but remain separately and singly, without exaltation, in their saved condition, to all eternity; and from henceforth are not gods, but are angels of God forever and ever. (D&C 132:16-17. Italics added.)

The same revelation emphasizes the need for celestial marriage now, in this life: ... Except ye abide my law [celestial marriage] ye cannot attain to this glory. For strait is the gate, and narrow the way that leadeth unto the exaltation and continuation of the lives, and few there be that find it, because ye receive me not in the world neither do you know me. But if ye receive me in the world, then shall ye know me, and shall receive your exaltation; that where I am ye shall be also. (D&C 132:21-23. Italics added.)

And the Prophet Joseph Smith said: Except a man and his wife enter into an everlasting covenant and be married for eternity, while in this probation, by the power and authority of the Holy Priesthood, they will cease to increase when they die; that is, they will not have any children after the resurrection. But those who are married by the power and authority of the priesthood in this life, and continue without committing the sin against the Holy Ghost, will continue to increase and have children in the celestial glory. [^4]

While in this probation and in this life certainly mean the period of our mortal lives.

Through the scriptures we have a fairly clear picture of the fate of the people of Noah's day who, like many people today, ignored the testimonies of written scripture and of living prophets. Luke records the words of the Savior: And as it was in the days of Noe, so shall it be also in the days of the Son of man. They did eat, they drank, they married wives, they were given in marriage, until the day that Noe entered into the ark, and the flood came, and destroyed them all. (Luke 17:26-27.)

They were drowned in their sins. Their marriages were for time. They reveled in worldliness. They were possibly like many in the world today who place no curb upon their eating, drinking and licentiousness. Their ignoring the laws of God and the warning of the prophets continued until the very day when Noah and his family entered the ark. Then it was too late. Too late! What finality in that phrase! Following their eternal history, we find Peter telling of them more than two millennia later: For Christ also hath once suffered for sins, the just for the unjust, that he might bring us to God, being put to death in the flesh, but quickened by the Spirit: By which also he went and preached unto the spirits in prison; Which sometime were disobedient, when once the longsuffering of God waited in the days of Noah, while the ark was a preparing, wherein few, that is, eight souls were saved by water. (1 Pet. 3:18-20.)

At last, they had a chance in the spirit world to hear the voice of missionaries and prophets again. But so late! What sad words! Nearly a further two millennia passed into history and we hear of them again in modern revelation. Of the vision given to Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon in 1832, the Prophet writes: And again, we saw the terrestrial world, and behold and lo, these are they who are of the terrestrial. ... They who are the spirits of men kept in prison, whom the Son visited, and preached the gospel unto them, that they might be judged according to men in the flesh; Who received not the testimony of Jesus in the flesh, but afterwards received it. (D&C 76:71, 73-74.)

Too late! The terrestrial for them! It could have been the celestial, and it could have been exaltation! But they procrastinated the day of their preparation. The same lamentable cry of "Too late!" will apply to many of today's Church members who did not heed the warning but who proceeded-sometimes carelessly, sometimes defiantly-to bind themselves through mortality to those who could not or would not prepare for the blessings which were in reserve for them.

The Lord's program is unchangeable. His laws are immutable. They will not be modified. Your opinion or mine does not alter the laws. Many in the world, and even some in the Church, seem to think that eventually the Lord will be merciful and give them the unearned blessing. But the Lord cannot be merciful at the expense of justice.

Make Firm Bride-and-Groom Decisions Those young people who chart their course to a marriage in the temple have already established a pattern of thought which will make them amenable to mutual planning with the chosen partner once he or she is found. Even before their marriage is solemnized in the holy place they will be planning their life together, and will continue the process as bride and groom when they sit down to chart their way through a happy, successful and spiritual life to exaltation in the kingdom of God. Now they will drive down some "stakes."

One of the "stakes" the husband drives is that he is going to attend priesthood meeting every week in the year, every year of his life. The two of them drive the "stakes" that they will attend Sunday School and sacrament meeting every Sabbath, taking their babies and the children with them, thus firmly entrenching this as a family program which the children will almost certainly carry on in the families they will raise later. Another "stake" is the decision to pay an honest tithing regularly and permanently. Such decisions having been firmly made, the question of attending church will not need to be re-examined every Sunday morning, nor will the couple have to consider each paycheck time whether to pay tithing. It is the same with other worthy goals.

Importance of Observing Marriage Vows In a properly charted Latter-day Saint marriage, one must be conscious of the need to forget self and love one's companion more than self. There will not be postponement of parenthood, but a desire for children as the Lord intended, and without limiting the family as the world does. The children will be wanted and loved. There will be fidelity and confidence; eyes will never wander and thoughts will never stray toward extra-marital romance. In a very literal sense, husband and wife will keep themselves for each other only, in mind and body and spirit.

Infidelity is one of the great sins of our generation. The movies, the books, the magazine stories all seem to glamorize the faithlessness of husbands and wives. Nothing is holy, not even marriage vows. The unfaithful woman is depicted as the heroine and the hero is so built up that he can seemingly do no wrong. It reminds us of Isaiah who said: "Woe unto them that call evil good, and good evil." (Isa. 5:20.)

There are those married people who permit their eyes to wander and their hearts to become vagrant, who think it is not improper to flirt a little, to share their hearts and have desire for someone other than the wife or the husband. The Lord says in definite terms: "Thou shalt love thy wife with all thy heart, and shalt cleave unto her and none else." (D&C 42:22. Italics added.)

The words none else eliminate everyone and everything. The spouse then becomes pre-eminent in the life of the husband or wife and neither social life nor occupational life nor political life nor any other interest nor person nor thing shall ever take precedence over the companion spouse. We sometimes find women who absorb and hover over the children at the expense of the husband, sometimes even estranging them from him. This is in direct violation of the command: None else.

I have discussed previously the sin of romance outside of one's marriage vows, but I emphasize it again here in the context of planning a life in which the first thought in that direction never arises. Marriage presupposes total allegiance and total fidelity. Each spouse takes the partner with the understanding that he or she gives self totally to the spouse all the heart, strength, loyalty, honor and affection with all dignity.

Those who claim their love is dead should return home with all their loyalty, fidelity, honor, cleanness, and the love which has become embers will flare up with scintillating flame again. If love wanes or dies, it is often infidelity of thought or act which gave the lethal potion. I plead with all people, young and old, bound by marriage vows and covenants to make that marriage holy, keep it fresh, express affection meaningfully and sincerely and often. Thus will one avoid the pitfalls which destroy marriages.

Home-breaking is sin, and any thought, act or association which will tend to destroy one's own home or the home of another is a grievous transgression. A certain young woman was single and therefore free to properly seek a mate, but she gave attention to and received attention from a married man. She was in transgression. She argued that his marriage was "already on the rocks," that the wife of her new boy friend "did not understand him," that he was most unhappy at home, and that he did not love his wife.

But regardless of the state of the married man, the young woman was in serious error to comfort him and listen to his disloyal castigation of his wife. The man was in deep sin. He was disloyal and unfaithful. So long as a man is married to a woman, he is duty bound to protect and defend her and, conversely, the same responsibility is with his wife.

In one of the numerous cases which have come to my attention, husband and wife were quarreling and had reached such a degree of incompatibility that they had flung the threat of divorce at each other and had already seen attorneys with this in mind. Both of them, embittered at each other, had found companionship with other parties. This was sin. No matter how bitter were their differences, neither had any right to begin courting or looking about for friends. Any dating or such association by wedded folks outside the marriage is iniquitous. Even though two people proceed with a divorce suit, to be moral and honorable they must wait until the divorce is final before either is free to develop new romances.

A woman from a broken marriage married within hours after her divorce became final. It was evident that she had been untrue to her marriage vows, for she had been courting while she was still an undivorced wife. If one cannot remarry before the divorce is final, it must be obvious that one is still married. How then can one justify courtship while he or she still has living an undivorced spouse?

Even though these affairs begin near innocently, like an octopus the tentacles move gradually to strangle. When dates or dinners or rides or other contact begin, the abyss of tragedy opens wide its mouth. It has reached deep iniquity when physical contacts of any nature have been indulged in. The tragedies which result affect spouses, children, and other loved ones. Through Jacob, the Lord spoke to the Nephite men on this topic: For behold, I, the Lord, have seen the sorrow, and heard the mourning of the daughters of my people... because of the wickedness and abominations of their husbands. ... Ye have broken die hearts of your tender wives, and lost the confidence of your children, because of your bad examples before them: and the sobbings of their hearts ascend up to God against you... many hearts died, pierced with deep wounds. (Jac. 2:31, 35.)

Women too stand condemned for extra-marital irregularities. They often invite men to sensual desire by their immodest clothes, their loose actions and mannerisms, their coy glances, their extreme makeup, and their flattery.

To a young couple in love and starting married life together the warnings may sound superfluous, but unfortunately they are not. Too many fall into this sin. Those who chart their course wisely will include in their planning a firm resolution never to take the first step away from their marriage vows.

Find Time for Family Gospel Living When one plans properly early in life, one is not going to permit employment or social life or recreation to control and take over, and to make the basic things take a second place. Therefore, time must be budgeted. There will be time for service in the Church organizations and quorums; time for missionary work; time to be a quorum president, auxiliary leader, bishop, Relief Society president, teacher; and time to support the program of the Church in every way.

Devotion and prayer will be an integral part of lives charted on a true spiritual course. There will always be time for prayer. There will always be the moments of blessed solitude, of closeness to the Heavenly Father, of freedom from worldly things and cares.

When we kneel in family prayer, our children at our side on their knees are learning habits that will stay with them all through their lives. If we do not take time for prayers, what we are actually saying to our children is, "Well, it isn't very important, anyway. We won't worry about it. If we can do it conveniently, we will have our prayer, but if the school bell rings and the bus is coming and employment is calling-well, prayer isn't very important and we will do it when it is convenient." Unless planned for, it never seems to be convenient. On the other hand, what a joyous thing it is to establish such customs and habits in the home that when parents visit their children in the latter's homes after they are married they just naturally kneel with them in the usual, established manner of prayer!

In the Church, we are trying to shift more of the training of and responsibility for the children and young people back to the parents and home as our fundamental concept, and let the Primary, Sunday School and Mutual Improvement Associations, Seminary and other agencies add their blessings. It is the responsibility of the parents to teach their children in the home and rear them righteously and keep them in a proper environment. In the home, the young people should be so indoctrinated and fortified that the problems of children and youth will be minimal. The family home evening is designed and established for this very purpose. As with prayers, there should be no failure to find time and opportunity for this most rewarding activity.

Plan for Mother to Stay Home Tremendously important to the child's upbringing is the presence of Mother in the home. Of late years, mothers have left their homes to work in such numbers that Church authorities are much concerned, and make a call to mothers: "Come back home, Mothers, come back home." We realize that there is an occasional mother who must go out to work. There are some mothers whose children are all reared, and who are thus free to work. But for mothers to leave children when there is not an absolute necessity is a hazardous thing. Generally, children just cannot grow up properly disciplined under babysitters, no matter how good these may be, as they can under a mother who loves them so much that she would die for them.

I remember an impressive experience which emphasized to me the value of Mother's staying at home. I was in a northwestern city for an evening missionary meeting. I had arrived early in the day on the only available flight. The stake president was a busy man and I said to him, "You go on about your work. Just give me a table and your typewriter, and I have plenty of things to do all afternoon."

So I started to work. Two or three hours passed so rapidly that I hardly realized the time had flown, and it must have been about 3 p.m. when I heard the front door open. While the father was out at work, the mother was upstairs ironing and sewing. Now the front door opened a crack and a child's voice said: "Oh, Mother!" I listened and heard the warm, loving voice from upstairs say, "I'm up here, dear. Do you want something?"

"Nothing, Mother," said the little boy, and he slammed the door and went out to play.

In a few minutes the door opened again and another boy stepped in, and a little older voice called, "Mother!" Again I heard the voice from upstairs say, "Here I am, darling. Do you want something?'"

"No," was the reply, and the door closed again and another child went out to play.

In a little while, there was still another voice, that of a fifteen-year-old girl. She came rushing in, quite surprised to find a stranger in the home. She too called, "Oh, Mother!" And to this the response was again, "I'm up here, darling. I'm ironing." That seemed to satisfy this young girl completely and she went about her piano practice.

A little later there was a fourth voice, a seventeen-year-old girl voice. The call upstairs was repeated and the same mother voice responded and invited her to come up if she wanted to. But she just sat down at the living room table and spread out her books and began studying.

Mother was home! That was the important thing! Here was security! Here was everything that the child seemed to need. But suppose they came home and called "Mother!" only to find a silent house, or suppose another voice answered, calling out, "Your mother isn't home. She'll be home at 5:30." If this were repeated day after day, the youngsters would stop calling "Mother!" They would become independent and get along without Mother and lose that sense of security which comes from Mother's being home to answer the greeting and be available to solve their youthful problems.

We must spend more time with the children and less in clubs, bowling alleys, banquets and social gatherings. Fathers and Mothers, we must "come back home." We must sacrifice some of our other interests, and organize our Church programs better so that both parents and youth will not be away from the home so much of the time. We must get more people to work in the Church so that the burden will not fall so heavily on the few. Then we must organize and do the maximum possible in the minimum amount of time, so that there can be more proper home life.

Chart Course for the Children Young parents should chart a course in their home and family life which will give the children firm but loving guidance and not let the children rule in the home. Children should be given responsibility, and duties to create in them the proper sense of responsibility. As indicated previously, their activities and habits should be in keeping with their ages, and parents should guide them accordingly. When they begin to go into their teens, they must be guided in their social life, into group activities, group picnics, group parties, going to church in groups, having firesides only groups, no dating. Our little girls and boys should understand this long before they go to Mutual Improvement Association meetings. They must be made to understand that when they become older there will be other activities and interests in their lives that will be equally important, but until then, group activities. Wise parents will understand this and chart the course of group activities for their children until the offspring are more mature.

When young people begin to mature perhaps in middle teens parents may relax the rules a little and permit their sons and daughters to do some dating, but only non-steady dating at this point. This age is the time for Mary to get acquainted with many boys to learn the good qualities of each, and for Johnny to get acquainted with many girls to see the fine points of each. It is at this age that they begin to develop a composite figure, the "dream girl" or "dream boy"-and begin to look for the one who will make an ideal husband or a perfect wife.

This type of child direction can be done properly only with a charted course. It is often too late to solve problems when they already rear their ugly heads due to lack of planning and inadequate indoctrination.

In a properly charted Latter-day Saint home, young people, especially young men, will plan a mission. With proper indoctrination, a boy is led to understand the course of his life. He will be a deacon, a teacher, a priest, an elder. He will attend priesthood meetings and seminary, Sunday School and MIA and do his home teaching. He will fill an honorable mission and he will get his education. He will be married in the holy temple to a lovely Latter-day Saint girl who also has these same ideals and whose life has followed a similar planned course in home and Church to prepare her to be a loving wife and mother. Such young people are properly fortified against such evils as early and steady dating. They will grow up with no petting or immorality and none of the serious, damaging things which ruin lives. Parents should chart and guide the course of their children's lives in the early years. Then there will be none of the intimacies that spell sin and ruin.

Parents Must Stay Close to Children Each mother should plan to stay close enough to her daughter so that she can talk to her before and if she is in trouble. I say to these girls who are in trouble, "Do your mother and father know about this?" Invariably the answer is, "Oh, no, I couldn't talk to my mother about this. I could talk to my bishop and I could talk to my stake president and to you, but I could never talk about it to my mother or my father."

A little Idaho girl came to my office, ready to have her baby. There was no father for the baby and no name for the poor little unfortunate. "I couldn't tell my mother," she said. "I'll stay down here in Salt Lake and have my baby and give it away; but I'll never tell my mother." It is sad how many times this situation is repeated.

We all realize that communication is a two-way street, and that youth often build their own barriers. But are parents charting their course right in this matter? Mothers, are you so busy with social life, with clubs, with working out of the home, or with housework, that you have no time to sit down and talk to your little girls and tell them the things they should know when they are nine, and ten, and eleven, and older? Can you be frank and loving to then, so that they in turn can be frank in giving you their confidences?

And you fathers, are you so busy making a living, playing golf, bowling, hunting, that you do not have time to talk to your boys and hold them close to you and win their confidence? Or do you brush them off, so that they dare not come and talk about these things with you?

Parents Accountable for Children's Training The Lord holds parents accountable for training their children in righteousness.

And again, inasmuch as parents have children in Zion, or in any of her stakes which are organized, that teach them not to understand the doctrine of repentance, faith in Christ the Son of the living God, and of baptism and the gift of the Holy Ghost by the laying on of the hands, when eight years old, the sin be upon the heads of the parents. And they shall also teach their children to pray, and to walk uprightly before the Lord. (D&C 68:25, 28.)

We cannot evade the responsibility. Only by properly planning and charting our family life can we guide our children and keep them free from the pitfalls that lead to sin and destruction, and put them on the pathway to happiness and exaltation. In this, nothing is more powerful than the example of their own parents and the influence of their home life. Our children's lives will be much the same as they see in their own homes as they are growing to manhood and womanhood. We should therefore chart our course along the pathway which we would want our children to follow.

Plan for Happiness Happiness is an elusive thing. It is like the pot of gold at the end of the rainbow. If we go out deliberately to find it, we may have difficulty in catching it. But if we follow directions closely, charting our course properly, we will not need to pursue it. It will overtake us and remain with us.

"What is the price of happiness?" One might be surprised at the simplicity of the answer. The treasure house of happiness is unlocked to those who live the gospel of Jesus Christ in its purity and simplicity. Like a mariner without stars, like a traveler without a compass, is the person who moves along through life without a plan. The assurance of supreme happiness, the certainty of a successful life here and of exaltation and eternal life hereafter, come to those who plan to live their lives in complete harmony with the gospel of Jesus Christ-and then consistently follow the course they have set.

Smith, Gospel Doctrine, pp.275, 279.

Talmage, Jesus the Christ, p.548.

Deseret News, March 13, 1897.

Documentary History of the Church. Vol. 5, p.391.

---
Notas:
[^1] Dante, Divine Comedy.
[^2] Melvin J. Ballard, "Three Degrees of Glory."
[^3] Joseph F. Smith, Gospel Doctrine (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1966), p. 475.
[^4] Melvin J. Ballard, "Three Degrees of Glory."
