Spencer W. Kimball, Miracle of Forgiveness ( 1969)

Chapter Eighteen

Forgive to Be Forgiven

For if ye forgive men their trespasses, your heavenly Father will also forgive you: But if ye forgive not men their trespasses, neither will your Father forgive your trespasses. —Matthew 6:14-15 And forgive us our debts, as we forgive our debtors. —Matthew 6:12

EXALTATION, THE PINNACLE OF THE PROPER DESIRE OF man, comes to him only if he is clean and worthy and perfected. Since man is weak and sinful, he must be cleansed before he can reach the exalted state of eternal life, and such cleansing from personal sins comes only through forgiveness following repentance.

Since forgiveness is an absolute requirement in attaining eternal life, man naturally ponders: How can I best secure that forgiveness? One of many basic factors stands out as indispensable immediately: One must forgive to be forgiven. The Lord's prayer emphasizes this: Our Father which art in heaven, Hallowed be thy name. Thy kingdom come. Thy will be done in earth, as it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread. And forgive us our debts, as we forgive our debtors. And lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil: for thine is the kingdom, and the power, and the glory, forever. Amen. (Matt. 6:9-13. Italics added.)

The Savior immediately returned to his message as though he might not have emphasized it enough. Now he strengthened it in the positive as well as in the negative, giving reasons as well as the implied command.

For if ye forgive men their trespasses, your heavenly Father will also forgive you: But if ye forgive not men their trespasses, neither will your Father forgive your trespasses. (Matt. 6:14-15.)

The Lord must have considered this basic. He had long before made the same statement to his people in the Western world through his great prophet, Alma, when it was given in comparable words: And ye shall also forgive one another your trespasses; for verily I say unto you, he that forgiveth not his neighbor's trespasses when he says that he repents, the same hath brought himself under condemnation. (Mos. 26:31.)

Forgiveness Must Be Sincere The command to forgive and the condemnation which follows failure to do so could not be stated more plainly than in this modern revelation to the Prophet Joseph Smith: My disciples, in days of old, sought occasion against one another and forgave not one another in their hearts; and for this evil they were afflicted and sorely chastened. Wherefore, I say unto you, that ye ought to forgive one another; for he that forgiveth not his brother his trespasses standeth condemned before the Lord; for there remaineth in him the greater sin. I, the Lord, will forgive whom I will forgive, but of you it is required to forgive all men. (D&C 64:8-10.)

Note the Lord's comment about inadequate forgiveness on the part of his former-day disciples. Just what their sufferings were is not stated, but the penalties and chastisement were sore.

The lesson stands for us today. Many people, when brought to a reconciliation with others, say that they forgive, but they continue to hold malice, continue to suspect the other party, continue to disbelieve the other's sincerity. This is sin, for when a reconciliation has been effected and when repentance is claimed, each should forgive and forget, build immediately the fences which have been breached, and restore the former compatibility.

The early disciples evidently expressed words of forgiveness, and on the surface made the required adjustment, but "forgave not one another in their hearts." This was not a forgiveness, but savored of hypocrisy and deceit and subterfuge. As implied in Christ's model prayer, it must be a heart action and a purging of one's mind. Forgiveness means forgetfulness. One woman had "gone through" a reconciliation in a branch and had made the physical motions and verbal statements indicating it, and expressed the mouthy words forgiving. Then with flashing eyes, she remarked, "I will forgive her, but I have a memory like an elephant. I'll never forget." Her pretended adjustment was valueless and void. She still harbored the bitterness. Her words of friendship were like a spider's web, her rebuilt fences were as straw, and she herself continued to suffer without peace of mind. Worse still, she stood "condemned before the Lord," and there remained in her an even greater sin than in the one who, she claimed, had injured her.

Little did this antagonistic woman realize that she had not forgiven at all. She had only made motions. She was spinning her wheels and getting nowhere. In the scripture quoted above, the phrase in their hearts has deep meaning. It must be a purging of feelings and thoughts and bitternesses. Mere words avail nothing.

For behold, if a man being evil giveth a gift, he doeth it grudgingly; wherefore it is counted unto him the same as if he had retained the gift; wherefore he is counted evil before God. (Moro. 7:8.)

Henry Ward Beecher expressed the thought this way: "I can forgive but I cannot forget is another way of saying I cannot forgive."

I may add that unless a person forgives his brother his trespasses with all his heart he is unfit to partake of the sacrament.

For he that eateth and drinketh unworthily, eateth and drinketh damnation to himself, not discerning the Lord's body. For this cause many are weak and sickly among you, and many sleep. ( 1 Cor. 11:29-30.)

Transgressors Not to Be Hounded Some people not only cannot or will not forgive and forget the transgressions of others, but go to the other extreme of hounding the alleged transgressor. Many letters and calls have come to me from individuals who are determined to take the sword of justice in their own hands and presume to see that a transgressor is punished. "That man should be excommunicated," a woman declared, "and I'm never going to rest till he has been properly dealt with." Another said, "I can never rest, so long as that person is a member of the Church." Still another said: "I will never enter the chapel so long as that person is permitted to enter. I want him tried for his membership." One man even made many trips to Salt Lake City and wrote several long letters to protest against the bishop and the stake president who did not take summary disciplinary action against a person who, he claimed, was breaking the laws of the Church.

To such who would take the law into their own hands, we read again the positive declaration of the Lord: there remaineth in him the greater sin." (D&C 64:9.) The revelation continues: "And ye ought to say in your hearts-let God judge between me and thee, and reward thee according to thy deeds." (D&C 64:11.) When known transgressions have been duly reported to the proper ecclesiastical officers of the Church, the individual may rest the case and leave the responsibility with the Church officers. If those officers tolerate sin in the ranks, it is an awesome responsibility for them and they will be held accountable.

One woman called every week to inquire whether her former son-in-law had been excommunicated. I told her to let the matter drop; that she had done her full duty in making the matter known to the proper authorities and now she would do well to forget it and leave the disciplining to the appropriate officials. Another bitter woman almost lost her reason, so determined was she to see that her divorced husband paid the severest penalties. It was obvious that her motive was revenge, not justice. She had problems of her own, but she disregarded them in her frenzy in seeking revenge.

Another couple had had much trouble which culminated in divorce. The woman had acknowledged her guilt of infidelity, and had done all she could to make adjustment through her bishop, and had remarried in what seemed to be a happy marriage. The man, on the other hand, had been most demanding and seemed determined to see that she was disciplined severely. From authority to authority he took the case, rehearsing all her weaknesses and eccentricities, fully embellishing them and demanding that the Church take action.

Bitter vituperation and ugly calumnies came from him. He quoted scripture; he cited the handbook; he rehearsed the policy and practice of the Church in such matters. Revenge seemed to be his obsession. It was necessary to say to him: "You have done your full duty when you have reported the misdeeds to the proper authority. You need not take the matter further." And when he persisted, it was finally necessary to tell him that unless he desisted, action might be taken against him. Revenge is sweet to some, but "revenge is mine, saith the Lord." Again, he that will not forgive is worse than the original culprit.

Revenge Is Foreign to the Gospel The spirit of revenge, of retaliation, of bearing a grudge, is entirely foreign to the gospel of the gentle, forgiving Jesus Christ. Even the old Mosaic law, which is usually thought of as being harsher, forbade this spirit. From Sinai and the wilderness comes to us the imperishable command, always pertinent in any age: Thou shalt not go up and down as a talebearer among thy people: neither shalt thou stand against the blood of thy neighbour: I am the Lord. Thou shalt not hate thy brother in thine heart: thou shalt in any wise rebuke thy neighbour, and not suffer sin upon him. Thou shalt not avenge, nor bear any edge against the children of thy people, but thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself: I am the Lord. (Lev. 19:16-18.)

Again, James warns against the grudge: "Grudge not one against another, brethren, lest ye be condemned: behold, the judge standeth before the door." (Jas. 5:9.) And someone has said: "One of the heaviest loads a man can carry is a grudge."

In the midst of discordant sounds of hate, bitterness and revenge expressed so often today, the soft note of forgiveness comes as a healing balm. Not least is its effect on the forgiver.

One of the glorious aspects of the principles of forgiveness is the purifying and ennobling effects its application has upon the personality and character of the forgiver. Someone wisely said, "He who has not forgiven a wrong or an injury has not yet tasted one of the sublime enjoyments of life." The human soul seldom rises to such heights of strength and nobility as when it removes all resentments and forgives errors and malice. [^1]

Retaliation certainly is not repentance, but the suffering of indignities, on the other hand, may be the way toward that goal. The Lord's matchless Sermon on the Mount provides for the better way, one without revenge or retaliation. And Paul said to the Romans: Recompense to no man evil for evil. Dearly beloved, avenge not yourselves, but rather give place unto wrath: for it is written, Vengeance is mine; I will repay, saith the Lord. (Rom. 12:17, 19.)

Spinoza expresses it this way: He who wishes to revenge injuries by reciprocal hatred will live in misery. But, he who endeavors to drive away hatred by means of love, fights with pleasure and confidence; he resists equally one or many men, and scarcely needs at all the help of fortune. Those whom he conquers yield joyfully, not from want of force, but increase thereof.

Do Not Judge One man came in with his erring wife, and when she had been disciplined by dis-fellowshipment he taunted her, saying, "Now, how do you like it? You can't take the sacrament. Now don't you wish you had listened to me?" As this despicable husband was judging, it reminded me of the corrupt men who brought the adulteress to the Lord, whose soft answer puts all such accusers to flight: "He that is without sin among you, let him first cast a stone at her." (John 87.) The scriptures are very strict upon the unauthorized judging. The Lord himself made it clear and emphatic: Judge not, that ye be not judged. For with what judgment ye judge, ye shall be judged: and with what measure ye mete, it shall be measured to you again. (Matt. 7:1-2.)

The Lord will judge with the same measurements meted out by us. If we are harsh, we should not expect other than harshness. If we are merciful with those who injure us, he will be merciful with us in our errors. If we are unforgiving, he will leave us weltering in our own sins.

While the scriptures are plain in their declaration that man shall have meted out to him the same measure that he gives his fellowmen, the meting out even of warranted judgment is not for the layman, but for proper authorities in Church and state. The Lord will do the judging in the final analysis.

The bishop in his ordination to that office is made a "judge in Israel" to those of his own ward, but to none who are not so placed under his jurisdiction. The stake president, by his setting apart, is made a judge over the people of the stake over which he is to preside. Likewise, a branch president and mission president have somewhat similar responsibilities. The General Authorities, of course, have general jurisdiction, and have the duty to make judgments in certain instances.

The Lord can judge men by their thoughts as well as by what they say and do, for he knows even the intents of their hearts; but this is not true of humans. We hear what people say, we see what they do, but being unable to discern what they think or intend, we often judge wrongfully if we try to fathom the meaning and motives behind their actions and place on them our own interpretation.

A person who judges anyone else is just as likely to judge his Church leaders, often thereby bringing disharmony and contention to our wards and branches. But the spirit of forgiveness and not of judgment is what is required-forgiveness and understanding. If those who seem so disturbed about the actions of their leaders would only pray to the Lord with full purpose of heart, saying constantly, "Thy will be done," and "Father, lead me aright and I will accept," their attitude would change and they would return to happiness and peace.

People who are inclined to sit in judgment on others should read and reread these words of Paul to the Romans: Therefore thou art inexcusable, O man, whosoever thou art that judgest: for wherein thou judgest another, thou condemnest thyself; for thou that judgest doest the same things. But we are sure that the judgment of God is according to truth against them which commit such things. And thinkest thou this, O man, that judgest them which do such things, and doest the same, that thou shalt escape the judgment of God? (Rom. 2:1-3.)

The Redeemer's principle of not judging is not a single-action program-it is a day-to-day requirement of life. He tells us to clean up our own errors first-to remove the beam-size faults. Then, and not till then, is one justified in turning his attention to the eccentricities or weaknesses of another.

And why beholdest thou the mote that is in thy brother's eye, but considerest not the beam that is in thine own eye? Or how wilt thou say to thy brother, Let me pull out the mote out of thine eye; and, behold, a beam is in thine own eye? (Matt. 7:3-4.)

This should leave no doubt in any mind. The unequalness of the beam and the mote is telling. A mote is a tiny sliver like a small portion from a toothpick, while the beam is usually a great, strong timber or metal which runs from wall to wall to support the heavy roof of the building. When one is loaded down with beam-size weaknesses and sins, it is certainly wrong to forget his own difficult position while he makes mountains of the molehill-size errors of his brother.

Our vision is completely obscured when we have no mirror to hold up to our own faults and look only for the foibles of others. When we follow the instructions of the Lord, we are kept so busy perfecting ourselves that we come to realize that the faults of others are small in comparison. We should establish the delightful habit, then, of minimizing the weaknesses of others and thus increase our own virtues.

He who will not forgive others breaks down the bridge over which he himself must travel. This is a truth taught by the Lord in the parable of the unmerciful servant who demanded to be forgiven but was merciless to one who asked forgiveness of him. (See Matt. 18:23-35.)

It is interesting to note the difference in the debts. The wicked servant owed 10,000 talents and was owed only 100 pence. The Bible dictionary says that a talent is 750 ounces while a Roman penny is the eighth part of an ounce. In the parable, then, the wicked servant who owed 10,000 talents and who begged for time and mercy was condemning and imprisoning for debt the man who owed him a relatively paltry sum, one 600,000th of his own debt. Did not Paul say that we are usually guilty of the same transgressions and errors of which we accuse and condemn our fellowmen?

Once I had a "talents-and-pence," "mote-and-beam" situation when an injured husband finally persuaded his adulterous wife to come with him to my office. She admitted her guilt but justified herself in her losing interest in her own home in the fact that her husband was so righteous and fair and honorable that it gave her an inferiority complex. I asked her what he did to disturb her and justify her leaving her home and her children and him. She could find little fault with him. He provided well, was a good father, was kind and thoughtful, a good member of the Church, but because she had bad tendencies and impure thoughts, she felt inferior. Hers was the beam; hers was the 10,000-talent error; his was the mote and the 100-pence error.

No Escape Without Forgiveness If the faults of two people are more nearly equal, if both of them have a beam-impaired vision, that still gives no justification for a selfish, unforgiving attitude. With this in mind, I once wrote to a woman with whom I had had previous occasion to discuss at length her family problems. I had given counsel in my desire to prevent further misunderstandings and avoid a separation or divorce. After some weeks, she wrote that she would accept my decision. I responded in part as follows: It is not my decision-it is up to you to make the decisions. You have your free agency. If you are determined to get a divorce it is your responsibility and your suffering if you are not willing to make adjustments. When I talked with you, I understood that you had forgiven each other and would start from there to build a beautiful life. Apparently, I was mistaken. All my warnings and pleadings seem to have fallen on deaf ears. I want you to know that I do not justify in your husband anything that was wrong, but I recognized all the way through that his was not the whole fault. I have never been able to feel that you had wholly purged the selfishness from your own soul. I do know that two people as seemingly intelligent and apparently mature as you two, could have a gloriously happy life, if both of you would begin to let your concerns run in favor of the other, instead of in favor of your selfish selves. The escapist never escapes. If two people, selfish and self-centered, and without the spirit of forgiveness, escape from each other, they cannot escape from themselves. The disease is not cured by the separation or the divorce, and it will most assuredly follow along in the wake of future marriages. The cause must be removed. Being young, both of you are likely to marry again. Each of you is likely to carry into the next marriage all the weaknesses and sins and errors you have now, unless you repent and transform. And if you will change your life for a new spouse, why not for the present one? Perhaps you have thought that your home was the one home that was frustrated with problems. You should know that most couples have misunderstandings but many solve their problems instead of permitting their problems to crush them. Many wives have shed bitter tears, and many husbands have lain sleepless hours, but thanks be to the Lord that great numbers of these folks have been smart enough to solve their difficulties.

In my letter, I continued as follows: Partners stay in business together for years. They may be as different as fish and fowl, but because there is a compelling and compensating reason for their understanding of each other, they overlook weaknesses, strengthen themselves, and work together. They seldom break up a partnership where they would both lose seriously and financially by doing so. A celestial marriage is far more to fight for and to live for, and to adjust for, than any financial or other gain or beneficial arrangements that two partners might have between them.

Now, my beloved friends ... the matter is in your hands-you may do as you please, but I warn you that the trouble is deeper than you realize, and not easily resolved by divorce. And I warn you also that, either separated or living together, you will be damaged and cankered and poisoned and dwarfed by bitterness and hatreds and loathings. The first need is to master yourselves.

The Poison of Bitterness In that letter I mentioned bitterness and hatred, which so often accompany the unforgiving spirit. Bitterness poisons mostly the one who harbors it in his heart. It generates hatred, and "whosoever hateth his brother is a murderer: and ye know that no murderer hath eternal life abiding in him." (1 John 3:15.)

Generally, the hated one does not even know how bitter is the animosity leveled against him. He may sleep at night and enjoy a reasonable peace, but the one who hates estranges himself from good folk, shrivels his heart, dwarfs his soul, makes of himself an unhappy pygmy.

Usually such a person broadcasts his troubles, his prejudices and his hates, and thus is even less appreciated by his fellowmen than the one who must always be speaking of his physical infirmities and explaining his operations. It becomes wearisome, and people are bored by the harangues. Only good manners keeps people from running when the complainer, the hater, the critic appears.

I knew a man who took every occasion to criticize one of his colleagues for passing up the weekly sacrament meeting. His denunciation and condemnation were vituperative and frequent. Later, I noted that the same critic was frequently absenting himself from his sacrament meeting and he seemed in every case to justify it, but he had made no allowances for his brother in similar situations. Is not the gossip hardest on his fellow gossip? Is not the critic most critical of other critics?

The Lord and his Church do not justify any wrongdoing on the part of any of us. But if each of us keeps his own heart pure and his own mind free from bitterness, and serves the Lord with all his might, mind, strength, and heart, he can be at peace. He can be sure that every other soul, like himself, will have to pay full price for his misdeeds, and will receive due rewards for his good deeds.

I returned, and saw under the sun, that the race is not to the swift, nor the battle to the strong, neither yet bread to the wise, nor yet riches to men of understanding, nor yet favour to men of skill; but time and chance happeneth to the all. (Eccles. 9:11.)

Our mission is to save, not to injure nor destroy. It is indeed unfortunate that people are not always discreet and diplomatic in their dealings with others. Sometimes the best people, and even the best Church leaders, though having the finest intentions, give offense and injury without meaning to do so. In my work, I have run into this often.

But neither real nor fancied offenses from others, leaders or riot, justify the spirit of selfishness, jealousy, recrimination and resentment that sparks and then rekindles feuds and hostility. It is this same spirit, nourished by hurt feelings and fancied slights, which causes rifts and feuds in wards and branches. Those in positions of authority sometimes have their actions and motives questioned and are resented by members of their wards and branches and stakes when instead these members should be understanding and forgiving and willing to support and accept counsel from the leaders.

I knew a man who had had a fight with his neighbor over water and the filling in of a ditch common to both farms. Hatred increased till they watched each other like hawks. If one went to church, the other stayed home. If one went to town, the other remained at the farm so he would not meet him. When they did meet unexpectedly, their handshake was an icy one. They impugned each other's motives; each interpreted every intended good act of the other as having an ulterior motive. When the one was made a Church leader, the other and his family absented themselves from Church activity. When a reorganization took place and the other family was honored with leadership, the formerly active family could not now be induced to attend to their duties.

I knew a stake president who was released before he was desirous of being replaced. He became very bitter and his venom expressed itself in staying away from the Church services, in criticizing the leaders who had released him, and then, gradually, the leaders who replaced him, and eventually, the Church which he was now injuring. On and on he skidded toward apostasy. His spite and hatreds injured him only. The stake continued to prosper.

The damage to one who becomes the critic and sets himself up as a judge is severe, especially if he finds fault with the leaders of the Church whom the Lord has appointed. Since the crucifixion, there have been tens of thousands of men called by the Savior to fill positions of responsibility, not one of whom has been perfect, and yet all are called of the Lord and must be upheld and sustained by those who would be disciples of the Lord. That is the true spirit of the gospel.

It is most regrettable that individuals permit themselves to be so disturbed about the actions of their leaders. I am sure that if such people would pray to the Lord with all their hearts and minds and voices, saying constantly, "Thy will be done," and "Father, lead me aright and I will accept," they would have a change of attitude and would return to happiness and peace.

Not understood. Poor souls with stunted vision Oft measure giants by their narrow gauge. O God, that men would see a little clearer, Or judge less harshly where they cannot see!

The Lord can judge men by their thoughts as well as by what they say and do, for he even knows the intents of their hearts; but that is not true of us humans. We hear what others say, we see what they do, but we cannot always tell what they think nor what they intend. Therefore, we often judge wrongfully if we try to fathom their meaning and give our own interpretation to it.

Forgiveness is the miraculous ingredient that assures harmony and love in the home or the ward. Without it there is contention. Without understanding and forgiveness there is dissension, followed by lack of harmony, and this breeds disloyalty in homes, in branches and in wards. On the other hand, forgiveness is harmonious with the spirit of the gospel, with the Spirit of Christ. This is the spirit we must all possess if we would receive forgiveness of our own sins and be blameless before God.

From the Visiting Teacher's Message, October, 1963.

---
Notas:
[^1] Dante, Divine Comedy.
