Spencer W. Kimball, Miracle of Forgiveness ( 1969)

Chapter Nineteen

As We Forgive Our Debtors

O man, forgive thy mortal foe, Nor ever strike him blow for blow; For all the souls on earth that live, To be forgiven must forgive. Forgive him seventy times and seven; For all the blessed souls in heaven Are both forgivers and forgiven. —Alfred Lord Tennyson

IN THE PREVIOUS CHAPTER I DWELT MOSTLY ON THE negative aspects of this subject-on people who have been unforgiving, and the spirit and attitude they carry. In the present chapter I shall highlight the positive side, indicating the joy which comes to those who truly forgive.

From a Ward Teaching message comes this: It is safe to assume that nothing Jesus did brought him more joy than to forgive his fellowmen. He gave his very life that Adam's transgression may be forgiven, and that we be spared the consequences thereof. Let us each look back over his own life, and recall the time when he has forgiven someone. Has any other joy been more gratifying? Has any other feeling been more uplifting? The destructive feelings of smallness, pettiness, and hate, or longing for revenge, are crowded out by the attitude to forgive. "Forgiveness is better than revenge; for forgiveness is the sign of a gentle nature, but revenge the sign of a savage nature. [^1]

The great Abraham Lincoln understood this principle better than most. He had an answer to many problems. His Secretary of War, Edwin Stanton, was one of his problems. Edwin Stanton wrote a hot letter to a general who had abused him and accused him of favoritism. He read the letter to Lincoln, who listened and then exclaimed: "First rate, Stanton, you've scored him well, just right!"

As Stanton folded the letter into its envelope, Lincoln quickly asked, "Why, what are you going to do with it now?"

"Mail it to him."

"No, no, that would spoil it," responded Lincoln. "File it away; that is the kind of filing that keeps it sharp and doesn't wound the other fellow."

Paul and Stephen Forgave Enemies A mark of true greatness is the forgiving heart. Consider the life of Paul. Though he may not have been perfect, he was a most righteous man after his conversion. He gave us a beautiful example of forgiving others. He recalled: Alexander the coppersmith did me much evil: the Lord reward him according to his works. (2 Tim. 4:14.)

Paul was willing to leave the judgment and penalty to the Lord, who would be wise and just. In spite of all he suffered at the hands of oppressors, some of whom were his own false brethren, he was not consumed and scorched with hate or bitterness or rancor. Quite the reverse.

To the Corinthians he urged the very traits he had so fully developed in himself. (2 Cor. 11:23-28.) Here we have the noble Paul who had suffered much from his contemporaries Paul, who had been tortured with beatings, who had suffered incarceration in many prisons; Paul, who had received two hundred stripes across his back, who had been beaten with rods; Paul, who had been stoned and left for dead, and who had three times been shipwrecked and had struggled many hours in the water; Paul, who had suffered from robbers and had been hidden from his pursuers and had escaped in a basket over the wall this Paul who had suffered so much at the hands of others came near the end of his life with a forgiving heart and said: "At my first answer no man stood with me, but all men forsook me: I pray God that it may not be, laid to their charge." (2 Tim. 4:16. Italics added.)

Another who exemplified the divine nature in forgiving was Stephen. One of the seven men chosen for temporal work in the Church, Stephen was a man "full of faith and of the Holy Ghost." His life closely approached the perfection line, so much so that people "saw his face as it had been the face of an angel." (Acts 6:15.) Following his piercing sermon to his antagonists, the wicked of the place, he became the victim of a rash, vicious assassination by men who rushed at him And cast him out of the city, and stoned him: and the witnesses laid down their clothes at a young man's feet, whose name was Saul. And they stoned Stephen, calling upon God, and saying, Lord Jesus, receive my spirit. And he kneeled down, and cried with a loud voice, Lord, lay not this sin to their charge. And when he had said this, he fell asleep. (Acts 7:58-60. Italics added.)

Great Example of Jesus We have the supreme example of fortitude, kindness, charity and forgiveness in him, who set the perfect example, our Savior, Jesus Christ, who commands us all to follow. All his life he had been the victim of ugliness. As a newborn infant he had been spirited away to, save his life at the instruction of an angel in a dream, and had been taken to Egypt. At the end of a hectic life he had stood in quiet, restrained, divine dignity, while evil men spat foul, disease-germ-ridden spittle in his face. How nauseating! But what composure he showed! What control!

They pushed him around and jostled him and buffeted him. Not an angry word escaped his lips. What mastery of self! They slapped him in his face and on his body. What humiliation! How painful! Yet he stood resolute, unintimidated. Literally did he follow his own admonition when he turned his other cheek so that it too could be slapped and smitten.

His own disciples had forsaken him and fled. In such a difficult position, he met the rabble and their leaders. He stood alone at the mercy of his brutal, criminal assailants and vilifiers.

Words, too, are hard to take. Incriminations and recriminations and their blasphemy of things, persons, places and situations sacred to him must have been hard to take. They called his own sweet innocent mother a fornicator, yet he stood his ground, never faltering. No cringing, no denials, no rebuttals. When false, mercenary witnesses were paid to lie about him, he seemed not to condemn them. They twisted his words and misinterpreted his meanings, yet he was calm and unflustered. Had he not been taught to pray for them "which despitefully use you"?

He was beaten, officially scourged. He wore a crown of thorns, a wicked torture. He was mocked and jeered. He suffered every indignity at the hands of his own people. "I came unto my own," he said, "and my own received me not." He was required to carry his own cross, taken to the mount of Calvary, nailed to a cross, and suffered excruciating pain. Finally, with the soldiers and his accusers down below him, he looked upon the Roman soldiers and said these immortal words: "Father, forgive them; for they know not what they do." (Luke 23:34.)

We Must Forgive Regardless It would have been easy for Paul, Stephen and Jesus to be revengeful-that is, if they had not assiduously cultivated the forgiving spirit. Revenge is a response of the carnal man, not the spiritual one. It enters into one's life when he allows it to through misunderstandings and injuries.

In our own dispensation, the Lord spoke pointedly of this matter and made a statement which is startling in its implications. It is found in Doctrine & Covenants Section 64, previously quoted. I shall never forget this scripture, for it came to me in what seemed a miraculous manner.

I was struggling with a community problem in a small ward in the East where two prominent men, leaders of the people, were deadlocked in a long and unrelenting feud. Some misunderstanding between them had driven them far apart with enmity. As the days, weeks, and months passed, the breach became wider. The families of each conflicting party began to take up the issue and finally nearly all the people of the ward were involved. Rumors spread and differences were aired and gossip became tongues of fire until the little community was divided by a deep gulf. I was sent to clear up the matter. After a long stake conference, lasting most of two days, I arrived at the frustrated community about 6 p.m., Sunday night, and immediately went into session with the principal combatants.

How we struggled! How I pleaded and warned and begged and urged! Nothing seemed to be moving them. Each antagonist was so sure that he was right and justified that it was impossible to budge him.

The hours were passing it was now long after midnight, and despair seemed to enshroud the place; the atmosphere was still one of ill temper and ugliness. Stubborn resistance would not give way. Then it happened. I aimlessly opened my Doctrine and Covenants again and there before me it was. I had read it many times in past years and it had had no special meaning then. But tonight it was the very answer. It was an appeal and an imploring and a threat and seemed to be coming direct from the Lord. I read from the seventh verse on, but the quarreling participants yielded not an inch until I came to the ninth verse. Then I saw them flinch, startled, wondering. Could that be right? The Lord was saying to us-to all of us-"Wherefore, I say unto you, that ye ought to forgive one another."

This was an obligation. They had heard it before. They had said it in repeating the Lord's Prayer. But now: "... for he that forgiveth not his brother his trespasses standeth condemned before the Lord ..."

In their hearts, they may have been saying: "Well, I might forgive if he repents and asks forgiveness, but he must make the first move." Then the full impact of the last line seemed to strike them: "For there remaineth in him the greater sin."

What? Does that mean I must forgive even if my antagonist remains cold and indifferent and mean? There is no mistaking it.

A common error is the idea that the offender must apologize and humble himself to the dust before forgiveness is required. Certainly, the one who does the injury should totally make his adjustment, but as for the offended one, he must forgive the offender regardless of the attitude of the other. Sometimes men get satisfactions front seeing the other party on his knees and grovelling in the dust, but that is not the gospel way.

Shocked, the two men sat up, listened, pondered a minute, then began to yield. This scripture added to all the others read brought them to their knees. Two a.m. and two bitter adversaries were shaking hands, smiling and forgiving and asking forgiveness. Two men were in a meaningful embrace. This hour was holy. Old grievances were forgiven and forgotten, and enemies became friends again. No reference was ever made again to the differences. The skeletons were buried, the closet of dry bones was locked and the key was thrown away, and peace was restored.

In this regard the admonition of President Joseph F. Smith in 1902 is as applicable now as then: We hope and pray that you will ... forgive one another and never from this time forth ... bear malice toward another fellow creature. It is extremely hurtful for any man holding the gift of the Holy Ghost to harbor a spirit of envy, or malice, or retaliations, or intolerance toward or against his fellow man. We ought to say in our hearts, "Let God judge between me and thee, but as for me, I will forgive." I want to say to you that Latter-day Saints who harbor a feeling of unforgiveness in their souls are more censurable than the one who has sinned against them. Go home and dismiss envy and hatred from your hearts: dismiss the feeling of unforgiveness; and cultivate in your souls that spirit of Christ which cried out upon the cross, "Father, forgive them; for they know not what they do." This is the spirit that Latter-day Saints ought to possess all the day long.

Yes, to be in the right we must forgive, and we must do so without regard to whether or not our antagonist repents, or how sincere is his transformation, or whether or not he asks our forgiveness. We must follow the example and the teaching of the Master, who said: "... Ye ought to say in your hearts let God judge between me and thee, and reward thee according to thy deeds." (D&C 64:11.) But men often are unwilling to leave it to the Lord, fearing perhaps that the Lord might be too merciful, less severe than is proper in the case. In this we could all take a lesson from the great David.

When David was being pursued to the death by the jealous King Saul, and David came upon an easy opportunity to kill him, the young, pure-minded David refrained from ridding himself of his enemy. He cut off the skirt of Saul's robe to prove to the king that he had been in David's hand and at his mercy. Speaking later to Saul, he said: ... I have not sinned against thee; yet thou huntest my soul to take it. The Lord judge between me and thee, and the Lord avenge me of thee: but mine hand shall not be upon thee ... wickedness proceedeth from the wicked. (I Sam. 24:11-13.)

And Saul, when he realized how helpless he had been when at the mercy of David, responded: Thou art more righteous than I; for thou hast rewarded me good, whereas I have rewarded thee evil. (I Sam. 24:17.)

One of the world's most beautiful mountains, located in Jasper National Park in Canada, was named for Edith Cavell. Edith Cavell was a nurse who was executed by her enemies for having hidden, nursed, and fed wounded soldiers. As she stood before the firing squad she uttered these deathless words which are now preserved in bronze and granite: "I realize that patriotism is not enough. I must have no hatred or bitterness toward anyone."

The Ultimate in Forgiveness Sometimes the spirit of forgiveness is carried to the loftiest height to rendering assistance to the offender. Not to be revengeful, not to seek what outraged justice might demand, to leave the offender in God's hands this is admirable. But to return good for evil, this is the sublime expression of Christian love.

In this regard we have the stimulating example of President George Albert Smith. It was reported to him that someone had stolen from his buggy the buggy robe. Instead of being angry, he responded: "I wish we knew who it was, so that we could give him, the blanket also, for he must have been cold; and some food also, for he must have been hungry."

This brings to mind the classic story of Jean Valjean in Victor Hugo's immortal book, Les Miserables. President Henry D. Moyle summarized this for us in his address printed in the November, 1957, Improvement Era: Victor Hugo's description of Jean Valjean after nineteen years as a prisoner in the galleys is unforgettable. His initial offense was the stealing of a loaf of bread to feed his mother's starving family. At that time he was only a boy. Upon his release from prison, after all others had rejected him as a despised ex-convict, he was finally befriended by a bishop, M. Beauvian. This bishop treated Jean Valjean with great kindness and generosity. He trusted him and gave him food and lodging. Jean Valjean, unable to overcome the evil impulses fostered during his prison years, repaid the bishop by robbing him of his silverware, consisting of many priceless heirlooms. He was shortly after apprehended by the gendarmes and brought back, with the bishop's treasures in his bag. The bishop forgave Jean Valjean and, in place of accusing him of his dastardly deed of ingratitude, instantly said to him, "You forgot the candlesticks," and giving them to Jean Valjean, told him that they were silver, too. After the officers had left, the bishop said to the ex-convict: "Jean Valjean, my brother, you belong no longer to evil but to good ... I will draw it [his soul] from dark thoughts and from the spirit of perdition—. " This act of forgiveness on the part of a man whose property had been stolen aroused the latent virtues of Jean. They had lain dormant for nineteen years. Even his long term in the galleys could not destroy the inherent desire in man to do good. Almost his first act after the saintly deed of the bishop was to befriend a golden-haired girl in dire distress known as Cosette. The author's ultimate description of Jean Valjean is indicative of the tremendous transformation in the character of this unfortunate man. Cosette completed the reformation of this man's life which the bishop had initiated. Victor Hugo writes: "The Bishop had caused the dawn of virtue on his horizon; Cosette evoked the dawn of love." After a life filled with charity, forgiveness and other good deeds, Jean Valjean sacrificed life itself for the happiness and well-being of Cosette and her husband. In his final letter to her, he wrote these words: "I am writing just now to Cosette. She will find my letter. To her I bequeath the two candlesticks which are on the mantel. They are silver, but to me they are gold. They are diamonds I do not know whether he who gave them to me is satisfied with me ... I have done what I could."

One act of complete forgiveness entirely altered the life of this ex-convict. Throughout his life, he was hounded and suffered humiliation and degradation almost beyond human endurance. The gendarmes continually sought for trivial reasons to reincarcerate him. Nevertheless, he succeeded in keeping the second great commandment throughout the remaining years of his life. He had once again regained the attributes of virtue, love and forgiveness, which he conscientiously exercised thereafter toward those who pursued and persecuted him.

We also see in the life story of Jean Valjean how closely repentance on his part followed his forgiveness by the man he had wronged. Thereafter he brought forth fruits meet for repentance.

A certain man found that he had a suspicious growth which presaged serious trouble. When the doctor had taken a biopsy and found the growth to be malignant, the man made arrangements at the hospital for radical surgery. When he learned the truth-that his life was hanging in the balance-this good man recoiled at first, then resigned himself, relaxed and smiled as he told the doctor: "Before I go to the hospital, doctor, I have four items of unfinished business. First, I will check my insurance policies and my titles and see that all are in order; second, I'm going to settle all my financial obligations; third, I'm going to have my will rechecked; and fourth, I'm going to see Bill and apologize for the unkind things I have said about him and ask his forgiveness for the grudge I have long carried against him. Then, I am ready to go to the hospital, and to my grave if necessary."

In the context of the spirit of forgiveness, one good brother asked me, "Yes, that is what ought to be done, but how do you do it? Doesn't that take a superman?"

"Yes," I said, "but we are commanded to be supermen. Said the Lord, 'Be ye therefore perfect, even as your Father which is in heaven is perfect.' (Matt. 5:48.) We are gods in embryo, and the Lord demands perfection of us."

"Yes, the Christ forgave those who injured him, but he was more than human," he rejoined.

And my answer was: "But there are many humans who have found it possible to do this divine thing."

Apparently there are many who, like this good brother, hold the comfortable theory that the forgiving spirit as exemplified in the examples I have quoted is more or less the monopoly of scriptural or fictional characters and can hardly be expected of practical people in today's world. This is not the case. That the forgiving spirit can be developed today is demonstrated by the accounts which follow-in which, be it noted, the provocation was in most instances more extreme than most of us meet.

Hatred and Bitterness Can Be Overcome These are accounts of some contemporaries who have risen to great heights in self-mastery in contrast to the many people who carry bitterness in their hearts for wrongs or fancied ones. Sometimes the injured ones get courage and strength from others who have had great trials and have borne up under them. Such is the experience of Mrs. Ruby Spilsbury Brown of El Paso, Texas, and her late husband, George, who lost their son in the Second World War and became bitter at the incident and bitter at the Japanese race because of it. They received much courage in their trial from the Glenn Kempton story related later in this chapter, and it may be that many readers will find strength in knowing that other folks have great tribulations and emerge from them and rise above them.

The Robert Brown story follows, in the words of his mother: Our son, Bobby, was taken prisoner by the Japanese at the fall of Bataan in April, 1941, and thus escaped the infamous Death March. He arrived at the prison camp of Cabanatuan ahead of the rest of the troops and stood at the gate as they filed slowly in. So many of them were missing, others seriously wounded and all of them pitifully hungry and weakened. No wonder he sobbed his heart out at the sight of them.

Bobby enlisted in the New Mexico National Guard in October, 1949 and was inducted into the U. S. Army in January, 1941. By the time his unit left the last of August for places unknown he had risen to master sergeant, and in January, 1942, he was given a field commission as first lieutenant and was placed in charge of the regimental supply. For nineteen months we had no word from the War Department other than the terse "missing in action." In the two-and-a-half years he was in the prison camps; we received only five messages from him. Very brief they were, on post cards with checked blanks for the sender to fill in. They were signed by our son but heavily censored. At least it was in his handwriting and oh, how we treasured these! The rest of the information came to us piecemeal from his buddies, making their way to our door as they returned after the surrender.

Bobby was sent to the southern island of Mindanoa, in the Philippines, where the boys were put to work in the rice fields and on chicken farms. We are told that here our boys, in order to keep their starved bodies alive, found it necessary to take food wherever they could find it. A sick hen must be killed to keep the flock from infection, and eggs replaced the water in their canteens. Such ruses supplied some additional food for their emaciated bodies. Bobby learned to outwit them at their own game and was able to use his cunning and ability to the good of his troubled men. Major Bob Davey of Salt Lake City said he heard singing in the nearby jungle and he could hardly believe his ears, for the song was "An Angel From on High." Leaping from his bed he clawed his way through the jungle undergrowth to a little clearing where a half-starved, ragged handful of LDS POW's were gathered to worship the Lord, and our Bobby was leading the song. This Major Davey told us many things about Bobby and how he had learned to understand the Japanese language and was thus able to help many of his buddies who could not understand the guards' commands. This saved them many brutal beatings. In September, 1944, about 750 of our boys were loaded into an unmarked ship to be sent to Japan. Just a short way out from the island the ship was torpedoed by our U. S. Navy, blowing a large hole in the ship.

The men who were down in the hold of the ship scrambled for safety but the Japanese turned their machine guns on them. Bobby and the company doctor interceded, begging that they be given a chance to escape without being shot at, for they were just a few miles out in Zamboaga Bay. The last time Bobby was seen alive was when he and the doctor leaped into the water to help some of the boys who had been badly wounded. They were trying to keep afloat holding to pieces of debris and trying to aid those who were wounded. When Bobby called for them all to duck to escape the machine gun fire they all dived under, but Bobby was not among those who came up. For many years George, my husband now deceased, was U. S. Deputy Marshal and handled hundreds of federal prisoners. Included among these charges were many Japanese who were held as spies. Both he and I had let this hatred grow in our hearts, for we felt that every Japanese that we saw was somehow responsible for Bobby's suffering and death. Knowing this, our Federal Judge R. E. Thomason, in deference to our feelings, used other deputies to handle the prisoners of that nationality. Our bitter feelings began to affect our family, and sensing this, we prayed for help to overcome this. Then Brother Kempton, a member of our stake high council, told how he had overcome the bitterness of hatred in his heart for the men who were responsible for the death of his father. After hearing his story, which was much like our own sad one, George and I felt that if Glenn Kempton could master himself and control his feelings we could do it also. And we made greater effort in prayer and fasting for divine help and realized that the Lord can comfort hearts filled with bitterness and hate. Then you, Brother Kimball, came also to El Paso and we listened carefully to your advice, and you made us understand that before the Lord could put comfort into our tom hearts, we must get hatred and bitterness out of our hearts. Through fasting and prayer and determination we were able to eradicate these feelings. The Lord came to our assistance. Later, members of the family and a few close friends met in the office of the commander at Ft. Bliss. There was the posthumous presentation of Bobby's medals, among which were two purple hearts and the coveted Bronze Star, five in all.

Sister Brown then tells how a measure of comfort came to her and her husband in Bobby's death when they saw some of the wrecks of bodies and minds which did come home, and when they recognized that there are many things worse than death, and especially when that death comes to a worthy priesthood carrier who goes to eternity clean and free from the sins of the world.

The Kempton Story My memory takes me back to 1918 and to another story of forgiveness seldom equalled in my experience. It concerns my good friend, Glenn Kempton, who rose to spiritual heights not often attained by mortal man.

In February, 1918, in the Southern Arizona country, there occurred one of the most sensational tragedies of Arizona history. Four officers of the law went into the fastnesses of the mountains to enforce the draft law upon the Powers boys, who had failed to register. Three of the four officers were killed. Well do I remember the funeral, with the three caskets draped with the United States flag, and the three young widows and their nineteen orphaned children sitting on the front rows. Knowing the families intimately, the entire community in the Gila Valley was stirred deeply.

We saw the sweet young widows plod through the years in their loneliness, rearing their nearly a score of children. We saw the youngsters grow to maturity and become prominent in the community, while the Powers boys and Sisson were serving their long and desolate years in the state penitentiary.

When the shooting at Kilburn Canyon was over, "The Powers boys and Sisson fled and for 26 days eluded a posse of more than 3,000 men, including about 200 U. S. Cavalrymen." [^2]

The Arizona papers carried big headlines. Excitement was at an all-time high. The whole country was at fever pitch. The men surrendered March 8, 1918, 14 miles below the Mexican border. They were tried, found guilty, and sentenced to life imprisonment in the Arizona Penitentiary.

Forty-two merciless, unending years had passed. Sisson had died three years before. The Powers boys, old men now, were released in April, 1960, by the Arizona Governor and walked out on "—their legs still bowed in the parenthesis of horsemen, their receding hair turned grey. Each lost the sight of his left eye in the gunfight." [^3]

Our concern now with the tragic story involves this great man, Glenn Kempton, one of the nineteen orphaned children of 1918, who was big enough to forgive. He grew up deprived of a father and was subject to the usual prejudices, hates and bitternesses which would naturally surround a young boy under such circumstances. He has been gracious enough to tell me the story in his own way:

There followed one of the greatest man-hunts in the southwest history. The draft evaders were finally run down and caught near the Mexican border. They were tried and found guilty of murder, for which they received sentences of life imprisonment.

As a young boy in my early teens, there grew in my heart a bitterness and a hatred toward the confessed slayer of my Father, for Tom Powers had admitted killing my Dad.

"Ye have heard that it hath been said, Thou shalt love thy neighbour and hate thine enemy. But I say unto you, Love your enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to them that hate you, and pray for them that despitefully use you and persecute you; that ye may be the children of your Father which is in heaven—."

"Wherefore, I say unto you, that ye ought to forgive one another; for he that forgiveth not his brother his trespasses standeth condemned before the Lord; for there remaineth in him the greater sin. I, the Lord, will forgive whom I will forgive, but of you it is required to forgive all men."

"Forgiveness is in advance of Justice where repentance is concerned."

I didn't know whether or not Tom Powers had repented but I did know now that I had an appointment to make after I returned home, and I resolved before I left the mission field to do just that.

A few years ago, just shortly before Christmas, a season when the love of Christ abounds and the spirit of giving and forgiving gets inside of us, my wife and I were in Phoenix on a short trip. Having concluded our business in the middle of the second afternoon, we started home. As we rode along, I expressed the desire to detour and return home via Florence, for that is where the state prison is located. My wife readily assented. It was after visiting hours when we arrived but I went on inside and asked for the warden. I was directed to his office.

Then I stood and extended my hand. He stood and took it. I continued, "With all my heart, I forgive you for this awful thing that has come into our lives."

He bowed his head and I left him there. I don't know how he felt then, and I don't know how he feels now, but my witness to you is that it is a glorious thing when bitterness and hatred go out of your heart and forgiveness comes in.

I thanked the warden for his kindness, and as I walked out the door and down that long flight of steps I knew that forgiveness was better than revenge, for I had experienced it.

As we drove toward home in the gathering twilight, a sweet and peaceful calm came over me. Out of pure gratitude I placed my arm around my wife, who understood, for I know that we had now found a broader, richer and more abundant life.

Not only had Glenn Kempton found the joy of forgiving, but the example he set as a faithful Latter-day Saint has had far-reaching influence on many others who know his story and have heard his testimony.

"Blessed are the merciful: for they shall obtain mercy."

Other Modern Examples There was the young mother who lost her husband. The family had been in poor circumstances, and the insurance policy was only $2,000. The company promptly delivered the check for that amount as soon as proof of death was furnished. The young widow concluded she should save this for emergencies, and accordingly deposited it in the bank. Others knew of her savings, and one kinsman convinced her that she should lend the $2,000 to him at a high rate of interest.

Years passed, and she had received neither principal nor interest and she noticed that the borrower avoided her and made evasive promises when she asked him about the money. Now she needed the money and it could not be had.

"How I hate him!" she told me, and her voice breathed venom and bitterness and her dark eyes flashed. To think that an able-bodied man would defraud a young widow with a family to support! "How I loathe him!" she repeated over and over. Then I told her the Kempton story. She listened intently. I saw she was impressed. At the conclusion there were tears in her eyes, and she whispered: "Thank you. Thank you, sincerely. Surely I, too, must forgive my enemy. I will now cleanse my heart of its bitterness. I do not expect ever to receive the money, but I leave my offender in the hands of the Lord."

Weeks later, she saw me again and confessed that those intervening weeks had been the happiest of her life. A new peace had overshadowed her and she was able to pray for the offender and forgive him, even though she never received back a single dollar.

I saw a woman once whose little girl had been violated. "I will never forgive the culprit so long as I live," she repeated every time it came into her mind. Vicious and ugly was the act. Anyone should be shocked and disturbed at such a crime, but to be unwilling to forgive is not Christlike. The foul deed was done and could not be undone. The culprit had been disciplined. In her bitterness the woman shriveled and shrank.

Contrast this woman with the Latter-day Saint girl who climbed the heights of self-control as she forgave the man who disfigured her lovely face. Let the United Press newsman, Neal Corbett, tell her story as it appeared in the pages of the newspapers of the land.

"I would think he must be suffering, anybody who's like that, we ought to feel sorry for him," said April Aaron of the man who had sent her to a hospital for three weeks, following a brutal San Francisco knife attack. April Aaron is a devout Mormon, 22 years of age—. She is a secretary who's as pretty as her name, but her face has just one blemish-the right eye is missing, April lost it to the 'wildly slashing knife of a purse snatcher," near San Francisco's Golden Gate Park while en route to an MIA dance last April 18. She also suffered deep slashes on her left arm and right leg during a struggle with her assailant, after she tripped and fell in her efforts to elude him just one block from the Mormon chapel—. "I ran for a block and a half before he caught me. You can't run very fast on high heels," April said with a smile. Slashes on her leg were so severe doctors feared for a time it would need amputation. The sharp edge of the weapon could damage neither April's vivaciousness, nor her compassion. ". I wish that somebody could do something for him, to help him. He should have some treatment. Who knows what leads a person to do a thing like this? If they don't find him, he's likely to do it again." ... April Aaron has won the hearts of the people in San Francisco Bay area with her courage and good spirit in face of tragedy. Her room at St. Francis hospital was banked with flowers throughout her stay and attendants said they couldn't recall when anyone received more cards and expressions of good wishes.

The following is taken from a Los Angeles newspaper account attesting to the strength of people who have risen above the sordid revenge and ugly bitterness which so often prevails in such circumstances: ... The three men apprehended for the kidnap-murder of Marvin V. Merrill were Negroes. There are those who could fan this incident into an uncontrollable blaze of racial hatred, but just the opposite spirit was present at the funeral service last week at Matthews Ward. Angelo B. Rollins, a Negro postal employee, was selected by the mail-carriers at Wagner Station to represent them by reading a eulogy at the services. Elder Merrill had served the postal department for more than 20 years. Scattered throughout the chapel and overflow room were scores of postmen who came directly from their postal routes, still in their uniforms. Many of these men were Negroes—. Rollins said: "No man can condone the actions of the perpetrators who ended his life. These vicious and vile acts that make us bow our heads in shame, point an accusing finger at innocent millions as a nation of offenders. In my sinful weakness, I would have rent them limb from limb, but the still small voice of the Master said, 'Vengeance is Mine.' ... This Mormon Elder, Norman Merrill, firm in the strength of his faith, and steeped in the teachings of Christ, would probably have said of them, as did our Savior at Calvary, 'Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do.'

Reconciliation Through Church Channels When Church members cannot resolve their mutual problems alone, they sometimes reach a point where the Church steps in to help. Such a situation was brought to my attention several years ago in a case involving two older Latter-day Saints in the East who had become bitter enemies to the point where each carried a gun to protect himself from the other. The cause of their feud was a purchase of property; the contract had been loosely written and many misunderstandings had arisen. The seller was wealthy; the buyer was poor. Each was certain his own memory of the transaction was right. Each made angry accusations, and feelings steadily became more bitterly intense.

The men were asked to meet with their branch presidents, but they refused to do so because of fear of bodily harm should they meet each other. The case was scheduled to go to court and lawyers were hired. Through passing months the fires of bitterness flared and antagonism seethed.

Instead of the bitter, revengeful attitude built up, what was the proper thing to do? Paul told the Roman saints: Dearly beloved, avenge not yourselves, but rather give place unto wrath: for it is written, Vengeance is mine; I will repay, saith the Lord. Therefore if thine enemy hunger, feed him; if he thirst, give him drink: for in so doing thou shalt heap coals of fire on his head. Be not overcome of evil, but overcome evil with good. (Rom. 12:19-21.)

We remember too the injunction of the Lord: Resist not evil: but whosoever shall smite thee on thy right cheek, turn to him the other also. And if any man will sue thee at the law, and take away thy coat, let him have thy cloke also. And whosoever shall compel thee to go a mile, go with him twain. (Matt. 5:39-41.)

But the two antagonists were far from such thoughts now. Efforts at mediation continued, however, and by persistent efforts of their wise mission president the men were finally brought together in the home of a branch president. All this time the wives of both of the men had been praying almost ceaselessly that an understanding would come and forgiveness would result.

When the matter was fully explained and each point of view had been aired, in the spirit of the gospel both men accepted the decision and offered their hands in forgiveness and fellowship. The seller had in his heart also a real spirit of helpfulness, for in a surprise action he voluntarily signed a check for the full amount that was in dispute and presented it to the buyer who had asked his forgiveness. Thus through the spirit of understanding and forgiveness, the two men and their grateful wives returned to their homes, secure in the thought that all was settled. Peace was established, and in shame the men hid away the two guns, and two men became brothers again. Gifts could now conscientiously be placed on the altar.

Therefore if thou bring thy gift to the altar, and there rememberest that thy brother hath ought against thee; Leave there thy gift before the altar, and go thy way; first be reconciled to thy brother, and then come and offer thy gift. (Matt. 5:23-24.)

Litigation Between Church Members Paul takes the principle of forgiveness one step further when he suggests that for one Church member even to accept an injustice from another member is preferable to a court action. Disputes ought rather to be settled through channels of Church authority. Does one love his neighbor if he hales him into the courts? Paul found this fault among his Corinthian converts, and admonished them: Dare any of you, having a matter against another, go to law before the unjust, and not before the saints? But brother goeth to law with brother, and that before the unbelievers. Now therefore there is utterly a fault among you, because ye go to law one with another. Why do ye not rather take wrong? Why do ye not rather suffer yourselves to be defrauded? (I Cor. 6:1, 6-7.)

Pride or Peace? Frequently, pride gets in our way and becomes our stumbling block. But each of us needs to ask himself the question: "Is your pride more important than your peace?"

All too frequently, one who has done many splendid things in life and made an excellent contribution will let pride cause him to lose the rich reward to which he would be entitled otherwise. We should always wear the sackcloth and ashes of a forgiving heart and a contrite spirit, being willing always to exercise genuine humility, as did the publican, and ask the Lord to help us to forgive.

In 1906, my father received a letter from his dear friend, Matthias F. Cowley, who had been greatly embarrassed by being dropped from the Council of the Twelve. His letter showed great courage and a sweet, unembittered spirit: "In relation to the trial which has come to me, I will say that I accept it in all humility and meekness, with no fault to find against my brethren, but a strong desire to continue faithful and to devote my life and all my energies in the service of the Lord."

In the Spirit of Love Inspired by the Lord Jesus Christ, Paul has given to us the solution to the problems of life which require understanding and forgiveness. "And be ye kind one to another, tender-hearted, forgiving one another, even as God for Christ's sake hath forgiven you." (Eph. 4:32.) If this spirit of kindly, tender-hearted forgiveness of one another could be carried into every home, selfishness, distrust and bitterness which break so many homes and families would disappear and men would live in peace.

This forgiving spirit has a quantitative as well as a qualitative aspect. Forgiveness cannot be a one-time program. Undoubtedly, Peter had been annoyed by some who were repeaters and who even after they were forgiven returned to their sin. To clear this up, he asked the Redeemer: Lord, how oft shall my brother sin against me, and I forgive him? till seven times? Jesus saith unto him, I say not unto thee, Until seven times: but, Until seventy times seven. (Matt. 18:21-22.)

This is in accord, of course, with the Master's teaching and practice of the highest gospel law, the law of love: A new commandment I give unto you, That ye love one another; as I have loved you, that ye also love one another. By this shall all men know that ye are my disciples, if ye have love one to another. (John 13:34-35.)

Difficult but Possible Hard to do? Of course. The Lord never promised an easy road, nor a simple gospel, nor low standards, nor a low norm. The price is high, but the goods attained are worth all they cost. The Lord himself turned the other cheek; he suffered himself to be buffeted and beaten without remonstrance; he suffered every indignity and yet spoke no word of condemnation. And his question to all of us is: "Therefore, what manner of men ought ye to be?" And his answer to us is: "Even as I am." (3 Ne. 27:27.)

In his Prince of Peace, William Jennings Bryan wrote: The most difficult of all the virtues to cultivate is the forgiving spirit. Revenge seems to be natural with man; it is human to want to get even with an enemy. It has even been popular to boast of vindictiveness; it was once inscribed on a man's monument that he had repaid both friends and enemies more than he had received. This was not the spirit of Christ.

If we have been wronged or injured, forgiveness means to blot it completely from our minds. To forgive and forget is an ageless counsel. "To be wronged or robbed," said the Chinese philosopher Confucius, "is nothing unless you continue to remember it."

The injuries inflicted by neighbors, by relatives, or by spouses are generally of a minor nature, at least at first. We must forgive them. Since the Lord is so merciful, must not we be? "Blessed are the merciful, for they shall obtain mercy" is another version of the golden rule. "All manner of sin and blasphemy shall be forgiven unto men" said the Lord, "but the blasphemy against the Holy Ghost shall not be forgiven unto men." If the Lord is so gracious and kind, we must be also.

Sometimes the poets in their expressive lines touch our hearts even better than prose could. John Greenleaf Whittier gave us these thought-provoking lines: My heart was heavy, for its trust had been Abused, its kindness answered with foul wrong; So turning gloomily from my fellow men, One summer Sabbath day I strolled among The green mounds of the village burial-place; Where, pondering how all human love and hate Find one sad level; and how, soon or late, Wronged and wrongdoer, each with meekened face, And cold hands folded over a still heart, Pass the threshold of our common grave, Whither all footsteps tend, whence none depart, Awed for myself, and pitying my race, Our common sorrow, like a mighty wave, Swept all my pride away, and, trembling, I forgave.

When such people as the widow, Bishop Kempton, the Browns, and others grievously wronged can forgive; when men like Stephen and Paul can forgive vicious attacks against themselves and set the example of forgiveness; then all men should be able to forgive in their reach for perfection.

Across the barren deserts of hate and greed and grudge is the beautiful valley of paradise. We read in the papers and hear on TV constantly that the world "is in an awful mess." Not true! The world is still most beautiful. It is man who is off center. The sun still illumines the day and gives light and life to all things; the moon still brightens the night; oceans still feed the world and provide transportation; rivers still drain the land, and provide irrigation water to nourish crops. Even the ravages of time have not sloughed off the majesty of the mountains. Flowers still bloom and birds still sing, and children still laugh and play. What is wrong with the world is man-made.

It can be done. Man can conquer self. Man can overcome. Man can forgive all who have trespassed against him and go on to receive peace in this life and eternal life in the world to come.

Ward Teacher's Message, January, 1944.

El Paso Times, May 31, 1960.

Ibid.

---
Notas:
[^1] Dante, Divine Comedy.
[^2] Melvin J. Ballard, "Three Degrees of Glory."
[^3] Joseph F. Smith, Gospel Doctrine (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1966), p. 475.
