Spencer W. Kimball, Miracle of Forgiveness ( 1969)

Chapter Twenty-One

The Church Will Forgive

—Whosoever transgresseth against me, him shall ye judge according to the sins which he has committed; and if he confess his sins before thee and me, and repenteth in the sincerity of his heart, him shall ye forgive, and I will forgive him also. —Mosiah 26:29

CONSCIENTIOUS MEMBERS OF THE TRUE CHURCH OF Jesus Christ cannot fail to be concerned about their sins and those of others in relation to Church fellowship. On this point let us remind ourselves of the effects of sin and the power of repentance, as expressed in an address by President Hugh B. Brown: Sin creates inner conflict, causes loss of self-respect, saps moral strength, causes injury to and estranges others, makes men more susceptible to temptation, and in numerous other subtle ways retards, delays, and blocks our journey toward our goal. Its enticements tend to divert us from moral ideals and to obscure our vision of desirable objectives. True repentance halts this disintegration and, when followed by baptism and the gift of the Holy Ghost, places one's feet on the highway of successful living. With the companionship of that Spirit, one may release the power which is in the human soul even as men have been able to release the power of the atom. This power, when released and given divine direction and guidance, will lead to immortality and eternal life. [^1]

Truly one has this power when he is a faithful member of the Church, the Church being the principal medium through which this power can be exercised and developed. Thus it is important that a member have full fellowship in the Church. Serious sin brings loss of this power, for the sinner then almost invariably cuts himself off from Church association and the influences that come front association with people who are striving for righteousness. The power then lies dormant and ineffective in the soul of the transgressor.

But the power can be set loose from its chains of bondage. Repentance and its promise of forgiveness will set this power free so that it is again effective in one's life. And to do this, where the sin is of major proportions, there are two forgivenesses which the unrepentant one should obtain-the forgiveness of the Lord, and the forgiveness of the Lord's Church through its proper authorities.

Forgiveness by the Church Forgiveness by the Lord is dealt with in the next chapter. On the general subject of forgiveness by the Church I wrote in part as follows to a young man who had confessed to adulterous transgressions: The other forgiveness, is obtained through your ecclesiastical leader the bishop, stake president, mission president or General Authority who has the authority to waive penalties. You have offended the Church and its people as well as the Lord by having broken the law of chastity, which is the next most serious sin to murder. If you are arrogant, cocky, and unrepentant, you may be "cut off" or excommunicated from the Church. But if the ecclesiastical officer is convinced of total and sustained repentance he may waive that penalty-which may he termed a forgiveness in that sense. Simultaneously, the transgressor should begin his petitions to the Lord for a final forgiveness. God may obliterate or absolve sins. Your bishop has no such power. Your Heavenly Father has promised forgiveness upon total repentance and meeting all the requirements, but that forgiveness is not granted merely for the asking. There must be works-many works-and an all-out, total surrender, with a great humility and "a broken heart and a contrite spirit."

It depends upon you whether or not you are forgiven, and when. It could he weeks, it could he years, it could be centuries before that happy day when you have the positive assurance that the Lord has forgiven you. That depends on your humility your sincerity, your works, your attitudes.

Continue your work with increased zeal and your prayers with increased intensity. Read the book of Enos and "go and do thou likewise." Read the scriptures which are enclosed and memorize the shorter ones.

Function of Church Leaders The affairs of the Church of Jesus Christ are administered by the Presidency of the Church and the Twelve Apostles, with numerous other General Authorities assisting, and also through the stake and mission presidents and the bishops. These men are the shepherds of the flocks. The Lord has placed these men to lead his kingdom on earth, and upon them he has placed authority and responsibility, each in his particular sphere. He has given these men the Melchizedek Priesthood, which is his own power and authority delegated to men. He recognizes and ratifies the acts of these chosen and anointed servants.

The Lord will forgive the truly repentant. But before the Lord can forgive, the sinner must open his heart to him in full contrition and humility, unburdening himself, for the Lord sees into our very souls. Likewise, to have the forgiveness of the Church there must be an unburdening of the sin to those properly appointed within the Church.

The function of proper Church leaders in the matter of forgiveness is two-fold: (1) to exact proper penalty-for example, to initiate official action in regard to the sinner in cases which warrant either dis-fellowshipment or excommunication; (2) to waive penalties and extend the hand of fellowship to the one in transgression. Whichever of the two steps is taken, either forgiveness or Church disciplinary action, it must be done in the light of all the facts and the inspiration which can come to those making the decision. Hence the importance of the repentant transgressor making full confession to the appropriate authority.

Penalties Involve Deprivation Every departure from the right way is serious. One who breaks one law is guilty of them all, says the scripture. (Jas. 2:10.) Yet there are the lesser offenses which, while neither the Lord, his leaders, nor the Church can wink at them, are not punished severely. Then there are serious sins which cannot be tolerated without judgment, which must be considered by the appropriate leader, and which places the sinner's Church standing in jeopardy.

Church penalties for sin involve deprivations-the withholding of temple privileges, priesthood advancements, Church positions and other opportunities for service and growth. Such deprivations result from errors which are not always punishable by serious measures but which render the perpetrator unworthy to give leadership and receive high honors and blessings in God's kingdom. These are all retardations in our eternal progress which a person brings on himself. Even without any official Church action, for example, a person breaking the Word of Wisdom excludes himself from Church office and often-by staying away from church-from Church fellowship.

When the bishop is ordained he becomes judge of his people. He holds the keys to the temples and none of his ward members may enter one without the turning of the key by the bishop. If he considers someone unworthy to receive these glorious temple privileges, he may punish by withholding the privilege. Many other blessings are withheld to give the individual some time to bring his life up to the standard required. Deprivation, then, is the usual method of disciplining in the Church. In extreme cases, as described below, the transgressor is deprived of Church activity and participation by dis-fellowshipment or is totally severed from the Church by excommunication.

Powers of Church Officers Not every person nor every holder of the priesthood is authorized to receive the transgressor's sacred confessions of guilt. The Lord has organized an orderly and consistent program. Every member in the Church is answerable to an ecclesiastical authority. In the ward, it is the bishop; in the branch, a president; in the stake or in the mission, a president; and in the higher Church echelon of authority, the General Authorities with the First Presidency and the Twelve Apostles at the head.

The function of each is much the same as that of the bishop, so we shall mention him particularly as showing the pattern. The order of heaven provides that the members of the ward will counsel with the bishop. A bishop is, by the very nature of his calling and his ordination, a "judge in Israel." (See D&C 107:72.) The Lord has given to the bishop, in his ordination, certain powers and authority: And unto the bishop of the church, and unto such as God shall appoint and ordain to watch over the church and to be elders unto the church, are to have it given unto them to discern all those gifts lest there shall be any among you professing and yet be not of God. (D&C 46:27.) Thus, none shall be exempted from the justice and the laws of God, that all things may be done in order and in solemnity before him, according to truth and righteousness. (D&C 107:84.)

The bishop will determine the merits of the case. He it is who will determine by the facts, and through the power of discernment which is his, whether the nature of the sin and the degree of repentance manifested warrant forgiveness. He may deem the sin of sufficient gravity, the degree of repentance sufficiently questionable, and the publicity and harm done of such considerable proportions as to necessitate handling the case by a Church court under the procedure outlined by the Lord. All this responsibility rests on the bishop's shoulders. Seminary teachers, institute directors and auxiliary and other Church workers can wield a powerful influence on people in distress by imparting wise counsel and sympathetic understanding, but they are without ecclesiastical authority and jurisdiction and will not attempt to waive penalties but will send the sinner to his bishop who should determine the degree of public confession and discipline that is necessary.

If careful consideration indicates the necessity, action for dis-fellowshipment is taken and this denies the blessings of Church activity and participation, though it does not deprive the sinner of membership or priesthood. When such action is taken, it remains for the repentant one to continue in his efforts to be faithful and prove himself worthy to do all that he would normally be permitted to do. When this is done sufficiently, to the satisfaction of the Church court which imposed the penalty, generally the hand of fellowship may be restored and full activity and participation be permitted the erring one.

But if, after all factors are considered, the nature and seriousness of the transgression seem to the bishop to require excommunication, the transgressor is required to stand trial before a proper Church court to have his case considered. In the cases of male members of the Church holding the Aaronic Priesthood or no priesthood, and all female members of the Church, the action of a bishop's court only is required in judgment, even including excommunication, though the higher courts may take original jurisdiction. For holders of the Melchizedek Priesthood, a bishop's court may give first consideration and may disfellowship only; the court must remand the transgressor to the higher court if more drastic action is recommended.

After the stake presidency and high council have tried a case, if the defendant feels that justice has not been given, or that the hearing did not give him a fair trial, he may appeal his case to the First Presidency of the Church and the Council of the Twelve. (See Handbook of Instructions for more detail.)

Excommunication The scriptures speak of Church members being "cast out" or "cut off," or having their names "blotted out." This means excommunication. This dread action means the total severance of the individual from the Church. The person who is excommunicated loses his membership in the Church and all attendant blessings. As an excommunicant, he is in a worse situation than he was before he joined the Church. He has lost the Holy Ghost, his priesthood, his endowments, his sealings, his privileges and his claim upon eternal life. This is about the saddest thing which could happen to an individual. Better that he suffer poverty, persecution, sickness, and even death. A true Latter-day Saint would far prefer to see a loved one in his bier than excommunicated from the Church. If the one cut off did not have this feeling of desolateness and barrenness and extreme loss, it would be evidence that he did not understand the meaning of excommunication.

An excommunicant has no Church privileges. He may not attend priesthood meetings (since he has no priesthood); he may not partake of the sacrament, serve in Church positions, offer public prayers, or speaks in meetings; he may not pay tithing except under certain conditions as determined by the bishop. He is "cut off," "cast out," and turned over to his Lord for the final judgment. "It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God" (Heb. 10:31), and especially already branded as an apostate or transgressor.

Inasmuch as ye are cut off for transgression, ye cannot escape the buffetings of Satan until the day of redemption. And I now give unto you power from this very hour, that if any man among you, of the order, is found a transgressor and repenteth not of the evil, that ye shall deliver him over unto the buffetings of Satan; and he shall not have power to bring evil upon you. (D&C 104:9-10.)

There is a possibility of an excommunicant returning to the blessings of the Church with full membership, and this can be done only through baptism following satisfactory repentance. The way is hard and rough and, without the help of the Holy Ghost to whisper and plead and warn and encourage, one's climb is infinitely harder than if he were to repent before he lost the Holy Ghost, his membership, and the fellowship of the saints. The time is usually long, very long, as those who have fought their way back will attest. Any who have been finally restored would give the same advice: Repent first-do not permit yourself to be excommunicated if there is a possible way to save yourself from that dire calamity.

Ample scriptures indicate the power of proper Church authorities to judge its members in sin. The prophet Alma judged those who had been in iniquity and who confessed and repented, and waived the usual penalties.

And whosoever repented of their sins and did confess them, them he did number among the people of the church; And those that would not confess their sins and repent of their iniquity, the same were not numbered among the people of the church, and their names were blotted out. And it came to pass that Alma did regulate all the affairs of the church. (Mos. 26:35-37.)

The Lord had previously said to Alma: Therefore I say unto you, Go; and whosoever transgresseth against me, him shall ye judge according to the sins which he has committed; and if he confess his sins before thee and me, and repenteth in the sincerity of his heart, him shall ye forgive, and I will forgive him also. (Mos. 26:29.)

When the Lord told the Palestinians, "Judge not that ye be not judged," he evidently was giving general instructions to the mass of humanity through the assembly gathered. In the scripture above quoted, he is talking to ecclesiastical leaders whose responsibility it is to judge the people and regulate the affairs of the Church. As an individual, the bishop or other Church leader will not judge his fellowman, but in his official position as bishop and judge he must be the judge of their actions.

The Lord's promise to Alma is reassuring: "Yea, and as often as my people repent will I forgive them their trespasses against me." (Mos. 26:30.)

Power to Bind and Loose There are cultists who claim that the Church might sever a person from the Church but could not affect his eternal status or take from him the Holy Ghost or his priesthood or temple blessings. This is but wishful thinking, for the Lord has pledged to acknowledge the acts of his servants, and his Church is his kingdom. And when the person is excommunicated by the bishopric, the high council, or the higher councils, it is as though the Lord had personally with his own voice pronounced the penalty.

That this kind of authority, reaching in its effects from this life into the future phases of eternity, was to be a feature of the Church of Jesus Christ is clearly shown by the Savior's words: And I say also unto thee, That thou art Peter, and upon this rock I will build my church; and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it. And I will give unto thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven: and whatsoever thou shalt bind on earth shall be bound in heaven: and whatsoever thou shalt loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven. (Matt. 16:18-19.)

The Lord was speaking to Peter, who was the chief apostle, and it is the first apostle who holds all the keys of the priesthood. At a later time Jesus said: Verily I say unto you, Whatsoever ye shall bind on earth shall be bound in heaven: and whatsoever ye shall loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven. (Matt. 18:18.)

The Prophet Joseph Smith explains: Now the great and grand secret of the whole matter consists in obtaining the powers of the Holy Priesthood. For him to whom these keys are given there is no difficulty in obtaining a knowledge of facts in relation to the salvation of the children of men—. Herein is glory and honor, and immortality and eternal life—. (D&C 128:11-12.)

Bishops Remove Penalties, Not Sins Although there are many ecclesiastical officers in the Church whose positions entitle and require them to be judges, the authority of those positions does not necessarily qualify them to forgive or remit sins. Those who can do that are extremely few in this world.

The bishop, and others in comparable positions, can forgive in the sense of waiving the penalties. In our loose connotation we sometimes call this forgiveness, but it is not forgiveness in the sense of "wiping out" or absolution. The waiver means, however, that the individual will not need to be tried again for the same error, and that he may become active and have fellowship with the people of the Church. In receiving the confession and waiving the penalties the bishop is representing the Lord. He helps to carry the burden, relieves the transgressor's strain and tension, and assures to him a continuation of Church activity.

It is the Lord, however, who forgives sin. This point, and the position of the bishop and comparable officers in the matter, was brought out in the following instruction given to bishops of the Church by President J. Reuben Clark on April 5, 1946: I have been very much interested in what the bishop has said about forgiveness. There is a great principle involved there, as he indicated, and we must not, I think, conclude that forgiveness can be obtained merely for the asking. It has come to our attention that in one of our foreign missions boys came to the presiding officer, admitted their sin, they confessed, they were sorry, I suppose they wept, and he forgave them. Then they went back into the ranks, came back a month or six weeks later, confessed again, and were again forgiven.

I do not understand that that is the law of the Church. Sin is a terrible thing. The Lord does forgive, and he requires us to forgive, because he has said, "I will forgive whom I will, but of you it is required to forgive all men." We forgive them as members of the Church and receive them back into membership and fellowship.

There is in the Church... the power to remit sins, but I do not believe it resides in the bishops. That is a power that must be exercised under the proper authority of the priesthood and by those who hold the keys that pertain to that function. Woo back every sinner. Forgive them personally. The Lord has said that. Do all you can, but short of that formal remission the matter then rests between the transgressor and the Lord, who is merciful, who knows all of the circumstances, who has no disposition but to aid his children, give them comfort, guide them, and help them. But the Lord has said, "I cannot look upon sin with the least degree of allowance." So we leave it with him, and our prayers go with the prayers of the transgressor that God will forgive him, but the path of the sinner was never smooth and I believe never will he. We must pay the penalty, but God's mercy tempers his justice. His love is boundless, his desire to see us is infinite All of us have done something that would be better left undone. All of us need the mercy of God and his love, and we should look at all the others, our brothers and sisters, knowing that we, with them, have something for which to be forgiven, but we must remember we must pay whatever the price be that the Lord exacts.

Let it be said in emphasis that even the First Presidency and the Apostles do not make a practice of absolving sins. They waive penalties in the course of their ministrations. Thus the forgiveness or waiver of penalty is not something to be taken idly or thoughtlessly and is not to be given for a mere token effort or trial, but only for a genuine, wholehearted repentance. Little reward can be expected for a tiny effort to repent, for the Lord has said that it must be a total repentance "with all his heart" and the error must be forsaken fully and wholly, mentally as well as physically. The "filthy dreamer" of the day or night, or an adulterer who still has desires toward the object of his sin, who still revels in the memories of his sin, has not forsaken it "with all his heart" as required by holy scripture. But if the repentance is total, the scriptural "thou shalt forgive" not only is required of individuals but seems to unlock doors even for leaders.

False Claims on Remitting Sins All that has been said about waiver of penalties and absolution of sin makes nonsense of any idea that money, or suffering, or penance, or fasting, or confessing will of itself bring forgiveness. Moroni's prophetic foresight looked forward to the time of such a concept. He said that the eternal promises of the Lord should roll on, until all his promises should be fulfilled. And this would come in a day when it should be said that miracles were done away with; when the power of God should be denied; when there would be much backbiting in the churches; when there would be wars and rumors of wars, earthquakes, and much pollution on the earth, with murders, robberies and many sins.

Yea, it shall come in a day 'then there shall be churches built up that shall say: Come unto me, and for your money you shall be forgiven of your sins. (Morm. 8:32.)

Since the power to remit sins is so carefully and strictly limited within the true Church of Jesus Christ, where so many men bear the true priesthood of God, it is monumental presumption for unauthorized men elsewhere to claim to absolve people from sin. "... Whosoever exalteth himself shall be abased ." (Luke 14:11.) We may be sure that there will be great condemnation on those who assume such authority. The word of the Lord is a solemn warning against impostors: Wherefore, let all men beware how they take my name in their lips— For behold, verily I say, that many there be who are under this condemnation, who use the name of the Lord, and use it in vain having not authority. (D&C 63:61-62.)

Confession Confidential and Voluntary The bishop is expected to keep confidential the confession of the transgressor, unless he considers the sins serious enough and the repentance slack enough to take the matter before the bishop's court or the high council court. The keeping of full confidence makes it possible for the repentant individual to retain the confidence and win the friendly support of all with whom he associates. If the bishop sees fit to forgive the transgression, that is, to waive penalties, he may wish to keep very close to the sinner for a substantial period to assist and encourage him while the person is overcoming his errors and transforming his life. And at the discretion of the bishop, those who have cleared their transgressions and shared their burdens with their bishop or proper authority, can then move forward in Church activity with freedom and assurance.

While most missionaries go into the mission field clean and worthy, there is an occasional one who has carried unadjusted guilt into his mission and has had a continual fight to keep the spirit of the mission. Some have even failed in the fight, for the conflict in the soul is near annihilating. But the missionary, guilty of transgression, who has truly repented, confessed his sin fully and cleared his burden totally, so far as possible, goes into the mission field with a light heart, with full freedom and assurance. He has acted voluntarily to free himself. His confession and the resultant forgiveness bring security and rich rewards.

The matter of his transgression is held in strict confidence between him and his bishop and stake president. It is their prerogative as bishop and stake president to decide in their hearts, with the help of their Heavenly Father, whether the young man in question is worthy to go, and if they feel he is sufficiently repentant, after having examined all facts in the case, and that he is worthy for missionary service, they may proceed with the recommendation. A General Authority is usually called also to pass on the more difficult morals cases.

Varied Treatment for Similar Sins The question is often raised as to why the treatment of transgressors is varied, why a particular sin does not always bring the came penalty. Here it needs to be realized that errors are of different magnitudes, that the reasons and incentives are different. The degree and intensity of repentance are different also.

A member in an eastern city wrote to me asking why a certain man had not been excommunicated. He said the case was flagrant and was generally known. He also wanted to know why the bishop was not disciplined for having forgiven the offender and having granted him continued activity in the Church. The answer I gave might clear the matter in other's minds, and I quote in part here: Dear Brother: The sin of adultery is a most heinous one and deserves strict discipline. Our bishops and stake presidents are instructed to handle these matters with dispatch and with mercy and with understanding and with love.

Each individual case is the responsibility of each individual ecclesiastical leader. Sometimes the stake president too may wish to take original jurisdiction.

The rules concerning the handling of these matters are somewhat flexible. Recognizing that repentance is vital to the salvation of all of us since all men sin in a lesser or a greater degree, and since the intensity of repentance, which is an intangible thing, can be determined fully only by inspiration and discernment, it is left generally to the discretion of the ecclesiastical leader to decide on the treatment of the case, since all cases are different. Some are vicious, intentional, premeditated, repeated and unrepented of; others seem to have some extenuating circumstances or may have been done under a moment of passion or pressures of unusual situations, and are followed by sincere repentance. Accordingly the treatment of these cases is left largely to the bishop in the ward or the president in the stake or the president of the mission.

In my experience, I have found repentance is also an intangible. One must judge by the feel rather than by what is said or done, and in my experience, numerous times two people have committed the same sin and one might be eligible for forgiveness and the blessing of the Church in months where another would not be ready in years. In fact, I have seen this-one hard and cold and belligerent and unrepentant, and the other bowed in "sackcloth and ashes" with a "broken heart and a contrite spirit" and willing to do anything to make good. It must be obvious that no period of one year or ten years or one month or a lifetime should be the determining factor. Even the Lord will not forgive a person in his sins. If the bishop or stake president is careless and grants forgiveness when it is not justified, the responsibility is with him.

It is obvious that the public cannot know the degree nor intensity of repentance. A person having committed a serious sin may have shed bushels of tears and prayed numerous hours and lasted many days, and may have the most total and effective repentance, and yet the public would have no way of knowing it. It would be quite improper for the bishop or stake president who has been doing the interviewing, to announce this publicly. Hence, the people must leave this matter to the bishop or stake president and, as indicated above, they may do so with confidence. It is proper for us, when we feel that something is wrong and might have been overlooked by the presiding authority, to call it to his attention, and when we have done this the responsibility is passed to the ecclesiastical leader.

Repentance Is the Key Church leaders called upon to judge members in transgression carry a heavy burden of responsibility. With their aid, and through sincere repentance, the sinner may make the adjustments which will restore him to full fellowship with the Church. The same kind of repentance will assure him the miracle of God's forgiveness-which is discussed in the remaining chapters.

Taken from a radio address given December 7, 1947.

---
Notas:
[^1] Dante, Divine Comedy.
