Spencer W. Kimball, Miracle of Forgiveness ( 1969)

Chapter Twenty-Two

God Will Forgive

Behold, he who has repented of his sins, the same is forgiven, and I, the Lord, remember them no more.—Doctrine & Covenants 58:42

WHEN A TRUE CONSCIOUSNESS OF GUILT FINALLY settles down upon the one who has sinned and he feels the heaviness of it its throttling force and crushing power only then can the sinner begin to realize how powerless he is on his own to rid himself of his transgressions. Only then can he begin to understand how futile are his unaided efforts to wash away the stains so indelibly stamped on his life and character. In his anguish he must come to lean heavily upon the Lord and trust in him, acknowledging that "with God all things are possible."

Jesus Christ the Only Way The purging out of sin would be impossible but for the total repentance of the individual and the kind mercy of the Lord Jesus Christ in his atoning sacrifice. Only by these means can man recover, be healed and washed and purged, and still be eligible for the glories of eternity. On the savior's great role in this, Helaman reminded his sons of King Benjamin's comments: There is no other way nor means whereby man can be saved, only through the atoning blood of Jesus Christ, who shall come, yea, remember that he cometh to redeem the world. (Hel. 5:9.)

And, in recalling the words which Amulek spoke to Zeezrom, Helaman emphasized man's part in obtaining forgiveness-repenting from his sins: ... He said unto him that the Lord surely should come to redeem his people, but that he should not come to redeem them in their sins, but to redeem them from their sins. And he hath power given unto him from the Father to redeem them from their sins because of repentance... . (Hel. 5:10-11. Italics added.)

Hope Motivates to Repentance Such scriptures breathe hope into the soul of the convinced sinner. Hope is indeed the great incentive to repentance, for without it no one would make the difficult, extended effort required especially when the sin is a major one.

An experience I had some years ago emphasized this. A young woman approached me in a city far from my home and came under some pressure from her husband. She admitted to me that she had committed adultery. She was a bit hard and unyielding, and finally said: "I know what I have done. I have read the scriptures, and I know the consequences. I know that I am damned and can never be forgiven, and therefore why should I try now to repent?"

My reply to her was: "My dear sister, you do not know the scriptures. You do not know the power of God nor his goodness. You can be forgiven for this heinous sin but it will take much sincere repentance to accomplish it."

Then I quoted to her the cry of her Lord: Can a woman forget her sucking child, that she should not have compassion on the son of her womb? yea, they may forget, yet I will not forget thee. (Isa. 49:15.)

I reminded her of the Lord's words in our own dispensation to the effect that whoever repents and obeys God's commandments will be forgiven. (D&C 1:32.) My visitor looked bewildered but seemed to be yearning as though she wanted to believe it. I continued: "Eventually forgiveness will come for all but the unpardonable sins to that transgressor who repents sorely enough, long enough, sincerely enough."

She remonstrated again, though she was beginning to yield. She wanted so much to believe it. She said she had known all her life that adultery was unforgivable. And I turned again to the scriptures and read to her the oft-repeated statement of Jesus: Wherefore I say unto you, All manner of sin and blasphemy shall be forgiven unto men: but the blasphemy against the Holy Ghost shall not be forgiven unto men. And whosoever speaketh a word against the Son of man, it shall be forgiven him: but whosoever speaketh against the Holy Ghost, it shall not be forgiven him, neither in this world, neither in the world to come. (Matt. 12:31-32.)

She had forgotten that scripture. Her eyes lighted up. She reacted joyously to it, and asked, "Is that really true? Can I really be forgiven?"

Realizing that hope is the first requirement, I continued by reading many scriptures to her, to build up the hope that was now awakened within her.

How great the joy to feel and know that God will forgive sinners! Jesus declared in his Sermon on the Mount: "... Your heavenly Father will also forgive you." (Matt. 6:14.) This is on certain conditions, of course.

As I have previously said, in modern revelation the Lord has said to his prophet: "Behold, he who has repented of his sins, the same is forgiven, and I, the Lord, remember them no more." (D&C 58:42.) Our Lord gave the same word through the prophet Jeremiah: "... For I will forgive their iniquity, and I will remember their sin no more." (Jer. 31:34.) How gracious is the Lord!

On the occasion I am recalling, this woman, who was basically good, straightened up and looked me in the eye, and in her voice was a new power and resoluteness as she said: "Thank you, thank you! I believe you. I shall really repent and wash my filthy garments in the blood of the Lamb and obtain that forgiveness."

Not long ago, she returned to my office a new person bright of eye, light of step, full of hope as she declared to me that, since that memorable day when hope had seen a star and had clung to it, she had never reverted to adultery nor any approaches to it.

Recently, I had another experience related to this particular scripture. I had just finished performing the holy ordinance in the temple wherein a delightful young couple had been sealed for eternity. The large group of relatives and close friends were congratulating the bride and groom. Having other pressing appointments I slipped out of the room and started down the hall, and I was startled when someone grasped my left arm. As I turned about, I saw a woman of about forty-five, who had a pleading look in her eyes. She asked, rather abruptly, "Do you remember me?"

She was intently looking to see if I would recognize her. Numerous times this question has been asked me and, though I try to remember those whom I have met, sometimes I fail. This time I was disconcerted for, though there was the feeling that I had seen her before, I had to admit with some embarrassment: "I am sorry"

To my surprise, she whispered with deep feeling, "I am glad you do not remember me. I was afraid you would. If you can forget me and my transgressions, I have the hope that my Father in heaven may forget, as he said: '... I will forgive their iniquity, and I will remember their sin no more.'"

She then briefly reminded me of a long, sad, troubled night when I had sat through the hours with her and her husband at a time when their eternal marriage was in jeopardy, and when I had worked with them and pleaded with them and warned them and quoted scriptures to them to bring repentance and to save their disintegrating marriage. After reminding me of the incident, she continued: "It has been fifteen years since that crucial night, and I have done everything in my power to prove my repentance to my Lord. Our marriage was saved and is cemented. It is glorious! Our family life is wonderful and our children are growing up in faith and peace. Thank you! Thank you!"

And she softly breathed, as she left me: "I've hoped and yearned and prayed for the assurance that the Lord had totally forgiven me and forgotten my transgressions; and now that you remember neither me nor my sins, my hope has soared. Do you think that my Savior may also have forgotten my errors?"

In my office one day sat a sober couple who had a large family of little children. Early in their married life they had both committed adultery, and for many years had been suffering untold agonies of remorse. They had forgiven each other but were still suffering tortures.

The couple came to get some questions answered. They could stand it no longer. The husband broke the silence. "I told my wife that because of our adultery years ago we could never hope for salvation in the celestial kingdom, much less exaltation and eternal life, but that we could receive great satisfactions as we bore children and reared them to be so righteous that we could be sure they would all receive all the blessings of the gospel and the Church and eventually reach their exaltation."

When I quoted a long list of scriptures showing that forgiveness was possible eventually, when the heavy price had been paid, I could see hope stir within them and a peace settle over them. They left my office radiant with a new-found ecstasy.

Promises to the Repentant Sinner Certainly the Lord loves the sinner, and especially the one who is trying to repent, even though the sin is abhorrent to him. (D&C 1:31.) Those who have transgressed can find many scriptures which will comfort them and impel them to move forward into total and continuing repentance. For instance, continuing his revelation to all men dated November 1, 1831, and referred to above, the Lord stated: Nevertheless, he that repents and does the commandments of the Lord shall be forgiven; And he that repents not, from him shall be taken even the light which he has received for my Spirit shall not always strive with man, saith the Lord of Hosts. (D&C 1:32-33.)

It should be remembered that these commandments from the Standard Works of the Church are to "all men, and there is none to escape." This means that the call to repentance from sin is to all men and not to the members of the Church only, and not to those only whose sins are considered major ones. And the call promises forgiveness of sin to those who respond. What a farce it would be to call people to repentance if there were no forgiveness, and what a waste of the life of Christ if it failed to bring the opportunity for salvation and exaltation!

Sometimes a guilt consciousness overpowers a person with such a heaviness that when a repentant one looks back and sees the ugliness, the loathsomeness of the transgression, he is almost overwhelmed and wonders, "Can the Lord ever forgive me? Can I ever forgive myself?" But when one reaches the depths of despondency and feels the hopelessness of his position, and when he cries out to God for mercy in helplessness but in faith, there comes a still, small, but penetrating voice whispering to his soul, "Thy sins are forgiven thee."

The image of a loving, forgiving God comes through clearly to those who read and understand the scriptures. Since he is our Father, he naturally desires to raise us up, not to push us down, to help us live, not to bring about our spiritual death. "For I have no pleasure in the death of him that dieth," he has said, "wherefore turn yourselves, and live ye." (Ezek. 18:32.)

From Ezekiel too come these words of solace and hope: Again, when I say unto the wicked, Thou shalt surely die; if he turn from his sin, and do that which is lawful and right; If the wicked restore the pledge, give again that he had robbed, walk in the statutes of life, without committing iniquity; he shall surely live, he shall not die. None of his sins that he hath committed shall be mentioned unto him: he hath done that which is lawful and right; he shall surely live. (Ezek. 33:14-16.)

The same prophet wrote also, in the name of the Lord: Then will I sprinkle clean water upon you, and ye shall be clean: from all your filthiness, and from all your idols, will I cleanse you. A new heart also will I give you, and a new spirit will I put within you: and I will take away the stony heart out of your flesh, and I will give you an heart of flesh. (Ezek. 36:25-26.)

We are indebted to John for the encouraging and beautiful expression: "If we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness." (1 John 1:9.)

As he fervently prayed at the dedication of the Kirtland Temple in 1836, the Prophet Joseph Smith expressed his assurance that sins could be blotted out: "O Jehovah, have mercy upon this people, and as all men sin forgive the transgressions of thy people, and let them be blotted out forever." (D&C 109:34.) The thought of blotting out of sins during the process of forgiveness was also expressed by the Lord when he said: "I, even I, am he that blotteth out thy transgressions for mine own sake, and will not remember thy sins." (Isa. 43:25.)

"Great are the words of Isaiah," said the Savior (3 Ne. 23:1), and that prophet's words rise to the sublime in the well-known passage wherein he made a promise of forgiveness to all who will repent: Seek ye the Lord while he may be found, call ye upon him while he is near: Let the wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts: and let him return unto the Lord, and he will have mercy upon him; and to our God, for he will abundantly pardon. (Isa. 55:6-7. Italics added.)

What a glorious promise of forgiveness the Lord made through the great Isaiah! Mercy and pardon! What more could men want or hope for!

Come now, and let us reason together, saith the Lord: though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be as white as snow; though they be red like crimson, they shall be as wool. (Isa. 1:18.)

Specific assurances of forgiveness are several times recorded in the Doctrine and Covenants. For instance, on the bank of the Missouri River, down which the Prophet and ten elders were traveling in canoes, the Lord gave the group these words of comfort : Behold, verily thus saith the Lord unto you, O ye elders of my church, who are assembled upon this spot, whose sins are now forgiven you, for I, the Lord, forgive sins, and am merciful unto those who confess their sins with humble hearts. (D&C 61:2.)

And speaking of his elect who subscribe to his requirements, the Lord says: For they will hear my voice, and shall see me, and shall not be asleep, and shall abide the day of my coming; for they shall be purified, even as I am pure. (D&C 35:21.)

The promise is again given "that by keeping the commandments they might be washed and cleansed from all their sins." Here the reader is urged to read the whole of the 76th Section of the Doctrine and Covenants, but particularly from the 51st verse on. Those who have overcome their sins and been perfected are "... the church of the Firstborn. They are they into whose hands the Father has given all things." (D&C 76:54-55.)

Forgiveness for Adultery When Paul preached to the Galatian people, he listed the sins which leave people wretched. He cautioned: ... Walk in the Spirit, and ye shall not fulfill the lust of the flesh. For the flesh lusteth against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the flesh: and these are contrary the one to the other: so that ye cannot do the things that ye would. (Gal. 5:16-17.)

Paul then recounted the numerous sins and added: "... they which do such things shall not inherit the kingdom of God." (Gal. 5:21.)

Many people who have sinned grievously have been terrified at this statement of Paul's. In the matter of sexual sin many have likewise been deeply worried by their interpretation of a statement by the Prophet Joseph Smith, which perhaps makes a greater impact on people of our dispensation. In a High Council meeting, the case of Harrison Sagers was tried. He was charged with seduction and had said that Joseph Smith taught that such was right. The Prophet records further: I was present with several of the Twelve, and gave an address tending to do away with every evil, and exhorting them to practice virtue and holiness before the Lord; told them that the Church had not received any permission from me to commit fornication, adultery, or any corrupt action; but my every word and action has been to the contrary. If a man commit adultery, he cannot receive the celestial kingdom of God. Even if he is saved in any kingdom, it cannot be the celestial kingdom. I did think that the many examples that have been made manifest, such as John C. Bennett's and others, were sufficient to show the fallacy of such a course of conduct. [^1]

It might seem presumptuous for us to try to clarify the statement of the Prophet or indicate what were his total concepts, but because so many who have fallen into sexual sin and have done all in their power to repent have been devastated with the above statement, there is a constant appeal for clarification. May I offer some suggestions for the thoughtful reader?

A letter came to me from a woman who many years before had been involved in adultery. Having come to realize her plight, she had confessed her sins to her husband and the Church, penalties had been waived, and she had been permitted to go forward with her life in the Church. Now many years had passed years of faithfulness, activity and worthiness. She had felt she was forgiven she had been breathing again freely. Recently she had been asked to teach Relief Society theology lessons, and in one of her first lessons she had come to the statement of the Prophet Joseph Smith as above quoted. This devastated her, and she wondered if all she had suffered and all her years of repentance meant nothing for her, and if she was still condemned. She asked: "Can I never get it straightened out? Will I be deprived of the celestial kingdom no matter what I do? Will I lose my beloved husband? Will my children be taken from me? What can I do? Am I lost? What have I to look forward to? Is there no hope?"

If the above quotation were taken literally, it would seem difficult to reconcile it with other scriptures and with the practices and policies of the Church. Is it possible that the Prophet just did not take time to elaborate on the matter at that time, or that in recording it he did not double check the implications? Or was it properly recorded when he gave it?

The same Joseph Smith who gave us that quotation also gave us many scriptures which state that there is forgiveness; and other holy scriptures attest that repentance can bring forgiveness if that repentance is sufficiently "all-out" and total. Here are some of the words front the pens of Joseph Smith and other prophets. For brevity, I give here in summary only the key phrases. Some of them I have quoted previously.

Nevertheless, he that repents and does the commandments of the Lord shall be forgiven. (D&C 1:32.)

But he that has committed adultery and repents with all his heart, and forsaketh it, and doeth it no more, thou shalt forgive. (D&C 42:25.)

Behold, he who has repented of his sins, the same is forgiven, and I, the Lord, remember them no more. (D&C 58:42.)

... I am able to make you holy, and your sins are forgiven you. (D&C 60:7.)

... I, the Lord, forgive sins, and am merciful unto those who confess their sins with humble hearts. (D&C 61:2.)

... I, the Lord, forgive sins unto those who confess their sins before me and ask forgiveness, who have not sinned unto death. (D&C 64:7.)

... When ... they repent of the evil, they shall be forgiven. (D&C 64:17.)

... They shall be purified, even as I am pure. (D&C 35:21.)

... I will forgive their iniquity, and I will remember their sin no more. (Jer. 31:34.)

I have blotted out, as a thick cloud, thy transgressions... . (Isa. 44:22.)

... If he ... repenteth in the sincerity of his heart, him shall ye forgive, and I will forgive him also. (Mos. 26:29.)

... Their sins and iniquities will I remember no more. (Heb. 10:17.)

... And the Lord said unto him: I will forgive thee and thy brethren of their sins. (Eth. 2:15.)

... Be converted, that I may heal you. (3 Ne. 9:13.)

... And I shall heal them; and ye shall be the means of bringing salvation unto them. (3 Ne. 18:32.)

Less than a year after the restoration of the Church of Jesus Christ, the Redeemer spoke concerning the ugly sin of infidelity and lustfulness and the conditions for receiving forgiveness: And he that looketh upon a woman to lust after her shall deny the faith, and shall not have the Spirit; and if he repents not he shall be cast out. Thou shalt not commit adultery: and he that committeth adultery, and repenteth not, shall be cast out. But he that has committed adultery and repents with all his heart, and forsaketh it, and doeth it no more, thou shalt forgive. (D&C 42:23-25.)

And Section 132 of the Doctrine and Covenants indicates that, though he may be subjected to the buffetings of Satan, a person may eventually be forgiven of adultery even after marriage for time and eternity in the temple: And again, verily I say unto you, if a man marry a wife by my word, which is my law, and by the new and everlasting covenant, and it is sealed unto them by the Holy Spirit of promise, by him who is anointed, unto whom I have appointed this power and the keys of this priesthood ... and if ye abide in my covenant, and commit no murder whereby to shed innocent blood, it shall be done unto them in all things whatsoever my servant hath put upon them, in time, and through all eternity: and shall be of full force when they are out of the world; and they shall pass by the angels, and the gods, which are set there to their exaltation and glory in all things, as hath been sealed upon their heads, which glory shall be a fullness and a continuation of the seeds forever and ever. (D&C 132:19.)

I have already referred to the statement of the Savior that all manner of sin except blasphemy against the Holy Ghost can be forgiven. (See Matt. 12:31.) It is of interest that in preparing his inspired revision of this passage Joseph Smith added the significant words "who receive me and repent," which are italicized in the following passage: ... All manner of sin and blasphemy shall be forgiven unto men who receive me and repent; but the blasphemy against the Holy Ghost, it shall not be forgiven unto men. (Matt. 12:26, Inspired Version.)

Going back to the Prophet's original statement, had he inserted in it the three words I believe it implies "and remains unrepentant" this statement would fit perfectly in the program as given in the numerous scriptures, many of which came through the Prophet himself. If such words were inserted, the statement would read as follows: If a man commit adultery (and remain unrepentant) he cannot receive the celestial kingdom of God. Even if he is saved in any kingdom, it cannot be the celestial kingdom.

This restriction on the unrepentant adulterer is in line with that on all who remain in sin. President Joseph Fielding Smith, writing in the Improvement Era, made this comment: "No unrepentant person who remains in his sins will ever enter into the glories of the celestial kingdom." [^2] This statement is consistent with all we read in the scriptures on the subject, which is perhaps summed up in Alma's words: "... for there can no man be saved except his garments are washed white; yea, his garments must be purified until they are cleansed from all stain ..." (Al. 5:21.)

In offering these suggestions let it be understood that I have no intent to minimize the seriousness of the sexual sins or other transgressions but merely to hold out hope to the transgressor, so that men and women of sin may strive with all their power to overcome their errors, wash themselves "in the blood of the Lamb" and be purged and purified, and thus be able to return to their Maker. Those involved must not relax because of the possibility of forgiveness. Let me repeat that it is a serious and solemn matter when people permit themselves to get into sexual sins, of which adultery is only one of the more serious ones.

In view of all these scriptures I have quoted, and many others which could be added, is it not reasonable to believe that the Prophet's statement of 1843 which so deeply concerns so many people is really in harmony with all the other scriptures?

Perhaps Paul's comment to the Corinthians shows a like situation.

... Be not deceived: neither fornicators, nor idolaters, nor adulterers, nor effeminate, nor abusers of themselves with mankind, Nor thieves, nor covetous, nor drunkards, nor revilers, nor extortioners, shall inherit the kingdom of God. (1 Cor. 6:9-10.)

Here is an extremely limiting statement which seems to coincide in import with that of Joseph Smith mentioned above. And it is true! Certainly, the kingdom cannot be populated with such men as Paul had found in the Church branches where he worked. It could hardly be glory and honor and power and joy if the eternal kingdom were made up of fornicators, adulterers, idolaters, sexual perverts, thieves, covetous persons, drunkards, liars, rebels, reprobates, extortioners and such people. But Paul's next thought is comforting as well as clarifying: And such were some of you: but ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are justified in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God. (1 Cor. 6:11.)

This is the great secret. Some of those who inherit the kingdom may have committed such grievous sins but are no longer in those categories. They are no longer unclean, having been washed, sanctified and justified. Paul's hearers had been in those despicable categories, but having now received the gospel with its purifying, transforming powers they were changed. The cleansing process had been applied and they were washed clean and had become eligible for the first resurrection and for exaltation in God's kingdom.

The Cleansing Process When a physical body is filthy, the process of cleansing is a thorough bath, the brushing of teeth, the shampooing of hair, the cleaning of fingernails, and the donning of fresh, clean clothing. When a home is renovated, roofs are mended or replaced, walls washed or painted, floors swept and scrubbed, furniture repaired and dusted, curtains laundered and metals polished. When a defiled man is born again, his habits are changed, his thoughts cleansed, his attitudes regenerated and elevated, his activities put in total order, and everything about him that was dirty, degenerate or reprobate is washed and made clean.

The analogy holds also in other areas of life. When soiled clothes have been through the laundry and washed, starched and pressed, they are no longer filthy. When the smallpox victim has been healed and cleansed, he is no longer contaminated. In the moral area also there is immunization. Are not the social and physical diseases much the same? They come through exposure and low resistance and unless there is early and adequate treatment they are likely to run their courses and even take life. The one is physical and temporary while the other has eternal consequences. When one is washed and purged and cleansed, he is no longer an adulterer. The washing, purging, cleansing process is mentioned many times, many places, by many prophets.

The effect of the cleansing is beautiful. These troubled souls have found peace. These soiled robes have been cleansed to spotlessness. These people formerly defiled, having been cleansed through their repentance their washing, their purging, their whitening are made worthy for constant temple service and to be found before the throne of God associating with divine royalty.

Difficult but Attainable Those who, having committed grievous sexual sin, assume this sin to be unforgivable under any and all conditions are perhaps confusing difficulty with impossibility. Certainly the road of repentance from such sin is not easy, which is one good reason for abstaining in the first place. And as I have stressed throughout this book, even though forgiveness is so abundantly promised there is no promise nor indication of forgiveness to any soul who does not totally repent.

To every forgiveness there is a condition. The plaster must be as wide as the sore. The fasting, the prayers, the humility must be equal to or greater than the sin. There must be a broken heart and a contrite spirit. There must be "sackcloth and ashes." There must be tears and genuine change of heart. There must be conviction of the sin, abandonment of the evil, confession of the error to properly constituted authorities of the Lord. There must be restitution and a confirmed, determined change of pace, direction and destination. Conditions must be controlled and companionship corrected or changed. There must be a washing of robes to get them white and there must be a new consecration and devotion to the living of all of the laws of God. In short, there must be an overcoming of self, of sin, and of the world.

Sanctification Through Overcoming In the Book of Revelation it is written that he that overcometh shall "eat of the tree of life," receive "a crown of life," not be hurt of the second death. He shall receive of the "hidden manna," a "white stone," and a "new name," shall have "power over the nations." He shall be clothed in "white raiments," and his name will "not be blotted out." "To him that overcometh will I grant to sit with me in my throne, even as I also overcame, and am set down with my Father in his throne." (Rev. 3:21. Italics added.) How glorious and rich are the promises to those who overcome!

"What are these which are arrayed in white robes?" asked one of the elders in John's vision, and the answer was: "... These are they which came out of great tribulation, and have washed their robes, and made them white in the blood of the Lamb. Therefore are they before the throne of God, and serve him day and night in his temple ..." (Rev. 7:14-15.)

It would seem that these people had not always been perfect. They had had soiled robes and many weaknesses, but had now overcome and had washed the soiled raiment in the blood of the Lamb. They were now clean and purified, as is indicated in the blessings promised.

The Prophet Alma discourses on the mercies of the Lord through the cleansing power wherein repentance has purged sin, and joy leads toward "rest" or exaltation: Therefore they were called after this holy order [of the high priesthood], and were sanctified, and their garments were washed white through the blood of the Lamb. Now they, after being sanctified by the Holy Ghost, having their garments made white, being pure and spotless before God, could not look upon sin save it were with abhorrence; and there were many, exceeding great many, who were made pure and entered into the rest of the Lord their God. (Al. 13:11-12.)

This passage indicates an attitude which is basic to the sanctification we should all be seeking, and thus to the repentance which merits forgiveness. It is that the former transgressor must have reached a "point of no return" to sin wherein there is not merely a renunciation but also a deep abhorrence of the sin where the sin becomes most distasteful to him and where the desire or urge to sin is cleared out of his life.

Surely this is what is meant, in part at least, by being pure in heart! And when we read in the Sermon on the Mount that the "pure in heart" shall see God, it gives meaning to the Lord's statement, made through the Prophet Joseph Smith in 1832, that presently impure people can perfect themselves and become pure: Therefore, sanctify yourselves that your minds become single to God, and the days will come that you shall see him; for he will unveil his face unto you, and it shall be in his own time, and in his own way, and according to his own will. (D&C 88:68.)

Again, in 1833, the Prophet gave assurance that the totally repentant one will see the Lord; and this means forgiveness, for only the pure in heart will see God.

Verily, thus saith the Lord: It shall come to pass that every soul who forsaketh his sins and cometh unto me, and calleth on my name, and obeyeth my voice, and keepeth my commandments, shall see my face and know that I am. (D&C 93:1.)

With such a magnanimous promise, why would anyone hesitate to throw off the evils of his life and come to his Lord?

The Buffetings of Satan A phrase that occurs several times in modern revelation should certainly be an incentive to prompt, unreserved repentance. This term talks of sinners being delivered to the "buffetings of Satan." For instance, the Lord consigns to the buffetings of Satan those who, having organized themselves "by a bond or everlasting covenant that cannot be broken," subsequently broke that covenant. "And he who breaketh it shall lose his office and standing in the church, and shall be delivered over to the buffetings of Satan until the day of redemption." (D&C 78:12.)

Again the Lord speaks: And the soul that sins against this covenant, and hardeneth his heart against it, shall he dealt with according to the laws of my church, and shall be delivered over to the buffetings of Satan until the day of redemption. (D&C 82:21.)

To some of the Church members earlier in our dispensation who had broken their covenants and thereby come under condemnation, the Lord stated: Therefore inasmuch as you are found transgressors, you cannot escape my wrath in your lives. Inasmuch as ye are cut off for transgression, ye cannot escape the buffetings of Satan until the day of redemption. And I now give unto you power from this very hour, that if any man among you, of the order, is found a transgressor and repenteth not of the evil, that ye shall deliver him over unto the buffetings of Satan and he shall not have power to bring evil upon you. (D&C 104:8-10.)

Similarly in the revelation relating to the new and everlasting covenant, the Lord emphasizes the seriousness of certain transgressions by saying that even though the offenders may be redeemed and finally be exalted, "... they shall be ... delivered unto the buffetings of Satan unto the day of redemption, saith the Lord God." (D&C 132:26.)

Just what constitutes the "buffetings of Satan" no one knows except those who experience them, but I have seen many people who have been buffeted in life after they have come to themselves and realized to some degree the horror of their acts. If their sufferings were not the "buffetings of Satan," they must be a near approach to them. Certainly they reflect great sorrow, anguish of soul, shame, remorse, and physical and mental suffering. Perhaps this condition approaches the sufferings of which the Lord spoke when he said: But if they would not repent they must suffer even as I: Which suffering caused myself, even God, the greatest of all, to tremble because of pain, and to bleed at every pore, and to suffer both body and spirit... . (D&C 19:17-18.)

Always Better Not to Sin In all our expressions of wonder and gratitude at our Father's loving and forgiving attitude we must not be misled into supposing either that forgiveness may be considered lightly or that sin may be repeated with impunity after protestations of repentance. The Lord will indeed forgive, but he will not tolerate repetitions of the sin: ... And the Lord said unto him: I will forgive thee and thy brethren of their sins; but thou shalt not sin any more, for ye shall remember that my Spirit will not always strive with man; wherefore, if ye will sin until ye are fully ripe ye shall be cut off from the presence of the Lord—. (Eth. 2:15.)

Another error into which some transgressors fall, because of the availability of God's forgiveness, is the illusion that they are somehow stronger for having committed sin and then lived through the period of repentance. This simply is not true. That man who resists temptation and lives without sin is far better off than the man who has fallen, no matter how repentant the latter may be. The reformed transgressor, it is true, may be more understanding of one who falls into the same sin, and to that extent perhaps more helpful in the latter's regeneration. But his sin and repentance have certainly not made him stronger than the consistently righteous person.

God will forgive of that, we are sure. How satisfying it is to be cleansed from filthiness, but how much better it is never to have committed the sin! Even though one may have the assurance that God and all others have forgiven him, will a man ever totally forgive himself for gross sin? How splendid for one to be able to stand tall and look straight and honestly to affirm that, though he may have committed some follies and lesser errors, he has never broken the major laws! Ezekiel gives comfort to that soul who has never lost his footing when, speaking for the Lord, the prophet emphasizes that he that "hath walked in my statutes, and hath kept my judgments, to deal truly; he is just, he shall surely live, saith the Lord God." (Ezek. 18:9.)

There are prodigals like the murderer who commits crime no more because he is in the death cell, or the gambler who abandons the roulette wheel because he has no more to gamble. Forgiven? Yes, if repentance is adequate. Exalted? That is the question, and perhaps, only the Lord can answer it. But in any event the situation is not hopeless. The prodigal may still have a good life with many blessings. And the Lord in his mercy can indeed work miracles of forgiveness.

A man may have served a prison term for a felony and through good behavior have been pardoned, but will he be able to vote, hold public office, become the president of the country? A Church member may have been involved in certain gross crimes and finally be forgiven, but will he be appointed bishop or stake president? Consideration of questions like these dispels the illusion that it is somehow better to have trod the rugged path of sin and repentance than to have been consistently faithful.

Mercy Does Not Rob Justice There are many people who seem to rely solely on the Lord's mercy rather than on accomplishing their own repentance. One woman rather flippantly said, "The Lord knows my intents and that I'd like to give up my bad habits. He will understand and forgive me." But the scriptures will not bear this out. The Lord may temper justice with mercy, but he will never supplant it. Mercy can never replace justice. God is merciful, but he is also just. The Savior's atonement represents the mercy extended. Because of this atonement, all men can be saved. Most men can be exalted.

Many have greatly misunderstood the place of mercy in the forgiveness program. Its role is not to give great blessings without effort. Were it not for the atonement of Christ, the shedding of his blood, the assumption by proxy of our sins, man could never be forgiven and cleansed. Justice and mercy work hand in hand. Having offered mercy to us in the overall redemption, the Lord must now let justice rule, for he cannot save us in our sins, as Amulek explained. (Al. 11:37.)

Perhaps the greatest scriptural exposition on the respective roles of mercy and justice, and God's position in it all, is that of Alma to his son Corianton. It is important for all of us to understand this concept.

But there is a law given, and a punishment affixed, and a repentance granted; which repentance mercy claimeth; otherwise, justice claimeth the creature and executeth the law, and the law inflicteth the punishment; if not so, the works of justice would be destroyed, and God would cease to be God.

But God ceaseth not to be God, and mercy claimeth the penitent, and mercy cometh because of the atonement; and the atonement bringeth to pass the resurrection of the dead; and the resurrection of the dead bringeth back men into the presence of God; and thus they are restored into his presence, to be judged according to their works, according to the law and justice.

For behold, justice exerciseth all his demands, and also mercy claimeth all which is her own; and thus, none but the truly penitent are saved.

What, do ye suppose that mercy can rob justice? I say unto you, Nay; not one whit. If so, God would cease to be God. (Al. 42:22-25.)

"There should be no license for sin," said the Prophet, "but mercy should go hand in hand with reproof." And again, "God does not look on sin with allowance, but when men have sinned, there must be allowance made for them." [^3]

Forgiveness-The Divine Invitation From what has been said in this chapter I hope it is clear that forgiveness is available to all who have not committed the unpardonable sins. Fortunately for some, when repentance is adequate God will forgive even one who has been excommunicated-which, like surgery, unfortunately is sometimes necessary.

But if he repent not he shall not be numbered among my people, that he may not destroy my people, for behold I know my sheep, and they are numbered. Nevertheless, ye shall not cast him out of your synagogues, or your places of worship, for unto such shall ye continue to minister; for ye know not but what they will return and repent, and come unto me with full purpose of heart, and I shall heal them; and ye shall be the means of bringing salvation unto them. (3 Ne. 18:31-32.)

We can hardly be too forceful in reminding people that they cannot sin and be forgiven and then sin again and again and expect repeated forgiveness. The Lord anticipated the weakness of man which would return him to his transgression, and he gave this revelation in warning: And now, verily I say unto you, I, the Lord, will not lay any sin to your charge; go your ways and sin no more; but unto that soul who sinneth shall the former sins return, saith the Lord your God." (D&C 82:7.)

Forgiveness of sins is one of the most glorious principles God ever gave to man. Just as repentance is a divine principle, so also is forgiveness. Were it not for this principle, there would be no point in crying repentance. But because of this principle the divine invitation is held out to all-Come, repent of your sins and be forgiven!

Documentary History of the Church, Vol. 6, p.81. Italics added.

Improvement Era, July, 1955, p.542.

Documentary History of the Church, Vol. 5, p. 24.

---
Notas:
[^1] Dante, Divine Comedy.
[^2] Melvin J. Ballard, "Three Degrees of Glory."
[^3] Joseph F. Smith, Gospel Doctrine (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1966), p. 475.
