Spencer W. Kimball, Miracle of Forgiveness ( 1969)

Chapter Twenty-Three

The Miracle of Forgiveness

Wherefore, my beloved brethren, have miracles ceased because Christ hath ascended into heaven, and hath sat down on the right hand of God, to claim of the Father his rights of mercy which he hath upon the children of men? And [Christ] hath said: Repent all ye ends of the earth, and come unto me, and be baptized in my name, and have faith in me, that ye may be saved. —Moroni 7:27, 34

MAKING A STIRRING APPEAL FOLLOWING THE BLOODY extinction of his people, the lonely Moroni, last survivor of a great civilization, looked down the stream of time to our own day when the Book of Mormon should come forth. Among other erroneous concepts then held, he predicted, would be the idea that "miracles are done away." (Morm. 8:26.)

Modern Miracles We who live now recognize the fulfillment of this prophecy. Fortunately, active Church members are aware of modern miracles-angelic visitations, gospel restoration, the Book of Mormon, for example. When we think of miracles, most of us think of healings under the power of the priesthood. But there is another, even greater miracle-the miracle of forgiveness.

Importance of Spiritual Sight Indeed the day of miracles has not passed except for those who will not heed the call of the Lord and of his servants, who night and day warn and plead and implore. There is a glorious miracle awaiting every soul who is prepared to change. Repentance and forgiveness make a brilliant day of the darkest night. When souls are reborn, when lives are changed then comes the great miracle to beautify and warm and lift. When spiritual death has threatened and now instead there is resuscitation, when life pushes out death when this happens it is the miracle of miracles. And such great miracles will never cease so long as there is one person who applies the redeeming power of the Savior and his own good works to bring about his rebirth.

There are two kinds of miracles, as there are two parts to life in every area. There is the body and the spirit. Thus there are two kinds of healings.

As the Lord passed down the path, two blind men begged for light. "So Jesus had compassion on them, and touched their eyes: and immediately their eyes received sight, and they followed him." (Matt. 20:34.) These were their mortal eyes which were opened.

The scripture says, "... and they followed him." This last phrase might mean that they would receive their spiritual sight. If they followed him really, lived his commandments, were totally obedient, their souls would receive sight unto eternal life.

Of the two, spiritual sight is by far the more important. Only those whose physical eyes do not see can know of the deprivation this entails, and it is a serious one. But even this cannot be compared to the blindness of those who have eyes and will not see the glories of that spiritual life which has no end.

The Blessing of Peace The essence of the miracle of forgiveness is that it brings peace to the previously anxious, restless, frustrated, perhaps tormented soul. In a world of turmoil and contention this is indeed a priceless gift.

The Nephite civilization did not learn this in time. As it began to funnel to a rough and tragic conclusion, the prophet Mormon thought he glimpsed a possibility of the people's repenting and receiving forgiveness for their great sins. But he was mistaken. All his life, since his boyhood, he had decried the hardness of his people and watched with sadness and tears the approaching darkness. Finally his hope vanished. He wrote: But behold this my joy was vain, for their sorrowing was not unto repentance, because of the goodness of God; but it was rather the sorrowing of the damned, because the Lord would not always suffer them to take happiness in sin. And it came to pass that my sorrow did return unto me again, and I saw that the day of grace was passed with them, both temporally and spiritually; for I saw thousands of them hewn down in open rebellion against their God, and heaped up as dung upon the face of the land. (Morm. 2:13, 15.)

Alma said it well. He had tasted the bitterness of a sinful life and of spiritual rebellion, so he knew well what he was saying-"Wickedness never was happiness." (Al. 41:10.) And since happiness brings peace, wickedness brings its antithesis-strife and turmoil.

"The greatest need of this world today is peace," said President David O. McKay. "The turbulent storms of hate, of enmity, of distrust, and of sin are threatening to wreck humanity. It is time for men-true men-to dedicate their lives to God, and to cry with the spirit and power of the Christ, 'Peace, be still !'..."

Peace is the fruit of righteousness. It cannot be bought with money, and cannot be traded nor bartered. It must be earned. The wealthy often spend much of their gains in a bid for peace, only to find that it is not for sale. But the poorest as well as the richest may have it in abundance if the total price is paid. Those who abide the laws and live the Christ-like life may have peace and other kindred blessings, principal among which are exaltation and eternal life. They include also blessings for this life.

And may the Lord bless you, and keep your garments spotless, that ye may at last be brought to sit down with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and the holy prophets who have been ever since the world began, having your garments spotless even as their garments are spotless, in the kingdom of heaven to go no more out. And now, may the peace of God rest upon you, and upon your houses and lands, and upon your flocks and herds, and all that you possess, your women and your children, according to your faith and good works, from this time forth and forever—. (Al. 7:25, 27.)

Transforming Power of God The effect of the Lord's transforming power is seen in many personal lives. When Saul had been selected, called and appointed to be the King of Israel, when he had been anointed and blessed and set apart, "...God gave him another heart..." and he "...turned into another man ..." (1 Sam. 10:6, 9.) Miracles had enveloped Saul.

The Apostle Paul is often mentioned in this connection. Although his former persecution against the Church Of God had been done with sincere motives, he recognized the sin and, through the redeeming grace of Christ, found peace through forgiveness despite a life in which he was now the persecuted. His testimony is impressive: ... Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners of who I am chief. Howbeit for this cause I obtained mercy, that in me first Jesus Christ might she" forth all longsuffering, for a pattern to them which should hereafter believe on him to life everlasting. (1 Tim. 1:15-16.)

But perhaps the best documented scriptural life showing the dramatic regeneration and the peace obtained through the miracle of forgiveness is that of the Prophet Alma. (See Mos. 27.) His earlier life had been one of open rebellion against God, of systematic attempts to destroy the Church, despite the training in the truth which his father had undoubtedly given him. His had indeed been a life of great sin, to which he had added the evil of idolatry.

Then came the visit from the angel, the terrible rebuke which rendered him dumb and paralyzed for three days and nights. During this period he suffered anguish of remorse, an agony of soul which he describes as being "racked with eternal torment." His description is a classic in scripture. I have referred to it before, but do so at some length again because of its great relevance to this concluding chapter.

But I was racked with eternal torment, for my soul was harrowed up to the greatest degree and racked with all my sins. Yea, I did remember all my sins and iniquities, for which I was tormented with the pains of hell; yea, I saw that I had rebelled against my God, and that I had not kept his holy commandments. Yea, and I had murdered many of his children, or rather led them away unto destruction; yea, and in fine so great had been my iniquities, that the very thought of coming into the presence of my God did rack my soul with inexpressible horror. Oh, thought I, that I could be banished and become extinct both soul and body, that I might not be brought to stand in the presence of my God, to be judged of my deeds. And now, for three days and for three nights was I racked, even with the pains of a damned soul. (Al. 36:12-16.)

In Alma's account the sensitive reader can in a measure identify with him, feel his pains, experience his great sense of horror at the recognition of the depth of his sin. The reader can then share also in the great relief which Alma was to find. How did he gain this relief? In the same way every transgressor does by partaking of the miracle of forgiveness through genuine repentance and by casting himself wholly on the mercies of Jesus Christ.

And it came to pass that as I was thus racked with torment, while I was harrowed up by the memory of my many sins, behold, I remembered also to have heard my father prophesy unto the people concerning the coming of one Jesus Christ, a Son of God, to atone for the sins of the world. Now, as my mind caught hold upon this thought, I cried within my heart: G Jesus, thou Son of God, have mercy on me, who am in the gall of bitterness, and am encircled about by the everlasting chains of death. And now, behold, when I thought this, I could remember my pains no more; yea, I was harrowed up by the memory of my sins no more. And oh, what joy, and what marvelous light I did behold; yea, my soul was filled with joy as exceeding as was my pain! Yea, I say unto you, my son, that there could be nothing so exquisite and so bitter as were my pains. Yea, and again I say unto you, my son, that on the other hand, there can be nothing so exquisite and sweet as was my joy. (Al. 36:17-21.)

Now anguish was turned to joy, pain to calm, darkness to light. Only now could Alma have peace. He emphasized to his son Shiblon the sole source of that peace.

... And never, until I did cry out unto the Lord Jesus Christ for mercy, did I receive a remission of my sins. But behold, I did cry unto him and I did find peace to my soul. (Al. 38:8.)

Peace Through Preparing for Christ's Coming It is not easy to be at peace in today's troubled world. Necessarily peace is a personal acquisition. As is implied throughout this book, it can be attained only through maintaining constantly a repentant attitude, seeking forgiveness of sins both large and small, and thus coming ever closer to God. For Church members this is the essence of their preparation, their readiness to meet the Savior when he comes. Any other course will align them with the five foolish virgins in the Master's parable.

Then shall the kingdom of heaven be likened unto ten virgins, which took their lamps, and went forth to meet the bridegroom. And five of them were wise and five were foolish. They that were foolish took their lamps, and took no oil with them: But the wise took oil in their vessels with their lamps. While the bridegroom tarried, they all slumbered and slept. And at midnight there was a cry made, Behold, the bridegroom cometh; go ye out to meet him. Then all those virgins arose, and trimmed their lamps. And the foolish said unto the wise, Give us of your oil; for our lamps are gone out. But the wise answered, saying, Not so; lest there be not enough for us and you: but go ye rather to them that sell, and buy for yourselves. And while they went to buy, the bridegroom came; and they that were ready went in with him to the marriage: and the door was shut. Afterward came also the other virgins, saying, Lord, Lord, open to us. But he answered and said, Verily I say unto you, I know you not. Watch therefore, for ye know neither the day nor the hour wherein the Son of man cometh. (Matt. 25:1-13.)

Luke's Gospel expresses the same idea in another way: Let your loins be girded about, and your lights burning; And ye yourselves like unto men that wait for their Lord, when he will return from the wedding; that when he cometh and knocketh, they may open unto him immediately. Blessed are those servants, whom the lord when he cometh shall find watching: verily I say unto you, that he shall gird himself, and make them to sit down to meat, and will come forth and serve them. (Luke 12:35-37.)

Those who are ready will be at peace in their hearts. They will be partakers of the blessing the Savior promised to his apostles: Peace I leave with you, my peace I give unto you: not as the world giveth, give I unto you. Let not your heart be troubled, neither let it be afraid. (John 14:27.)

The Miracle of Forgiveness The mission of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is to call people everywhere to repentance. Those who heed the call, whether members or nonmembers of the Church, can be partakers of the miracle of forgiveness. God will wipe away from their eyes the tears of anguish, and remorse, and consternation, and fear, and guilt. Dry eyes will replace the wet ones, and smiles of satisfaction will replace the worried, anxious look.

What relief! What comfort! What joy! Those laden with transgressions and sorrows and sin may be forgiven and cleansed and purified if they will return to their Lord, learn of him, and keep his commandments. And all of us needing to repent of day-to-day follies and weaknesses can likewise share in this miracle.

Can we not understand why the Lord has been pleading with man for these thousands of years to come unto him? Surely the Lord was speaking about forgiveness through repentance, and the relief that could come from the tenseness of guilt, when he followed his glorious prayer to his Father with this sublime entreaty and promise: Come unto me, all ye that labour and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest. Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me; for I am meek and lowly in heart: and ye shall find rest unto your souls. For my yoke is easy, and my burden is light. (Matt. 11:28-30.)

It is my hope and prayer that men and women everywhere will respond to this gentle invitation and thus let the Master work in their individual lives the great miracle of forgiveness.
