John A. Widtsoe, In Search of Truth: Comments on the Gospel and Modern Thought ( 1930)

I. NEW LAMPS FOR OLD

Aladdin of Arabian Nights fame secured an old battered copper lamp of magical powers. By its aid he built himself a magnificent palace, acquired great wealth and became the son-in-law of the King. A wicked magician determined to secure possession of the wonderful lamp. With a supply of ordinary but new, highly polished lamps, he approached the palace, offering "new lamps for old." Aladdin's wife, who knew nothing of the uncommon properties of the old lamp, gladly exchanged it for a new one. Then Aladdin's troubles began. Palace, wealth, and station vanished overnight.

This ancient tale is being retold in our modern times. Almost every day someone, usually honest enough, offers a new belief or thought, burnished and bright with newness, to replace convictions that we have long held and which have well maintained us. This always raises the question whether the old beliefs should be surrendered unless we are certain that the new offerings can serve us better. A careless exchange may result in loss or fearful consequences.

PROGRESS WELCOMED.

There is, of course, no objection to a thing or thought because it is new. This is a growing and increasing world; and as long as time endures, if we live well, progress will animate us. The mind must not be closed against progress. New light is constantly coming into the world, which should be received with gladness. The question is merely with respect to the validity and value of the new offerings. Are the old beliefs false? Are the new ones true? If true, are they of such fundamental value as to necessitate the required exchange? So run the questions that man must answer, if indeed he be an honest and progressive man. New beliefs should be accepted with care, but to refuse to exchange old error for new truth would be disastrous. The proffered exchange of a narrow for a more comprehensive conception of eternal realities would be made with profit, and all right-minded persons should stand ready to accept such greater light. There can be no valid objection to changing one's opinion on any subject, provided he changes from error to truth. In fact, many of the new opinions or beliefs are better than the old ones. But, of the truth of the new conception we must make sure; or we may find that the old is better than the new lamp.

EXCHANGES OF MINOR IMPORTANCE.

The new offerings are often of minor importance, as for example when they are old beliefs or practices in a new dress. There are not many fundamental thoughts; and they have been in man's keeping from the beginning of history. Questions concerning God, the origin of and destiny of man, the purpose of life and the extent of the universe, were asked by the first man. They have been answered in every age to the partial satisfaction of many. Our new knowledge has brought confirmation and larger understanding of such fundamental conceptions; seldom has it displaced any of them. Restatements of such old truths are harmless enough. Speech changes with the centuries; and often an apparent change is only a new way of stating an old truth.

When new thoughts and opinions are of minor concern, such as new uses of old truths, or applications of new truths to old needs, to refuse acceptance is to be stubborn. To substitute an automobile for a horse and buggy, or a steel for a quill pen, or paper for papyrus, or sanitation for filthy surroundings, is well done, even if we find it difficult to yield our old habits to new ones. The relative value of the stagecoach and the railroad cannot be made fundamental in human conduct, though it may vitally change our manner of living.

It is important to discriminate when the new is offered in exchange for the old, between the essential and the incidental or desirable in human life. Essentials are spiritual in their nature; things merely desirable are of the earth.

DANGEROUS EXCHANGES.

In many cases, however, the new offerings strike deliberately at the foundations of our established beliefs. If accepted, many of them would destroy the means by which man has moved these many years towards peace of mind and happiness of life. Often it is impossible at first sight to detect the danger of such suggestions, for they are carefully worded, and have not been subjected to the test of life and experience. Their truth has not been fully plumbed. Those who gaily and happily accept new opinions without inquiry, may soon find themselves in a state of misery, either expressed or silent. To such persons, the exchange of the old for the new has brought disaster. A new definition of God, a new theory of man's relationship to God, or a new interpretation of the purpose of life are matters which must be subjected to the severest tests of truth. One who loves truth cannot follow the multitude with respect to such matters. He must know for himself.

Since in every proffered exchange may lie hidden a thrust at fundamental truth, every offering must be examined. In appearance it may be beautiful, yet have a rotten core. In this day, a man who does not carefully weigh and consider modern issues has failed to catch the spirit of truth-seeking which has made possible our modern civilization.

AS THE TWIG IS BENT.

A new offering is none the less dangerous because it seems slight and modest in its demands. An accumulation of microscopic particles makes a mountain. "Constant dripping wears away the stone."

It was slight but unweighed exchanges, in the early days of Christianity, that led to the great apostasy, and necessitated the restoration of the gospel in this day. Each exchange seemed small and harmless enough, but when they accumulated throughout the years, they changed and corrupted almost beyond recognition, the simple, easily understood and life-giving doctrine of the Lord Jesus Christ. Each exchange meant humanity's loss, yet at the time they seemed reasonable enough. Why be baptized by immersion when sprinkling was so much easier? Why study the principles of the gospel when a preacher could do it for us? And so on, until the change was complete.

RESULTS OF NEW KNOWLEDGE.

This is a day of new beliefs, because it is a day of new knowledge. Of necessity we think and speak in terms of that which we know. Therefore, as knowledge progresses, our thinking changes or enlarges, unless, indeed, we fail to keep abreast of the new-won truth, and are content to be as one who does not understand the language of the land. A person who is obliged to depend on interpreters is in a most unsatisfactory and often dangerous condition, for he may easily be imposed upon.

From the beginning, humanity has been adding to its store of knowledge. Sometimes the increase has been rapid, at other times slow. Occasionally, communities or whole nations have lost some of their knowledge, but on the whole, man's stock of knowledge has increased with the years. The last century and a half have been characterized by the most rapid increase in knowledge recorded in history. Discoveries and inventions have crowded upon one another. The volume of truth accumulated during this period exceeds the total sum of truth previously gathered. Our progress in bringing truth out of its hiding place has been stupendous. New realms of the visible and invisible universe have been penetrated with unfailing success. Applications of the new truths are innumerable. Buggies and wagons have been crowded out by automobiles and airplanes; the pony express and the speaking tube by the fast mail and the radio; candles and lamps by gas mantles and Mazda bulbs; the spinning wheel and hand loom by machine driven textile mills and so on ad infinitum. What the end of the search will be, no man can foretell.

This marvelous progress has almost completely changed our physical living. Our intellectual horizon has been extended and our spiritual convictions deepened. Undreamed-of physical comforts, intellectual understanding, and spiritual comprehension are the gifts of this new day. Naturally, we think and speak in harmony with these changed conditions.

Our modern advances are products of scientific activity. Science has shown herself possessed of unlimited power in winning truth to her side. In very deed, modern thought is thought which uses the facts, language, and conceptions of science. The new offerings are in the main children of the scientific laboratory. They are parts of the philosophy of science.

CLEAR THINKING.

So rapidly have the changes of the century come that we find it difficult to keep up with the procession. New discoveries, with new words and new conceptions, are constantly demanding the right to displace our older views. The new facts may well be accepted, but a multitude of partially formed opinions are presented, which require a nicety of discrimination.

Facts are harmless enough; but the inferences drawn from them, sometimes true, often false, may involve serious consequences. The biggest questions before the modern world concern themselves with the inferences drawn from the recently accumulated body of truth.

There is need as never before of simple tests by which the validity of new views may be determined. In this scientific age men and women should understand the processes and limitations of science and should be able to test for themselves the doctrines drawn from scientific investigation. Confusion of thought lies back of most of our human discord; clarity of thought is a saving issue in any day. Our whole lives should expand with the progress of knowledge but only under the guidance of clearness of vision and thinking.

RECONCILIATION OF TRUTH.

With an increasing body of facts there must needs be a constant demand for reconciliation among old and new conclusions. Such reconciliation should not be difficult, since all proper human activities aim to secure truth. Every person of honest mind loves truth above all else. In the proposed exchange of the new for the old, religion has often been in apparent conflict with science. Yet, the conflict has only been apparent, for science seeks truth, and the aim of religion is truth. That they have occupied different fields of truth is a mere detail. The gospel accepts and embraces all truth; science is slowly expanding her arms, and reaching into the invisible domain, in search of truth. The two are meeting daily: science as the child, religion as the mother. Earnest attempts at reconciliation are rewarded with full success. Occasional failures are usually due to the mistake of alone trying religion, the more comprehensive and better established, by the newer and less dependable standards of science. Religion has an equal right to try science. Either method, properly applied, leads to the same result: truth is truth, whether labeled science or religion.
