John A. Widtsoe, In Search of Truth: Comments on the Gospel and Modern Thought ( 1930)

II. THE FACTS OF SCIENCE

Science is the most used and the worst used word of the day. Everybody knows that we live in a scientific age, for we have steam-engines and electric dynamos, railroads and steamships, airships and radio sets, and a multitude of wonders undreamed-of a generation ago. Therefore, everybody speaks glibly of science, as of a foster-brother, but as casually as we speak of a relative of whose inmost nature we have little appreciation.

Great truths have come to the world as a result of scientific activity. That goes without question. Much misinformation has also been paraded under the noble name of science. That perhaps could not be helped. But "handsome is as handsome does." Whatever is scientific must conform to the definition and spirit of science. "Humbug is humbug," said William James, "even though it bear a scientific name."

DEFINITION OF SCIENCE.

Science is knowledge, all knowledge of mankind, systematically classified and arranged. The sum of human experience is the sum of scientific knowledge. To possess all truth is its hope; without increasing truth it perishes. It is never complete; it is ever increasing; "it knows in part and prophesies in part.

"It is the spirit of man brooding over the stream of natural events that has given birth to science. For science is knowledge and knowledge is the result of mental activities operating upon a world of object." (Wolf, Essentials of Scientific Method, p. 17.) The domain of science is illimitable. To know man is as much a concern of science as to know a beast, or a plant, or a rock. The nature of man is as important to science as the metallurgy of copper. Wherever methodical study and logical thought are employed, there we shall have science. Only one condition is imposed upon knowledge by those who build science: it must be arranged systematically for the easier comprehension of man. The facts of nature organized about human life, that is science.

OBJECTS OF SCIENCE.

The pursuit of knowledge gives rare joy. Many of those who have been instrumental in building science have been so engaged for the sheer happiness it has given them. Nevertheless, whether consciously or not, they have recognized the fourfold object of scientific men—of science we may say.

The object of science is first to collect all existing human knowledge wherever or whenever gathered, and to assemble it for general use. The earliest books record travels undertaken to learn of conditions existing in distant lands, and today, expensive expeditions are fitted out to seek out the knowledge that may be buried in the common places of strange nations.

The second object of science is closely allied to the first. It is the discovery of new knowledge, not possessed before by any people. The hunger for more knowledge has been the spur which has driven men, great and small, into scientific endeavor. The ecstasy of joy which accompanies the discovery of new truth has been the reward which has led men to sacrifice ordinary satisfactions and to face hardships for scientific careers. To increase the sum of human knowledge is the first object of science.

The third object of science is developed from the first two. New and increasing knowledge gives men new power over the forces of nature. The discovery of the principle of the lever made it possible for weak man to lift huge blocks of stone; the determination of the inherent power of steam gave to man a servant under control to do work beyond the unaided strength of man. The third object of science is therefore, to give men increasing control over the forces of nature. It is the realization of such new power in the many inventions of the day that has stirred the imagination of humanity; and such control probably gives as much satisfaction as the pure intellectual joy of discovery.

The fourth object of science is somewhat more intangible, but perhaps the most important, and results from the necessary and accurate methods employed by science.

"Science is a method of thought and work as truly as it is a body of information. Training in scientific method is the great desideratum. People are much more likely to have correct ideas if they understand and practice the correct method of ascertaining ideas. This matter of method is the very essence and kernel of natural science." (Gager, Science and Theology, pp. 35-36.)

Science has been built in the main by persons who have been devoted lovers of truth. Truth has seemed to them so precious a possession that it has justified their best efforts. But, a man who loves truth and seeks it, frequently finds that the new truth is in opposition to his former, cherished beliefs. Then if his love of truth be genuine, he must replace the traditions of his life with the new-won knowledge. Such open-mindedness, known as the spirit of science, is the fourth object of all who honestly engage in the advancement of learning. It is the spirit rather than the possessions of science that has helped mankind; it is this spirit rather than coming discoveries that will benefit the human race.

To gather existing knowledge; to discover new knowledge; to give man an increasing control over natural forces; and to make love of truth the greatest human passion—these are the objects of science.

OBSERVATION.

Science is founded upon the observation of the phenomena of nature. That which man observes becomes his experience and out of the facts of experience all human knowledge, which is science, is built. Observation is more than sight. We observe things or events when we apprehend them through the use of any of our senses. The basic elements, the facts of science, are obtained by the use of our senses.

It follows that science is man-made. Natural phenomena, as for example, the revolution of the heavenly bodies, would go on just the same whether or not man lived on earth. Therefore, the limitations of man's powers are the limitations placed upon science. Yet, however weak or strong a man may be, the facts of science come by observation; he has no other means of obtaining them.

USE OF INSTRUMENTS.

The universe is vast. Man with his natural powers can explore only a small part of it. The stars are but luminous points to the unaided eye; and the world of minute life is wholly beyond direct sight. The visible is small compared with the unseen world. There is unseen light and unheard sounds of which we are wholly unconscious if we depend on our unaided senses.

Aids to human senses are necessary if we are to know anything beyond the narrow limits of our natural powers. Scientific instruments are such aids. "Without instruments we have only a peephole view of the universe." (J. Arthur Thompson, Science and Religion, p. 39.) The telescopes, photographic plate and spectroscope made modern astronomy possible. In physics, the chronometer and thermometer have been mighty helps; chemistry rests upon the use of the balance; and biology has been developed by the microscope and microtome. The progress of every science has been derived from the perfecting of some aid to man's senses.

"What stretches before us is like a mountainous region covered with mist; through the mist there stand out the peaks that we directly know through our senses. The rest is unsensed. But of the immense mist-covered universe—unseen instruments he is able to see the invisible." (Ibid., p. 40.)

In truth, there was no real scientific progress until instruments of precision and magnification were devised, and whenever a new instrument has been constructed, a new science or a new branch of science has come into being.

The facts of science have been accumulated as the power of man's observation has been increased by the use of instruments. Scientific progress is determined by the possession and use of suitable instruments.

EXPERIMENTATION.

Man's power of observation is enhanced by yet another method. In the beginning of scientific enquiry, naturally occurring phenomena were the subjects of observation. Later investigators set up a number of conditions, under full control and observed the resulting phenomena. This is called the experimental method. The experimenter does not wait for natural phenomena to occur, but by setting up an experiment, secures results under controlled conditions. The use of instruments and experiments together has enabled man with his rather poor natural powers to master in an astounding degree the secrets of the unseen universe. Experimentation is the chief characteristic of modern science. It has added greatly to man's power of observation.

MEASUREMENT.

Science demands that observation be accurate. Usually facts must be measured or given precise position in time or space. It is not enough to know that it rained. Science must know where it rained, at what time of the day or night, and how much water fell at a definite time and place. The unaided senses are seldom able to make accurate quantitative measurements. Two people will seldom agree on the weight of a piece of cheese, but using the scales will soon bring them into harmony. In the words of R. A. Millikan, "But after all, the evidence of our eyes is about the least reliable kind of evidence which we have. We are continually seeing things which do not exist, even though our habits are unimpeachable." (The Electron, p. 7.) Measuring instruments of astounding refinement have been devised and made to meet this demand of science. Knowledge based on guesswork is not acceptable. It is not really knowledge. The use of measuring instruments has given certainty to scientific knowledge, and has been the chief enemy of superstition which fed and feeds on vague knowledge and unfounded suppositions.

VERIFICATION.

The search for truth is sacred. One must guard against error. The limitations placed upon man's natural powers are such that it becomes necessary to repeat an observation or an experiment many times until full faith in the results is established.

Moreover, it must be possible for another normal individual to repeat the work and to obtain the same results. If two individuals doing work in the same manner do not agree in their findings, the results of both must be held in question. When, however, as is usually the case, hundreds of students repeat the work and come to the same conclusion, the results may with safety be classed as facts of observation. Honest accuracy characterizes reputable work in science. Very often, those untrained in scientific processes fail to understand the unyielding demand for accuracy, and pseudo-science is born.

Verification is another important aid to human senses.

REGISTRATION.

The facts of science, gathered or discovered, measured, verified and established, are not of full use until they have been recorded or registered. Every observation must be written down, classified, and published.

Memory is treacherous. If our knowledge is to be trusted it must be preserved in written form. Record making is another important element in careful scientific work. For the benefit of other workers, the results should be published in widely circulated journals. In earlier days, when journals were few, scientific workers in different countries often had to traverse the same paths and make the same discoveries in order to make full progress. Today the prompt publication of every new discovery often saves much time for others working in the same field. The publication of scientific papers also facilitates the important work of verification. It is held to be a duty of scientific workers to publish their results fully and promptly.

An important part of registration is the classifying of obtained facts. Similar observations are grouped together. This has done much for scientific progress. Unassorted observations have remained of little value for generations but when grouped and arranged by a competent worker have leaped into life and have moved science onwards.

Registration, consisting of recording, classification, and publication, is yet another aid to scientific progress.

REGULARITIES.

When many observations in the same field are carefully classified, definite regularities are usually found among them. A student of agriculture may take samples of soil at different depths and determine their moisture content. If the results from all samples taken at the same depth are grouped together, it becomes evident that in a deep, well-drained, and irrigated field, the moisture increases from the top downward to a certain point, after which it decreases. Unless the moisture determinations were properly classified, this regularity would not be observed. The human mind must group and classify to find order in apparent disorder.

One of the notable facts of science is that such regularities are found in every division or department of scientific inquiry. In fact, the incentive to scientific study vanishes to a large degree, if regularities in nature may not be expected.

"In the case of natural phenomena, of course, man cannot create order, he can only look for it, try to discover it, if it is there. But it is the need for order as an aid to life that prompts man to search for it everywhere. If he succeeds, well and good; if he fails to discover order, or some special form of order, in any realm of facts, then he modifies his expectation or maybe abandons it altogether and turns his attention to other facts in the hope of discovering order there. Sometimes, indeed, the need for perfect order has been felt so keenly, in the face of the obdurate disorder of an imperfect world, that men like Plato and other idealistic philosophers have conceived an ideal, transcendental world over and above this world of ours. Here is shown, in an extreme form, the felt need for order which, in varying degrees, all intelligent human beings experience. And it is this felt need that always prompted mankind, and still prompts us, to try and discover in Nature." (Wolf, Essentials of Scientific Method, pp. 21-22.)

NATURAL LAW.

A natural or scientific law is the statement of the recognition of the regularity that appears when like facts in an investigation are grouped together. It is really a summary in brief of facts that have been discovered. Until the law connecting them has been brought out, facts hang as it were in the air, belonging nowhere in particular.

By observation through centuries it is known that as winter approaches, the sun moves southward, and as summer returns it comes northward. That is the law of the movement of the sun with respect to the seasons.

It is the major concern of science to elucidate the laws in accordance with which things or events happen. Facts in themselves have little value; but when so strung together as to bring out the recurring regularities, they reveal the law according to which they exist. Laws, the brief descriptions of innumerable facts, make comprehensible to the human mind the complexity of the universe, as well as the orderliness which prevails among universal phenomena. No person can remember all the observed facts in our possession; but most of the major laws derived from them may be understood and remembered.

The constant appearance of law in the study of nature is the most comforting gift of science. Without law there would be no certainty in life. Under the same conditions one thing might happen today, another tomorrow. There is harmony and order throughout the universe.

"The best expression of this harmony is law. Law is one of the most recent conquests of the human mind; there are still people who live in the presence of a perpetual miracle and are not astonished at nature's regularity. Men demand of their gods to prove their existence by miracles; but the eternal marvel is that there are not miracles without cease. The world is divine because it is harmony. If it were ruled by caprice, what could prove to us it was not ruled by chance?" (Poincare, The Value of Science, p. 13.)

BASIS OF SCIENCE.

"Science is a kind of knowledge reached by recognized methods of observation and experiment, registration, and measurement. It limits itself by its own methods and though it is not confined to the study of the ponderable (for that would mean excluding psychology and physiology at the very least), it always depends for stability on some kind of measurement or registration. So it may be said that Science includes all systematized, verifiable, and communicable knowledge, reached by reflection on the impersonal data of observation and experiment. We mean by 'systematized' that science is coordinated knowledge, the multitudinous data in empirical terms. We mean by 'verifiable' that its conclusions can be checked by all normally constituted minds when the observations or experiments are repeated with strict adherence to scientific methods." (J. Arthur Thompson, Science and Religion, pp. 4 and 5.)

Facts based upon verifiable and verified observations form the basis of science. They are the building blocks of science, and there are no other. Failure to recognize facts as the only foundation of science is the cause of most controversies within science, or between science and religion.

To walk safely with science and religion, facts must be of first consideration. Every inference, every hypothesis or theory is based upon and drawn from facts. The faith of science is in facts, not in conjectures, however valuable the latter may be as guides to new discovery. There would be no science without facts.

"For science is an objective study of the facts of nature. It uses any and all hypotheses which assist in correlating these facts, and its many hypotheses have had varying degrees of success in making such correlations, but science never commits itself as a matter of faith to any of them, not even to evolution. When it does so it ceases to be science." (Millikan, Science and Life, p. 77.)

GOSPEL VALUE OF FACTS.

No one questions the value of facts. Properly secured and verified they become the permanent property of mankind, the blocks or means by which the progress of the race is made possible.

The gospel of Jesus Christ accepts all truth, "Ye shall know the truth and the truth shall make you free." There is no limitation placed upon the truth that may be accepted by the members of the Church. Every fact of science or of history or of any other department of learning is accepted by the Church. The only condition is that the fact that presents itself for admission must be sound—it must be a fact indeed.

At the same time it is to be held within clear vision that the methods employed so far by science in the gathering of facts, are not the only ones available. The eye and the ear, aided by the telescope and the telephone, encompass a vast world; but there are other senses through the use of which the acquaintanceship of a larger world may be secured. There are realities in the universe beyond eye or ear which are made known by the acuter, though perhaps less understood, senses of man. This is well recognized by science itself, which is even now invading this more subtle field. The behavior of the human mind, the basis of human conduct, the causes of social and economic phenomena, religion and the spiritual life of man, life after death, and such fields as not long ago were held to be outside the domain of science, are now being studied, lifted to scientific dignity, and called by scientific names. The accumulated convictions of humanity, for example that there is a God, are no longer scorned out of consideration, but accepted as convictions of high probability of truth, obtained by the use of senses which science so far has but partly learned to understand. Religion, the old-fashioned foundation of the spiritual life, is gaining in respect with every new-found fact of nature, for with every new discovery man is brought nearer to the unseen world which he has known these many generations.
