John A. Widtsoe, In Search of Truth: Comments on the Gospel and Modern Thought ( 1930)

III. THE INFERENCES OF SCIENCE

The inferences of science have received most public consideration, usually without recognizing that they depend upon the facts of science. There can be no objection to inferences made in honesty and in search for truth; but it is most objectionable to give them an undue and improper prominence.

THE MIND.

Science is a creation of man. It is the recognition by the mind through human senses of the realities of existence. The mind of man is a noble instrument, a pre-eminent possession, by which he becomes conscious, not only of his own existence, but of the conditions of external nature. By tests of mind, humanity is distinguished from the lower orders of life. The triumphs of science are evidences of the supremacy of mind—a supremacy which dominates all nature. The glory of physical conquests, of the sea and earth and air, have often dazzled men to such a degree that they have forgotten that back of all discovery and progress is the power of observation and thought. Without mind, there is no science, no progress, only extinction.

"We have spelt 'mind' with a small 'm,' for our values are human values; yet we trust there is even in us something that has value for the eternal. 'The same was in the beginning with God . . . And without Him was not anything made that was made,'" (Religion, Science and Reality, Needham, Editor, p. 217.)

This powerful and all-embracing instrument, the mind, not only brings facts into view, but seizes upon these to learn of their essential and very nature. It could not be otherwise. Thus comes speculation; which if guided and controlled may be of much human service, but which untrammeled and wilful may lead mankind into deep distress.

"When we hear one say too loudly, 'All came from the protons and electrons of the primeval fire-mist,' we answer firmly: 'No, not from matter and energy only, but from matter and energy and mind.' 'In the beginning was Mind,' and that same Mind is the light of men. We adhere tenaciously to the Aristotelian idea that there can be nothing in the end which was not also in kind in the beginning. And by no 'joukery-pawkery,' as Scots folk say, can 'Mind' be got out of 'Matter.' If it seems to emerge, it is because it was there all the time." (Thompson, Science and Religion, pp. 55-56.)

EXPLANATIONS AND CAUSES.

The regularities that appear when like observations are systematically grouped always arouse the interest of thinking people. Why?—is the first and common thought concerning a new law of nature.

The sun rises in the east and moves westward over the heavens until sunset, when it disappears from view. That is the law. Why does the sun so move? The sun moves southward in winter and northward in summer. That is the law. What is the explanation of this recurrent regularity? Such are the first questions of the eager mind, and there is no rest until explanations have been found.

In time, a Galileo speaks. The earth revolves to the east upon an axis, daily; the earth moves round the sun in an elipse, annually,—therefore the apparent daily westward motion of the sun; therefore day and night; therefore the southward journey of the sun in winter and its return in summer.

Even such an explanation does not fully satisfy; for, another question follows: Why does the earth revolve about its own axis and around the sun? After much conjecture and apparently fruitless discussion, a Newton proposes a reasonable cause. All things in the universe attract one another. The larger the bodies the greater the attraction; the farther apart, the smaller the attraction. The laws of the motions of the heavenly bodies are thus not only explained, but a cause is found for them. This goes still further to satisfy the cravings of the normal human mind for a full understanding of the experience of life.

Of course, the question may be asked and is asked, "What is the cause of universal attraction?" By pursuing the cause or causes to the last degree, we come to a land where human understanding cannot enter. The wise thinker knows and respects the limits of human thought. It is profitless to enter where there is no light. When light is obtained, the darkest places may be explored.

"When, therefore, we think we have 'explained' natural phenomena by ascertaining their 'causes,' we have, in reality, only recognized the order of sequence of events. This is only a more accurate description of the phenomena and so 'explanation' is, in reality, chiefly only accurate description. This, in fact, is the fundamental problem of science—to describe natural events and their sequence as accurately as possible. When we have done this we should not deceive ourselves into thinking we understand the real nature of cause. Every scientist is aware of this limitation." (Gager, Science and Theology, p. 13.)

Facts are won by observation aided by instruments, measurements, and registration. The explanations and causes, or the meaning of the regularities of facts, are inferences quite different from facts.

"By inference is meant the formation of judgments, (beliefs and opinions) on the strength of, or as a consequence of other judgments already formed, it may be, on the ground of observation, or only entertained provisionally either for further consideration, or for the sake of argument." (A. Wolf, Essentials of the Scientific Method, pp. 17-18.)

There may be facts without inferences but no inferences without facts. It is not always easy to distinguish clearly between fact and inference; but the essential nature of each is sufficiently clear to enable any careful thinker, not a quibbler, to determine whether he is dealing with a fact or an inference. There have been few differences concerning facts of science, but about the inferences of science storms of difference have often raged.

"It is interesting to note that these leaders in scientific discovery do not hesitate to acknowledge that their previous statements have been superseded by more recent discoveries. It is nothing derogatory to science that what is stated as facts today may be modified tomorrow. This is true, however, only regarding the interpretation of certain discovered facts. Facts never change, but the inferences from them are changeable. For example, it can never be doubted that radium manifests certain forms of energy which until within recent years were wholly unknown; that it will discharge an electroscope; that it will kill certain disease germs and destroy living cells in the human body and accomplish a multitude of other feats. It is the knowledge of the how and the why, and other like processes, which fluctuates, and yet ever forges ahead, because of solid fundamental principles on which to stand." (Tyndall, Through Science to God, p. 174.)

HYPOTHESIS AND THEORY.

Since inferences depend on facts, it follows that they change or may change as new facts are discovered. A fact, once established, remains a permanent part of knowledge. Another fact only adds to the knowledge formerly possessed. This is one of the best distinctions between facts and inferences.

In the beginnings of science few facts were available, and the methods of securing and verifying facts poorly developed. In those days, the inferences drawn from such uncertain knowledge were highly speculative and really of little value. As the methods of science were improved, the inferences became more reliable.

Scientific inferences not only help in explaining the observed phenomena of nature, but they are also great aids in the progress of science. For example, when the law of gravitation was advanced by Newton, many other facts of astronomy pertaining to other bodies than the earth and the sun were also explained, and by such more complete understanding, new astronomical facts were more easily obtained.

It is a common scientific practice, therefore, as facts accumulate, to set up a possible explanation, even if it is only provisional, for it aids the mind in understanding the knowledge gained and make suggestions for further progress. Such inferences are called hypotheses. The motions of the sun over the heavens and the recurring night and day, winter and summer, are regularities or laws; the explanation of these laws by the inference that the earth revolves upon an axis and moves around the sun was an hypothesis. The scientific worker uses hypotheses as a builder uses scaffolding and other temporary frames in the erection of a house. Occasionally, the hypotheses become so supported by increasing facts that no better inferences can be conceived to take their place.

When another inference is suggested as a cause of the explanation proposed by the first hypothesis, we move yet a step further from the facts in the case. Such a second inference is called a theory. When Newton proposed universal attraction as the cause of the movements of the heavenly bodies, he set up a theory of astronomy. Laws, hypotheses, and theories are used indiscriminately in the common speech, and often they do overlap, but there is a clear distinction among them. A law is a description of the observed regularity of a group of facts. An hypothesis is the explanation of this law. A theory is the explanation of the hypotheses, an inference yet further removed from the facts upon which our thinking rests. Often the hypotheses and theories are the same.

"This is the way science advances: observation, description, comparison, generalization, hypothesis, theory. Then more observation, with special reference to the hypothesis or theory. This is known as the method of the working hypothesis: it is also known as the method of multiple hypotheses. It is the most powerful intellectual tool for the discovery of truth known to man. It is the only known rational procedure for arriving at a correct understanding or explanation of the material world." (Gager, op. cit., p. 57.)

Every science has its facts, laws, hypotheses, and theories. In chemistry, the law of multiple proportions declares that if two elements are combined to form more than one compound, the proportions of the two elements vary by simple arithmetical numbers. From this law John Dalton inferred the atomic hypothesis or theory, namely, that all matter is made up of small particles, one peculiar to each element. This inference has been the greatest single factor in the development of modern chemistry.

"An hypothesis is any tentative supposition by the aid of which we endeavor to explain facts by discovering their orderliness. All the methods of science may be said to depend on fruitful hypotheses. So long as it can be put to the test, any hypothesis is better than none. Without the guidance of hypotheses we should not know what to observe, what to look for, or what experiments to make, in order to discover order in nature. For observation not guided by ideas, is blind, just as ideas not tested by observation are empty.

"Hypotheses or suppositions are, of course, used in everyday life and in philosophy and in theology, as well as in science. In science, however, no hypothesis is seriously entertained unless it can be put to the test of observation, either directly or indirectly. Hypotheses may be true even if they cannot be tested and verified. On the other hand, hypotheses that can be tested by observation frequently turn out to be false, when so tested. Nevertheless, science has no use for barren hypotheses, that is, hypotheses which cannot be put to the test. Many hypotheses, which subsequently turn out to be false, were fruitful all the same, because they suggested lines of investigation which, though they led to the repudiation of those hypotheses, also led to the discovery of truths. But hypotheses which are barren at one time may become fruitful at a subsequent period, when suitable scientific instruments and processes have been invented. Thus, for example, most of the hypotheses relating to air were barren until Guericke invented the airpump, and the chemists of the eighteenth century invented suitable processes for the analysis of air." (Wolf, Essentials of Scientific Method, pp. 23-24.)

The careful man does not become so enamored of an hypothesis or a theory that he cannot distinguish it from a fact. The careless person often forgets this distinction, and thereby hangs the tale of many a misadventure in the world of thought and belief.

SCIENTIST AND PHILOSOPHER.

In the world of inference the individual plays a most prominent part. Careful and long continued training will enable almost any man of good ability to be a gatherer of scientific facts. A knowledge of the state of the subject under consideration, an acquaintanceship with the methods of research, some ingenuity in devising experiments and apparatus, care, industry, patience—and behold! out of the great unknown come truth upon truth, fact upon fact, to increase the sum of human knowledge.

Something more and rarer is needed to set up profitable inferences from available facts. To do this there is called into service the creative imagination. Facts and regularities are imagined in many and various relations and the most satisfactory is selected to be a working hypothesis or theory for the further development of the subject. With the mind's eye Newton saw the planets revolving under the force of attraction; and Dalton imagined the atoms as the ultimate particles of matter. The gift of such an imagination is very rare.

When facts, laws, and hypotheses are considered in their relations to one another and the world, an even greater and rarer gift is required, that of philosophic insight. Many of our current quibbles about science and religion come because a good gatherer of scientific fact may be an extremely poor philosopher. The discoverer of a new land cannot always visualize the future of the new country. Nevertheless, a man who has been successful in gathering new knowledge usually feels authorized to set himself up as an interpreter of that knowledge. This often leads to real mischief.

In the field of inference it is more necessary than in the world of fact to know the nature of the leader. Human nature is ever the same, and the scientist is tempted to color truth with personal bias, as when he sets out to defend an hypothesis because it is his product.

In the history of science it is true that many scientists of unquestioned ability in the laboratory have also been great philosophers. It is to these men that we owe the great generalizations that have moved science onward. A man with a stern desire for truth, who has the gift of philosophic insight, is the best type for the development of scientific hypotheses.

"It by no means follows that, because a man has won a name for himself in the field of natural science, his judgments on such problems as Socialism, Home Rule, or Biblical Theology will be necessarily sound. They will be sound or not according as he has carried his scientific method into these fields. He must properly have classified and appreciated his facts, and have been guided by them, and not by personal feeling or class bias in his judgments." (Pearson, Karl, The Grammar of Science, p. 9.)

The Church has no quarrel with hypotheses or theories. It merely insists that they be known for what they are—inferences from facts, and subject to change as new facts accumulate. It further suggests, respectfully, that until the facts give final certainty to the theory, the scientific philosopher refrain from presenting theory as fact to people untrained in science.
