John A. Widtsoe, In Search of Truth: Comments on the Gospel and Modern Thought ( 1930)

IV. THE TRUSTWORTHINESS OF SCIENCE

Science consists of facts, and of inferences drawn from facts. Both are essential in developing an acquaintanceship with nature. Both belong to the experience of every man, for the knowledge of mankind, whether labeled science or not, consists of that which we observe with our senses and that which we infer with the mind. The two may often overlap, yet they are distinct in essence.

The claims made for science by its devotees are many and far-reaching. Some of them tend to overturn completely the views and opinions of the past. A civilization, veritably new, has been produced in this scientific age. The demand for adaptation is often greater than human power. When these new demands go beyond the field of improved physical environment into the world of opinions, beliefs, and faith, it becomes necessary to inquire sharply into their validity. How trustworthy is science? Each major offering must be tested for its truth, before it is accepted as a guide in human conduct.

LIMITATION OF HUMAN SENSES.

The facts of science, the building blocks of modern thought, are won by observation. The keenness of the senses determines the sharpness of the observation. Very definite limitations have been placed upon the senses of man. With his eye he sees only a part of the universe. There are ether waves too long or too short to excite the sense of vision, yet they would reveal, could they be seen, an interesting part of the universe. The human eye sees only a fraction of nature. There are sounds so shrill or so low that they do not affect the ear drum. It is said that the unheard sounds of the universe are the most beautiful, could they be heard. The same may be said of the other human senses. Man lives in an illimitable universe, only a fraction of which may be recognized by his unaided senses.

Not only does man so live among invisible and unheard realities, but within the world allotted to him he sees and hears indistinctly. The trees and grass and flowers on the distant mountain are but as a green carpet to him. The singing of the birds in the distant tree is but a murmur to his ears. Even when things are near, the imperfection of human senses is evident. A measuring stick laid along a given line does not give to the eye the same length every time the measurement is made. The difference may be slight, only a small fraction of an inch, but it appears and reappears.

Man's remedy for the errors due to imperfect senses has been the repetition of observations by one and many observers. When many normal men observe alike, under set conditions, the results are accepted as facts of knowledge.

In view, however, of the sense limitations placed upon man, it is clear that an observer may easily be deceived; and it often happens that many are deceived by appearances that cannot be penetrated by unaided senses. The world is full of such observations parading as facts for our consumption.

At the best, science, built upon man's power of observation, should be exceedingly careful in pasting the fact-label upon observations; and modestly and gratefully humble in presenting its facts for universal acceptance.

LIMITATION OF INSTRUMENTS.

Instruments have been devised as the first and most effective means of overcoming the very definite limitations placed upon human senses. With the telescope, trees and flowers may be seen upon the distant mountainside, and with a microscopic attachment the measurements of a given line come more nearly into agreement. The progress of science has corresponded very nearly with the development of aids to the senses. The invention of a new instrument has nearly always meant the birth of a new branch of science. The history of instruments to aid the senses would be a good history of modern thought.

However, while the telescope enables the eye to see distant objects much more clearly, it does not enable the eye to see everything in the distance. Every scientific instrument is definitely limited in its power of exploring its particular field of universal phenomena. By the use of the telescope, more but not all of the mysteries of the universe are revealed. Greater and greater refinements are sought, so that more powerful instruments must be built to reveal more of the universe.

However, imperfections similar to those that inhere in human senses characterize aids to the senses. The lens of the telescope tends to distort the image produced, and at its edges there are fringes of colored light that hinder clear vision. The chemist's balance, capable, far beyond the unaided power of man, to determine the weights of things, is dependent for its accuracy on knife edges and scale pans, temperature, and surrounding air currents. No instrument is exempt from its inherent limitations.

In the use of instruments, it is always a first need to guard against error due to the imperfections of the instruments and the influence of surrounding unknown or uncontrollable conditions. Every observation by the use of instruments is under suspicion until the possible errors have been fully estimated.

While the possession of instruments enable us to penetrate more completely the region of the unknown, it does not relieve us from the necessity of carefully estimating the truth of our observations, and presenting them humbly for admission to the kingdom of fact. The well trained scientist realizes this, and applies every test to his finding before offering them as permanent additions to our body of established knowledge.

THE INVISIBLE WORLD.

In the domain of fact it may be said that we have only two concerns: to observe all we can with our unaided senses, and to observe as much more as we can with such aids to our senses as may be secured.

In the end, the aim of science is to secure a knowledge of that part of the universe not directly sensed. When the telescope was contrived the veil was lifted, so to speak, from the unknown heavens. The world of minute things revealed by the microscope is wholly beyond the reach of unaided vision. More and more the unseen world has been placed within man's reach, as new kinds of apparatus have been perfected.

In this patient but courageous exploration of the universe, two things have become patent. First, man possesses the power to find ways and means by which the unknown may be made known; second, the unseen world is infinitely vast, so that it yields abundantly of knowledge whenever a seeker for truth ventures into a new field. Progress in penetrating the region of the unknown has been so astoundingly great that today we unhesitatingly go at new explorations with the certainty that new knowledge will be won.

"In the realm of organisms as well as in the domain of things, we have much to do with the invisible. It is not altogether easy to think of a beetle under a hundredth of an inch in length, and this is not the smallest size for an animal with a body. Within that small compass there are organs like those in ourselves—a brain, many muscles, a food-canal, a kind of heart, a respiratory system, and so forth. It is difficult to picture such minute architecture. And how impossible to picture the constitution of the egg-cell within which all that barely visible beetle lay implicit. But an hundredth of an inch is gigantic when we come to minute unicellular or noncellular organisms that do not build up any body." (Thompson, Science and Religion, p. 41.)

A knowledge of the unseen world is the chief result of modern scientific effort. It is noteworthy that the existence of the unseen world into which science is rapidly entering has been declared these many centuries by religion. When we go beyond that which may be directly sensed by man we are in a field declared by religion to be subject to man's knowledge. That science has entered this world with physical instruments rather than with the finer instruments of man's physical nature does not invalidate the claim that both systems of thought are operating in the same field of existence. In all our thinking it must be carefully remembered that the scientific structure that we build is only as trustworthy as are the instruments and observations that produced the facts from which we have built our science. The same holds true of religion.

POSSIBILITY OF SEVERAL INFERENCES.

The care that should be used in establishing the observations of science must be multiplied when scientific inferences are under consideration, for they are interpretations or explanations of facts.

This is due in part to the personal element involved in all kinds of interpretations. The experiences of mankind do not differ markedly, yet their meaning is conceived in a thousand ways. Just as no two pairs of eyes see the same phenomenon of nature precisely alike, so no two animals interpret the phenomena of nature alike. It is possible to apply tests by which many persons are compelled to come to agreement respecting an observation under set conditions, but no such means exist to bring honest thinking men into agreement as to the inferences from the facts established. Each thinker must come to his conclusion independently. It must be, as it were, a conversion.

The reason is evident. The regularities of any set of observations may be interpreted in several ways. The daily westward trail of the sun may result from the motion of the sun around the earth, or the rotation of a spherical earth upon an axis. Before the earth had been circumnavigated, the doctrine of a flat earth could well be defended by the use of existing facts. The ancient Greek doctrine of a stationary earth and a moving sun may be used today to explain most of our astronomical facts.

Every scientific inference now held in repute is the one of several preferred by students of the subject, because it seems to fit in better with existing knowledge. But every inference now held in repute is subject to change as new knowledge is gained or better thinking prevails. Therein lies, or should lie, the essential difference between a fact and an inference.

PROBABILITIES.

When there are several possible explanations of a group of observations, which one shall be accepted and used? That question has to be answered over and over in the progress of science. Those who concern themselves with scientific philosophy undertake to analyze each proposed inference in terms of the known facts and laws. The interpretation to which most, though not necessarily all, of the accumulated observations point, is usually adopted. That is, the weight of probability determines the adoption of a scientific hypothesis and theory. Again, the fundamental distinction between a fact and an inference is emphasized.

As new knowledge is accumulated, the inference may be found inadequate and incorrect and is abandoned, or the new knowledge may confirm it continually, when it grows in probability of truth until it approaches a fact in its certainty. The degree of probability involved in a scientific inference should never be forgotten. If that were remembered we should have less loose talk about science and the domination of the scientific age.

THE ASSUMPTIONS OF SCIENCE.

In fact, the whole structure of science rests upon assumptions which if false make necessary a full reconstruction of our modern thought.

There was no modern science and no modern thought until the doctrine of cause and effect was accepted. At one time men believed that a natural phenomenon was independent of a cause. A given action might today result in one effect and tomorrow in another. Upon such a foundation no certainty could be built. Under such a belief, witchcraft, sorcery, and all manner of abominations flourished. Now, practically all civilized men believe that the surrounding conditions being the same, the same cause always has the same effect, whether now, or a thousand years from now. It is impossible, however, for us of this age to perform the experiments of an age to come. We can only say that whenever it has been tried it has been found to be true in every department of human inquiry that like causes have like effects. While this doctrine is an inference or assumption, yet its universal attestation in every field of endeavor gives it the force of final truth. Yet it remains an assumption.

As knowledge has accumulated, another assumption has been established—one closely akin to the foregoing. In every division of learning the order that prevails in nature has been observed. The heavenly bodies move in perfect regularity through space; the orderly arrangement of electrons, atoms, and molecules constitutes the reliable material world in which we live; the composition of a known substance is constant, and so on. In all scientific endeavor the assumption is made that nature is orderly, not spasmodic. The sun moves from east to west; does not without warning suddenly move from west to east. We live under a reign of law. Orderliness is characteristic of law. This, also, is an assumption, but one of such high probability of truth that it approaches the dignity of a fact. Many thinkers hold that the reign of law that prevails in the universe is sufficient proof that intelligence is the controlling power of nature.

"Perhaps no fact is more momentous than the uniformity of nature. Everyone realizes how necessary is steadfastness of character. One cannot deal with a man who is truthful today but lies tomorrow. Likewise it would be impossible for us to adjust ourselves to a capricious or whimsical world. But ours is a world of unvarying law. The sun does not rise in the east today and in the west tomorrow; fire always burns; unsupported objects always fall to the earth; poisonous substances are always poisonous; spring always follows winter; children always have parents; effects always follow causes.

"Were it not for this unvarying uniformity we could not interpret the past, forecast (even to the slightest degree) the future, nor adjust ourselves to our environment. Health, happiness, commerce, science, education, life itself-all depend on the fact of the uniformity of nature." (Gager, Science and Theology, p. 44.)

There was a time also, when it was believed that matter, and all things in the universe, were created from nothing, and by divine fiat could be annihilated. There was no great progress until that doctrine passed away. It is now held that matter, energy, and all the elemental constituents of the universe are indestructible. The eternal persistence of matter and energy stand by the side of the law of cause and effect and the doctrine of an orderly universe as cornerstones of scientific progress. Yet, it must be admitted that these conceptions are only assumptions, but of such high probability that they cannot reasonably be questioned.

There is yet another assumption lying deep in the foundations of science, namely, that the observations of one man may be verified by another. Under this doctrine men possess like powers and may together bring knowledge out of the dark places of universal existence.

Attention is called to these assumptions upon which all of science is built as a reply to those who carelessly or ignorantly place science, a manmade thing, on a pinnacle of absolute and final truth.

THE RESPONSIBILITY OF LEADERSHIP.

It could scarcely be expected that the rank and file of humanity, busy with the daily cares of life, would familiarize themselves with the principles involved in scientific observation and thinking. The vast majority of people will continue to lean their opinions upon the teachings of those who have wide reputations for scientific knowledge.

"Well-meaning men without poise or any sort of scientific discrimination and highly trained and able men without conscience are about equally grave dangers to the wholesome development of human society." (Millikan, Science and Life, p. 75.)

If that be so, extreme care should be used by scientific leaders in sending abroad disputed views, as if they were facts of observation. Controversies involving scientific knowledge are always about inferences, very seldom about facts. Usually such a controversy concerns itself with the probability of the truth of a doctrine of science. The public does not understand this. Scientists on both sides, warm with enthusiasm for their inferences, defend their respective views with all their might. Stories of such disputes among men of science litter the pages of scientific journals—and that is the place for them. When such controversies are carried into the field of popular interest, the very spirit of science should forbid men of science from stating claims in such a manner as to mislead a public untrained in scientific logic. The recent controversies between science and religion have been most unscientific—and the scientists have often been quite as unscientific as the religionists. Dogmatism is unbecoming in everyone, but especially in a scientist. It is well for him to remember the probabilities lying at the foundation of science.

"But I am not going to place the whole blame for the existence of this situation upon misguided leaders of religion. The responsibility is a divided one, for science is just as often misrepresented as is religion by men of little vision, of no appreciation of its limitations, and of imperfect comprehension of the real role which it plays in human life—by men who lose sight of all spiritual values and therefore exert an influence upon youth which is unsettling, irreligious, and sometimes immoral. The two groups, the one in the religious field, the other in the scientific, are in reality very much alike. They represent essentially the same type of mind, or perhaps I should say, the same stage of intellectual development. Each interprets the Bible, for example, essentially literally, instead of historically, the one to support, the other to condemn. Both may be assumed to be sincere, but the one is wholly unacquainted with science, while presuming to judge it; the other is in almost complete ignorance of what religion is, while scoffing at it. I am ready to admit that it is quite as much because of the existence of scientists of this type of their counterparts in the field of religion that the fnudamentalist controversy has flared up today, and it is high time for scientists to recognize their share of the responsibility and take such steps as they can to remove their share of the cause." (Millikan, op. cit., pp. 42-43.)
