John A. Widtsoe, In Search of Truth: Comments on the Gospel and Modern Thought ( 1930)

V. EVOLUTION

The evolution squabble, undignified and often unfair on both sides, is a good illustration of the unscientific treatment of a scientific subject. It is not the intention here to unravel the various aspects of this controversy, but merely to analyze its parts in accordance with the principles already laid down. If more preliminary analysis had been given the subject for popular education, less contention would have resulted, and both sides of the controversy would have fared better, at least in the opinion of onlookers.

THE FACTS OF EVOLUTION.

As with every doctrine of science, the first question is concerning the facts from which the inferences are drawn. The facts of evolution are well known, widely published and easily understood. Among these facts, the following are of special interest.

Throughout the universe, there are gradations from the elementary to the more complex. Thus, in space there are vast unformed masses of particles, gaseous clouds, also matter formed into stars or suns, but in gaseous condition, and finally heavenly bodies that are solid and more like the earth. With the progress of knowledge there have been observed all stages of cosmic creation from primeval particles unformed and unorganized to suns and stars and planets formed, organized, and cooling. So, also, on the earth, matter is found in elementary states and in all manner of combinations to the most complex compounds found in living beings.

The history of life upon the earth as revealed by the fossil record shows that as time went on, the existing life forms became more and more complex. In the earliest rocks only elementary forms of life have left their fossil records; in the rocks laid down later the fossil records show more advanced forms of life up to the most recent geological formations. This fact is one of the most commonly used in the evolution controversy. The story of paleontology is one of ascending life forms throughout the history of the earth.

The forms of life now existing upon the earth have many close resemblances. For example, man and the vertebrates generally have skeletal structures that are very nearly alike, bone for bone, and use for use. The muscles likewise are similarly constructed and placed. The nervous organization functions alike in man and in lower vertebrates. There are other resemblances not quite so evident as that the blood of man and of many of the lower animals reacts alike to chemical tests. Comparative anatomy and blood tests indicate close resemblances between man and many lower animals and among the different groups of the lower animals themselves.

The embryonic life of man is also used as a fact upon which the doctrine of evolution is built. The embryo of man is at first very simple. As it grows it resembles at various stages the embryos of various lower animals. Organs appear and after a time disappear, organs which remain permanently in the lower animals, until at last, man appears as we know him.

If all of existing creation is properly classified, it is possible to proceed from man, as the highest, by small changes to the lowest form of life. The one great difference, in such a classification, not yet bridged, is that of intellectual power.

Finally, for our purposes, wild animals and plants have been domesticated and often changed materially in bodily form as a result of domestication. And, in recent times, experimental biology has succeeded in affecting many surprising changes in life forms.

Such are some of the main facts of evolution in briefest outline. A vast literature sets forth in detail the facts around which the evolution controversy has raged.

No one, least of all the Church, objects to these facts if properly verified. They are all accepted, acceptable, and welcome. The work of gathering more knowledge in the field of biology is favored by the Church.

THE LAW OF EVOLUTION.

When the foregoing and all other existing facts bearing on the subject are examined, a certain regularity appears.

In space there seems to be a steady process by which unorganized matter is being organized into more and more complex forms. On earth, the elements tend to combine into more elaborate forms. The geological record points to a constant advancement among life forms. Present life seems in the main to move forward.

That is, creation as a whole has been and is moving forward, becoming more complex, evolving or progressing. Exceptions to the rule are in the minority and rather emphasize the usual order.

This regularity of progression in the universe from the simple to the complex, is the inference known as the law of evolution. It has been observed or felt from the earliest day. Before the Greeks, and throughout the history of thought, it appears and reappears. Modern science did not originate it, but emphasized it by the discovery of new facts. The law of evolution, thus stated, does not require that all things, all life, shall have a common origin. It merely declares that everything in the universe is moving onward.

The Church does not oppose such a doctrine of universal advancement. The doctrine or law of progression is one of the best established and best loved in the gospel of Jesus Christ. In no particular is the work of the prophet, Joseph Smith, more in harmony with modern thought. Throughout all time man shall increase, progress, to a Godlike destiny.

ORIGIN OF LIFE.

With the facts of life before him, man naturally begins to speculate. The origin of life is perhaps the most interesting question that man propounds to himself, for if it can be answered, many other difficult questions at once find answer.

In such speculations the inference has been made that if there has been steady development of life forms on earth, they must have descended from a common ancestor. And that ancestor must have come as a faint spark of life from the accidental combination of materials in the primordial inorganic, lifeless slime, under favorable conditions of moisture and temperature. That is the inference set up by the proponents of the ultra-evolutionary hypothesis.

Note, however, that we are now in the realms of inference. Every intelligent mind, who cares to secure the facts, has pretty much the same right to draw his conclusions. As has been said, a good collector of facts may be a poor philosopher; and many a man in the street who has no scientific training may be a first class thinker. There is no reason why all should not examine for themselves the doctrine of the common origin of all life forms from one accidentally formed germ of life. Yet it is upon this inference without proper specification, that much of evolutionary talk has centered.

The weaknesses of this hypothesis of the origin of life are evident. First it violates the doctrine which has the support of all observed facts, that only life begets life. Then if one such life germ could be formed, any number may have been so formed, for we have no right to say that only in one spot, among one group of molecules were the necessary conditions favorable. If many such beginners of life were formed, our life forms probably had different ancestral origins which could account for many divergences not yet understood. One group of forms might have come up independently of an other. Once that is admitted, the whole aspect of evolution is changed.

Moreover, we have no facts that deny the existence of life on other bodies in space. By the very processes of thought used in scientific investigation we are led to infer that there is life on other worlds. If so, germs of life may have been carried through space, settled upon earth, and initiated life on earth. If one such germ could so come from other spheres, others might have come. This view has been held by many eminent scientists. Both Lord Kelvin and Von Helmholz the foremost physicists of England and Germany in their day, held that life on the earth had come from other worlds; and Dr. Arrhenius, one of the masters of science in our day, wrote a book to show the possibility of such an origin of life on earth. Besides, there are many other inferences, by thoughtful, competent workers, concerning the origin of earth life.

No competent scientist can claim for the doctrine that all life on earth came from one germ, fortuitously formed in primeval days, that it is more than an inference subject to later proof. Those who hold to it tenaciously do so because they cannot think of a better inference that will square with the facts to the satisfaction of their minds. But, it is a poor hypothesis, for it has so many alternatives and so few facts in its support. It has received undue consideration, for it has not been properly segregated and placed in the controversy about evolution.

ORIGIN OF MAN.

Another inference involved in the discussion of evolution, but really distinct from the hypothesis of the common origin of life, is that man has descended from the lower animals—that he also dates back to the chance assembling of lifeless matter, in the slimes of the earth's beginning, into an organized form of life.

This inference is based, first, upon the structural similarities of the physical bodies of man and many of the lower animals; secondly, upon the gradually ascending nature of earth's life forms as shown in the fossil record, with man as the latest and culminating figure; and thirdly, upon the discovery of remains of man-like beings dating back to the time of the glacial invasions of the pleistocene era—tens of thousands of years before the recorded human history began.

Conclusions based upon all three of these arguments are at best inferential, and should only be given such value by men of science when used in public discussion. They may appear to many to be the best explanations of the origin of man, but they are far from final. Other explanations may readily be conceived, and new facts may be discovered at any moment to invalidate the present hypothesis. The facts used and the inference set up are too far apart.

If, as has been suggested, the doctrine of the common origin of life rests upon an insecure foundation, the evolutionary doctrine of the origin of man suffers in like proportion for it does not follow as a logical necessity that structural resemblances prove organic relationships. The long story of life as read in the rocks is far from being fully told. At best we make inferences to cover the gaps in the story.

The man-like remains of great antiquity found in various countries are undoubtedly genuine. Sometimes such few parts of a skeleton are found that the reconstruction of the whole individual implies considerable guesswork. But, those engaged in such labors are conscientious and while their enthusiasms may often run away with them, they are quite ready to admit mistakes as later knowledge appears. But, even allowing primitive, man-like beings on earth in early days, we cannot say with assurance, except as we favor the inference, that man has descended from these beings.

The whole question as to the origin of man from the point of view of science must be admitted to be as yet in a state of uncertainty. The doctrine of organic evolution is one explanation, but there are many others. Again, the difference between a fact and an inference must be sharply maintained.

The doctrine of the origin of man as held by the Church has not suffered from the advancement of modern biology, anthropology and archaeology.

THE VIEW OF THE CHURCH.

The Church, which comprehends all truth, accepts all the reliably determined facts used in building the hypothesis of organic evolution. It does not question the observed order of advancement or progression in nature, whether called the law of evolution or by any other name. In every field, the Church encourages the search for knowledge and welcomes each new fact as it appears.

The inference from the facts and law of evolution must however, be treated as hypotheses or theories. They must be weighed by the logic of the mind; the probability of their truth must be sought; and credence given them in due proportion to the evidence secured. They must be tested by other truth already firmly established.

The doctrine of organic evolution, as any other inference of science, is subject to constant change, with the development of new knowledge. It has already changed so much that to treat it as an established fact and to build a course of conduct and belief around it, is both foolish and unscientific. If the difference between fact and inference had been held clearly in mind, much of the absurd talk on the subject would have been eliminated. While all men of learning accept the facts and general law of evolution or the law of progression among living beings, there are differences among the leaders of thought respecting the inferences regarding the origin of life and the origin of man. One need only consult the current periodicals and recent books to learn that divergent views are held concerning the probability of truth in these inferences.

The Church, by its own methods of winning truth, real and true to hosts of men and women who have used them, declares that man is an eternal being. That which he is, is everlasting. It had no beginning; it cannot end. Man is not inferior in eternal quality to the elements of which he is built. As an eternal being he lived before he came upon earth. He was begotten in that pre-existent state by God, whom we worship as the Creator of the earth, and the Father of our spirits. From the beginning, man has been man. How the eternal spirit of man became associated, first, with the mortal body is not known; nor is the whole career of mankind on this earth known. But man was always man; else he is not eternal; nor a very child of God. True, upon the earth, as in the time before this, he is subject to the unending law of progress, and throughout the endless ages he has developed and progressed, but his relationship as a child of God has always existed.

This doctrine does not conflict with any fact of science; it clashes only with certain theories acknowledged to be inferences from the facts in our possession, and subject to change as knowledge advances. It is a doctrine that can be most easily comprehended by a human mind not rendered nearsighted by laboratory walls or preconceived ideas. It does not abrogate the law of evolution in its proper and wide sense.

In this age of advancing knowledge we must not allow our vision to become earth-bound. The heavenly bodies are not so far away as they seemed a generation ago. Besides, assuming a God who really has power in the universe and love for humanity, who is something more than the impersonal sum of natural forces, the doctrine of man's earth-origin, as held by the Church, need not be a stumbling block to intelligent, forward-looking, progressive persons.

No one should exchange the evidence of generations for a hypothesis, unable to stand without the scaffolding support of men who themselves differ as to the truth that may come out of the search. In the case of present-day views of the origin of man, the old is better than the new, no matter how bright and burnished the modern offering appears to be.

It must always be remembered that only a part of human knowledge, accurate and dependable, is obtained by the use of physical instruments. Man possesses many powers of spiritual but reliable nature, by the use of which knowledge may be garnered.
