John A. Widtsoe, In Search of Truth: Comments on the Gospel and Modern Thought ( 1930)

VII. THE DUTY OF INQUIRY

The increasing body of human knowledge and derived conclusions, raises important questions. Shall a man accept new facts and inferences upon the authority of those who stand high in their respective fields of knowledge? Or, shall he attempt to determine for himself whether the new offerings are true or false?

AUTHORITY AND FACTS.

Certainly, no man can in person survey the whole field of knowledge and check upon the accuracy of the multitude of observations that form the ground-work of science. He must of necessity depend upon the honesty, care and skill of those who, as trained experts, are advancing the boundaries of learning. When a man of high standing announces a new discovery we are justified in accepting it with little question, but when the announcement comes from one of lesser renown it is well to withhold judgment, until the concensus of scientific opinion favors the discovery. Every new scientific observation is sooner or later repeated by others, and only when many persons have confirmed it, does it rise to the dignity of a fact. Even the discoveries of those who stand highest in the scientific world are not exempt from such scrutiny. For example, some time ago, Dr. R. A. Millikan announced that he had discovered a new powerful radiation, which he denominated cosmic rays. Promptly, other investigators undertook to check up on Dr. Millikan's results. Ultimately the accuracy of the observation will be confirmed or disproved. The facts of science ripen with age. We can afford to accept those that have stood the test of years.

Authority has its distinct limitations, even in the field of discovery.

AUTHORITY AND PHILOSOPHY.

The conclusions or inferences drawn from the facts of science can seldom be accepted upon bare authority. Such conclusions are the product of thinking rather than of observation, and all intelligent men may and should think clearly. Experts in gathering facts do not always use their facts as well as do common men. Usually, the larger conclusions of science project into the very structure of our beliefs and opinions. No one is justified in accepting off hand, upon the authority of others, views that may shape conduct or determine daily happiness. Some men have concluded from the order observed in the universe that there is no God; others, that the orderly movements of the heavenly bodies confirm the belief in God. One does not need to be a trained astronomer, familiar with instruments of precision and the higher mathematics, to reason upon the facts of astronomy. Given a reasonable familiarity with the findings of modern astronomy, and anyone should be able to decide for himself whether they indicate the existence of a supreme ruler. True, as more capable persons accept a conclusion, the more justified we are in accepting it, but undue leaning upon authority in matters that we can decide for ourselves is always dangerous. Only the gullible swallow an opinion simply because someone has labeled it science.

USE OF AUTHORITY.

Old opinions are subject to similar treatment. Holding to a certain belief for many years does not give it validity. The question must always be,—Have we, for ourselves, examined this or that belief and to the best of our ability found it true and worth retaining? Unverified opinions, cluttering our minds, have no more right than new opinions not subjected to inquiry.

Of course, in days of youth or until we have attempted our own solutions we must lean our opinions upon those in authority. We must not cast off all belief because it has not been verified by us. The process of verification is often long and tortuous. Thus the younger members of a family accept, until they are maturely able to settle matters for themselves, the teachings of their parents and older people; likewise, accept the guidance of those who are wise, until they have had the opportunity to make careful inquiry into the matters at issue. We must be anchored either to those of authority or to our own sober findings.

INDIVIDUAL AUTHORITY.

But can a man, not a specialist, determine for himself the truth, say of a scientific theory? Yes: and no proposition of consequence in human life can properly ask for consideration unless it is susceptible of analysis and proof by the person to whom it is offered: It is a characteristic of truth that it may be understood by the average human mind. In fact, it is doubtful if any statement which confuses the mind is true. Science is built up of a multitude of observations or facts, each easily understood. It is the number rather than the quality that overawes us. The conclusions drawn from these many facts are always simple, and within human comprehension. Personal responsibility for the opinions we hold cannot be shifted on the ground that truth can not be understood. The more certain the truth, the simpler it is, and the more easily understood. Therefore, a man may know for himself.

OUR FIRST DUTY.

Truth is the most precious of the possessions of man. It is holy. By its use alone can man realize his deepest hopes and achieve his highest destiny. Always, truth brings happiness; and untruth, misery. This is equally so in physical, mental, or spiritual affairs.

The search for truth is, therefore, our first and highest duty. Whatever a man's labor may be he must make sure that it is founded in truth, and he must, always, eagerly and with all his might seek for new and additional truth. Since error often masquerades as truth, and since our preconceived ideas, our traditions, tend to becloud our brains, he must be on guard against involuntary deception. It is pitiful to seek truth, honestly, then fail to recognize it as it passes by; and finally to accept error by mistake. Truth must be verified, by personal effort, before it is incorporated into our lives.

As long as men were content to accept opinions without verification, the dark ages ruled the world. There was no progress. Our modern day, with its countless blessings, dawned when men recognized their duty and asserted their right of personal free inquiry concerning all matters affecting their lives. As the responsibility of that duty and that right has been felt by men, every human concern has prospered. Men inquired into the nature of the universe, and science was born; they inquired into man's relationship to God, and religious freedom was born. Every forward step has been the result of inquiry. The duty of inquiry is merely the duty to search out truth.

RELIGIOUS INQUIRY.

The view has been expressed that man's inquiry should stop short of matters of religion. That cannot be so, for the aim of religion is but to reveal the truth concerning God, man, and the meaning of life, that is, the truth of all things. By its very definition, the gospel includes all truth, therefore, the searcher after scientific or any other truth, to a degree, is searching out religion. Certainly it is the duty of man to seek spiritual truth and to seek it for himself. The authority which exists in the Church does not relieve a person from learning the truth of the gospel for himself; it is rather an aid in that pursuit. In fact, it is a gospel requirement that every person should know the truth of the gospel for himself. He may only know a part of the whole truth, but, as far as he goes, he should know for himself. Salvation is an individual matter. "Blessed are thou—for thou hast inquired of me." (D&C 6:14.)

The basic doctrine of the agency of may confirms the view that the duty of inquiry concerning truth rests upon every man. Every living soul is a free agent. That was determined in the Great Council before the foundations of the earth were laid. In the words of Lehi "Wherefore, men are * * * free to choose liberty and eternal life through the great mediation of all men or to choose captivity and death, according to the captivity and power of the devil." (2 Nephi 2:27.) Such freedom could not be exercised unless men had the right to inquire into all truth as a precedent to choosing for themselves. The doctrine of progression, likewise, implies that man must add truth to truth, not merely by being told, but by verifying each new truth to his own full satisfaction. There is a vast and ample scriptural confirmation of the duty and right of inquiry.

EXAMPLE OF JOSEPH SMITH.

Joseph Smith, the Prophet, set the example. He relates that in his fifteenth year there was a great religious revival in his neighborhood. The people were contending some for one Church, some for another. Four of his father's family, including his mother and his older brother Hyrum, had joined one of the proselyting churches. He kept aloof from all of them, for "so great were the confusion and strife among the different denominations, that it was impossible for a person young as I was, and so unacquainted with men and things, to come to any certain conclusion who was right and who was wrong. * * * In the midst of this war of words and tumult of opinions, I often said to myself, 'What is to be done? Who of all these parties are right? or, are they all wrong together? While I was laboring under the extreme difficulties caused by the contests of these parties of religionists, I was one day reading the Epistle of James, first chapter and fifth verse, which reads: "If any of you lack wisdom let him ask of God, that giveth to all men liberally, and upbraideth not; and it shall be given him.'" He then sought the Lord and received the marvelous First Vision which initiated the restoration of the gospel in these days. Certainly Joseph Smith recognized the duty and exercised the right of, inquiry.

Brigham Young, likewise, recognized this principle. He says: "All rational beings have an agency of their own, and according to their own choice they will be saved or damned—the volition of the creature is free; this is a law of their existence."

RATIONAL INQUIRY.

The duty and right of inquiry may however be used properly or improperly, depending upon the motive actuating the investigation. There may be constructive or destructive inquiry. A destructive inquiry is usually a search for error and weakness. All things under man's dominion are imperfect. Well as it is to know these imperfections, it is better to know the truth that resides in human accomplishments. Whoever goes through life searching for error, (and of course finding it) misses the obvious truth that lies in his way. Soon his senses become impaired and he relishes only the taste of error. Constructive inquiry has moved the world onward. Truth is stamped upon the structural units of our modern civilization. In the search for truth, error is the chaff blown from the grain. And indeed, it is by the token of truth that error is best recognized. Many men are fooling themselves by looking for flaws in their church or nation. By seeking truth and trying its value by faithful use they would come to sound conclusions. A good citizen, whether of business, state or church, in the exercise of his right of inquiry, seeks out and uses that which is good and soon discovers by elimination that which is mean and ugly and finds also remedies therefor.

Alchemy and astrology, founded in error, have brought only unhappiness and confusion into the world, chemistry and astronomy founded in truth, are among the world's blessings. The danger that lurks in the destructive attitude of mind is consuming—it destroys most completely the one who harbors it. We find that which we seek.

THE OPEN MIND.

The open mind is the sign of growth and progress. To stand before the known and undiscovered universe, in full desire for truth, and ready to accept it, insistent only that it must be the truth and nothing else, that has been and ever will be the attitude of those who have done most for the human race. The open mind is ready to accept truth; but more ready to reject error. It tests and tries; it philosophizes and prays; then it goes on its way rejoicing, ready for more truth at the next turn of the road.

And those who love truth will yield themselves to it, with gratitude in their hearts.
