During His ministry, Jesus Christ restored sight to the blind and mobility to the lame. He restored the higher law of love and forgiveness. He restored Melchizedek Priesthood authority to act in God’s name. Yet one of the most important things He restored is rarely discussed: He restored the sacred nature of the family and marriage by re-establishing a noble image of women and children.1

In order to appreciate the dramatic change that Jesus made to the role of women and their relationships, we need to place His teachings in the context of His day. How did Jewish, Greek, and Roman men treat women and children? Combing through their volumes of documents, letters, poems, plays, histories, and holy books leaves the impression that in many cases their family relations went awry.2 We find startling differences when we compare their pages of misunderstandings, oppression, and dysfunctional relationships, to the New Testament stories of Jesus’ tender interactions with women and children.

Christ made abrupt and radical changes that restored women to a place of value with eternal potential. This book opens a window into family life during the time of the New Testament to better appreciate Jesus’ transformative teachings about women—teachings that are still influencing families today.3 This introduction provides a short historical background. For more historical definitions background see Appendices 1-4. 1 Many scholars have looked at family life in the ancient world. See the bibliography for studies used in this study. 2 For example, from the Apocrypha: Joshua ben Sira in, Ecclesiasticus (also known as Wisdom of Sirach or Sirach, 180 BC), Esdras (c.90 BC- AD 96), and Fourth Maccabee (63 BC). There are many writings from contemporaries of New Testament figures such as Philo Judaeus of Alexandria (20 BC to AD 50), Titus Flavius Josephus, the Jewish-Roman historian (AD 37-101), Apocalypse of Moses, Assumption of Moses (AD 7-29), Apocalypse of Baruch (c. AD 50-100), First Book of Enoch (c. 167 BC-AD 14), Second Enoch (c. AD 1-50), The Psalms of Solomon (c. 69-40 BC), etc. To gather context, even though the Mishnah was not redacted until AD 220, it claims to record rabbis from the Pharisaic tradition who lived during the late Second Temple era. 3 The impact of the Lord’s teachings continues to bless the world. Bruce C. Hafen, “Covenant Hearts: Why Marriage Matters and How to Make it Last,” (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book, 2005). Shortly before he presented the “Proclamation to the World,” President Gordon B. Hinckley said, “In my judgment, the greatest challenge facing
