The ancient Jewish world was patriarchal (as were Roman, Egyptian, and Mesopotamian societies).4 This hierarchal system directly impacted interpersonal relationships. Generally speaking, at the time of the New Testament, Jewish women and children were kept at home as much as possible so as not to be exposed to things of the world. The public domain was man’s territory. Only a husband could deal with land and financial matters. Many did not treat men and women equally and considered women inferior “in all things.”5 In some cases, women were blamed for all evil.6 Women were only “sanctified through the deeds of men . . . the anomaly of women is worked out . . . by assigning her to a man’s domain.”7

Most often, Jewish records spanning two centuries before and after the New Testament express little evidence that their authors understood the benefits of a mutually supportive, sensitive, affection-based companionship with one’s spouse—let alone the relationship’s eternal importance. Eve and her daughters were seen as the cause of most troubles in life: “Of the woman came the beginning of sin, and through her we all die.”8 Many shared this view and felt that women should be “punished for bringing death into the world,” hence they must suffer to bring forth life.9 At least some of the men of the time, blamed Eve and her daughters for perpetuating evil on earth.

Unlike the scriptural account of Genesis 3:20 that records Adam naming Eve, or “Life” in Hebrew, “because she was the mother of all living,” we find an interpretation giving the earth the title of “the mother of all things,” not Eve. The same teacher went so far as to blame women for men’s sins, “For from garments cometh a moth, and from a woman the iniquity of a man.”10 This became a breeding ground for pride: “Give not the power of thy soul to a woman, lest she enter

Ann Jackson, “Strong Families Key to Future, President Hinckley tells Colorado Forum,” Ensign (July, 2003). 4 Paula S. Fass, this nation is the problem of the family, brought on by misguided parents and resulting in misguided children.” Lisa

The Routledge History of Childhood in the Western World (New York City, NY: Routledge, 2013).

For more see Appendix 4.

5 Flavius Josephus, trans. William Whiston, Josephus Complete Works: Against Apion (Grand Rapids, MI: Kregel Publications, 1978), II. 25.

6 Ben Sira, Ecclesiasticus, 25:17; “The wickedness of a woman is all evil,” and 25:19, “All wickedness is but little to the wickedness of a woman: let the portion of a sinner fall upon her.” Ecclesiasticus was preserved in the Apocrypha (which was included in the Latin Vulgate and some King James Versions, KJV), as well as in the Greek collection of Jewish sacred writings known as the Greek Septuagint (LXX) and portions found in the Dead Sea Scrolls, Masada, and Cairo Geniza.

7 Jacob Neusner, ed., Dictionary of Judaism in the Biblical Period (Peabody, MA: Hendrickson, 1999), 676. Furthermore, the “biblical society was defined in terms of its male members as indicated by the census in Exodus 20, and in Numbers 1 and 26, which counted adult males but no women or children” 673. That said, a census was often taken to know the military potential or tax base, which corresponds only to males being counted. 8 Ben Sira, Ecclesiasticus, 25:24.

9 nd Fred Skolnik and Michael Berenbaum, eds., Encyclopedia Judaica, 2 ed. 22 vols. (Detroit, NYC, San Francisco: Thomson Gale, 2007), 21:161.

10 Ben Sira, Ecclesiasticus, 42:13-14. These misogynist statements continued as Philo, a contemporary of the apostle Paul, wrote, “Why then do you prevent and misapply the name of good-will which is a most excellent and humane one, and conceal the truth, exhibiting as a veil an effeminate and womanly disposition? For are not those persons womanly in whose minds reason is overcome by compassion?” Philo, Special Laws, 29.3.156. upon thy strength, and thou be confounded.”11 As we shall see, this type of baggage damaged the image of women and family relationships.12

But it was not all bad.13 Jewish thought at the time covered a spectrum of attitudes toward women and children.14 Positive sentiments such as this one were recorded: “Children, and the building of a city shall establish a name, but a blameless wife shall be counted above them both.”15 More frequently, though, the positive feelings were a bit reserved: “If she [a wife] have a tongue that can cure, and likewise mitigate and shew mercy: her husband is not like other men.”16

This cultural stereotype infiltrated the many aspects of family life and inhibited relationships for generations. According to the rabbinic law, those who served belonged to the inferior class of women, children, and slaves.17 By the time of the New Testament, respect, cooperation, and love between spouses were not necessarily the aim of marriage. Righting these wrongs was one of the powerful legacies of Jesus’ ministry. By placing the cultural background adjacent to Jesus’ teachings, one can see the emancipation He offered. The truths He taught transformed the cultural worth of women.

11 Ben Sira, Ecclesiasticus, 9:2. The quote was proceeded by, “Be not jealous over the wife of thy bosom, lest she shew in thy regard the malice of a wicked lesson” (9:1).

12 Dallin H. Oaks, “The Great Plan of Happiness,” Ensign (Nov 1993), 73. “Some Christians condemn Eve for her act, concluding that she and her daughters are somehow flawed by it. Not the Latter-day Saints! Informed by revelation, we celebrate Eve’s act and honor her wisdom and courage in the great episode called the Fall.” 13 As a sampling, I examined Ben Sira’s Ecclesiasticus for each use of “wife / woman / women” throughout the entire text. I found 41 negative references to women and 18 positive examples. 14 C.D. Yonge, trans., The Works of Philo: Complete and Unabridged (Peabody, MA: Hendrickson Publishers, Reprint 2004), 817. One of those positive finds is from Philo’s teachings. He described Abraham and Sarah’s relationship in glowing terms: “but Abraham, marveling more and more at the love of his wife for her husband thus continually being renewed and gaining fresh strength, . . . and also of the honour in which he held his wife.” The quote actually discusses Abraham’s taking Hagar to wife. The ellipsis portion continues, “and also at her spirit of forecast so desirous to provide for the future, takes to himself the handmaid who had been approved by her to the extent of having a son by her; though as those who give the most clear and probably account say he cohabited with her only till she became pregnant; and when she conceived, which she did after no long interval, he then desisted from all connection with her, by reason of his natural continence.”

15 Ben Sira, Ecclesiasticus, 40:19.

16 Ben Sira, Ecclesiasticus, 36:25. Also, “The beauty of a woman cheereth the countenance of her husband, and a man desireth nothing more” (36:24).

17 Jacob Neusner, The Economics of the Mishnah (Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 1990), 27. “One should train for the job all those who are employed on the estate, whether slaves or children or women.” David Sedley, Oxford Studies in Ancient Philosophy, XXV (Oxford, England: Oxford University, winter 2003), 213. Josephus, Against Apion. 2.25. Philo, A Volume of Questions and Solutions to Questions which arise in Genesis, I.29. Joachim Jeremias, Jerusalem in the Time of Jesus (Philadelphia: Fortress Press, 1969), 367.
