Women Released from their Cultural Baggage

,

Jesus entered a society with many deeply instilled barriers to His teachings. He shocked his audiences with declarations of His Messiahship (i.e., Luke 4:21-28). Equally as shocking, He appreciated and validated women and children (Mark 14:4-6; Luke 7:39; 10:40; etc.). As decisively as He cleansed the temple, Jesus attacked the cultural falsehoods that surrounded practices of family life in his time. He tore down false practices and notions regarding women, children, and family relationships. He denounced centuries of harmful traditions that destroyed marital partnerships and led to misogyny.

The four Gospels describe Jesus refusing to follow the traditional social barricades that impeded relationships between men and women. As we read, the Lord speaks to women (John 4:7-27), encourages their education (Luke 10:39-42), heals them (Mark 7:25-29), asks them to speak out as witnesses (Matthew 28:5-10), touches them (Mark 5:30-34; Matthew 28:9), and teaches the eternal nature of their marriage relationships (Matthew 5:3-11; John 17:21; Ephesians 5:25, 31). In contrast to the Pharisaic culture and practice from the time, Jesus’ interactions with women were offensive (i.e. Luke 7:39; John 4:27; etc.).

To demonstrate how dramatically Jesus changed family relationships, one must understand what family life was like and how it contrasted with what Jesus taught. By placing the Lord’s teachings and doctrine within their social context, His teachings become overpowering in their significance and beauty. This chapter highlights five cultural customs that affected women and then contrasts them with Christ’s empowering changes.

I. Segregation

Cultural Background and Baggage

Jewish pharisaic traditions kept men and women physically segregated.18 Men and women “should not mingle.”19 This physical segregation led to emotional segregation, which developed into misunderstandings. Women were seen as a cause of temptation, so they were veiled, silenced, and kept away from men as much as possible.20 Especially in the city, Jewish women were discouraged from going outside in order to avoid being seen by men. This protocol existed in Jerusalem and extended to other large cities where Jews lived. For example, in Alexandria, the third largest city in the Greco-Roman world, the Jewish philosopher Philo (20 BC to AD 50), described his view of the ideal separation of men and women in public:

Marketplaces and council-halls, law-courts and gatherings, and meetings where a large

number of people are assembled, and open-air life with full scope for discussion and action

– all these are suitable to men both in war and peace. The women are best suited to the

indoor life which never strays from the house . . . A woman then, should not be a

busybody, meddling with matters outside her household concerns, but should seek a life of

seclusion.21

This view of segregated women was accepted for centuries as the social norm at the time of the New Testament. A more relaxed attitude about gender separation existed outside of the cities. Although most girls and women remained at home, as one historian described it, “confined at home as in a prison.”22

The segregation continued inside wealthy Pharisee and Sadducee homes with separate quarters exclusive to members of their gender.23 Shortly before and during the time of the New Testament, when these traditions were heavily entrenched in Jerusalem and beyond, contemporaries described segregated living spaces where women “were always kept in seclusion and did not even appear at the house-door, and their unmarried daughters, who were limited to the women's quarter, women who for modesty's sake shunned the eyes of men, even their closest relatives.”24 Even in the home, though, if a male guest came for a meal, the women and girls

18 Philo, De Specialibus Legibus (3.169). Philo explained that unmarried girls were confined to the female quarters of a house, while married women could go anywhere in the home, unless a strange male came in, then she would have gone to the female quarters in the back of the house. Also see John H. Elliott, Anchor Bible: 1 Peter (New York City, NY: Random House-Doubleday, 1964), 568. “As roles and status were gender-specific and clearly demarcated, so was the social space that was proper to males (public) and females (domestic, private).” 19 Mishnah, Middot 2.5; also see Charlesworth, Jesus and Temple, 15. 20 Geoffrey W. Bromiley, International Standard Bible Encyclopedia, B.L. Bandstra and A.D. Verhey, “Sex,” 4. 431. To “avoid tempting another to immorality; thus they were veiled in public and segregated as much as possible from men. At the synagogues and Herod’s Temple they were excluded from the court of the men.” 21 Judaeus Philo, Special Laws III., 7 vols. (London: William Heinemann, Ltd., 1967), 3.169, 171. 22 Skolnik, Encyclopedia Judaica, 21:161.

23 Philo, Philo’s Flaccus, 70.

24 Philo of Alexandria, Pieter Willem van der Horst, trans., Philo’s Flaccus: The First Pogrom (Boston, MA: Brill, 2003), 70. Scholars refer to this time as the Hasmonean (140 BC to 37 BC) and Herodian (37 BC to AD 68). were not to eat at the same table, but could silently interact with the company as servants.25 Pious Jerusalem families limited their interaction by gender except on rare occasions.

Synagogue worship was also segregated.26 Men were commanded to attend their Sabbath worship services, but women were not. If a woman chose to attend a synagogue service, she sat separately. Within a few decades after the time of the New Testament, rabbis added separate entrances for men and women and lattice barriers to keep the women unseen and unheard.27 Women did not read the Scriptures, give their opinion, teach, or pray verbally during the service, but they were allowed to listen in silence.28 Gender separation and silencing in religious meetings led to prejudices about the religious nature of women.29 If participating in the synagogue worship taught one to be more holy, then women missed out.

Inside one’s home, women participated in religious worship, especially in maintaining the kosher food laws, Sabbath observance, lighting the candles, offering table blessings, and reciting the shema (Deuteronomy 6:4-9; 11:13-21; and Numbers 15:37-41).30 Much of the Jewish worship was communal and occurred outside the home, and in that sphere, women’s worship was restricted compared to men. Men felt it an honor to have 613 commandments and pitied women who were only required to live six commandments.31

25 Leonard J. Swidler, Jesus was a Feminist: What the Gospels Reveal about His Revolutionary Perspective (Landham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield, 2007), 76. John Baggett, Seeing Through the Eyes of Jesus: His Revolutionary View of Reality and His Transcendent Significance for Faith (Grand Rapids, MI: Eerdmans, 2008), 128.

26 Michael Avi-Yonah, “Synagogue Historical Roots,” Skolnik, Encyclopedia Judaica, 19. 364-366; also 354-355. In the diaspora there is evidence of “women [acting] as donors to the synagogues and participants within manumission ceremonies. In general, the climate within the diaspora seems to have been more conducive for allowing women to assume more active roles within the synagogue.” The New Testament mentions specific synagogues in Capernaum (Mark 1:21), Nazareth (Luke 4:16), Damascus (Acts 9:2), Antioch in Pisidia (Acts 13:14), Iconium (Acts 14:1), Thessalonica (Acts 17:1), Berea (Acts 17:10), Corinth (Acts 18:8), and Ephesus (Acts 18:19). In addition there were synagogues in Jerusalem for specific immigrants such as the synagogue of the Libertines, Cyrenians, and Alexandrians (Acts 6:9).

27 Jeremias, Jerusalem in the Time of Jesus, 374. Archeologists found a lattice separation for gender in a Mesopotamian synagogue from AD 245. Between the third and seventh century, galleries were built to keep the women on separate floors from the men in addition to their separate entrance. Michael Avi-Yonah, “Synagogue Historical Roots,” Skolnik, Encyclopedia Judaica, 19. 364-366. 28 Mishnah, Kiddushin, 4:13. Dan W. Clanton, The Good, the Bold, and the Beautiful (New York, NY: T & T Clark International, 2006), 23; “There is no firm evidence for women functionaries” in leadership roles. Most women were illiterate, but even those who could read were discouraged from reading the Law or Torah (Genesis, Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers, Deuteronomy).

29 As an example of the evolution of limitations placed on woman’s religious opportunities, we read in Deuteronomy 11:18-19, “Lay up these my words in your heart and in your soul. . . . And ye shall teach them your children.” But sometime before 132 BCE when the Greek Septuagint (LXX) translated this passage, they interpreted it as “you shall teach them to your sons.” Later still, after the destruction of the temple and the rabbinic schools took over Judaism, we read a commentary on these verses in Sifre Deuteronomy 46, “. . . your sons and not your daughters.” Different schools of thought debated how much religious law a father should teach his daughter as we will discuss in chapter 7, but all sons had the religious duty to learn the Torah.

30 Clanton, The Good, the Bold, and the Beautiful, 24; “From kosher laws to the recitation of the shema, from private prayer to Sabbath practices, not only would women have been present, they would have been active participants due to their dominance in the private, domestic sphere.”

31 Mishnah, Berakhoth 3:3, outlines the six commandments for women: 1) Light the Sabbath lamp or candles in their homes, 2) Offer table blessings over the food (also required for children and minors), 3) Prepare the dough offering, 4) Say eighteen benedictions (see footnote 51) which was also required for slaves and minors, 5) Maintain the mezuzah on the door of their homes, 6) Observe the laws of niddah that dealt with menstruation.

An element of protection underscored these rules: girls were segregated in hopes of keeping

them chaste. From the Apocrypha, the Jewish leader Ben Sira counseled fathers to keep an eye on their unmarried daughters, even inside their homes, to avoid all risks of their being defiled, “lest she make thee a laughingstock to thine enemies, and a byword in the city, and a reproach among the people, and make thee ashamed before the multitude.”32 The Jewish code of law, or Mishnah, recorded an example of “a young maid [who] once went out to draw water from the spring and she was forced.”33

Yet for the most part, these confining regulations oppressed and demeaned women.34 They

created a culture of fear and mistrust between the sexes.35 This gave rise to a lack of appreciation and reinforced negative gender stereotypes of women as dangerous temptresses.36 Segregation often inhibited a woman’s ability to contribute within her community, to serve outside of her home, to join in public worship, and to access education.37 Changes by Jesus

Jesus did not live by these segregating restrictions for women. He refused to isolate women

and treated them as valued individuals. He allowed women and children to join the group of five thousand and later the group of four thousand who gathered to hear Him teach in Galilee (Matthew 14:21; 15:38).38 He refuted those who wanted to send the women and children away

Woman (Mark 10:13-14; Matthew 15:23). He welcomed women to stay in the same room as

with an men (Luke 7:38-40). He did not segregate the unclean, whether they were sick or

Issue sinful or social outcasts.

Of All three synoptic Gospels recorded Jesus’ remarkable interaction with an

Blood

unclean woman on a crowded street in Galilee (Matthew 9:19-22; Mark 5:24-34;

Luke 8:43-48). The story begins with a throng of people accompanying Jesus across town to the home of Jairus, a ruler of the synagogue, to heal Jairus’ daughter. En route, an “unclean” woman tries to touch Jesus to receive His healing virtue. This woman was labeled “unclean” because, for over a decade, she had an “issue of a blood,” possibly a hemorrhaging uterus.39

More specifically, for the past twelve years, the Mosaic law forbade her from going out in public, touching anyone, worshipping in the synagogue or temple, or sharing her husband’s bed (Leviticus 15:19-28). As a result of her condition, her husband had probably divorced her

32 Ben Sira, Ecclesiasticus, 42:11.

33 Mishnah, Ketuboth 1:10.

34 Ben Witherington III, Grace in Galacia (London and NY: T&T Clark International, 2004), 271, credited to Rabbi Judah b. Elai (c. AD 150) in Berakoth 7:18 and Jer Berakoth 13b; and to Rabbi Meier (c. AD 150) in Bab Menahoth 43b. Jewish rabbis from the second century after Christ supposedly began their morning prayers by saying, “Blessed be He that He did not make me a Gentile; blessed be He that He did not make me a slave; blessed be He that He did not make me a woman.”

Woman in the World of Jesus (Philadelphia, PA: Westminster Press, 1978), 34. 36 Skolnik, 35 Charles, The Apocrypha and Pseudepigrapha, 2.134. See page 4 in this book, and Evelyn and Frank Stagg, Encyclopedia Judaica, 21:161

37 Ben Sira, Ecclesiasticus, 26:14-15.

38 Interestingly the Scripture records there were “five thousand men, beside women and children,” meaning that the women and children were allowed to be there by the Lord, but not counted by whoever recorded the event (Matthew 14:21; 15:38). This gives us a feel for the cultural practices that did not include women in their tallies. 39 Julie Smith, “A Redemptive Reading of Mark 5:25-34,” Interpreter (2015). Smith skillfully argues that “the story of the woman with the hemorrhage of blood redeems the story of the fall of Eve by paralleling and then inverting that text.”

(Deuteronomy 24:1).40 Since physical disabilities were seen as the consequence of sin, and a woman’s menses made her “unclean” (Ezekiel 36:17-18), we assume that at least some of her neighbors and family had probably accused her of wickedness and rejected her.41 The Gospel of Mark also included that she was destitute because she spent all her money on medical help (5:26).

Yet this faith-filled and determined woman sought healing from the Lord: “If I may touch

but his clothes, I shall be whole” (Matthew 9:21; Mark 5:28). To do so, she broke the segregation protocol that had banished her to a life of seclusion—she went outside into a crowded street and tried to hide herself in the pack following Jesus. When she touched His outer garment, or the hem of His tunic, Jesus immediately felt that “virtue has gone out of me,” or more literally, “power has gone forth from me” (Luke 8:46 KJV and RSV). Jesus gave part of Himself in order to heal the woman physically. This in turn led to her healing socially and emotionally as well. It took amazing bravery for the woman to answer Jesus’ direct question, “Who touched me?” (Mark 5:31).

In that throng of townspeople hurrying through the village to Jairus’ home, she showed her

faith, courage, and humility; “When the woman saw that she was not hid, she came trembling, and falling down before him, she declared unto him before all the people for what cause she had touched him, and how she was healed immediately” (Luke 8:47). Jesus offered no reproach for her breaching social propriety—instead he praised the depth of her faith: “Your faith has brought you salvation” (Luke 8:47, ABT). And then Jesus offered a departing blessing, “Go in peace” (Luke 8:48).42 In this poignant story, Jesus defied the cultural norms that marginalized women. By acknowledging, touching and healing this woman, He set a new standard for the way women should be treated.

II. Communication

Cultural Background and Baggage

An obvious extension of the fact that men and women were segregated was that they did not directly communicate with each other. Simply stated, Jewish men were instructed not to speak very much with women. The Mishnah directed, “Talk not much with womankind,” followed by the appalling phrase, “they said this of a man’s own wife: how much more of his fellow’s wife!”43 Along the same vein, Ben Sira recorded, “A silent wife is a gift from the Lord; her restraint is more than money can buy.”44 Equally extreme, a renowned Rabbi Joshua claimed that any girl or woman found speaking to a man in the street was guilty of breaking the law of

40 Mishnah Gittin, 9.10; Yebamoth, 14.1.

41 Their culture assumed that God sent death, illness, or deformities, because of sin (Job 20:11; Exodus 20:5; John 9:2; etc.). The opposite also held, that the righteous are spared pain. See footnotes 591, 592, 593 in this book. 42 1 Samuel 1:17 also repeats this same promise given to another woman of great faith, Hannah. The high priest Eli

parallels between Luke’s birth narratives and Hannah’s account. Brown, Birth, 335, 357. 43 Mishnah prophesied of a forthcoming son as she prayed in the Tabernacle and then said, “Go in peace.” We can find many , Avoth 1:5. In 1963 Philip Blackman translated the same passage “engage not in much gossip with

womankind.” The text of the Mishnah varies significantly with different translators. 44 Ben Sira, Ecclesiasticus, 26:14-15. Ben Sira’s request for silence may be literal, but just as likely, it may refer to a wife who did not speak against her husband, but honored his will. chastity unless there was evidence to the contrary.45 With or without that extreme inference, speaking with the opposite gender was avoided for fear it might result in something scandalous: “Do not speak excessively with a woman lest this ultimately lead you to adultery!”46

Another Jerusalem rabbi taught that men who talked to women demonstrated misplaced priorities that would end in damnation: “He that talks much with womankind brings evil upon himself, neglects the study of The Law and at the last will inherit Gehenna [hell].”47 Another rabbi misused the Scriptures to defend the lack of communication with women: “We have not found that the Almighty spoke to a woman except Sarah.”48 In his view, because the Holy Book did not record God speaking to women, neither should men.

This cultural background sheds light on why it seems that the young Mary and

Joseph her betrothed Joseph barely communicated with each other. During Mary’s espousal

and Mary to Joseph, he discovered her pregnancy, “before they came together” (Matthew

1:18). As an upright law-abiding Jew, Joseph felt bound to obey The Law and

divorce Mary. At that point he did not understand the miraculous nature of Mary’s conception.

One has to wonder if Mary had tried to explain angel Gabriel’s visit to Joseph. Had she told Joseph why she left Nazareth? Had she tried to resolve the misunderstanding? Luke later tells us that Mary “kept all these things, and pondered them in her heart” (Luke 2:19). Perhaps she was culturally not allowed to speak privately with Joseph. Fortunately, God found another way to transmit information to Joseph, sending an angel to share the good news of the miraculous conception. In response to the angel’s call, Joseph immediately finalized the marriage (Matthew 1:23-24). By the time the couple journeyed south to Bethlehem, they had been married several months, though the narrative attests that Joseph “knew her not till she had brought forth her firstborn son” (Matthew 1:25).

Changes by Jesus

Jesus did not silence women, but spoke with them respectfully. In Bethany, he spoke directly with both Mary and Martha (Luke 10:42). In Samaria, He conversed with the woman at the well (John 4:7-27). In Galilee, He called to a crippled woman, bent over perhaps from osteoporosis, and spoke the healing words to her, “Woman, thou art loosed from thine infirmity” (Luke 13:12). In Jericho, He conversed with Salome, the mother of James and John, politely asking her, “What do you wish?” (Matthew 20:21, NASB). She felt safe to make her request as well as to receive His answer, even though it included a gentle reproach: “Ye know not what ye ask . . . to sit on my right hand, and on my left, is not mine to give, but . . . my Father[’s]” (Matthew 20:22-23).

In Jerusalem, on the road to Golgotha, He sensitively observed the women crying and comforted them, “Daughters of Jerusalem, weep not for me” (Luke 23:28). Over and over again, Jesus’ example cut through layers of segregation and silence to offer dignity and deference to women.

45 Mishnah, Ketuboth 1:8. “If they saw her speaking with some man in the street and said to her, ‘What manner of man is this?’ [and she answered], ‘His name is NN and he is a priest,’… R. Joshua says: We must not rely on her word, but she must be presumed to have suffered intercourse . . . unless she can bring proof for her words.” 46 Babylonian Talmud, Nedarim. 20a. The Talmud postdates the New Testament but is occasionally cited as an example of the ripple effect that earlier thinking had on Judaism over time. It gives evidence of how the prohibitions of communication spread to extreme conclusions.

47 Mishnah, Avoth 1:5.

48 Jerusalem Talmud, Sotah. 7.1, 21b.

Samaritan The longest recorded conversation that Jesus had with a woman is His

Woman encounter in Samaria with the woman at the well (John 4:7-28). Only John’s

Gospel records this dialogue that took place thirty miles north of Jerusalem in the

Samaritan capital city of Sychar.49 By the time of the New Testament, sharp animosity had existed for over a thousand years between Judea and Samaria. The mutual disrespect, blasphemy, retaliation, and impertinence on both sides grew from generation to generation.50 When traveling between Jerusalem to Galilee most Jews chose to avoid Samaria by taking a longer route around it. Jesus did not.51

On one such trip, the Lord and His disciples arrived at Sychar around the time of their midday meal.52 He rested near Jacob’s well and sent His disciples into the city to buy bread for their noon meal (John 4:8). As He rested, “a Samaritan woman came to draw water, [and] Jesus said to her, ‘Will you give me a drink?’” (John 4:7, NIV). This was an unusual request because a religious Jew would never eat anything touched by someone ritually “unclean”—especially a Samaritan. The whole trip would have been repulsive to a devout Jew from Jerusalem: walking on a Samaritan road, going into a Samaritan town, eating Samaritan food, and drinking Samaritan water.53

Yet, when Jesus asked the Samaritan woman for a drink of water from her pot, He had

higher motives in mind than simply quenching His thirst. John explained that this

Woman Samaritan woman chose to walk further out of town to get her water from Jacob’s at the well (John 4:12). As the chore of hefting water was physically taxing, and carrying it Well difficult, one wonders why she chose the “sixth hour” or noon—the hottest time of

day.54 This was not a common hour to go to the well; most people went in the cool of the early morning. Also, archeologists speak of a copious spring on the other side of town that would have been closer and easier to draw her water.55 Both of these details suggest that the woman unnecessarily added more hardship to her task.

49 The New Testament refers to Samaritans throughout its first five books as both enemies and neighbors of Judea and Galilee. In addition to this account in John 4, the New Testament mentions Samaritans in the following examples: Jesus is called a Samaritan (John 8:48), in the parable of the Good Samaritan (Luke 10:33), and finally the healing of the Samaritan leper (Luke 17:16). Some scholars suggest that Stephen was a Samaritan as he quotes

Testament (Grand Rapids, MI: Baker Academic Publishing, 2007), 284. 50 F. F. Bruce, the Samaritan Bible in Acts 7, not the Septuagint. Darrell L. Bock, Acts: Baker Exegetical Commentary on the New New Testament History, 342. In AD 51, a pilgrimage of Galileans opted to take the shorter route

through Samaria, but they were “roughly handled” by the Samaritans, resulting in at least one dead. In retribution, a group of Jewish Zealots massacred the Samaritan district indiscriminately. 51 Josephus, Antiquities, XVII.10.9; 6.1; Wars, IV. 8.1; Life, 52. Three major routes led from Judea to Galilee during the period of Herod’s Temple. The shortest route went directly through Samaria. Josephus reports that Roman troops chose the shortest route through Samaria, and a few Galilean Jews chanced it. But rarely would a Judean Jew contaminate himself by traveling through that “impure” country. Instead, Jews from Jerusalem chose the safest routes by avoiding Samaria entirely, even if it added an extra day to their journey. 52 Raymond E. Brown, An Introduction to the New Testament (New York: Doubleday, 1997), 343. Archeologists

well and Askar, about one mile north of Jacob’s well. 53 The imagery of water is also poignant because water was a most critical issue in Palestine—politically, socially, have found two ancient cities near Jacob’s well that may be ancient Sychar. Shechem was two miles from Jacobs and physically. The availability of water governed many of life’s decisions. In this story, it appears that there was plenty of water in the well and Eastern hospitality ensured service, even by a woman in Samaria. 54 Day lasted from 6:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. and night was divided into three or four watches (depending on whether the watch was Jewish or Roman). In the Jewish world, the new day began with night just as in the creation it was dark before light.

55 Clinton E. Arnold, ed., Zondervan Illustrated Bible Backgrounds Commentary: John, Acts (Grand Rapids, MI: Zondervan, 2002), 2877.

However, when we learn about the details of her life–her past divorces and current sins–we imagine that she may have tried to avoid the social gathering place—filled with the daily gossip or scorn of her neighbors—by walking alone further out of town. The extra work involved in the unusual time and location may have been worth the isolation.

John’s record includes the woman’s astonishment at Jesus’ breach of social rules.56 The woman correctly asked Him, “How is it that thou, being a Jew, askest drink of me, which am a woman of Samaria?” (John 4:9). Jesus’ behavior slashed through strongholds of Judaic social norms: He spoke to a woman, He spoke to a Samaritan, and He asked to drink water from an unclean pot. His actions reinforced His message that God is no respecter of persons (2 Chronicles 19:7; Acts 10:34).57

Living Yet, the Lord’s conversation pulled His listener in a different direction than she

Water anticipated. The woman questioned the social and religious propriety of His request,

so Jesus proposed that she ask Him for living water—reversing their roles. “If thou

knewest the gift of God, and who it is that saith to thee, Give me to drink; thou wouldest have asked of him, and he would have given thee living water” (John 4:10). In the New Testament, the doctrines of Christ become living water for disciples. The Old Testament uses “living water” to describe a spring or running water, in contrast to “dead” or stagnant water stored in a cistern.58 Living water was a rich prize.59 Christ redefined “living water” as something even more valuable: the doctrines, the truths, and the revelation that flow from Him.

However, the Samaritan woman was initially deaf to this higher symbolism. Ironically, she responded, “Art thou greater than our father Jacob, which gave us the well?” (John 4:12).60 To

56 Tensions arose between northern and southern Israel dating back to King Solomon’s death and split of the kingdom. Problems flared up worse than ever after the Babylonian captivity. Ezra 4:1-4 and Nehemiah 2:19-20 explain that the Jews returning from their Babylonian captivity refused the Samaritans’ help to rebuild the temple. Zerubbabel’s team turned away the Samaritans who had no proper genealogical evidence of Levitical descent. In retribution, the Samaritans conspired with the foreign overlords to prevent the Jews from rebuilding the walls of Jerusalem, reconstructing the city, and rebuilding the temple. Samaritans retaliated by claiming the Jews apostatized and built their own temple on Mount Gerizim (2,890 feet) near their capital city, Shechem, in the fourth century BC (around the time of Alexander the Great). In 128 BC, any hope of healing their rift was shattered by the Jewish retribution. Under orders from the high priest, John Hyrcanus, Jewish activists destroyed the Samaritan Temple on Mount Gerizim and captured the city of Shechem. The demolition of the temple on Mount Gerizim could not have been more offensive. For more information on the return from Babylon, see Appendix 2. 57 This raises the interesting question of whether or not Jesus considered the Samaritans part of the tribe of Israel. He told the gentile Syrophoenician woman that His mission was to preach only to Israelites (Matthew 15:26-27; Mark 7:26-28; Luke 16:20-22), yet John 4:42 says that the Lord’s first community of followers were Samaritans. 58 The Scriptures often associate living water with the temple and eternal life (Jeremiah 2:13; Isaiah 8:6; 1 Nephi 11:25). The Book of Mormon affiliates “living waters” with the tree of life, the love of God, and salvation (1 Nephi 11:25).

59 In the Babylonian Talmud, “Torah” was used as a symbol of water: “Oh ye who are thirsty, come to the water.” Talmud, Abodah Zarah, 5.7. “What is meant by ‘water’ is Torah.” Similarly, in apocryphal 2 Esdras 14:37 (also known as 4 Ezra 9:26): ‘“Ezra, open your mouth and drink what I give you.’ So I opened my mouth, and was handed a cup full of what seemed like water, except that its colour was the colour of fire. I took it and drank, and soon as I had done so my mind began to pour forth a flood of understanding.” The Eastern Orthodox Church canonized Ezra, which dates to sometime between 165 BC and 50 BC. 60 Note that the woman mentioned Jacob—one of the patriarchs. This is in keeping with Samaritan belief that accepted the patriarchs (Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob), but not many of the Old Testament prophets. The Samaritans’ core beliefs came from the Pentateuch (Genesis, Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers, Deuteronomy) and the following five were handed down orally:

The challenges of getting water from a well, in addition to the social stigmas of her life, would have made the prospect of never again thirsting a welcome offer—but that was not the Lord’s message. He patiently taught her to look beyond her sphere of understanding, and explained that He was not referring to sustaining her physically, but eternally (John 4:14). Jesus wanted to emancipate her from her spiritual bondage, so He opened the doorway for her repentance by revealing His divine mantle and omniscience.

After Jesus divulged His knowledge of her five divorces in her tainted past and that she currently lived in sin, she humbly acknowledged, “I perceive that thou art a prophet” (John 4:19). Her response after such a humiliating and embarrassing disclosure from a complete stranger spoke of the open and humble condition of her heart. Rather than feeling defensive, running away, or retreating in self-pity, the woman acknowledged Jesus as a prophet and then moved to the next logical step of asking for His prophetic insight into a standard doctrinal question that often surfaced between the Jews and Samaritans. In fact, the woman’s question gave evidence to her faith in Jesus as a prophet (John 4:19-20). She asked Him, “Where is the correct place to worship?” Mount Gerizim in Samaria (as the Samaritans believed) or Mount Moriah in Jerusalem (as the Jews believed).

To the Samaritans, Mount Gerizim was the most holy place on earth. In addition to the location of their late temple, they believed Mount Gerizim was sacred because it existed before the creation; that it was the first land to appear after the waters were gathered together; that it was as a twin of the Garden of Eden; and that it was the only land not covered by the flood.61

Samaritan Although the Jews had destroyed their temple, they believed the sacred site would

Beliefs someday house the true temple, and that it would be the only place to survive at the

end of the world.62

The woman asked again for earthly evidence while Jesus’ answer stretched her upward to heavenly principles. He explained that the location was not the key issue in worship; it was who, why, and how one worshiped. True worship comes from the condition of one’s heart, “true worshippers shall worship the Father in spirit and in truth” (John 4:23). This dramatic conversation broke through walls of ethnic bigotry.

Bruce W. Hall, Samaritan religion from John Hyrcanus to Baba Rabba: A Critical Examination of the Relevant Material in Contemporary Christian literature, the writings of Josephus, and the Mishnah (Sydney, Australia: Mandelbaum Trust, University of Sydney, 1987), 270. Other scholars add a sixth tenet that includes appearance at the end of time of a “Restorer” who would appear to usher in a new dispensation, teach the law, and restore the proper modes of worship. Kent Jackson, and Robert Millet, Studies in Scriptures: The Gospels (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book, 1986), 5.205.

61 Jeremias, Jerusalem in the Time of Jesus, 352-358. They taught that erizim was the place where Noah disembarked from the ark, the place where Abraham brought Isaac to be sacrificed, the burial site of Joseph their patriarch, and the location of the final judgment. Alan David Crown, Reinhard Pummer, Abraham Tal, eds., A Companion to Samaritan Studies (Tübingen, Germany: Mohr Siebeck, 1993), 100. 62 In 128 BC as part of Jewish revolt to cleanse their land of foreigners, a group of Jewish activists, working under the direction of the high priest, demolished the Samaritan Temple on Mount Gerizim. See footnote 56.

This became the earliest Johannine scriptural reference of Jesus’ literally announcing His Messiahship. “The woman saith unto him, I know that Messias cometh, which is called Christ: when he is come, he will tell us all things. Jesus saith unto her, I that speak unto thee am He” (John 4:25-26). This bold declaration stands in contrast to the many times in the Gospels when the Lord limited what He divulged due to the skepticism of His audience (Mark 13:4; Luke 20:2-8; 22:67; John 3:10-12; 3 Nephi 17:2; etc.). But here He forthrightly communicated with a woman (in particular, a sinning Samaritan woman), honoring her with great insight.

John’s description of what happened next offers profound symbolism: she left her water pot. Her pot can be seen as emblematic of the cares of the world, her old life, and her old source

She of sustenance. She left it all behind for her new life that led her to share the living

left her water or good news—the gospel—of Jesus the Messiah with her community, who

water pot may have become the first branch of believers.

The story ends with two other social shocks. Unlike their Jerusalem neighbors,

the Samaritan community listened to and acted on a message from a woman—and not just any woman, but a sinning adulteress. Second, the author chose to mention that Jesus and His disciples stayed with the Samaritans preaching the gospel for two days and that many believed, “for we have heard him ourselves, and know that this is indeed the Christ, the Saviour of the world” (John 4:42).

Commentaries on this story often illustrate Jesus’ rejection of racial prejudices, yet just as profound, we see that Jesus speaks to and teaches a woman with remarkable openness. He broke down enormous social barriers and trusted her to witness the truth of His Messiahship. He trusted her with the mysteries, and He trusted her to change. In this manner, Jesus empowered her and those of us who also have water pots to leave behind.

III. Dress

Cultural Background and Baggage

In the Jewish world, dress was an important symbol of one’s station and values. Strict modesty communicated one’s chastity.63 Even though the Old Testament did not forbid it, the pharisaic society of the late Second Temple era (20 BC to AD 70) required a married Jewess to be completely covered outside her home.64 If she did not entirely drape herself,65 her husband could divorce her and not have to pay for the marriage contract fee. The public protocol required a woman to cover her hair, face, and body.66 If a Jewess uncovered her head in public, it was interpreted as a sign of rejecting God: “You have departed from the way of the daughters of

63 Judith Lynn Sebesta, Larissa Bonfante, The World of Roman Costume (Madison, WI: University Press, 2001), 8. “Dress serves to distinguish friend and foe in war and in peace; divine and imperial figures, wife, prostitute, and defeated barbarian mother with child.”

64 Skolnik, Encyclopedia Judaica, 21.161.

65 Judith Lynn Sebesta, Larissa Bonfante, The World of Roman Costume (Madison, WI: University Press, 2001), 155, 186. Also see chapter 6 of this book on “Divorce.”

66 Philo, Yonge, trans., 817. Philo described the head covering as a “symbol of modesty, which all those women are accustomed to wear who are completely blameless.” This quote is in Philo’s discussion of Numbers 5:18, dealing with a woman accused of adultery. Nearly two centuries before the time of the Lord, Ben Sira surmised that he could determine if a woman had broken the law of chastity by the only part of the body unexposed: “The fornication of a woman shall be known by the haughtiness of her eyes, and by her eyelids” (Ecclesiasticus, 26:12, Douay-Rheims Bible).

Israel, whose habit it is to have their heads covered, and you have walked in the ways of 67 idolatrous women who walk about with their heads uncovered.” The biblical scholar Joachim Jeremias described their custom of veiling their faces with a complex arrangement of “two head veils, a head-band on the forehead with bands to the chin, and a hairnet with ribbons and knots, so that her features could not be recognized.” 68 The veiling was so extensive that on one occasion, a chief priest in Jerusalem did not even recognize his own mother as the person in front of him being tried for adultery. 69 Several generations after the New Testament, rabbinic Judaism expanded the definition of modesty to include covering a woman’s ankles. The Talmud warned against “voyeurism” because it may lead to adultery: “He who looks at a woman’s heels . . . is as if he had intercourse with her.” 70 Outside of the city, the dress code differed slightly. 71 This is one reason why Jews in the city looked down upon their less pious kinsmen in the country. 72 It was not practical for women in the country to wear such extensive wrappings because many farmers needed their wives’ and children’s help in the fields, and it would have severely impeded their productivity. Over the centuries, artists who depict New Testament scenes rarely portray women in public with their face and bodies completely draped, yet the writings from observant Jews from the time suggest that it was so. 73

Changes by Jesus

The rigor of the Jewish dress code provides an interesting backdrop for the story in Luke about the woman who washed Jesus’ feet with her hair.74 Given that women were to be covered in public settings, one can better understand the shock of Jesus’ host when an uninvited woman approached Jesus and unbound her hair (Luke 7:36-50). Instead of condemning the woman, Jesus acknowledged her thoughtfulness, humility, love, and faith as she wiped His feet with her hair. More astonishing, when the Pharisaic host questioned Jesus’ morals for allowing an

67 Sebesta and Bonfante, The World of Roman Costume, 186. 68 Jeremias, Jerusalem, 359. We get a feel for how much of a woman was veiled in a story of a pious woman named Qimhit, who claimed to keep her head covered even in the house as a sign of her uprightness: “May it (this and that) befall me if the beams of my house have ever seen the hair of my head.” Ibid., 360. 69 Jeremias, Jerusalem, 359. “It was said that once, for example, a chief priest in Jerusalem did not recognize his own mother when he had to carry out against her the prescribed process for a woman suspected of adultery.” 70 Babylonian Talmud, Nedarim, 2.4, 58c. “R. Josiah said: He who gazes at a woman eventually comes to sin, and he who looks even at a woman’s heel will beget degenerate children.” Another translation reads, “He that looks upon a woman’s heel is guilty of an act of lewdness.” This led to the counsel for men never to walk behind a woman—even if she were his wife—in case he might “see her heels.” Talmud, Berakot, 61a. 71 Sebesta and Bonfante, The World of Roman Costume, 186, “Women of Arabia may go out veiled, and women of Medea with their cloaks looped over their shoulders.”

72 Jeremias, Jerusalem, 362; “there is no indication that the custom of wrapping up the head was observed as strictly in the country as in the town.”

73 Mishnah , Nashim: Sotah, 3. 8. “How does a man differ from a woman? He may go with his hair unbound and with garments rent, but she may not go with hair unbound and with garments rent.” 74 Luke is the only Gospel to tell this story, although shortly before Jesus’ death the other three Gospels tell of Mary anointing Jesus in Bethany with pure nard, and wiping His feet with her hair (see John 12:1-8; Matthew 26:6-13; Mark 14:3-9). uncovered woman to touch Him (which was interpreted as evidence that she was “morally

A Woman I entered into thine house, thou gavest me no water for my feet: but she hath Washes washed my feet with tears, and wiped them with the hairs of her head. Thou gavest uncovered”75), Jesus condemned the host (Luke 7:44-46).

Jesus’ Feet me no kiss: but this woman since the time I came in hath not ceased to kiss my feet.

My head with oil thou didst not anoint: but this woman hath anointed my feet with

ointment.

According to Luke’s record, Jesus pointed out that the host had neglected to offer his traveling guests the opportunity to wash upon arrival.

Walking in sandals on dusty stones or unpaved roads left one’s feet callused, cut, and encrusted with dirt. Decorum dictated that a host provide the means for guests to wash before entering a house. At the very least, hosts provided basins of water for their guests; in more polite settings, the host assigned a servant or child to do the menial task of washing the guests’ feet. Foot care was such a filthy job that it was often delegated to slaves.76 In their homes, children often had the assignment to wash their fathers’ feet each day.77

In washing Jesus’ feet with her own hair, this woman entered into the role of “servant” or “child” of Christ. This act of submission to Jesus was a demonstration of her repentant heart, and Christ freely forgave her: “Her sins, which are many, are forgiven; for she loved much” (Luke 7:47). She seems to exemplify that discipleship of Christ requires submission to Him as servant to master, child to father. She also became yet another example of Jesus’ acceptance of social outcasts and of His rejecting restrictive social norms for women.

In this account, we have no evidence that Jesus verbally condemned the woman for breaching the rules of dress by uncovering her hair. Rather, by allowing her to continue, He communicated an acceptance. When He needed to speak out or to educate about one’s clothing, He did. But rather than condemning uncovered hair, He condemned those who dressed and acted for social aggrandizement: “Beware of the scribes, which desire to walk in long robes, and love greetings in the markets, and the highest seats in the synagogues, and the chief rooms at feasts” (Luke 20:46). He denounced dress as a form of pride. The Lord maintained a higher perspective around physical dress standards that fostered pure love rather than unhealthy rigid social standards.

After Jesus’ death, the Lord’s apostles counseled women and men to cover themselves with a different type of clothing—the armor of God:

Put on the whole armour of God, that ye may be able to stand against the wiles of the

devil.… Wherefore take unto you the whole armour of God, that ye may be able to

The withstand in the evil day, and having done all, to stand. Stand therefore, having your

Armor loins girt about with truth, and having on the breastplate of righteousness; And your

of God feet shod with the preparation of the gospel of peace; Above all, taking the shield of

faith, wherewith ye shall be able to quench all the fiery darts of the wicked. And take

the helmet of salvation, and the sword of the Spirit, which is the word of God (Ephesians

6:12-17; 1 Thessalonians 5:8).

75 Craig Keener, 1–2 Corinthians (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2005), 92. 76 In Greek, “servant” is the same word as “doulos / slave, bondman, man of servile condition,” and similarly a female servant or handmaid, was a “doule / female slave, bondmaid” (see John 15:15; Luke 1:38). See chapter 8. 77 See chapter 7.

In Christianity, clothing took on an important figurative meaning.78 More important than concerning oneself with outer adornments, the apostles asked followers of Christ to put off the natural man in order to put on the armor of God. Christians dress in God’s armor as they live God’s commandments and apply “the enabling power of His atonement.”79 With its protection, one becomes more holy and less worldly.

IV. Women’s Responsibilities

Cultural Background and Baggage

The most important duty of Jewish women at the time of the Second Temple was to bear and raise children. Bearing children was so crucial that if a wife were barren for ten years, a pharisaic husband had a religious obligation to divorce her.80 Some rabbis diminished women’s contributions in this sacred role: “All we [men] can expect from them [women] is that they bring up our children and keep us from sin.”81 Clearly, this statement does not recognize the nobility in motherhood. Raising children was often seen as a menial task on par with other household tasks.

Spousal Responsibilities

A Jewess’ household responsibilities are enumerated in the Mishnah as the “duties which a wife must perform for her husband” and included “grinding flour and baking bread, washing clothes and cooking food, nursing her child, making his bed and working in wool. If she brings one servant with her, she need not grind.”82 These duties would be increased or decreased depending on how many other women, children, or servants could help. Without slaves or children it fell to a wife to wash her husband’s face, hands and feet, and “prepare his cup.”83 Often multiple generations lived in the same home or close to one another and shared in the work.84

A chaste wife was an utmost requirement in honoring her husband.85 In Philo’s list of wifely virtues, sexual commitment to her husband received a triple emphasis through modesty, chastity, and cleaving. Rabbis often debated their views on social concerns that involved women

78 Clothing also took on emblematic meaning for the afterlife as John the Revelator described “white robes” given to those who died as martyrs of truth (Revelation 6:11; 7:9, 13-14). The white robe represented their purity by “wash[ing] their robes, and made them white in the blood of the Lamb” (Revelation 9:14). And Isaiah described, “[God] hath clothed me with the garments of salvation, he hath covered me with the robe of righteousness, as a bridegroom decketh himself with ornaments, and as a bride adorneth herself with her jewels” (Isaiah 61:10). These clothes empower one with immortality.

79 David A. Bednar, “The Atonement and the Journey of Mortality” Ensign (April 2012). 80 See chapter 6 of this book under “Divorce.”

81 Bromiley, International Standard Bible Encyclopedia, “Sex,” 4.431. 82 Mishnah, Ketuboth, 5:5.

83 Ibid.

84 Ken Campbell, ed., Marriage and Family in the Biblical World (Downers Grove, IL: Inter-Varsity, 2003), 232. 85 Philo, Yonge, trans., 138. Philo recounted the patriarch Judah’s reverie on a virtuous woman: “Perhaps then, according to my prayer, she is truly a virtuous mind, a citizen wife, excelling in modesty, and chastity, and all other virtues, cleaving to one husband alone, being content with the administration of one household, and rejoicing in the authority of one husband.” Ironically, Philo has these words coming out of Judah’s mouth in reference to Tamar, after Judah mistook her for a harlot and slept with her, making nearly every statement incongruous. The story screams of a double standard for men and women. and virtue.86 In one such dispute, a twist of suspicion is found in a rabbi’s description of a woman’s work: she must always keep busy or her “idleness leads to unchastity.” Another rabbi refuted with this general observation: “Idleness leads to lowness of spirit.”87

Next, a wife must be subservient to her husband.88 Philo explained that a husband, “delighting in his master-like authority, is to be respected for his pride: but the woman, being in the rank of a servant, is praised for assenting to a life of communion.”89 Most Jews referred to a wife as her husband’s property: “He that possesseth a good wife, beginneth a possession.”90 As her husband’s subservient property, a respectable wife was to honor her husband: “a wife who honors her husband is accounted wise by all.”91

Wives were to take counsel from their husbands, not to give it. Josephus explained why Adam was cursed in the Garden of Eden: “Because he weakly submitted to the counsel of his wife.”92 This attitude potentially fostered a sense of superiority and self-importance in the man that could inhibit the development of cooperation, unity, and selflessness between companions.93 We see a lack of mutual respect in such statements: “Better is the iniquity of a man, than a woman doing a good turn, and a woman bringing shame and reproach.”94

It appears that male dominion became skewed.95 The Jewish historian Josephus (AD 37-101) justified a man’s feeling superior to a woman by saying, “for says the Scripture, ‘A woman is inferior to her husband in all things.’”96 The “Scripture” that Josephus claimed is unknown, but his views on women are similar to those of other writers from the same era.97 Josephus

86 Seven of the Mishnah tractates deal with women and family life. Five of them deal with transition periods of marriage, divorce, and widowhood (Kiddishin, Detubot, Gittin, Sotah, and Yebamot). One volume or “tractate” specifically deals with women’s menstruation, niddah. 87 Mishnah, Ketuboth, 5:5.

88 Ben Sira, Ecclesiasticus, 44-50. A discriminatory attitude grew stronger throughout the period of the Second Temple. Throughout the entire apocryphal book of Ecclesiasticus we find praises for male Old Testament heroes without mentioning the noble women in their past. Yet in the Old Testament we find many positive relationships between men and women—like Job giving his three daughters gifts of inheritance (Job 42:15; also see Numbers 27:7). But that changed as we draw closer to the time that surrounded the New Testament. M. Jack Suggs, Katharine Doob Sakenfeld, James R. Mueller, eds., The Oxford Study Bible: Revised English Bible with the Apocrypha, 2nd Ed. (New York: Oxford University Press, 1992).

89 Philo, A Volume of Questions and Solutions to Questions which arise in Genesis, I.29. In the same volume, Philo describes the creation of Adam and Eve: “God, when first of all he made the intellect, called it Adam, after that he created the outward sense, to which he gave the name of Life [Eve]” (I.53). He felt man was the intellect and woman the senses.

90 Ben Sira, Ecclesiasticus, 36:26.

91 Ibid., 26.26.

92 Josephus, Antiquities of the Jews, I.1.4.

93 Ben Sira, Ecclesiasticus, 33:20, 23; “Give not to son or wife, brother or friend, power over thee while thou livest; . . . In all thy works keep the pre-eminence.”

94 Ibid., 42:14. Also statements like, “As long as thou livest, and hast breath in thee, let no man change thee.” Yet on the other hand, we also find in the same text, statements that praise humility, “The greater thou art, the more humble thyself, and thou shalt find favour before the Lord” (3:18, 21).

95 Ibid., 26.25; “A headstrong wife is regarded as a dog.” Submission was often tied with remaining silent. 96 Josephus, Against Apion, II. 25. Neusner, ed., Judaism in the Biblical Period, 676. Furthermore, the “biblical society was defined in terms of its male members as indicated by the census in Exodus 20, and in Numbers 1 and 26, which counted adult males but no women or children” (673). Censuses were often taken to know the military potential or tax base.

97 Peder Borgen, Philo of Alexandria: An Exegete for His Time (Netherlands: Brill, 1997), 58. A biblical scholar, Carras, observed ten points about which both Philo and Josephus wrote. The second point was, “Women are to have a subservient role to their husbands.” further added that women were only “sanctified through the deeds of men . . . the anomaly of women is worked out . . . by assigning her to a man’s domain.”98

Financial Responsibilities

In cities, Jewish women worked outside of their homes only if abject poverty required it. In cases of widowhood, divorce, or other experiences that caused extreme poverty, a woman was allowed to work as a cook, baker, spinner, weaver, laundress, inn-keeper, female hairdresser, midwife, or mourner.99 However, a negative social stigma still fell on any woman who worked in these jobs, and any pay earned by the wife or daughter was paid usually directly to (and kept by) the man of the house.100 Husbands or fathers bore the sole responsibility for breadwinning.

In the country, economic necessity allowed some women to work outside of their homes to help with the harvest or other farm needs. Archeologists estimate that “90-95 percent of the population of ancient Palestine would have been rural peasants,” living off the land or sea.101 Though frowned upon in the city, in agrarian communities some “maidens” went to the well for water and women assisted their fathers or husbands in the fields as needed.102 Even though few records survived from the rural segment of the population, we do find some texts that describe women working in the fields: “a woman that returned from the harvest . . . or from olive-picking or from the vintage.”103 This female contribution to the family coffers offered women more value in the country than in the city.

Changes by Jesus

Christian women had many similar responsibilities to those of their Jewish peers: bearing

children, serving one’s family, loving one’s husband, and serving those in need (1 Timothy 5:14; Titus 2:4). But the Lord made abrupt and fundamental changes to the priorities placed upon women. He never referred to women as possessions, nor did He dominate or try to control them (Matthew 9:22; 15:28; Mark 14:6; Luke 13:12; John 4:4-21; 8:10; etc.). The Lord’s restored church likewise denounces such treatment.104

98 Josephus, Against Apion, II. 25.

99 Mishnah, Ketuboth, 4.4, A “mourner” was a woman paid to cry and scream and throw dirt in the air in a demonstration of sorrow. This became a required part of mourning. See chapter 6, quotations found in “Women and Mourning.”

100 Ben Witherington III, Women and the Genesis of Christianity (Cambridge, England, NYC: Cambridge Press, 1990), 4.

101 Reta H. Finger, Of Widows and Meals: Communal Meals in the Book of Acts (Grand Rapids, MI: Eerdmans, 2007), 100. Also see, Daniel Sperber, Roman Palestine 200-400, the Land: Crisis and Change in Agrarian Society as Reflected in Rabbinic Sources (Tel Aviv, Israel: Bar-Ilan University, 1978). 102 Jeremias, Jerusalem, 362. “Ordinary families could not adhere strictly to the totally retired life of the woman of rank, who was surrounded by her household of servants; and the main reasons for this were economic ones. For example, a wife had to help her husband in his profession, perhaps by selling his wares (M. Ket. ix.4). We may also see this relaxation of custom among ordinary people in the description of the popular feasts which took place in the Court of Women, during the nights of the feast of Tabernacles; the crowds were so exuberant that finally it became necessary to construct galleries for the women, to separate them from the men (T. Sukk.iv.I, 198.6). Moreover, in the country there were further relaxations. Here, the maidens went to the well (M. Ket. i.1o; Gen. R. 49 on 18.20, Son. 49.6, 425); the married women engaged in agricultural work together with her husband and children.” 103 Mishnah, Yebamoth, 15.2.

104 Elder Richard G. Scott, “Honor the Priesthood and Use it Well,” Ensign (Nov 2008), 46: “In some cultures, tradition places a man in a role to dominate, control, and regulate all family affairs. That is not the way of the Lord.

The Gospel of John tells us that Jesus “loved Martha, and her sister, and Lazarus” (11:5).

Mary and When He went to their home in Bethany for a special dinner party, He noticed that

Martha Martha was frustrated with her sister’s lack of help. Even if the hostess had servants

(which she probably did), Martha’s workload was huge.

From the perspective of most rule-abiding Jews, Martha’s sister Mary was out of line to sit at Jesus’ feet to learn from Him. Not only did Mary neglect her responsibilities, but she was also speaking to a male guest—and it appears that she delved into areas of learning The Law, both of which were forbidden to women. Some rabbis taught that if a woman spoke with a man other than her husband, it was cause for a divorce.105

On the other hand, Martha acted as an upright Jewess preparing the meal and home for her honored guest, Jesus. She asked the male leader to correct her errant sister: “Lord, dost thou not care that my sister hath left me to serve alone? bid her therefore that she help me” (Luke 10:40). Jesus certainly did not mean that serving others is not important (as we discuss in chapter 8). His response to Martha sounds like a reminder of priorities to the modern reader.

Yet to that ancient society, His response would have been utterly shocking: “Martha, Martha, thou art careful and troubled about many things: But one thing is needful: and Mary hath chosen that good part” (Luke 10:41-42). Jesus’ support of Mary’s behavior was a revolutionary endorsement of female spiritual engagement, learning and communication.

The last phrase in Luke 10:42 is also interesting, “which shall not be taken away from her.” We need to examine that phrase in the world of the Second Temple. At that time everything a girl or woman earned or found legally belonged to her male guardian.106 A female had no claim on anything tangible—including her children, who were the property of their father (and in the case of divorce, the father had full custody).107 A female did not even have ownership of her own life: her father or husband could sell her into slavery.108 As a slave, a girl’s freedom and chastity could be taken away, as could her earnings, property or food.

With this as background, we find even more meaning in the Lord’s promise that her relationship with Him—and her knowledge could not be taken away. Not only would Mary be able to learn and live a richer life from her experience, but also, she would own her knowledge beyond this life. The Lord’s words apply to the eternal sphere as we read in D&C 130:18, “whatever principle of intelligence we attain unto in this life, it will rise with us in the resurrection.”

In addition to the benefits of educating women, this story validated male and female interaction. Jesus’ example indicated that it was acceptable for women to participate in the world of the mind and of the spirit, and not exclusively in traditional domestic tasks.

Like their Master, the apostles also encouraged women to participate, sanctioned their study, and authorized them to take an active role in building the kingdom of God, even in public settings. A shining example of a woman from the Greco-Roman world who embraced these opportunities is Lydia of Thyatira, a Christian convert living in Philippi. She led her household in spiritual pursuits. The Bible does not tell us anything about her marital status, but speaks of

In some places the wife is almost owned by her husband, as if she were another of his personal possessions. That is a cruel, mistaken vision of marriage encouraged by Lucifer that every priesthood holder must reject. It is founded on the false premise that a man is somehow superior to a woman. Nothing could be farther from the truth.” 105 Mishnah , Ketuboth 1:8. See chapter 6.

106 Witherington, Women and the Genesis of Christianity, 4. 107 Beryl Rawson, ed., The Family in Ancient Rome: New Perspectives (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1987), 36. See chapter 6 of this book.

108 Mishnah , Ketuboth, 3.8. her noble accomplishments. Lydia “worshipped God,” accepted the missionaries’ message, had an open heart, and followed the counsel of the apostle Paul (Acts 16:14). She had such a strong positive influence that when she was baptized, her entire household, including servants, followed her example. We also learn that she sold a rare and expensive purple dye, and she had a home large enough to host the apostle Paul and his fellow missionaries (Acts 16:15). She was a

disciple of Christ and a spiritual leader, who was able to provide for herself and for

Lydia others both temporally and spiritually.

There are many other examples of women in the New Testament who took

proactive roles in their worship and in building the kingdom. These include women like the prophetess Anna (Luke 2:36-38), Mary and Elisabeth (Luke 1:39-56), Dorcas or Tabitha (Acts 9: 36-42), Damaris (Acts 17:22-34), Philip's four prophetic daughters (Acts 21:8-14), Phebe (Romans 16:1-2), Prisca (Acts 18:13, 18-19, 24-28), Lois and Eunice (2 Timothy 1:5), all of whom receive acknowledgement and praise throughout this book. They each followed the Lord’s counsel to put His teachings first in their lives, above their cultural traditions, and in some cases, even above loved ones’ wishes if necessary: “If anyone comes to me and does not hate his own father and mother and wife and children and brothers and sisters, yes, and even his own life, he cannot be my disciple” (Luke 14:26, ESV).

The Gospels of Matthew and Mark also included the need for disciples to forgo society’s influences that take them away from the Lord’s work (Matthew 19:29; Mark 10:29). If being subservient to a husband or father kept one of them from following God, then the Lord summoned His disciples to forsake them and “come after me” (Luke 14:27).

The Lord also added another responsibility for women, “Come unto me, all ye that labour and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest. Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me” (Matthew 11:28-29). Women became students of the Savior and referred to Him as “teacher.” For example, Mary Magdalene addressed the risen Lord, ‘“Rabboni!’ (which means Teacher)” (John 20:16; NIV); and Martha “called her sister Mary aside. ‘The Teacher is here’” (John 20:16, NIV). He empowered those who listened to learn. Even though these are standard titles, they had extra meaning in the context of women learning from Jesus. He wanted His hearers to think on their own, and He gave assignments, such as this: “Go ye and learn what that meaneth, I will have mercy, and not sacrifice for I am not come to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance” (Matthew 9:13).

Jesus began certain parables with the injunction, “Now learn a parable of . . .” (Mark 13:28; emphasis added, also see Matthew 24:32). The Master Teacher educated on the Galilean hills, by the sea, in the synagogue, in houses, and in the temple to men, women, and children of all classes. Learning from Him provides spiritual, emotional, and social emancipation.

V. Witnesses

Cultural Background and Baggage

Jewish magistrates did not allow women to act as legal or official witnesses in a court of law.109 Jewish law formally silenced a woman’s legal testimony because men did not think that

109 Josephus, Antiquities, IV.8:15. Encyclopedia Judaica, 21.161. However, there are exceptions to this standard. “For example, rabbinic literature excludes women altogether as witnesses in a court of law. . . . In the Second Temple period, however, women apparently did serve in such a capacity. For example, one Dead Sea Sect text suggests that wives were encouraged to give evidence against their husbands in the Sect’s tribunal ( 1Qsa 1 10-11).” women could be trusted. One source claimed that the custom stemmed from rabbinic interpretation of Genesis 18:15, “Sarah denied, saying, I laughed not.” From Sarah’s response, the rabbis extrapolated that all women were liars and unworthy of acting as witnesses.110 Josephus rationalized women’s disqualification as witnesses because of the “levity and boldness of their sex.”111 With these and other rationalizations, Jewish leaders kept women from speaking as a witness in legal matters.112

Even outside of a court of law, some rabbis would not trust a woman’s word without additional proof. On a maiden’s wedding night, she had to produce various “tokens of virginity” because “we may not rely on her word, but she must be presumed to have been trampled of man unless she can bring proof for her words.”113 These accounts sound as if a girl or woman were guilty until proven innocent.

Changes by Jesus

Fortunately, Jesus validated a woman’s judgment by trusting her word as witness and by treating her as capable of speaking the truth. Over and over again Jesus called and accepted women among His witnesses. Beginning with the birth narratives, we see God authorizing women as witnesses: the priestess Elisabeth, the mother Mary, and the prophetess Anna (Luke 1:41-45; 1:46-55; 2:36-38). But would people at the time of Christ’s birth have believed their witnesses?

The fact that Luke chose to include them in his Gospel gave their words credence in the early church. Luke followed the Lord’s example and allowed women to speak as witnesses. Beginning in the temple when the angel Gabriel struck the priest Zacharias dumb, the likely candidate for a witness could not offer a verbal testimony of his vision (though perhaps his nonverbal witness spoke louder).114 For nine months, his wife, the priestess Elisabeth, witnessed Jewish Women A Comprehensive Historical Encyclopedia, Tal Ilan, “Post-Biblical and Rabbinic Women,” jwa.org/encyclopedia.

110 Mishnah, Shebuoth, 4:1, interpreted Leviticus 5:1 as “[The law about] ‘an oath of testimony’ applies to men but not to women.”

111 Josephus, Antiquities, IV.8:15. The full quote reads: “But let not a single witness be credited, but three, or two at the least, and those such whose testimony is confirmed by their good lives. But let not the testimony of women be admitted, on account of the levity and boldness of their sex. Nor let servants be admitted to give testimony, on account of the ignobility of their soul; since it is probable that they may not speak truth, either out of hope of gain, or fear of punishment.”

112 Tal Ilan, Jewish women in Greco-Roman Palestine (Peabody, MA: Hendrickson, 1996), 163. The subject of female witnesses came up later in a rabbinic dialogue in Deuteronomy 19:15, “. . . at the mouth of two or three witnesses, shall the matter be established.” One rabbi asked, “Is a woman also qualified to give testimony?” Later rabbinic writings concluded that because the Scripture verse does not mentioned women, then women were excluded (Deuteronomy 19:17-18); “the meaning of the ‘two’ in the other instance is men and not women.” This rabbinical debate dates to the Talmud.

113 Mishnah, Ketuboth 1.7 also 1.6. This example was not recorded until after the time of the New Testament. 114 The New Testament chronologically begins and ends at the temple as recorded in Luke’s Gospel, with several temple encounters between (Luke 1:5, 9, “A certain priest named Zacharias . . . his lot was to burn incense when he went into the temple of the Lord;” Luke 24:53, “And were continually in the temple, praising and blessing God. Amen”). After introducing a temple priest and priestess, Luke announced an angel in the temple sanctuary (Luke 1:8-21). We meet at the temple again with the forty-day-old Christ child and his parents (Luke 2:24-25). In the next story, twelve years later, they are back once more at the temple (Luke 2:46). Next Jesus cleansed the temple (John 2:15), followed by His teaching there (Matthew 21:23, 26:55; Mark 14:19; Luke 21:37; John 7:14, 28). The Lord stood outside of the temple and prophesied of its destruction (Matthew 24:2). His death caused the rending of the temple veil (Mark 15:38), yet his apostles continue to preach at the temple daily, praising God and being filled with of their miracle. When it was time to name their son, the local leaders wanted to name him after

Zacharias his father, Zacharias. Only Elisabeth was able to give voice, and she corrected the

Elisabeth authorities: “Not so; but he shall be called John” (Luke 1:60). Her unsolicited

interruption may have offended the local Jewish authorities, but Luke included her

voice as part of the prophetic story of her son.

Luke also included the humble testimony of Mary’s acceptance of her calling from the angel Gabriel: “Behold the handmaid of the Lord; be it unto me according to thy word” (Luke 1:38).115 Other prophets testified of Mary as “a precious and chosen vessel” (Alma 7:10), and that “she was exceedingly fair and white…most beautiful and fair above all other virgins” (1 Nephi 11:13, 15). By her honored role, she is known as the greatest woman to have lived.

Shortly after Gabriel’s visitation to Mary, she eloquently testified to Elisabeth, “My soul

Virgin doth magnify the Lord, and my spirit hath rejoiced in God my Saviour” (Luke 1:46-

Mary 47). Mary’s witness became a shining example to all generations that followed. Her

words seem to have universal application for all disciples of both genders, young and old, who have felt the Spirit of the Lord calling them:

For He has regarded the lowly state of His maidservant; For He who is mighty has done

great things for me, and holy is His name. And His mercy is on those who fear Him from

generation to generation. He has shown strength with His arm; He has scattered the proud

in the imagination of their hearts. He has put down the mighty from their thrones, and

exalted the lowly. He has filled the hungry with good things, and the rich He has sent away

empty. He has helped His servant Israel, in remembrance of His mercy, as He spoke to our

fathers, to Abraham and to his seed forever (Luke 1:48-55, NKJV). Mary is the role model for all other women who seek to be handmaidens of the Lord and witnesses of Christ.

Forty days following the birth of the Lord, Joseph and Mary and the infant Jesus went to the temple to fulfill the Mosaic law for a woman’s purification offering following childbirth (Leviticus 12).116 There we meet the third female witness of the Savior, a widow. One of the most devout temple worshipers in the New Testament: the valiant prophetess Anna.117 She is the

the Spirit (Acts 2:46-47). Paul received a vision of the Lord in the temple (Acts 22:17). Unmistakably, the temple is central to New Testament events, theology, and empowerment. The temple stands as a witness of the Savior. 115 “Handmaiden” is the word for female slave (see chapter 8). This is in part a fulfillment of Joel 2:28-29, “I will pour out my spirit upon all flesh; and your sons and your daughters shall prophesy, your old men shall dream dreams, your young men shall see visions: And also upon the servants and upon the handmaids in those days will I pour out my spirit.”

116 Leviticus 12:2-4 describes a woman’s purification period after childbirth—forty days for a boy and eighty for a girl, to “make an atonement for her, and she shall be cleansed” (Leviticus 12:7). The Mosaic law required two offerings, “the one for the burnt offering, and the other for a sin offering” (Leviticus 12:8). This is part of the reason the number forty became synonymous with purification or a purification period in the Bible. An explanation from Second Temple period describes why the purification was different for a male and female. Philo “alludes to this when he says that ‘man’s formation being more perfect than woman’s . . . only required half the time, that is forty days; but woman’s nature being less than perfect, took twice as many days—eighty” (Malan, Adam and Eve, 210). The Second Temple pseudepigraphic book of Jubilees looked to the creation to explain the doubling of time; as Eve was created second, it follows that the birth of daughters should take twice as long for purification (Jubilees 3:14). James VanderKam, Book of Jubilees (Sheffield England, Sheffield Academic Press, 2001), 31. We see the same doubling before postpartum bathing: “in the eighth night after the birth of a boy and the sixteenth night after the birth of a girl.” Steinberg, Encyclopedia of Jewish Medical Ethics, 184. 117 Anna is the Greek form of Hannah, meaning “favor” (1 Samuel 1-2). As Anna joins Simeon in the temple, she becomes a second witness. This is Luke’s pattern of having two witnesses offer a double proclamation of Jesus’ greatness. Luke’s Gospel is filled with parallelisms in his examples.

only woman in the New Testament given the title prophetess.118 The widow

Anna the “departed not from the temple, but served God with fasting and prayers night and

Prophetess day” (Luke 2:37).

Anna’s diligence at age eighty-four (or possibly 103 depending on how

Luke counted, see Luke 2:36-37) was rewarded one day when she spiritually recognized the forty-day-old infant Jesus as the promised Messiah: “She coming in that instant gave thanks likewise unto the Lord, and spake of Him to all them that looked for redemption in Jerusalem” (Luke 2:38). Anna raised her voice to all those who hoped for the Messiah. The Greek text is in the imperfect tense, meaning “she kept speaking” or spread abroad her witness of the child.119 Her role as a prophetess continued as her testimony of the Christ child came from “the Spirit of Prophecy.”120

Perhaps the clearest witness of Jesus’ divinity during His ministry came from a woman. He asked a close friend, Martha, if she believed that He had power over death. John recorded her

Martha inspired answer of the Lord’s divine nature: “Yea, Lord I believe that thou art the

As Christ [or in Hebrew, the Messiah], the Son of God, which should come into the

Witness world” (John 11:27). Her vibrant testimony shines as a second witness beside Peter’s

in Caesarea Philippi, voicing almost the same words:

TABLE 1

Peter in Matthew 16:16 Martha in John 11:27

Simon Peter answered and said, She saith unto him,

Yea, Lord I believe that

Thou art the Christ, Thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God the Son of God,

which should come into the world

The Lord endorsed and fostered Martha’s testimony, “I am the resurrection, and the life: he that believeth in me, though he were dead, yet shall he live: And whosoever liveth and believeth in me shall never die. Believest thou this?” (John 11:25-26). Her resounding testimony is one of the few—and possibly the most powerful—testimony of Christ that John included in his Gospel text.

Each of the Gospel writers documented that devout women remained beside Jesus at His cross and at the tomb (Matthew 27:55-56, 61; 28:1; Mark 15:40-41; 16:1; Luke 23:55-56; 24:1-10; John 19:25; 20:1). They also emphasized that these women were the first witnesses of the resurrection. Unfortunately, the social prejudice against women as reliable witnesses also affected the apostles. Initially they did not believe the women who ran from the empty tomb with the angel’s message that Jesus had risen (Matthew 28:5-6).

118 Luke 2:36. See Appendix 3. In the Old Testament the title “prophetess” is given to five women: Miriam, Deborah, Huldah, Noadiah and Isaiah’s wife (Exodus 15:20; Judges 4:4; 2 Kings 22:14; Nehemiah 6:14; Isa 8:3). 119 Fitzmyer, Anchor Bible: Luke I-IX, 431.

120 The “Spirit of prophecy” was described by Joseph Smith: “No man is a minister of Jesus Christ, without being a Prophet. No man can be the minister of Jesus Christ, except he has the testimony of Jesus & this is the Spirit of Prophecy.” Andrew F. Ehat and Lyndon W. Cook, ed., The Words of Joseph Smith: The Contemporary Accounts of the Nauvoo Discourses of the Prophet Joseph (Provo, UT: Religious Studies, BYU, 1980), 10-11. Joseph intended this statement to refer to all humanity, not only one gender.

By the time the Gospels were recorded, the Christian authors had learned more of the Lord’s expansive teachings, and all four authors honored the women who were at the tomb enough to mention several of them by name as table 2 shows:

TABLE 2

Matthew 27:56 Mark 15:40; 16:1 Luke 24:10 John 19:25

Mary Magdalene Mary Magdalene Mary Magdalene Mary Magdalene

Mary mother of Mary mother of Mary mother of Mary wife of

James and Joses James and Jose James Cleophas

Joanna wife of

Chuza

Jesus’ mother

Mother of Salome Other women Jesus’ mother’s

Zebedee’s sister

Children

At first, trapped in their culture and fears, the apostles did not believe the women’s

witness: “their words seemed to them as idle tales, and they believed them not” (Luke 24:11). In Mark’s Gospel, the women “neither said . . . anything to any man” (Mark 16:8). Either the story was remembered that way, or they could not trust their witness.121 Even Jesus’ closest companions were originally entrenched in this cultural baggage.

John’s Gospel explains that the women’s account piqued Peter and John’s curiosity enough that they wanted to see for themselves. After the two men saw the empty tomb, they returned to “their own home” (John 20:10). But Mary Magdalene could not leave; she stood next to the tomb weeping when the resurrected Lord appeared to her. How beautiful and empowering— especially with the cultural view of women—that Jesus chose a woman as His first witness of His miraculous resurrection! This moment is perhaps the most powerful example we have of the Lord tearing down the anti-female societal values of the time.

The Gospel of John honors Mary Magdalene as the first eyewitness of the resurrected Lord. According to John’s account, Jesus entrusted her with relaying His message, “go to my brethren, and say unto them, I ascend unto my Father, and your Father; and to my God, and your God” (John 20:17).

121 David Noel Freedman, ed., Eerdman’s Dictionary of the Bible (Grand Rapids, MI: Eerdman's Publishing, 2000), 859. A second century Bishop, Papias, claimed that Mark was “Peter’s interpreter,” according to the Roman Church historian Eusebius (AD 263 -340). For centuries, Christian tradition taught that the Gospel of Mark was actually Peter’s message recorded by Mark while he was with Peter imprisoned in Rome. Biblical scholars debate this theory now.

This act alone demonstrates Jesus’ veneration of women, raising them to a place of legal standing and giving them a voice in His religious order. Combined with the other female witnesses of Jesus’ birth, ministry, death, and resurrection, we see the Lord championing women with opportunities and power. This legacy carried into the young apostolic church.
