Women Teach and Serve in Christianity

.

Of the many ways in which Christ radically altered women’s opportunities and roles in the pages in the New Testament, His influence on women’s worship is one of the most obvious. In contrast to the limited worship opportunities that existed for women in Judeo-Greco-Roman cultures, Christianity invited women to participate more fully in religious worship. Christian women prayed, prophesied, served, and administered in the church. The New Testament includes numerous expressions of gratitude for women’s service, suggesting that their ministry was not only appreciated but also exemplary.122 This chapter looks at some of these exemplary women in the apostolic church—both named and unnamed. It also addresses some unclear statements in the New Testament—attributed to Paul—that seem to demean women and curb their worship opportunities.

I. Women in the Apostolic Church

The New Testament includes the names of forty-five females, at least thirty of whom are described as devoted followers of Christ (the complete list, with scriptural references, is in Appendix 3). The apostle Paul spotlights many women who worked closely with him in the apostolic church. He variously described these women as co-worker, witness, disciple, servant of the church, sister, mother, wife, yokefellow, deaconess, and one “prominent among the apostles” (Romans 16:7, ISV). We will look closely at faithful women who served in the apostolic church—nine named and three unnamed examples.123

122 Acts 1:14; 9:36; 16:1, 36; 17:4, 12, 34; Romans 1:8; Philippians 4:3; and many more. Often the KJV uses the word “man” or “all” or “brethren,” but in the Greek it is not gender specific and originally meant “humanity” or all saints. The NIV is a good English translation that distinguishes gender more precisely from the original Greek. 123 There is not enough scriptural information about the other four women to warrant their placement here, but they are listed in Appendix 3.

Leaders of House-Churches124

The term “house-church” is frequently used in New Testament literature to describe early Christian branches of the church that met in the saints’ homes.125 Paul refers to these “house-churches” in his closing remarks to the saints in Corinth when he says, “Aquila and Priscilla salute you much in the Lord, with the church that is in their house” (1 Corinthians 16:19). The saints worshiped and partook of the sacrament in house-churches. The book of Acts includes both house-churches and the temple as places for early Christians to worship: “And they, continuing daily with one accord in the temple, and breaking bread from house to house” (Acts 2:46; also see 1:13-14; 20:7-12, 20).

The New Testament includes five exemplary women who generously opened their homes

for worship meetings. We surmise their offering required a significant amount of preparation and effort. Their stories provide a glimpse into the significant contributions to early Christian worship made by females. Men were usually the heads of households, but if for some reason the men of the house were not able to lead, a woman may have taken charge. Records throughout the Roman Empire attest that several women acted as a head of their household.126

The first house-church mentioned in the apostolic church belonged to a wealthy Jerusalem

disciple named Mary (the sixth of seven women mentioned with the same name—see Appendix 3). We may safely assume that her husband was dead because she appears to have led her own household. She became a prominent woman in the church and the mother of the evangelist John Mark.127 Luke recounts that after the Apostle Peter’s miraculous release from prison by an angel, “he came to the house of Mary the mother of John, whose surname was Mark; where many were gathered together praying” (Acts 12:12). The rest of the book of Acts suggests that the Jerusalem saints often gathered there, and that her home became a Christian center for refuge and hospitality.

124 These women led in that they planned, prepared, organized, and carried out all responsibilities of hosting church services. In addition to coordinating the worship facilities, the text includes other services that each woman added to the church worship. I see them as leaders in the same sense that we refer to a Relief Society president as a leader. There is no evidence that these women were “ordained” or acted as priesthood leaders in their homes. 125 Everett Ferguson, ed. Encyclopedia of Early Christianity, 2nd Ed (Abingdon, England: Routledge, 2013), 546. “None of the earliest house-church meeting places can be positively identified archeologically, as the house-church organization implies that no specific changes were made in the building itself. The earliest evidence of a house converted architecturally into a place of Christian worship is from Dura-Europos, dated c. 241-256. It is a typical house with rooms grouped around a central court.” This is located in modern eastern Syria, along the Euphrates River. For more references on house-churches see Colossians 4:15; Philemon 1:2; Romans 16:5, 10-16, 23. 126 Carol Meyers, Toni Craven, Ross Shepard Kraemer, ed. Women in Scripture: A Dictionary of Named and Unnamed Women in the Hebrew Bible, the Apocryphal/Deuterocanonical Books, and the New Testament (Grand Rapids, MI: Eerdmans, 2001), 63.

127 David Noel Freedman, ed., Eerdmans Dictionary of the Bible (Grand Rapids, MI: Eerdmans Publishing, 2000), 859-861. John Mark is first mentioned in Acts 12:25; 15:37. We know him from the New Testament as the companion of both Paul and Barnabas, and nephew to Barnabas. The early Christian leaders, Papias (c. 120), Irenaeus (c. 180), Clement of Alexandria (c. 195), and Eusebius (c. 315) refer to Mark as Peter’s scribe in writing the Gospel of Mark. However, modern critical biblical scholars doubt this second to fourth century claim. David W. Bercot, ed., A Dictionary of Early Christian Beliefs (Peabody, MA: Hendrickson Publishers, 1998), 422-433.

Another woman who opened her home for church meetings and “labored with [Paul] in the

gospel” was Lydia. Luke described her as a wealthy land owner and business-woman—“a seller of purple” (Acts 16:14-30, 40). She housed Paul as well as his companions (Silas, Luke and Timothy) on his second gentile mission when they arrived in the city of Philippi. 128 Lydia was originally from Thyatira, a city in Asia Minor (modern-day Turkey) in the province of Lydia, which is possibly the source of her name (Acts 16:14). The Lydians were famous for dying textiles, which may explain why Lydia sold the expensive dye known as “purple.”129 As a seller of the purple she would have walked in wealthy circles and possibly held prominence in society.

The Book of Acts describes Lydia as a gentile who “worshiped God.” This title was used to identify investigators or those who embraced monotheism with Jehovah as their God, but not necessarily all the tenets of Judaism at that time (Acts 16:14). These gentile proselytes who accepted monotheism and upheld the laws of Moses were still welcome to worship with the Jews even without being constrained to live all 613 of the Mosaic laws. This was especially significant for men, as this meant they did not need to undergo the often-fatal adult circumcision.130

Lydia met Paul during a Jewish worship service. When the four missionaries arrived in Philippi, they “went out of the city by a river side,” on the Sabbath, because “prayer was wont to be made” (Acts 16:13). Paul and his companions “sat down, and spake unto the women which resorted thither” (Acts 16:13).131 The “Lord opened” Lydia’s heart and “she attended unto the things which were spoken of Paul” (Acts 16:14). She was not only baptized, but also influenced all of her household to convert to Christianity.132

Her generosity and love for the Lord’s servants led her to invite Paul and his companions to stay in her home: “If ye have judged me to be faithful to the Lord, come into my house, and abide there” (Acts 16:15). The four missionaries moved in and remained there until forced to

128 The Roman capital city of Philippi was founded by Philip, the father of Alexander the Great, as a frontier fortress. The nearby gold mines helped make him rich. It became a Roman colony when Octavius (who became Augustus Caesar) and Antony conquered Brutus and Cassius (who committed suicide there). Philippi was a walled city with a military and agricultural center. Not many Jews lived there. 129 In the ancient world, “purple” was a rich dye associated with royal or expensive fabrics. The valuable substance was extracted from crustaceans that grew along their Mediterranean coastline. For most of biblical history the Phoenicians or Syrians controlled the indigenous harvest of this dye, ensuring a monopoly (see Exodus 25:4; 2 Chronicles 2:7, 14; 3:14; Proverbs 31:22; Song of Solomon. 3:10; Mark 15:17-20; John 19:2-5; Revelation 17:4; 18:12, 16).

130 Alan F. Segal, Paul the Convert: The Apostolate and Apostasy of Saul the Pharisee (New Haven, CT: Yale University, 1990), 105. W. D. Davies, Paul and Rabbinic Judaism (Philadelphia, PA: Fortress Press, 1980), 121, explains the steps for Jewish conversion: “Now the process by which a man was made a proselyte was threefold: it consisted of circumcision, immersion in water (i.e., baptism), and the presentation of an offering in the temple. Of these rites baptism assumed a growing importance.”

131 Acts 16:1-4, describes Timothy joining Paul and Silas on their second gentile mission. The text also suggests that Luke joined Paul’s missionary force. In the book of Acts, when the narrative includes “we” passages, it is assumed that the author, Luke, joined Paul. By studying the “we” passages, bible scholars assume that Luke stayed in Philippi—or at least did not rejoin Paul for seven years (approximately AD 51-58) until Paul came back to Philippi. (It is in Acts 20:6 that the “we” pronoun joins the story line again.) The complete “we” passages are: Acts 16:10, 12, and 17 (second mission between Troas and Philippi); 20:5-15; 21:1-18 (end of third mission from Philippi to Jerusalem); 27:1-28:16 (Paul as a prisoner from Caesarea to Rome). Also, it appears that Luke was with Paul during his first (Colossians 4:14; Philippians 24) and second Roman imprisonments (1 Timothy 4:11). 132 We do not know if the Christian conversion of “households” were conscripted or individual choices. Knowing the importance of agency in Christ’s church, I would be surprised if the apostles baptized any against their will. That said, I presume in some cases, a servant may have felt like an eight-year-old Latter-day Saint child who eagerly accepts baptism to belong to the same organization as the rest of the family. leave due to persecution (Acts 16:40). Luke recorded that Paul was whipped and then imprisoned, but, after a miraculous release (the walls of the prison collapsed in an earthquake, culminating in the conversion of the jailer), Paul and his companions returned briefly to Lydia’s house, “where they met with the brothers and sisters and encouraged them. Then they left” (Acts 16:40).133

In addition to her home being a refuge for the apostle and missionaries, Lydia’s home also became the “house-church” or location for Christian converts in Philippi to worship for years (Philippians 1:3-7; 4:1).

The apostle Paul began his scolding letter to the saints in Corinth with a report from those “which are of the house of Chloe” (1 Corinthians 1:11). Paul must have known that her house had a good reputation and was trusted among the saints, because he acknowledged the “house of Chloe” as the source of his information (which was especially delicate, considering that the feedback was negative). Paul probably developed his respect of Chloe and her household during his eighteen-month-long stay in Corinth on his second mission, and he renewed that friendship when he returned to Corinth at the end of his third mission.

Between Paul’s first two visits to Corinth, Chloe’s people reported to the apostle that the Corinthian saints had “contentions among [themselves] . . . every one of you saith, I am of Paul; and I of Apollos; and I of Cephas; and I of Christ” (1 Corinthians 1:12).134 These divisions may have been within or between multiple house-churches in Corinth. After Paul’s eighteen months there, he sent Timothy and other missionaries to serve in Corinth: “I have planted, Apollos watered; but God gave the increase” (1 Corinthians 3:6). With a large population and strong missionary force, the saints most likely had multiple house-churches with various leaders, but only Chloe is singled out in 1 Corinthians as one who led a house esteemed by Paul to be a reputable source.

Paul first met Priscilla and her husband Aquila when he arrived in Corinth on his second apostolic mission. Priscilla and Aquila were Jewish refugees who had fled Rome when rioting between the two groups prompted Claudius Caesar (reigned AD 41-54) to expel all Jews and Christians from the capital city (Acts 18:2-3).136 However, due to the vast number of Jews in Rome, the task of enforcing the edict became too daunting. Priscilla and Aquila had already fled

133 Paul wrote to the Philippian saints over a decade after Lydia’s conversion. In the Epistle, he mentions two other women by name, Euodias and Syntyche. As he exhorts the saints to unity, he calls on the two ladies to “be of the same mind in the Lord” (Philippians 4:2).

134 Paul heard several other problems among the Corinthian saints: “It is reported commonly. . .” which may have come from the same trusted source of Chloe or her people (1 Corinthians 5:1). 135 Paul consistently refers to her in his letters as Prisca, while Luke writes out Priscilla. 136 Thirty years earlier (c. AD 19), Tiberius Caesar had also expelled the Jews from Rome for a time. See Appendix 2. Claudius Caesar’s reaction against the Jews and their splinter groups may also have been tied up in the Jewish problems in Palestine that accompanied Agrippa I’s death; a resurgence of Zealots developed from AD 48-52. to Greece (Acts 18:2) by the time Claudius had modified his edict to forbid Jews and their splinter groups, including Christians, from holding meetings.137

The couple generously welcomed Paul into their new home in Corinth as a fellow Christian and “because he was a tentmaker” (Acts 18:3, NIV). Priscilla and Aquila converted from Judaism to Christianity before Paul moved in with them.138 Paul presumably worked with Aquila making canvas or leather tents to support himself (Acts 20:34; 1 Corinthians 4:12; 9:12; 1 Thessalonians 2:9; 2 Thessalonians 3:8).139 He stayed with them for a year and a half, after which his hosts joined him as missionaries and sailed with him to Ephesus (Acts 18:18).

It appears that our heroic couple may have worked as missionaries for almost a decade. We know that they were back in Rome by approximately AD 57 because Paul included a personalized note to them in his Epistle to the Romans (Romans 16:3). He refers to them as “my helpers in Christ Jesus: Who have for my life laid down their own necks: unto whom not only I give thanks, but also all the churches of the Gentiles” (Romans 16:3-4). They must have also hosted a house-church in Rome, because Paul then greets “the church that is in their house” (Romans 16:5). Priscilla and Aquila became Paul’s lifelong friends (1 Corinthians 16:19), and they stand as ideal examples of a Christian couple unified in the Lord’s work.

The NIV translation reads: “Give my greetings to the brothers and sisters at Laodicea, and to Nympha and the church in her house" (NIV), and most English translations also read, “her church” (ESV, NASB, ISV, RSV, BLB, etc.). Yet the KJV reads “his house.” Yet, this is the only known reference in ancient literature to Nympha as a name, as it means bride. Perhaps it was a nick name for the more common names: Nymphaeus, Nymphodorus and Nymphius. The personal pronoun was used here, “autos / he, she, it.” The gender was usually known by the name. Several ancient Greek manuscripts of the text use the accents to point to a feminine name. Whomever it referenced, this member of the Laodicea church, opened their home for Christian worship.140

Women honored for Faith and Good Works

The virtuous disciple Tabitha came from the Judean coastal community of Joppa and holds the distinction of being the only woman in the New Testament referred to by the feminine form of the Greek word “disciple / mathetria.” (However, the Greek of Acts 9:36 suggests that there were others.)141 As a Christian disciple, she broke the pharisaic restrictions against women and

137 F. F. Bruce, New Testament History, 295-304. Regardless of Claudius’ attempts to suppress Jewish / Christian arguments, Christianity grew during his reign, thanks in part to the efforts of missionaries like Priscilla and her husband.

138 Ronald Brownrigg, Who’s Who in the New Testament (NYC, NY: Routledge, 2002), 16.

Matthews, Selected Writings of Robert J. Matthews: Gospel Scholars Series, 287–288. 140 The Greek 139 Richard Lloyd Anderson, Understanding Paul (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book, 1983), 335–336. Robert J. word “nympha” means bride, and “nymphas” bridegroom, so it is also possible that it may refer to the

church as the bride of Christ. Yet Apostolic Church usually honored the families who host worship services by calling them by name (Acts 12:12; 16:40; 1 Corin 1:11).

141 Meyers, Craven, Kraemer, ed., Women in Scripture, 159. became a female pupil of the gospel and a public figure among the needy. The Christian community knew Tabitha for her contributions of time and service: “she was always doing good and helping the poor,” which included making for others “shirts and coats” (Acts 9:37, NIV, 9:39, ISV).

Bible readers know her best as the woman whom Peter raised from the dead, as recorded in the book of Acts. Luke, the author, begins Tabitha’s story as she becomes ill. Two men run to the neighboring town to ask the apostle Peter to help them. Acts 9:39-40 reads:

When he was come, they brought him into the upper chamber: and all the widows stood by

him weeping, and shewing the coats and garments which Dorcas made, while she was with

them. But Peter put them all forth, and kneeled down, and prayed; and turning him to the

body said, Tabitha, arise. And she opened her eyes: and when she saw Peter, she sat up. Her healing had a great impact “throughout all Joppa; and many believed in the Lord” (Acts 9:42). Tabitha’s healing allowed others to develop faith, thus opening the way for their spiritual healing.

In Luke’s two volumes of Scripture (the Gospel and Acts), he recorded three similar miracles that were performed first by Jesus, then by Peter, and finally by Paul. Luke introduced Tabitha as his example of Peter raising the dead (Acts 9:40), which paralleled Jesus raising Jairus’ daughter (Luke 8:52-54), and Paul raising Eutychus (Acts 20:9-10). Luke organized the structure of his two books using parallel comparisons between the Lord and His apostles. Luke tells of these three people—two females and one male—who were brought back from the dead to stand as witnesses that God’s power, whether the healing is given by Jesus or His servants, “is the same” (D&C 1:38). Mark also adds that miracles “follow them that believe” (Mark 16:17).142 Tabitha’s restored life acts as a powerful female witness.

6 & 7. Eunice and Lois (Acts 16:1-3; 2 Timothy 1:5)

In his Epistle to Timothy, Paul praises Timothy’s faithful mother and grandmother by name: Eunice and Lois. He commends these two faithful women for teaching their son and grandson, respectively, about Christ. Timothy’s father was a Gentile, so the women had taken it upon themselves to teach him. Timothy learned so well what Paul said: “I am reminded of your sincere faith, which first lived in your grandmother Lois and in your mother Eunice and, I am persuaded, now lives in you also . . . how from infancy you have known the Holy Scriptures” (2 Timothy 1:5; 3:15; NIV). Eunice and Lois instilled their faith into Timothy, by fostering a love of the holy word from his “infancy” (2 Timothy 3:15, NIV). Whether these two women were literate or simply had many Scriptures memorized we are not told, though they provided Timothy with opportunities to study, inspiring him by the example of their faith. The enthusiasm for the Scriptures exemplified by this mother and grandmother was contagious, such that their posterity developed a deep love for God’s words.

We do not know when Lois and Eunice converted to Christianity. Perhaps it took place during Paul’s first apostolic mission to their home town Lystra. Yet we do know that by Paul’s second and third apostolic missions, Timothy had joined him in the missionary force (Acts 16:1-2; 18:5; 19:22; 20:4). Through their work together, Timothy became like family to Paul:

142 Outside of Luke’s writings, John includes the story of Lazarus raised from dead (John 11:43). “Timothy, my own son in the faith” (1Timothy 1:2, 18; 2 Timothy 1:1-2; 1 Corinthians 4:17).143 Rather than emphasizing his own role in developing Timothy’s spirituality, Paul credits those two most influential women in Timothy’s early life—Lois and Eunice—for teaching and preparing him. These women demonstrated the crucial principle that our most efficacious missionary work is often within our own families. One of the greatest gifts a parent can give a child is an inheritance of faith, as Eunice and Lois modeled.144 These two women lived the truths of Christianity to the fullest, blessing their posterity with faith even in a divided-faith home.

We assume Phebe was a gentile convert to Christianity because her name comes from Greek mythology.145 Paul recommends her to the Roman saints as a stalwart member and laborer in the kingdom: “I commend unto you Phebe our sister, which is a servant of the church which is at Cenchrea: That ye receive her in the Lord, as becometh saints, and that ye assist her in whatsoever business she hath need of you: for she hath been a succourer of many, and of myself also” (Romans 16:1). He also expresses appreciation for her generous service. He called her “sister,” just as he called his beloved Timothy “brother” (1 Thessalonians 3:2 and 2 Corinthians 1:1). His familial words suggest a kindred partnership.

An analysis of two of the Greek words used to describe Phebe sheds even more light on her role among the Corinthian saints. First, she is described as “servant / diakonos” (Romans 16:1). The New Testament uses the word “ diakonos” thirty times, which is translated in the KJV as either “minister” (twenty times), “servant” (seven times), or “deacon” (three times). We do not know for sure, but this may have referred to Phebe’s church assignment or office. Another definition for diakonos is the “discharge[r] of certain obligations in the community.” 146 It describes one who cares for the poor, assists with missionary work, has an office as a servant of God, or is a “servant of a spiritual power.”147

Modern English Bibles translate her title more literally as, “deaconess” or “deacon” (e.g., RSV, NJB, NRSV, and NIV). Whatever the translation, Paul communicates that Phebe was an assistant and helper in the early church. She then acted in conjunction with her church position and used her means and influence to build the church. Christianity opened the way for her to expand her service and exert her influence into her church community.

143 Timothy is mentioned in seven of the New Testament Epistles, but his gentile birth father is left unnamed. It appears that Luke felt Timothy’s mother and grandmother were more important to Christianity than his father, so he includes their names—Lois and Eunice.

144 Anderson, Understanding Paul, 362; also see Appendix 3. 145 Meyers, Craven, Kraemer, Women in Scripture, 135-136. Phoibe is a female name, but it was used “in the masculine form, [as] an epithet of the Greek god Apollo.”

146 G. Kittel, ed., Geoffrey W. Bromiley, translator, Theological Dictionary of the New Testament (Grand Rapids MI: Eerdmans Publishing, 1965), ii. 87. “It is, of course, an open question whether he is referring to a fixed office or simply to her services on behalf of the community” (93).

147 Ibid., 89.

Romans 16:1-2

NIV YLT ISV ‘‘

I commend to you our sister And I commend you to Phebe Now I commend to you our Phoebe, a deacon of the our sister—being a ministrant sister Phoebe, a deaconess church in Cenchreae. I ask of the assembly that is in in the church at Cenchrea. you to receive her in the Cenchrea—that ye may Welcome her in the Lord as Lord in a way worthy of his receive her in the Lord, as doth is appropriate for saints, and people and to give her any become saints, and may assist provide her with anything help she may need from you, her in whatever matter she she may need from you, for for she has been the may have need of you— for she has assisted many benefactor of many people, she also became a leader of people, including me. including me. many, and of myself.

The second word used to describe Phebe, “succourer / prostatis,” is used only once in the KJV New Testament (Romans 16:2). It designates a woman who is a “protectress, patroness, helper.”148 Other English translations use “sponsor” (CEB), “helper” (ASV, NAS, NKJV, RSV, WEB), “patron” (ESV), and “benefactor” (NRSV, HCS, NIV). Another translation reads: “she has proved to be of great assistance to many, including myself.”149

She may also have consecrated her wealth for the benefit of the church, as she is called a benefactor or patron in behalf of Paul and others (Romans 16:2, NIV, ESV). Certainly, he respected her and opened the door for her to receive the same esteem from the church leaders in Rome. Phebe traveled on official church business as a missionary or church worker under the apostle’s direction, and it appears that she personally transported Paul’s Epistle to the Roman saints.150 Her story offers the modern reader a glance at the ministerial opportunities offered by women in early Christianity.

The book of Romans introduces another outstanding woman named Junia (a Latin name commonly given to Roman girls) who labored with Paul.151 In the closing chapter of the Epistle to the Romans, Paul asks the Roman saints to “Greet Andronicus and Junia, my kinsmen and my fellow prisoners.” The Greek word for “kinsman” had a broad definition, so Andronicus and Junia could have been close family members or distant relatives connected through the tribes of Israel or Benjamin.

Paul mentions Andronicus and Junia together as if they were married or siblings. The two of them became Christians before Paul’s own conversion (“who also were in Christ before me,” Romans 16:7). This information about their long-standing discipleship explains why they were

148 Walter Bauer, revised by F. Wilbur Gingrich, Frederick W. Danker, A Greek–English Lexicon of the New Testament and Other Early Christina Literature, 2nd ed. (Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 1979), 718. 149 Bauer, A Greek–English Lexicon of the New Testament, 885. 150 Ibid. This conclusion comes from examining other mail carriers for Paul, like Epaphroditus in Philippians 2:25-30 and Tychicus in Colossians 4:7-9.

151 Ibid., 107. Scholars who have looked for the name Junia, found that it “occurs over 250 times among inscriptions from ancient Rome alone,” but it is always used as a female’s name, never a male.

“well known to the apostles” (Romans 16:7, ESV). The Greek text of this verse also suggests that Junia was even “prominent among the apostles” (CEB, RSV, NRSV). Other translators interpret the phrase to mean that Andronicus and Junia were actual apostles, “outstanding among the apostles” (Romans 16:7, NIV), or “leaders among the apostles” (NIRV). The Greek can be read either way.152 The word “apostolos” means “ambassador of the Gospel; officially a commis-sioner of Christ . . . [a] messenger, he that is sent.”153 We do not know what church assignments Junia and Andronicus filled. What we do know is that Junia was a noble woman of great faith, a long-term member—despite persecution and imprisonment—and a great witness of Christ. Unnamed Women

The New Testament contains over twice the number of references to unnamed women as it does to named women. From fictitious women in Jesus’ parables to women as real as His own sisters, the New Testament records the stories of 111 anonymous women.154 In Scripture, unnamed does not mean unnoticed or unimportant. Appendix 3 includes all 180 women referenced in the New Testament. In addition to some of the best-known unnamed women mentioned previously (i.e., the Samaritan woman at the well and the woman with a twelve-year hemorrhage), two groups of unnamed women deserve specific attention, as they stand out as energized disciples in the apostolic church: Philip’s four prophetess daughters and the sisters from Philippi, including Paul’s “yokefellow” (Philippians 4:3).

Luke records that Philip the evangelist from Caesarea had four prophetic daughters: “four daughters, virgins, which did prophesy” (Acts 21:8-9). 155 With only six words preserved about them, we learn that the girls acted as instruments in God’s work, were morally pure, possessed the Spirit of the Lord, and actively used the gift of prophecy to bless others. Because “the testimony of Jesus is the spirit of prophecy,” we can surmise that the girls had testimonies of Jesus the Christ as their Savior and Redeemer (Revelation 19:10).156 About the same time, Paul

152 Of the eighty-one times we find apostolos in the New Testament, the KJV translated it seventy-eight times as “apostle,” twice as “messenger,” and once as “one sent.” Of the four Gospels, only the book of Luke uses “apostolos” regularly, with Mathew and Mark using it once each and John not at all. Luke uses it to identify Jesus’ closest companions or the Quorum of the Twelve apostles (Luke 6:13). Yet as the church grew, the rest of the biblical writers seemed to differentiate between members of the “Twelve” and other “apostles” or “those sent.” In addition to the original Twelve apostles of the Lord, the New Testament refers to “apostolos” as Matthias (Acts 1:26), James the Lord's brother (Galatians 1:19), Paul (Romans1:1; Galatians 1:1, 17, etc.), Barnabas (Acts 14:14), Apollo (1 Corinthians 4:6, 9; 3:4-6, 22), Timothy and Silvanus (1Thessalonians 1:1 with 2:6), and possibly, Junia and Andronicus (Romans16:7).

153 James Strong, The New Strong’s New Exhaustive Concordance of the Bible (Nashville, Atlanta, London, Vancouver, TN: Thomas Nelson Publishers, 1995), 12; Greek dictionary for “apostolos.” 154 Appendix 3 lists 45 named women, 94 unnamed actual women, 14 unnamed fictional women, and 27 general references to women. Although the mother of the Lord is named in the synoptic Gospels, John does not name her, but refers to her as “mother of the Lord,” so she receives two references, but I do not count her twice. 155 Phillip is one of the men chosen to serve the widows in Acts 6:3, “Look ye out among you seven men of honest report, full of the Holy Ghost and wisdom, whom we may appoint,” which list also includes Stephen. 156 Joseph Smith confirmed John the Revelator’s message in a sermon, when he spoke, “John the Revelator says that the testimony of Jesus is the Spirit of prophicy [sic]. Now if any man has the testimony of Jesus has he not the spirit of prophecy and if he has the spirit of prophicy [sic]. I ask is he not a prophet and if a prophet will[,] he can receive revalation [sic]” (Ehat and Cook, Words of Joseph Smith, 230). admonishes all the saints in Corinth to seek the gift of prophecy (1 Corinthians 12:10, 31). Regardless of whether the sisters recognized this apostolic endorsement, they were inspired to use this gift of the Spirit (Acts 21:9). In this signal verse, we learn a great deal about Philip’s four daughters and honor each of them as a saint and prophetess of God.157

On Paul’s second apostolic mission, he felt a special call to Philippi, a chief city of Macedonia (Acts 16:12-40).158 A dozen years later when Paul was imprisoned (possibly in Rome), the Philippian saints sent someone to help him. Paul wrote to thank the saints for their thoughtfulness and faithfulness.159 In the last phrase of Philippians 4:3, Paul specifically thanks the “women which labored with me in the gospel,” establishing the church in Philippi. From an ancient perspective, Paul’s acknowledgment of those women shows a major innovation to Judeo-Greco-Roman worship. It suggests that women had the opportunity to serve in a religious setting, and that they were most likely testifying and witnessing in public—all of which Paul’s Pharisaic upbringing prohibited. His expression of gratitude speaks not only of his appreciation for the women, but also of his willingness to broadcast the women’s example to other Christians. He empowers women with opportunities to serve and trusts them to help build the Kingdom of God.

In the same Epistle to the Philippians, Paul asks his “yokefellow” for special help: “I intreat thee also, true yokefellow, help those women which labored with me in the gospel” (Philippians 4:3). This verse tells us not only that Paul valued the women who served with him, but also that another woman worked side by side with the missionaries and apostles. The term expresses a close relationship and is evidence of women’s new roles in the nascent Christian church. By giving instructions to “help” the women in the ministry, we see his sensitivity to the needs of the sisters in Philippi.

Paul’s personal note to his “true yokefellow” in this verse has piqued the interest of biblical

yokefellow / suzugos? The Greek word means “co-yoked . . . colleague,” and comes from the 160 root students for centuries (Philippians 4:3). To whom did Paul refer when he used the tender title of suzeugnumi, “to yoke together . . . in marriage.” In today’s parlance the terms “soul

mate,” “loyal companion,” “colleague,” or “spouse” might be used. These definitions share similarities to that of the word “help meet / 'ezer”—“an authority corresponding to him”—which

157 The word “prophetess” is used eight times in the Bible to describe several women (Luke 2:36-38; Revelation 2:20; Exodus 15:20, Judges 4:4; 2 Kings 22:14; Nehemiah 6:14; and Isaiah 8:3); although the word is not defined. Most refer to women who prophesied, though in Isaiah, “the prophetess” meant she was the wife of the prophet. Philip’s daughters are not included in that number, although perhaps they should be, as Acts 21:9 reads “virgins, which did prophesy.”

158 Paul went to Philippi following his vision that called him to northern Greece (Macedonia): “there stood a man of Macedonia, and prayed him, saying, Come over into Macedonia, and help us” (Acts 16:9). Paul, Timothy, and Silas immediately left Troas in Asia and entered Europe via northern Greece (c. AD 50-52). Philippi was located at the foot of Mount Pagaeus on the highway Via Egnatia that links the east and west across the Roman Empire. The city, ten miles inland, was the “chief city” in the north-eastern region of Greece (Acts 16:12). 159 The Philippians sent Epaphroditus, a companion and co-worker to help Paul in prison. At the time the letter was written, Epaphroditus was recovering from an illness and returning home (Philippians 4:18; 2:25-26). 160 Strong, Exhaustive Concordance of the Bible, 85. Greek dictionary of “yokefellow / suzugos.” described the relationship between Adam and Eve (Genesis 2:18, KJV, ISV).161 While we do not know with certainty the gender of Paul’s yokefellow, the context of verse 3 (an exhortation to, “help those women”) allows us to assume that she was indeed a female.162 Clement of Alexandria (who wrote in approximately AD 200, but worked from earlier sources) identifies the “yokefellow” from Philippians 4:2 as Paul’s wife.163 If that were the case, it implies that she, too, experienced a change of heart, converting to Christianity, and was similarly devoted and hard-working in the cause of Christ.

Paul’s Marriage. Whoever the yokefellow was, as a strict Pharisee (Acts 26:5) Paul would have most certainly married as a young man. He had to comply with Jewish protocol, which pressed all boys to marry close to age eighteen.164 Significant commandments given to every young man included marriage;165 at one point Paul boasts, “touching the righteousness which is in the law, [I am] blameless” (Philippians 3:6). We also find scriptural evidence of Paul’s marriage in 1 Corinthians 9:5, when he claimed to have “Do we not have the right to take along a believing wife, as do the other apostles” (ESV). Paul denounces those who preached celibacy in his list of wickedness: “The Spirit speaketh expressly, that in the latter times some shall depart from the faith, giving heed to seducing spirits, and doctrines of devils . . . Forbidding to marry . . . which God hath created to be received with thanksgiving of them which believe and know the truth” (1 Timothy 4:1-3). Regardless of who Paul’s wife—or his yokefellow—was, Philippians 4:3 speaks of men and women working in harmony to build the church.

II. A Puzzling Passage in 1 Timothy 2:9-15

The Epistles attributed to Paul speak positively in at least twelve examples of women teaching or preaching in the church.166 Unlike these positive illustrations, a passage in 1 Timothy, seems inconsistent and sticks out like a sore thumb as it reduces woman’s opportunity for participation in church services. Either 1 Timothy 2:9-15 is incongruous with the other dozen examples, or we have misunderstood the author’s intent regarding Timothy. This paradoxical

161 The forthcoming biblical translation Transparent English Bible is more allegiant to the literal text. It honors the words over accepted interpretation, modern grammar, or dogma. It translates “help meet” as “his one before.” 162 Other scholars suggest the ‘“yokefellow’ was a bishop or overseer.” James Dunn, John Rogerson, Eerdmans Commentary of the Bible (Grand Rapids, MI: Eerdmans, 2003), 1401. 163 Clement of Alexandria, Stromata ("Miscellanies") 3.6.74-76, also cited in Eusebius, Ecclesiastical History 3:30. 164 Mishnah, Avoth, 5:21. Also as a “young man / neanias,” Saul acts as a witness for the Sanhedrin in Acts 7:58, which would have required compliance with this very important Jewish protocol. Unlike the modern English usage, “young man / neanias” in New Testament Greek covered a broad span of years between ages twenty-four and forty. William F. Arndt et al., Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, 2nd ed. (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1979).

165 Mishnah , Avoth 5:21 lists the ideal man’s life including, “[eighteen] to the bride chamber.” See chapter 4 under “Marriage,” and chapter 7 under “Children’s education.”

166 Looking at whole Pauline sphere, references that show support of women teaching include: Romans 12:7; 16:1-2; 1 Corinthians 12:28-29; Galatians 6:5-6, “hekastos / everyone;” Ephesians 4:8, “anthropos / male or female,” 4:11, 29; Philippians 4:3, 2 Timothy 2:2; Titus 2:3-4; also see Acts 18:26). Modern critical biblical scholars question the Pauline authorship of the pastoral letters and others. Only seven Epistles are generally accepted as pure Pauline (Romans, 1 & 2 Corinthians, Galatians, Philippians, 1 Thessalonians and Philemon). However, in this book, I refer to the author as Paul of the entire traditional corpus (Romans through Hebrews), even though that is debated at present by scholars. passage deserves to be addressed, if only to show that it clashes with the teachings of Christ and the majority of the apostles’ canonized writings.

In nearly every chapter of 1Timothy, the author warns against the problem of false and inappropriate teachers (e.g., 1 Timothy 1:3; 2:12; 3:2; 4:11; 6:2, 3).167 It is as if a misty fog of apostasy were already seeping into the new church.168 Paul (the traditional author) writes as the older and more experienced apostle guiding his beloved younger leader, Timothy, as the latter supervised the region of Ephesus (1 Timothy 1:3).169 If the original author were Paul, he also knew that area well, as he had lived with the saints in Ephesus for three years during an earlier mission (Acts 19:1, 20:31). Tradition holds that the apostle John also lived and presided there at one time.170 With these two apostles and Timothy living, teaching, and supervising the region of Ephesus, we can imagine that the saints in Ephesus had been well taught.

In this letter, the author counsels men on how to pray appropriately and respectfully (1 Timothy 2:8).171 His next words act as a linking phrase, “In like manner also . . .,” as he advises women. We might assume that Paul will continue his discussion on appropriate prayer, but he does not, perhaps because praying in anger or with doubts was not a problem for them. Instead, he counsels women to “adorn themselves in modest apparel, with shamefacedness and sobriety; not with broided hair, or gold, or pearls, or costly array; but (which becometh women professing godliness) with good works” (1 Timothy 2:9-10).

Some of the words in the KJV are archaic and can lead to misunderstandings throughout this difficult passage, but it is evident that the author wants Christian women to replace worldliness and self-promotion with selfless service.172 Starting with the KJV phrase “shamefacedness and sobriety,” a few twentieth century translations can help clarify 1 Timothy 2:9.

167 William Farmer, ed., The International Bible Commentary (Collegeville, MN: Liturgical Press, 1998), 1733. “First Timothy could be entitled, ‘The Gospel of Paul in Conflict with False Teaching.’” 168 Anderson, Understanding Paul, 317, 344, 371-373. 169 Ibid., 314-17. Richard Lloyd Anderson supports the traditional dates of the writing of 1 Timothy to fall sometime between AD 63 and 66 after Paul’s first Roman imprisonment, during another Pauline Mediterranean ministry. It appears that Paul taught Timothy on his first Gentile mission in Lystra, after which Timothy joined Paul on his second apostolic mission, and became a beloved companion ever after (Acts 16:2). 170 Bromiley, The International Standard Bible Encyclopedia, 1.171, “. . . however, in harmony with the well-founded tradition that Ephesus was the scene of John’s later activity.” 171 Paul singles out “men / male / aner” in verse and gives them specific instruction on how to pray “lifting up holy hands, without wrath and doubting” (1 Timothy 2:8).

172 The churches under Timothy’s care in Ephesus were not the only ones with this problem. In the book of Revelation, John describes the great harlot and mother of abomination with similar ornaments: “the woman was arrayed in purple and scarlet colour and decked with gold and precious stones and pearls” (Revelation 17:4). Peter, too, disapproved of women who prioritized their worldly adornments over inner goodness: “Your beauty should reside, not in outward adornment—the braiding of the hair or jewelry, or dress—but in the inmost centre of your being, with its imperishable ornament, a gentle quiet spirit which is of high value in the sight of God” (1 Peter 3:3-4, NEB).

1 Timothy 2:9

KJV JB NAS RSV Welch-Hall173 Shamefacedness Quietly Modestly Modestly, In good taste, and and and and in a manner sobriety modestly discreetly sensibly that brings

honorable

respect

The author sees a specific problem with some women’s materialistic desires and prideful attitudes. Four times in the same letter, he cautions those who tried to impress others by their appearance (1 Timothy 5:6, 13; 6:9, 17). He contrasts eternal and superficial priorities.

It appears that Paul’s concern with women’s worldliness was only a tangent to the larger

problem of misplaced values and false teaching infiltrating the church community (1 Timothy 6:3-5). His specific concern with women’s hair (verse 9) may stem from the multigenerational Jewish custom that required moral women to hide or cover their hair. (The Talmud also lists several rules for men’s hair.174) As we discussed in chapter 1, Pharisaic Jews insisted that a woman veil herself head to toe when she left her home.175 If that same woman converted to Christianity, she then had the freedom of going out with her hair uncovered. Some women may have over reacted with their new freedom and concentrated more time and money on their hair adornments than on more worthwhile or charitable activities. Or perhaps part of the problem may be that male Jewish-Christian leaders (possibly even the converted Pharisee Paul) found the women’s new freedom in dress and uncovered hair too startling.

With this as context, let us now take a close look at the first puzzling verse: “Let the woman learn in silence with all subjection” (1 Timothy 2:11).176 First of all, any encouragement for women to learn the gospel should be seen as great progress and as a positive cultural breakthrough. For many previous generations women were kept from studying their Scriptures at all, and now that prohibition is clearly lifted. Secondly, Paul’s pharisaic background taught that women should remain quiet around men.177 A woman joining in religious worship was rare, but her offering opinions or questions on religious topics must have been a drastic change to which many men were not accustomed.

Third, considering alternate translations can help to elucidate Paul’s meaning. Many twentieth century English translations (NEB, NAS, NIV, etc.) change the word “subjection” to a form of the word “submit.” It is true that anyone—male or female, young or old—learns best

173 John W. Welch and John Hall, Charting the New Testament (Provo, UT: FARMS, 2002), 15-14. 174 Steinberg, Encyclopedia of Jewish Medical Ethics, 954. “A groom during his seven days of wedding feasts is allowed to cut his hair. . . . A Priest (Kohen) may not let his hair grow wild but is obligated to cut it every thirty days, . . . A High Priest cuts his hair every Friday. A king cuts his hair every day. The men of the watch in the temple cut their hair on Thursdays in honor of the Sabbath.”

175 Although Greco-Roman women did not have to keep their heads and bodies covered, and as many of the converts were gentiles previously, this was not an issue for them. Nevertheless, for their leaders who were often converts from Judaism, like Paul, it may have been an issue.

176 This verse sounds similar to 1 Corinthians 14:34-35, discussed in chapter 3 in this book. In that discussion we argue that words were added by a later editor.

177 See chapter 1, “Communication.” when he or she has a humble or submissive attitude as a learner. None of these translations uses the KJV word “silence.”

1 Timothy 2:11

________________________________ KJV NIV NEB JB Welch Hall178 Let the A woman A woman During instruction Let women learn

woman learn should learn in must be a learner a woman should in serenity, with in silence with quietness and listening quietly be quiet and deference in all subjection full of and with due respectful peace of soul

submission submission

The recurrence of words like “quiet,” or “peace,” and “silent” implies that irreverence may have been a problem in some church services (also see 1 Corinthians 14:26-33 and chapter 3 in this book). Allowing women to bring their children to worship services would have added to the problem of irreverence (or at least made sounds that the men were unaccustomed to hearing in that setting, and may have found distracting). However, Paul does not single out women for this problem. An earlier letter reads: “We beseech you, brethren . . . study to be quiet, and to do your own business, and to work with your own hands, as we commanded you” (1 Thessalonians 4:10, 11). Paul’s counsel to reverently listen and learn is similar to latter-day revelation which teaches: “Learn of me, and listen to my words; walk in the meekness of my Spirit, and you shall have peace in me” (D&C 19:23).179 The Spirit directs learning when one submits reverently to God.

The next verse continues in a condemnatory manner: “But I suffer not a woman to teach, nor to usurp authority over the man, but to be in silence” (1 Timothy 2:12). This verse echoes rabbinic statements from the late Second Temple era and beyond when women were not allowed to teach or speak in public, but sat separated from men in the synagogue, with no authority to testify.180 Recall how the Lord and His apostles called Christian women to witness and testify of Jesus as the Son of God. Just a few chapters later, the author attacks all false teachers, not just the gender of the instructor: “If any man [“ei tis / whoever, anyone,” male or female] teach otherwise, and consent not to wholesome words, even the words of our Lord Jesus Christ, and to the doctrine which is according to godliness . . . from such withdraw thyself” (1 Timothy 6:3, 5).

Did Paul add these verses in chapter 6 to clarify 1 Timothy 2:12? Also 2 Timothy 2:2 invites all upright church members to teach, preach, and witness: “The things that thou hast heard of me among many witnesses, the same commit thou to faithful men [anthropos / human, female or male], who shall be able to teach others also.” The Greek and later translations call for both men and women to become committed teachers.

By looking at the entire canonized corpus attributed to Paul, we find Paul inviting all to participate and teach, because “there is neither Jew nor Greek . . . male nor female: for ye are all one in Christ Jesus” (Galatians 3:28). Yet the Jewish tradition perpetuated Rabbi Eliezer’s teachings, “[Women] may not teach young children.”181

178 Welch and Hall, Charting the New Testament, 15-14. 179 Also see D&C 32:1; 90:15; 97:1; 107:99-100; 136:32. 180 Josephus, Antiquities, IV.8:15; Mishnah, Shebuoth, 4:1, only certain men could act as legal witnesses, “but not … women.”

181 Mishnah , Kiddushin 4.13.

In contrast, Paul teaches that older women should teach younger women to be wise (Titus 2:4).182 This was a vote of confidence that mature women had wisdom and were capable of teaching with the Spirit of God. By juxtaposing these examples of women teaching with his complaint of inappropriate teaching, it appears that Paul worried about falsehoods, not gender.183 We must again ask, what problem was the author trying to address? His main concern was to stop those who would usurp the priesthood authority and foster falsehoods (1 Timothy 1:6-8; 4:12; 5:17).184

The author concludes his argument by referencing the creation story from Genesis: “For it

was Adam who was first created, and then Eve. And it was not Adam who was deceived, but the

woman being deceived, fell into transgression” (1 Timothy 2:13-14, NASB). This verse retells the Genesis garden account with a punch at Eve’s transgression (Genesis 3:1-13). Unlike most Christians, Latter-day Saint doctrine honors Adam and Eve as prophet and prophetess, among the noblest of all mortals. Modern apostles have called the fall of Adam and Eve one of the “pillars of eternity.”185 Yet, in the late Second Temple era we find several derogatory statements about Eve.186 Instead of honoring Eve as the one who brought life, they emphasized: “through her we all die.”187

Still, these verses in 1 Timothy 2:13-14 do not seem to honor our first parents either.188 The text seems to force a cause and effect relationship between Eve partaking of the fruit and women not teaching or acting with authority.189 We find this type of scriptural interpretation in the Mishnah, which condemns women in general as liars, because Sarah lied (Genesis 18:5).190 This 182 Welch and Hall, Charting the New Testament, 15-14; summary of Titus 2:2-5. The only word for “aged” in the New Testament Textus Receptus is found here and in Philemon 1:9 when Paul refers to himself as aged (ten years or so before his death). Welch and Hall chose to translate verse twelve as: “the wife should not teach or usurp authority over her husband” giving the verse a family setting. A home setting does not fit into the framework of the letter though, and it seems out of place in a section tackling false teachers who impinged on the worship services. 183 Anderson, Understanding Paul, 317-319, 330-331.This confusing verse may hearken back to Paul’s urgent call for Timothy to denounce false teachers who were usurping proper priesthood authority, “you may command certain people not to teach different doctrines” (1 Timothy 1:3, Richard Anderson’s literal translation; also see 1 Timothy 1:4, 7; 2 Peter 2:1; etc.).

184 Ibid., 317. Anderson sees this letter “from the opening warning about rebuking false teachers to the closing language . . . [as a] sober warning against those reforming the revealed gospel.” A lack of respect for authority was a regular problem in other New Testament churches too—see1 Corinthians 9:1-5; 16:11; Titus 2:15. 185 Bruce R. McConkie, Sermons and Writings of Bruce R. McConkie (Salt Lake City, UT: Bookcraft, 1989), 190. Elder McConkie gave this talk at a BYU Devotional on February 17, 1981 and referred to the three pillars as the creation, the fall, and the atonement.

186 Ben Sira, Ecclesiasticus, 26:1. See Appendix 2 for more. 187 Ibid., 26:12-17.

188 Standing against this interpretation, the New Testament describes Adam and Eve as important pieces in the puzzle of earth life. Paul writes: “For as in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive” (1 Corinthians 15:22). Luke traced Jesus’ genealogy through his adopted father Joseph’s lineage back to Adam (seventy-seven names). In that genealogy, he honors the first parents not only as the lineage that brought the Savior, but also gave Adam the noble title “the son of God,” the only other person besides Jesus to share that name in the New Testament (Luke 3:38).

189 As discussed in the introduction, chapter 1, and Appendix 1, some Jewish writers from this era blamed Eve for the fall, death, and all of life’s trials (i.e., Ecclesiastics 25:24). 2 Esdras blamed Adam, “For the first Adam, burdened with an evil heart, transgressed and was overcome, as were also all who were descended from him. Thus the disease became permanent; the law was in the hearts of the people along with the evil root; but what was good departed, and the evil remained. (4 Ezra 3:20-21). Others blamed Satan (Wisdom of Solomon 2:24-25). Ben Sira blamed all women for Eve’s choice, thus rationalizing the need for men to control their wives and daughters as much as possible in order to keep sin under control (Ben Sira, Ecclesiasticus, 26:12-17). 190 Mishnah , Shebuoth, 4:1; see chapter 1, “Witnesses.” verse seems out of harmony with Paul’s other statements and those from our living prophets.191 These facts make me wonder if the verse, as it stands, was written or even intended by Paul.

The text continues in the same way: “Notwithstanding she shall be saved in childbearing, if they continue in faith and charity and holiness with sobriety.” Parents have the responsibility to obey all of God’s commandments, which include bringing children into the world, but this does not mean that one without children cannot be saved. Moreover, bearing a child does not bring salvation; as Paul drills, only Christ Jesus “hath saved us” (2 Timothy 1:9).

Joseph Smith made a significant clarification to 1 Timothy 2:15 by changing “she” to “they,” which gave to both parents the responsibility and blessing of childbearing.

1 Timothy 2:15 (emphasis added)

______________KJV JST______________

Notwithstanding she shall be saved in Notwithstanding they shall be saved in

childbearing, if they continue in faith childbearing, if they continue in faith

and charity and holiness with sobriety. and charity and holiness with sobriety. God designed Adam and Eve in a way to create offspring, and to raise them in a family unit, “in faith and charity” (1 Tim 2:15).192

Akin to Joseph Smith’s emphasis on having both parents join in God’s work of redemption through childbearing, Elder M. Russell Ballard of the Quorum of The Twelve restates the mutual relationship of both childbearing and priesthood power:

Men and women have different but equally valued roles. Just as a woman cannot conceive

a child without a man, so a man cannot fully exercise the power of the priesthood to

establish an eternal family without a woman. In other words, in the eternal perspective,

both the procreative power and the priesthood power are shared by husband and wife. And

as husband and wife, a man and a woman should strive to follow our Heavenly Father. The

Christian virtues of love, humility, and patience should be their focus as they seek the

blessings of the priesthood in their lives and for their family193 (emphasis added). Elder Ballard confirms the unified work of spouses in Christ’s restored Church: the power of God is seen in both procreation and priesthood powers (1 Corinthians 4:20).

Paul’s message in 1 Timothy 2:15 also speaks of women’s special role in God’s plan as co-creators.194 In this role, English translators emphasize two very different interpretations for the

191 D&C 25: 3, 7; “thou art an elect lady, whom I have called . . . to expound scriptures, and to exhort the church, according as it shall be given thee by my Spirit.”

192 I find it interesting that in chapter 2, the Prophet Joseph Smith only adds the plural “they,” not feeling the need to change any other verses (other than the spelling of braided and to change “but” to “for” in verse 12. We do not know exactly when he made these changes—he may have done so during his initial editing in 1830-31 or when he returned to the text afterwards. However, by the time Joseph asked the Church to publish his translation of the Bible, he had already called women to preside in the Relief Society, had empowered women to offer healing blessings, had called women to teach in worship services, and had ordained women with a washing and anointing to the Abrahamic priesthood.

193 Elder M. Russell Ballard, Ensign (May 2012): 19. 194 For more on this verse, see chapter 5 of this book. offspring. Either God prepared a way for Adam and Eve and their posterity to be saved through “the Child” (ISV, referring to Son of God); or, in the context of verse 13, bearing children is part of God’s plan for humanity (NASB).195

1 Timothy 2:15

WYC NASB ISV__________ But she shall be saved by But women will be Even though she will be generation of children, if she preserved through the saved through the birth of dwell perfectly in faith, and bearing of children if they the Child, if they continue love and holiness, with continue in faith and love and in faith, love, and holiness

soberness. sanctity with self- restraint. along with good judgment.

Paul’s counsel on the need for childbearing (either generally, or specifically to produce the

Son of God) may be interpreted as gender-specific to Eve and her daughters, but as we see throughout his Epistles, Paul promotes the joint efforts of both husband and wives in creating and raising children unto the Lord.196

The tenor of 1 Timothy 2:13-15 appears less respectful to women and is thus inconsistent with the Lord’s example, other statements from the New Testament Epistles, and modern apostles. These few verses seem to contain lingering ideas from the culture of the time, and need to benefit from the Lord’s liberating ideas. This inconsistency may be the possible result of a different author, editorial changes, a misunderstanding, or even the author’s mood on a given day. Rather than accepting them blindly, students of the Scriptures are responsible to seek the spirit of revelation and to confirm truth through one’s own mind and heart (D&C 8:2-3).

195 Focusing on another word in 1Timothy 2:15 also helps our understanding of this verse. Adam and Eve must join in the process of salvation, in being “saved / sozo / rescued,” by populating the earth and developing “faith . . . charity and holiness” (1 Timothy 2:15, KJV). The New Testament uses “saved / sozo” to teach humanity what they must contribute to their salvation by building on their belief with faith, prayer, baptism, hope, example, works, and obedience as found in other verses that use “saved / sozo” as shown below.1) “Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shalt be saved” (Acts 16:31; Romans 10:9; 1 Corinthians 1:21) 2) “Call on the Lord [to] be saved” (Acts 2:21; Romans 10:13)

3) “Baptism doth also now save us” (1 Peter 3:21; also Acts 2:40-41) 4) “We are saved by hope” (Romans 8:24)

5) “For what knowest thou, O wife, whether thou shalt save thy husband? or how knowest thou, O man, whether thou shalt save thy wife?” (1 Corinthians 7:16)

6) “For by grace are ye saved through faith” (Ephesians 2:8)

7) “Received . . . the love of the truth, that they might be saved” (2 Thessalonians 2:10) 8) “Take heed unto thyself, and unto the doctrine; continue in them: for in doing this thou shalt both save thyself, and them that hear thee” (1 Timothy 4:16).

9) “To save him . . . shew thee my faith by my works” (James 2:14-18; also Matthew 9:22; 14:30; 19:25; 27:42, 49; Mark 5:23, 28; 6:56; Luke 8:36; 13:23; 23:39; John 11:12).

10) “He which converteth the sinner from the error of his way shall save a soul from death, and shall hide a multitude of sins” (James 5:20).

196 For example, Ephesians 6:4 reads, “fathers, provoke not your children to wrath: but bring them up in the nurture and admonition of the Lord,” and 1 Thessalonians 2:11: “As ye know how we exhorted and comforted and charged every one of you, as a father doth his children.” Also see Colossians 3:21; Ephesians 5:31; 1 Timothy 5:1; Hebrews 12:7, 9, etc.

The emancipating changes that Jesus set in motion took time and resolve for people to absorb and incorporate. The cultural baggage that fettered the perception of women was not easily removed. After centuries of wallowing in unhealthy thought patterns, practices, and relationships, early Christians had the daunting task of changing their thinking and behavior. Most of the New Testament writings speak of women who valiantly served the Lord and dynamically helped build His church. Those sister saints were emancipated and empowered by the truth that set them free (John 8:32).

Guiding Questions

When we look at the entire body of the Christian Scripture about women’s roles in early Christian worship, a few glaring verses stick out as conflicting with the Lord and His apostles’ other statements and examples about women. Readers of the Bible have the challenge of working with edited, translated texts. In the case of the Epistles, the reader has the additional challenge of having access to only half (or less than half) of the original correspondences. Textual historians and priests preserved hundreds of different Greek manuscripts and thousands of fragments for each Epistle in the New Testament, none of which is exactly the same (though most differences are minimal without doctrinal importance).197

The textual changes are only part of the problem in understanding the Epistles; doctrinal and

cultural challenges also interfere with our modern perception of the Epistles. The reader often has to speculate on what behavioral problem precipitated the apostle’s advice, or what question triggered an answer. When I come to an unclear passage, I ask myself:

● Was the author referring to a specific problem? ● Is this consistent with what the author wrote elsewhere? ● Did the author mean this?

● What do other English or Greek translations have to say about this? ● Did Joseph Smith address this verse anywhere? ● What question drew out the answer or discussion?198 ● Is this doctrine or practice in harmony with the restored gospel and modern Scripture?

These questions will help us later on when we tackle some of the difficult passages about

women.

197 Fifty-five hundred ancient Greek copies or portions of the New Testament survive. The oldest 116 papyri date from the second to eighth century, 300 parchments in capital letters (or uncials) date from the third century, and 1,800 in lower case letters (or minuscule) from the ninth century. Richard Holzapfel, Eric Huntsman, Thomas Wayment, Jesus Christ and the World of the New Testament (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book, 2006), 7. 198 Joseph Smith Jr., History of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (1844; reprint Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book, 1980), 5.261.The Prophet Joseph Smith taught, “I have a key by which I understand the scriptures. I enquire, what was the question which drew out the answer?”
