Christian Women Prophesied and Veiled for Special Prayer

.

The majority of the New Testament encourages women to pray, serve, teach and witness.199 As highlighted in the previous chapter, the Lord authorized early Christian women to teach and to serve in the church. This chapter focuses on how Christianity empowered women to pray and prophesy in the church at Corinth. The first example from 1 Corinthians 11:2-13 shows that women were empowered to pray and prophesy with a veil over their heads. In early Christianity women wore a veil in certain prayers as a symbol of their authority to act in ordinances and of their humility before God. The second example reviews sections in the same book which encourage women to prophesy, followed by a confusing section in 1 Corinthians 14:31-35, that contradicts earlier guidelines. We will carefully examine that perplexing passage in its context.

I. 1 Corinthians 11:2-13

Cultural Background for Veiling Women

The Christian practice of women veiling to pray differed from the cultural use of the day. By way of background, for “a Roman woman, ‘to get married’ and ‘to veil oneself’ were exactly the same word. . . . The veil was the flag of female virtue, status, and security.”200 Avant-garde

199 Matthew 5:3-11; 9:19-22; 14:21, 15:23; 38; 28:5-10; Mark 7:25-29; 14:4-6; Luke 7:39; 10:4, 39-42; 13:12; John 4:7-27; 8:10; 17:21; Acts 1:14; 9:36; 16:1, 36; 17:4, 12, 34; Romans 1:8; Philippians 4:3; and Ephesians 5:25, 31; etc.). Often the KJV uses the word “man” or “brethren” which in the Greek, is not gender specific and originally could refer to both. After carefully counting each piece of advice to women and men in the New Testament (and by Paul specifically), I found more positive statements than negative ones. 200 Sarah Ruden, Paul Among the People: The Apostle Reinterpreted and Reimagined in His Own Time (New York: Pantheon Books, 2010), 85. “The veil held great symbolism: it reminded everyone that all freeborn women, women with families to protect them, were supposed to enter adulthood already married and that they were supposed to stay chastely married or else that they were chastely widowed until the end of their lives.” Ruden elaborated, “the ancients believed that it was female hair’s nature to inflame men, almost like breasts or genitals: men experienced Roman women of the first century were “more keen on showing off [their] elaborate hair-style than on constantly wearing an old-fashioned veil.”201 Ancient coins of aristocracy feature royal women wearing head coverings for a social or fashion statement.202

Wife of Hadrian, after 136 Faustina I, Wife of Antoninus Pius, 138-140

In other circles, a pharisaic Jewish woman veiled herself head to foot whenever she left her home as a symbol of modesty and female subservience.203 In Middle Assyrian law, a wife claimed the right to wear a veil in public to differentiate her standing from a concubine or slave.204 Her veil was a sign of prominence and authorized her actions and inheritance as a legal wife.205

Paul Among the Corinthians

In 1 Corinthians, Paul wrote to a culturally mixed audience of Christian converts in an attempt to redirect their understanding about women praying and prophesying while veiled.206 He first encountered the Corinthians on his second apostolic mission (Acts 18:1-11).207 During his eighteen months there he established a branch of Christianity. Yet, after his departure, Paul’s correspondence speaks of the infant church’s challenges in maintaining pure doctrine (1

women’s hair as powerfully inescapably erotic” (88). She then quotes pages of Roman poetry as evidence. 201 Ibid., 86.

202 Permission, to use photo from http://www.beastcoins.com received September 4, 2014. 203 Judith Lynn Sebesta, Larissa Bonfante, The World of Roman Costume (Madison, WI: University Press, 2001), 8, 155, 186. Fred Skolnik and Michael Berenbaum, eds., Encyclopedia Judaica, 2nd ed. 22 vols. (Detroit, New York: Thomson Gale, 2007), 21.161. Philo, Yonge, trans, Philo, 817; Jeremias, Jerusalem in the Time of Jesus, 359, 362. From a later date, Mishnah, Nashim: Sotah, 3. 8; Babylonian Talmud, Nedarim, 2.4, 58c; Berakot, 61a. 204 Hennie J. Marsman, Women in Ugarit and Israel: Their Social and Religious Position in the Context of the Ancient Near East (Boston, MA: Brill Academic Publishers, 2003), 123. During the Middle Assyrian period (covering the second half of the second millennium BCE), each will had to record the right of inheritance for a legal wife. The Babylonian Laws of Hammu-rabi (1700 BCE) declare that a wife’s inheritance was given as a marital gift or as an heir’s share of her husband’s inheritance. See Sophie Lamare-Defont, “Inheritance Law of and through Women in the Middle Assyrian Period,” in Women and Property in Ancient Near Eastern and Mediterranean Societies, ed. Deborah Lyons and Raymond Westbrook (Boston, MA: Center for Hellenistic Studies, Harvard University, 2005), 1.

205 Ruden, Paul Among the People, 88. Ruden sees Paul’s request for Christian women to wear a veil as “Paul was being protective rather than chauvinistic.” The lack of a veil may have been distracting to men “and stigmatizing to women.”

206 Jerome Murphy-O’Connor, “1 Corinthians 11:2-16 Once Again,” CBQ 50/2 (1988): 267. The veil also had religious significance for those who worshiped the Egyptian goddess, Isis. The cult instructed women to anoint and cover their heads with a light piece of linen fabric while praying.

207 Geoffrey W. Bromiley, International Standard Bible Encyclopedia, 1.7724. Twentieth century archeologists working in Corinth found a broken lintel stone that announced the “Synagogue of the Hebrews” and other artifacts mentioned in the New Testament.

Corinthians 1:11; 5:9; 7:1; and 16:10-11).208 The content of the letter insinuates that they struggled with their conflicting religious backgrounds and suffered from inexperienced membership and leadership.209 This is not surprising in light of the reality that Corinth had a reputation for wealth, worldliness, and immorality.210

The city’s unique geography allowed it to control the neck of land between mainland Greece and the Peloponnesus, which made it a double port city. As a double port city, it seemed to have a double portion of promiscuity. Over time the verb to korinthiazein or “to live like a Corinthian” came to mean “to live a dissolute life.” The phrase “to play the Corinthian” meant to visit a house of prostitution. To korinthiazomai, meant “to practice fornication.” A “Corinthian girl,” became another name for a prostitute. The word Corinth was also used as a metaphor for fertility. Under Roman rule, Corinth’s temple to the Roman goddess Venus housed one thousand priestesses who served as prostitutes in behalf of the goddess of love.211 Paul’s letters contended with these deceptive traditions.

Commentary on 1 Corinthians 11:2-13

In 1 Corinthians, Paul boldly corrects the saints on many issues, including the need for women to veil during certain ordinances that dealt with prayer (1 Corinthians 11:2-13).212 He teaches the Corinthian women that they could participate in the sacred experience of speaking by divine inspiration, with their veils signifying their authority to do so. Many biblical scholars find these verses about hairstyles or equality213 “a jumbled mess.”214 With this as a disclaimer (and as a challenge!), I also draw on restored doctrine to help decipher the early saints’ practice of

208 Richard Lloyd Anderson, Understanding Paul (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book, 1983), 131. Two canonized letters remain from Paul’s correspondence to the Corinthian saints, which make up approximately one fourth of the Pauline Scripture. Seven traces of letters have been detected. Anderson deduces “first” Corinthians was written during Paul’s third mission just before he left Ephesus (between c. AD 55 and 57). The letter suggests that most of the saints in Corinth were poor, some slaves, and all affected by their society. 209 Evidence of the diversity among the saints is that half of the names mentioned in 1 Corinthians are Greek and the other half are Latin.

210 In the tenth century BC, the Dorian Greeks first built an ancient city on an isthmus at the base of a 1,886-foot rocky summit (the “Acrocorinth”). On top of the mountain they built a temple to Aphrodite. Between 625 and 585 BC, they cut a five-foot-wide track through the rock peninsula connecting the ports on the Aegean and Adriatic Seas to create a more direct sailing route around southern Greece. It saved travel time as merchants could pull or wheel their ships across the four-mile isthmus. The city was also well known for the Isthmian games, wich their citizens hosted every two years.

211 Robert L. Millet, Studies in Scripture: Acts to Revelation (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book, 1987), 6.178, 81, 91. Bromiley, International Standard Bible Encyclopedia, 1.773. Raymond E. Brown, An Introduction to the New Testament (New York: Doubleday, 1997), 513. Leadership Ministries Worldwide, 1 & 2 Corinthians: The Preacher’s Outline and Sermon Bible (Chattanooga, TN: Alpha-Omega, 2003), 1. 212 Brown, Introduction to the New Testament, 522. Brown sees chapters 10 and 11 as Paul’s discussion of problems affecting community worship. He concludes that Paul “resorts to the authority of his own custom and those of the churches.” Craig S. Keener from Eastern Seminary sees Paul addressing a “clash of social values: . . . uncovered hair to many connoted seduction and immodesty.” 1–2 Corinthians (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2005), 92.

213 William Orr and James Arthur Walther, Anchor Yale Bible Commentaries: 1 Corinthians (New York City, NY: Random House-Doubleday, 1976), vii; “it is perilous to try to modernize Paul.” Sarah Ruden speaks of this whole passage in parentheses with “grounds for considering these verses not genuine . . . rough . . . clunky repetition.” A few pages later she bemoans, “the passage doesn’t flow, . . . it sputters with emotion, gets incoherent, changes tactics, and ends almost with a snarl.” Paul Among the People, 85, 88. 214 M. Catherine Thomas, personal correspondence with the author. covering a woman’s head during certain prayers.215 As I study these verses one by one, I find that the symbolism of the prayer veil points to the exalted role of woman.

11:2 Now I praise you, brethren, that ye remember me in all things,

and keep the ordinances, as I delivered them to you.

Paul opens the subject by commending the Corinthian saints for keeping the ordinances he taught them. The Greek word “paradosis / ordinance” has a broad definition that includes “handing over, delivery, hence teaching committed to a pupil . . . transmission, handing down, hence that which is received.”216 Modern English translations use “directions” (DBT), “traditions” (RSV, ESV, NASV), or “teachings” (NIV). In the Septuagint (LXX), or the Greek Old Testament in use at the time of the late Second Temple, paradosis also describes the ritual teachings that were handed down orally.217

For our discussion on 1 Corinthians 11, it is especially pertinent to see how Paul uses the term paradosis in his Epistles. In the verb form, he insists that the early churches should keep what he “paradidomi / passed on to you” as their salvation depended on it (1 Corinthians 15:2-3). In reference to Paul’s usage of paradosis, the Theological Dictionary of the New Testament explains, “The essential point for Paul is that it has been handed down (1C 15:3) and that it derives from the Lord (11:23).”218 Elsewhere, Paul describes paradosis as teachings taught by apostolic leaders (1 Thessalonians 2:15, 3:6). Perhaps most applicable of all, in the same chapter that Paul discusses the veil, he also refers to Christ passing on the sacrament in the same manner in which he received them from Christ: “I have received of the Lord that which also I delivered unto you” (1 Corinthians 11:23).

On the other hand, according to Paul, if the paradosis are initiated by “the traditions of men,” they are not valid (Colossians 2:8). He warned the saints, “withdraw yourselves from every brother that walked disorderly and not after the tradition [paradosis] which he received from us” (2 Thessalonians 3:6). Paul uses “paradosis” to refer both to formal instruction and to teachings. For example, in Galatians 1:14, he uses paradosis to describe that he was “extremely zealous for the traditions of my ancestors,” which probably included the Jewish temple offerings or rites. It

215 As a disclaimer, my thoughts on 1 Corinthians 11:2-13 do not purport to be a culminating study on the scholarship available on this difficult passage. My observations come through my LDS lens. I understand that many real differences exist between the Corinthian branch and today’s church. But even while honoring the historicity of first century Christianity, we can find Paul’s powerful message illuminating and still applicable to Christian women who veil to pray.

216 G. W. H. Lampe, ed., A Patristic Greek Lexicon (Oxford: Clarendon, 1995), 1014. Italics original. Strong’s New Exhaustive Concordance of the Bible defines paradosis as “from; transmission, a precept; spec. the Jewish traditionary law” (Nashville, TN: Thomas Nelson Publishers, 1995), 67 of the Greek Dictionary section. Another lexicon defines it: “the content of instruction that has been handed down, tradition, of teachings, commandments, narratives, et al.” Bauer, A Greek–English Lexicon of the New Testament, 763. Paul only uses the noun once in 1 Cor , in 11:2.

217 The term paradoseis is found thirteen times in the New Testament, eight of which are in Matthew 15 and Mark 7, where Christ discusses the “traditions of the elders” with the Jewish scribes (Matthew 15:2, 3, 6; Mark 7:3, 5, 8, 9, 13; also see Galatians 1:14; Colossians 2:8; 2 Thessalonians 2:15, 3:6; and 1 Peter 1:18). Some of these traditions refer to ritual behavior found not in the written law, but in the 10,000 oral laws. Pharisees and others claimed that these oral laws began with Moses and were passed down for 1,500 years. Others may be new Christian ordinances as described in 1 Corinthians 11:2.

218 G. Kittel, ed., Geoffrey W. Bromiley, translator, Theological Dictionary of the New Testament (Grand Rapids MI: Eerdmans Publishing, 1965), 6.172-173; Buchsel, “пαραδοσις.” In 1 Corinthians 11:23, Paul uses paradosis to imply the ordinance of the Lord’s Supper. appears that his use of paradosis in 1 Corinthians 11 and 15, comes from an earlier Christian 219 tradition that predates him; these verses “have a fairly settled Christological formula.” Looking beyond Paul into in other early Christian sources, we find paradosis generally referring to unwritten sacred “tradition given by Christ, preached by apostles, guarded by fathers.” 220 Paul’s teachings handed down through word or example included the sacrament of Jesus’ Last Supper and “the later activities of the Twelve.” 221 Initially, some held the paradosis more precious than Scripture (and other Christians, alongside Scripture), as they claimed that the Lord passed them on verbally. Most of this type of paradosis remained unwritten. The early Christians kept these teachings that were passed down secret “to enhance the dignity of the mysteries.” 222 In the Christian historical tradition, paradosis comes up in liturgical usage. In that setting, paradosis became associated with the Christian institutions for communion, baptism, special prayers, oil of unction, triple immersion, and other early rites. 223 The primitive Christian Church performed many sacred rites or ordinances, including baptisms for the living and the dead, the gift of the Holy Ghost, the sacrament of the Lord’s Supper, sealing of marriages for eternity, washing feet, and prayer circles. 224 The early Christian leaders discuss these ordinances either as “sacraments” (in the Latin Church), or as “mysteries” (in the Greek Church). 225 Using both words, Origen (c. 248) wrote:

When those who have been turned towards virtue have made progress and have shown that

they have been purified by the Word, and have led as far as they can a better life—then

(and not before) do we invite them to participate in our sacraments. . . . Whoever is pure

219 Ibid.

220 Lampe, ed., A Patristic Greek Lexicon, 1015. “Accepted tradition of church order and usage, as derived from apostles and handed on as norm of practice” (1014).

221 Ibid., 1014-1015.

222 Ibid., 1015. It was the “unwritten tradition” that lasted to even the post-Nicene father, John Chrysostom (c. AD 400), when he refers to paradoiseis as teachings transmitted by the Lord’s apostles, often unwritten, but must be obeyed (1016).

223 Ibid., 1015. Although the word was not limited to apostolic teachings throughout Greek literature (there it often relates to teaching in general—including rabbinic interpretation of Scripture, pagan religion, etc.), yet in the early Christian institutions, it carries a specific usage for “scriptural baptismal formula” or “making sign of cross, praying towards east, words of Eucharistic epiclesis, blessing of baptismal water, oil of unction, and candidate, as traditional practices.” Paradoiseis was also used for orthodox doctrine, including false doctrine among the Christians. Later they used it for those doctrines “established by early fathers.” Clement refers to paradoiseis as a title for a “Gnostic apocryphal work, Traditions of Matthias.”

224 Biblical examples of ordinances practiced in the primitive Christian church include the following Scriptures: “Else what shall they do which are baptized for the dead, if the dead rise not at all? why are they then baptized for the dead?” (1 Corinthians 15:29); “Repent, and be baptized every one of you in the name of Jesus Christ for the remission of sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost” (Acts 2:38); “And as they did eat, Jesus took bread, and blessed, and brake [it], and gave to them, and said, Take, eat: this is my body . . .” (Mark 14:22); “Neither is the man without the woman, neither the woman without the man, in the Lord” (1 Corinthians 11:11); “give diligence to make your calling and election sure” (2 Pet.er 1:10); “Honour unto the wife . . . and as being heirs together of the grace of life” (1 Peter 3:7); “Whosoever therefore resisteth the power, resisteth the ordinance of God: and they that resist shall receive to themselves damnation” (Romans 13:2); and “Submit yourselves to every ordinance of man for the Lord’s sake: whether it be to the king, as supreme” (1 Peter 2:13). Also see Hugh Nibley with Don E. Norton, ed., Temple and Cosmos: Beyond This Ignorant Present (Salt Lake City, UT: FARMS and Deseret Book, 1992), 313.

225 Martin P. Nilsson, Greek Popular Religion (NYC, NY: Columbia University, Press, 1940), 42-43. The Greek word for “mystery / μυστήριον” in the ancient world referred to the “mystery or secret rite,” as we see in the Eleusinian and Dionysian Mysteries as well as others.

not only from all defilement, but from what are regarded as lesser transgressions, let him be

boldly initiated into the mysteries of Jesus. For they are properly made known only to the

holy and pure.226

Fifty years earlier, Clement of Alexandria (c. 195) also emphasized the importance of worthiness in conjunction with “the mysteries are not exhibited indiscriminately to everyone.”227

Within this sacred sphere, several early texts mention these ceremonial rites in the early Church. Tertullian, in AD 198, described a service similar to baptism, that included washing and anointing: “We have come out of the font, we are thoroughly anointed with a blessed oil.”228 A few years later in AD 210, Tertullian further described, “The flesh, indeed, is washed in order that the soul may be cleansed. The flesh is anointed so that the soul may be consecrated.”229 As Hugh Nibley observed, “The further back we go [in Christian history], the more prominent becomes the rite in the church.”230 Members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints take particular interest in early Christian rites, as “we believe in the same organization that existed in the Primitive Church” (Articles of Faith 1:6). Both dispensations practice prayers in which women wear head coverings to represent their authority.231

11:3 “But I would have you know, that the head of every man is Christ; and the head of the

woman is the man; and the head of Christ is God.”

The first phrase of verse 3, “but I would have you know,” or “I want you to understand” (ESV), suggests that the saints had, at least partially, misunderstood Paul’s previous instructions: “Keep the ordinances, as I delivered them to you” (1 Corinthians 11:2–3). Paul uses the phrase, “but I would / thelõ de,” four times in this letter. Interestingly, he repeats this each time he corrects a misconception (1 Corinthians 7:32; 10:20; 14:5). Here the misconception dealt with why women covered their heads while praying and why men did not (1 Corinthians 11:4–11). The text suggests the saints of Corinth had a problem following this specific teaching.

Paul wants to correct this misunderstanding, but rather than merely restate the dress code on veils, he teaches an important doctrinal background that underlines the veil imagery. He explains the series of relationships established from the order of creation: God-Christ-man-woman. Paul reviews that God is the head of Christ, who is the head of man, who is the head of woman. The word “head / kephale” has multiple meanings in both Greek and English, but most often refers to: 1) the physical head or body, and 2) figuratively, the “starting point.”232 According to the Theological Dictionary of the New Testament, the word “head / kephale,” as used by Paul in 1 Corinthians 11, deals with the relationship of man and woman “at the very

226 David W. Bercot, ed., A Dictionary of Early Christian Beliefs (Peabody, MA: Hendrickson, 1998), 573. 227 Ibid.

228 Ibid., 481.

229 Ibid., 573.

230 Hugh Nibley, Mormonism and Early Christianity (Provo, UT: FARMS, 1987), 46-47. 231 Hugh Nibley, “The Early Christian Prayer Circle,” BYU Studies 19, no. 1 (Fall 1978): 41-78. 232 Wayne Grudem, “Does Kephal (“Head”) Mean “Source” or “Authority Over” in Greek Literature? A Survey of 2,336 Examples,” Trinity Journal ns 6.1 (Spring 1985): 38-59. Grudem, from the Trinity Evangelical Divinity School, argues against the definition of “source,” but his study demonstrates that 53% of the 2,336 examples of ancient Greek Literature that he examined use “head” physically, and the next most common use, 23% of the texts use it figuratively to mean the “starting point” (51). Theologically, he prefers the definition found in 16% of the texts as a person of superior authority. I use “starting point” as synonymous with “origin.” foundations of their creaturehood.”233 Therefore, God the Father was the “starting point” or origin of Christ (John 20:17),234 who was the “starting point” of man (3 Nephi 9:15), and man, via his side-rib, was the “starting point” of his helpmeet, woman (Genesis 2:22; Moses 3:23; Abraham 5:17).235

This relationship chain becomes the foundation of Paul’s instruction here.236 Three times in ten verses he uses different words to describe the genders’ intertwining origins: woman originates from man, and a man-child comes from woman (1 Corinthians 11:3, 8, 12, NASB). He also repeats that God created man in His image (1 Corinthians 11:7). Looking at the argument as a whole, Paul discusses a symbiotic connection in which men and women have mutual responsibilities for one another.

This bears highlighting, as Paul does not make a case for male superiority. In the same section, he speaks of woman as privileged with authority and indispensable to men and vice versa (1 Corinthians 11:10, 11, 12). Outside of these verses (and a similar verse in Ephesians 5:23), every other one of the 49 New Testament references to “head / kephale,” describes either a physical head or the Savior.237 Yet many have interpreted this as saying men are to rule women. I do not find evidence for that in the Pauline Epistles at large, nor specifically in the context of 1 Corinthians 11. Whenever Paul refers to a “ruler,” he uses other words—i.e., “rulers /archon

233 Gerhard Kittel, ed, Theological Dictionary of the New Testament (Grand Rapids, MI: Eerdmans Publishing, 1965), 3.679. I disagree with this dictionary’s interpretation that “woman is the reflection of man to the degree that in her created being she points to man, and only with and through him to God.” This speaks more of the perspective of the translators than Paul’s text as he explains in 1 Corinthians 11:8-11. 234 God the Father created Jesus’ spirit body, His mortal body, and His resurrected body (see Luke 1:34-35; Acts 13:34). Latter-day Saints (LDS) believe that Jesus is the literal “Son” of God and the premortal Jehovah, God of the Old Testament (Mosiah 3:5-8). The Father then is the source of the Son. Because they define God and Christ through the Trinity, my description runs contrary to that of most Christian biblical scholars, who prefer the definition of superior authority or rank. The Council of Nicea was called in 325 AD to determine the relationship between God the Father and Jesus the Christ. The issue was not resolved, though, and over the next centuries it continued to divide the eastern and western versions of Christianity until the Eastern Orthodox and Roman Catholic (Universal) Churches were formed. Here, again, the perspective of the restored gospel possibly sheds new light specifically on the definitions of these verses and on Paul’s writings in general. From the perspective of the restoration, the Prophet Joseph Smith taught that truth was restored to each dispensation, so I stand on the assumption that Paul understood that Jesus was the literal Son of God, His Father, spiritually and physically. For the LDS view of the Father and Son, see Joseph Smith-History, 1:17; 3 Nephi 9:15; D&C 130:22. 235 For many Trinitarian Christians, the Old Testament describes the source or creator of man as Jehovah Elohim (Genesis 1-2). For Latter-day Saints though, the pre-mortal Jesus was Jehovah. This allows LDS to make sense of this passage. Some Christian scholars question how Paul understood the Godhead, with the Father as the source of the Son, but it is not as confusing for those who deny the trinity. Elder Rulon S. Wells clarified during April Conference in 1931, “Who was it that created this world? Have we not read it was the Word that was with the Father in the very beginning, and that all things were made by him and without him was not anything made? He it was then that created the heavens and the earth. He it was then who, under the Father, created Adam and Eve and placed them as in the Garden of Eden. He it was, this Son of God, known then as Jehovah.” See John 1:1-4; D&C 29:34. 236 An alternative definition of “head / kephale” is “authority.” As a result, some scholars, including Robert Allard, Mark Finney, and Ed Christian, see this section as Paul teaching the proper ecclesiastical relationships, beginning with God who presides over all, to Christ who presides over men, and men who preside over women. Robert E. Allard, “Freedom on your head’ (1 Corinthians 11:2-16): A Paradigm for the Structure of Paul’s Ethics,” in Word & World 30, no. 4 (Fall 2010), 399-407. Mark Finney, “Honour, Head-coverings and Headship: 1 Corinthians 11.2-16 in its Social Context,” in Journal for the Study of the New Testament 33, no.1 (2010). Also Ed Christian, “Prophets under God’s Authority: Head coverings in 1 Corinthians 11:1-16,” in Journal of the Adventist Theological Society 1, nos. 1-2 (1999) 291-95.

237 References in the New Testament where “head / kephale,” speaks of the Savior are found in: Acts 4:11; Ephesians 1:22; 4:15; Colossians 2:10; 1 Peter 2:7.

(Romans 13:3), “rule / preside / proistemi” (1 Timothy 3:5; 5:17), “rule / govern / brabeuo” 238 (Colossians 3:15), and “rule / leader / hegeomai ” (Hebrews 13:7, 17, 24)—not kephale . As we will see in a few verses, Paul does not encourage male dominance over females (1 Corinthians 11:11-12). Some of the transforming doctrines that the Lord restored denounced unrighteous dominion and superiority of any kind: “A servant is not greater than his master” (John 15:20 NIV; also 13:16), “whosoever of you will be the chiefest, shall be servant of all” (Mark 10:44), and “Good Master, what shall I do to inherit eternal life? And Jesus said unto him, Why callest thou me good? None is good, save one, that is God” (Luke 18:18-19; also see Matthew 19:16; and Mark10:17). Paul’s verses on veiling women encourage a positive interrelationship among man, woman and God; they do not promote gender supremacy. Paul’s linear order on creation may sound demeaning to some modern readers. 239 However, He does not intend this as verses 10 and 11 discuss. His analogy applies specifically to the creation. In the ancient world, ideas that linked someone with deity were honorable and empowering. Paul does not suggest that women needed a detour or middleman to communicate with God. In the New Testament, both men and women pray directly to God the Father (Luke 11:1-2; Acts 1:14; 16:13; Romans 8:26; etc.); both men and women have access to the gifts of the Spirit (1 Corinthians 12:1-11); and both build the kingdom of God (1 Corinthians 12:12-31). Paul describes men and women as team players, not as competing individuals lined up in order of importance (1 Corinthians 12:7). Paul’s orderly lineup does not need to disrupt the other scriptural admonition for men and women to work beside as “complement[s],” “help meet[s],” “counterpart[s]” (Genesis 2:18, HCSB, KJV, YLT), or “yokefellow[s]” (Philippians 4:3). 240 Christ, Peter, and Paul taught the need to work together in harmony with the goal of becoming one as joint heirs (John 17:21-23; 1 Peter 3:7; Romans 8:17). Modern prophets similarly describe the goal of side-by-side spousal relationships. L. Tom Perry said, “The couple works together eternally for the good of the family. They are united together in word, in deed, and in action as they lead, guide, and direct their family unit. They are on equal footing. They plan and organize the affairs of the family jointly and unanimously as they move forward.” 241 Paul advocates mutually supportive relationships in this section (1 Corinthians 11:11), but first he describes the order of creation as a linear link to God in order to explain the symbolism behind women veiling during prayer.

11:4: “Every man praying or prophesying,

having his head covered, dishonoureth his head.”

In verse 4, Paul frankly states that men who cover their heads, either as a reflection of their

238 Timothy and Barbara Friberg, Analytical Lexicon of the Greek New Testament (Grand Rapids, MI: Baker Books, 2000), 77; “active rule over, be leader of.” Strong’s New Exhaustive Concordance of the Bible defines it, “first (in rank or power):—chief (ruler), magistrate, prince, ruler (16, #758).

239 Catherine Thomas, CES Symposium, unpublished manuscript, 1992. “The challenge of perfecting ourselves is great indeed, but the challenge of perfecting ourselves in a relationship is greater.” 240 By working in the same direction, seeking the same goals, and pulling with the same force, a couple can become unified. Whether this team effort is describes as an alignment from the order of creation, or as working side by side, the end result is the same; two mortals working together to serve God. 241 Elder L. Tom Perry, “Fatherhood an Eternal Calling,” Ensign (May, 2004). The quote is preceded with, “Since the beginning, God has instructed mankind that marriage should united husband and wife together in unity. Therefore, there is not a president or a vice president in a family.”

Judeo-Greco-Roman backgrounds, or for any other reason, dishonor their “head” or God.242 The idea behind “head covered” means something “down from the head” and is sometimes used for a veil that may even cover the face.243 Paul uses the dual meaning for head: “Every man praying or prophesying, having his head [physically] covered, dishonoureth his head [figuratively].” In keeping with the creation narrative, Paul’s injunction follows the reasoning that man was created in the image and glory of God, so when man communes with God, he should not cover his head, but acknowledge that affiliation (Genesis 1:27). By covering his head, a man would cover the image of God, thereby denying the power and dignity that the Creator bestowed upon him at creation. In other words, if a man worships with his head covered, he dishonors his starting point or origin. To do otherwise was to devalue his Christian beliefs. However problematic male head covering may have been, it appears that the bigger issue was that woman were not covering their heads, as this becomes the subject for the next five verses.

11:5–6: “But every woman that prayeth or prophesieth with her head uncovered dishonoureth

her head: for that is even all one as if she were shaven . . .”

Paul’s statement clarifies an enormous breakthrough in worship for Christian women.244 The apostle begins by explicitly declaring that women prayed and prophesied in public worship services of early Christian churches. This Christian practice marked a distinct departure from Paul’s previous Pharisaic traditions.245 At the time of the Second Temple, a Jewess’ religious experiences were sharply curtailed—from pilgrimages to synagogue worship.246 Not only did some rabbis discourage women from speaking and worshiping in public, they also discouraged women from leaving their homes, learning The Law, speaking with men, or eating at the same table with male visitors.247 This example of women praying and prophesying may refer to private, personal experiences, but the larger context of “ordinances” (KJV) or “the teachings as I delivered to you” (1 Corinthians 11:2, BLB), suggests that they were part of a special congregational experience. It corresponds with Joel 2:28, where the Spirit pours out the gift of prophecy on both men and women as “your sons and your daughters shall prophesy.”

Paul’s choice of wording for “prophesy / propheteuo / to speak forth under inspiration” may refer to women giving sermons as well. In either case, it represents enormous liberation, as

Finney, “Honour, Head-coverings and Headship” Journal for the Study of the New Testament 33, no. 1 (2010). 243 Jerome Murphy-O’Connor, 242 For more information on men wearing veils in the first century AD, both the social and liturgical, see Mark Keys to First Corinthians: Revisiting the Major Issues (Oxford, New York: Oxford

University Press, 2009), 143-144.

244 Clanton, The Good, the Bold, and the Beautiful, 23. See Appendix 1, “Synagogue.” 245 Mishnah , Ketuboth 6.6; Gittin 9.10. Jewish women were not allowed to speak in their worship or synagogue, nor in any public gathering—in fact, a husband could divorce his wife for speaking to another man (see chapter 6, under “Divorce”).

246 Mishnah, Kiddushin, 4:13. See Appendix 1 and chapter 1. 247 Dan W. Clanton, The Good, the Bold, and the Beautiful (New York: T & T Clark International, 2006), 23. Philo uses a simile to generalize women, “cooped . . . up . . . like a woman who belongs at home.” De Specialibus Legibus II 33.124. Mishnah, Sotah, 3.4. “If a man gives his daughter a knowledge of the Law it is as though he taught her lechery.” It is feasible that in that wealthy home, young girls were educated too, or else they may have had the opportunity to overhear lessons. The Talmud mentioned a few females who learned the oral laws. Witherington, Women and the Genesis of Christianity, 7. Nosson Scherman, The Mishnah: A New Translation with a Commentary, Yad Avraham anthologized from Talmudic sources and classic commentators (Brooklyn, NY: Mesorah Publications, 1981), III.58; “A father should not teach his daughter Torah because certain acumen is gained from it which she may use to hide her immorality. . . . It is also possible that she may use her knowledge of the Torah to attract men to her.” the whole idea of women participating in the public worship services was limited at the time.248 Jewish men dominated the public world and confined women’s worship primarily to their homes.249 Outside of her home, a Jewess was to be unseen and unheard. 250 Paul’s statement is an enormous step forward for women’s communal worship.

In verses 5 and 6, Paul also explains why women, unlike men, cover their heads while participating in special prayers or prophesying. Paul’s argument for women seems exactly the opposite of that for men. When a woman covers “her head / kephale” (physically), she shows honor and respect to “her starting point / kephale” (husband, Christ, and then God). To rephrase Paul’s words, a man honored his relationship to God by uncovering his head, while a woman honored God by covering her head. Paul explains this dichotomy in verse 7, but first he expresses his opinion that a woman’s head without a covering during certain prayers, is as disgraceful as shaving her head.251

11:7: “For a man indeed ought not to cover his head,

forasmuch as he is the image and glory of God:

but the woman is the glory of the man”

In verses 7, Paul references both creation stories from Genesis chapters 1 and 2.252 The first describes a male and female created “in the image of God” and both are given dominion over the earth (Genesis 1:26-27). The second has Adam naming all the animals, unable to find one equal or complementary to him until God takes part of his rib cage to create a “partner” (Genesis 2:20-22, NEB) or “his one before” (Genesis 2:20, TEB).253 Modern revelation teaches of a spiritual creation before the physical creation, which may help clarify the dichotomy between the two Genesis accounts (D&C 29:32; Moses 3:5).

Paul references both of these creation stories, yet he does not follow the Genesis wording. 248 Howard Clark Kee and Lynn H. Cohick, Evolution of the Synagogue (Harrisburg, PA: Trinity, 1999), 34, 96. 249 Clanton, Good, Bold, Beautiful, 24; ; “From kosher laws to the recitation of the shema, from private prayer to Sabbath practices, not only would women have been present, they would have been active participants due to their dominance in the private, domestic sphere.”

250 Judaeus Philo, Special Laws III., 7 vols. (London: William Heinemann, Ltd., 1967), 3.169, 171; “Marketplaces and council-halls, law-courts and gatherings, and meetings where a large number of people are assembled, and open-air life with full scope for discussion and action – all these are suitable to men both in war and peace. The women are best suited to the indoor life which never strays from the house . . . A woman then, should not be a busybody, meddling with matters outside her household concerns, but should seek a life of seclusion.” 251 Flavius Josephus, translated by William Whiston, Josephus Complete Works: Wars (Grand Rapids, MI: Kregel Publications, 1978), 2.15.1-n. Josephus mentions a woman named Bernice who shaved her head in conjunction with taking a Nazarite vow. Even though her vow was noble and voluntary, she was still publicly humiliated and shamed for the loss of her hair. This phrase from 1 Corinthians 11:6, had a dramatic effect in the late fourth century, when the early Church father Chrysostom wrote, “If thou cast away the covering appointed by the law of God, cast away likewise that appointed by nature.” Chrysostom, Homily XXVI, “On the Veiling of Women,” in Nicene and Post-Nicene Fathers of the Christian Church, ed. Philip Schaff, vol. 12, Saint Chrysostom: Homilies on the Epistles of Paul to the Corinthians (Oxford: Parker, 1891), 152. Chrysostom also felt that when women “abide within our own limits and the laws ordained of God, but to go beyond, is not an addition but a diminution” (ibid.). I feel Chrysostom misunderstood Paul by interpreting these verses to mean that men were to rule over women. 252 Daniel Ludlow, ed., Encyclopedia of Mormonism, “Ancient Sources” (New York: Macmillan, 1992), 1.17. 253 A more literal translation is found in the TEB, using side, not rib; “And YHVH ELOHIM made a deep sleep fall upon the soil-man, and he slept; and he took one from his sides, and he closed flesh under it. And YHVH ELOHIM built the side that he took from the soil-man into a woman, and he made her come toward the soil-man. And the soil-man said, ‘This one this time—bone of my bones, and flesh of my flesh! To this one will be called ‘woman,’ because from a man this one was taken’” (Genesis 2:21-23).

Genesis 1:27 1 Corinthians 11:7

God created man in his own image, . . . he is the image and glory of God in the image of God created he him

male and female created he them.

Rather than using the plural to denote humanity, Paul deviates to use the single form of the word 255 “man / Paul’s refiguring of the creation helps us understand what he meant by the “glory of God.”254 aner” (Genesis 2:21–23; 1 Timothy 2:13), to describe a linear connection with his

Creator.256

Paul evidently wants to accentuate the “glory of man,” as something different from the “glory of God” (1 Corinthians 11:7), which causes us to ask why? Reading this phrase within the context of this chapter, this letter, the Pauline corpus, and the New Testament at large, we can safely assume Paul does not mean that God created woman solely to glorify men, nor that man could use woman for his glory in a manipulative or disrespectful manner. We have no scriptural foundation to suggest that woman was created only for the use of man.

Although Josephus and many contemporaries of Paul disagreed,257 Paul repeatedly states that woman is not inferior to man (1 Corinthians 11:7, 11). Understanding what Paul means by “the woman is the glory of man” (1 Corinthians 11:7) is vital to understanding why Paul thinks women should wear a covering during special prayers.

Narrowing in on the “glory of God,” the passage in Moses 1:39 explains that God’s work and glory is “to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man.” The same can hold true for humanity’s work and glory. The union of man and woman is crucial in that work and glory—a glorious thing. Nevertheless, in the hierarchy of God, the glory of humanity should not overshadow the glory of God, and so glorious woman covers her head out of respect to God.

Paul describes woman as a symbol of human potential, since she facilitates the potential for human glory. Paul teaches that during this ordinance, when men and women commune with God through prayer and prophesy, the man takes on a vicarious role to represent the image and glory of God while a woman represents the image and glory of supplicating humanity. Man does not cover his head because he acts in the image of God. Woman, on the other hand, covers her head as a symbol of humanity (representing both genders in this sense). She should humbly acknowledge His divine glory by reverently and symbolically covering humanity’s glory when she stands in the presence of God. This interpretation is consistent with the Scriptures that

254 Although Paul deviates from the English Genesis 1:27, possibly his text was singular or he chose to change it. 255 E.A. Speiser, The Anchor Bible Genesis (New York: Doubleday, 1964), 7. Biblical commentaries often mention the plural nature of Adam in Genesis 1:26-27. For example, “Hebrew employs here plural possessives” Similarly, the Word Biblical Commentary, speaking of Genesis 1:26-27, explains that the “fluidity between the definite and indefinite form makes it difficult to know when the personal name ‘Adam’ is first mentioned. . . .The very indefiniteness of reference may be deliberate . . . ‘mankind, humanity’ as opposed to God or the animals. . . Adam, the first man created and named, is representative of humanity . . . clearly mankind in general, ‘male and female,’ not an individual is meant.” Gordon J. Wenham, Word Biblical Commentary (Texas: Word Books, 1987), 32. 256 Alonzo Gaskill, The Savior and the Serpent: Unlocking the Doctrine of the Fall (SLC, UT: Deseret Book, 2002), 110–125. Gaskill emphasizes that the symbols from the rib account foreshadow Jesus as the second Adam. 257 Josephus, Against Apion, II. 25. “‘A woman is inferior to her husband in all things.’” describe a woman or bride as a symbol of God’s people or the church.258

11:8-9 “For the man is not of the woman; but the woman of the man.

Neither was the man created for the woman; but the woman for the man .”

According to Genesis, God created Eve so that a corresponding union could be formed with potential for increase and glory (Genesis 1:27; 2:18-23). Woman’s arrival in Eden fulfilled the need for one “according to the opposite of him” (literally), or “counterpart” (YLT) or “authority corresponding to him” (ISV) or “a helper suitable for him” (NSB) or “help meet” (KJV).259 Significantly, God did not provide Adam immediately with a wife, but waited for Adam to name all the animals, whereupon he recognized his own need for an equivalent partner: “And Adam gave names to all cattle, and to the fowl of the air, and to every beast of the field but for Adam there was not found an help meet for him” (Genesis 2:20). It is as if God waited to introduce this important creation until Adam himself recognized his own inability as a single man: Adam recognized that he needed a copartner. “Eve was adequate for, or equal to, Adam. She wasn’t his servant or his subordinate.”260

In this sense, woman is “the glory of man” because she becomes the vehicle for humanity to gain a body furthering their potential glory.261 God gave women the sacred trust to carry and grow embryos. This is why Adam named his wife “Life” or “Living,” translated as “Eve / Chavvah.” With this unique responsibility to bring forth life, woman reflects the work of Christ himself. Just as Christ labored to create sons and daughters of God, so God designed a woman’s body to create mortal daughters and sons.262 But woman cannot do this alone. The physical creation of each human requires the work of woman and man working together as God planned.

Through the spousal relationship, a woman and a man became a mutually supporting entity. This may be misunderstood with many influential translations of Genesis 3:16, in which Eve is told, “Thy desire shall be to thy husband, and he shall rule over thee” (KJV). We now have other translations that clarify this as a joint responsibility “and he will rule with you” (TEB) or “he will govern with you” (emphasis added).263

258 1 Nephi 21:18; D&C 109:73-74; John 3:29; Revelation 21:9; Isaiah 50:1; 66:8; Jeremiah 33:11; etc. 259 In the 2019 New English Translation published by Zondervan, in the footnote to this verse, we read a good explanation of the Hebrew ‘ezer kěnegdô: “The English word “helper,” because it can connote so many different ideas, does not accurately convey the connotation of the Hebrew word רֶזֵע (’ezer). Usage of the Hebrew term does not suggest a subordinate role, a connotation which English “helper” can have. In the Bible God is frequently described as the “helper,” the one who does for us what we cannot do for ourselves, the one who meets our needs. In this context the word seems to express the idea of an “indispensable companion.” The woman would supply what the man was lacking in the design of creation and logically it would follow that the man would supply what she was lacking, although that is not stated here.”

260 Bruce C. and Marie K. Hafen, “Crossing Thresholds and Becoming Equal Partners,” Ensign (August 2007): 27. 261 Ibid., 93.

262 Jane Allis-Pike, “‘How Oft Would I Have Gathered You As A Hen Gathereth Her Chickens’: The Power of the Hen Metaphor in 3 Nephi 10:4-7,” in Andrew C. Skinner and Gaye Strathearn, ed., Third Nephi: An Incomparable Scripture (Salt Lake City: Neal A. Maxwell Institute and Deseret Book, 2012), 57-74: “It may seem paradoxical that Christ would choose to compare himself to a hen, since he is neither a female nor a mother. However, Christ, as a god, is the only ‘man’ who can be compared with a woman, at least in her capacity to give birth.” 263 Personal correspondence with the translation team at Power on High Ministries. The KJV of Genesis 3:16, and the LXX, use “rule over,” although, this biblical translation speaks more of the translators’ belief, than of the text. According to the Hebrew scholar, Legrand Davies, the KJV translation of “rule over” in Genesis 3:16, is based on the last two letters of the sentence translated as "over her +" In Hebrew, the "beth" is a prefix or inseparable preposition. Hebrew Dictionaries include its meaning as: in, at, to, on, among, with, towards, according to, by,

Adam was no dictator.264 The partnership is more important than either of the single entities. Only as a unified unit can either person experience lasting glory. God created Adam and Eve so that a glorious union could potentially be formed. Again Paul highlights the chain of relationships, or order of creation established in verse 3, to establish the value of the woman as integral to God’s plan.265

Allegorical View

Paul’s words about the order of creation can also be interpreted allegorically. Later in this

same Epistle, Paul refers to Jesus as the “last Adam” (1 Corinthians 15:45).266 Early Christian writers built on this theme: “Eve is a type of the church as Adam is a type of Christ. As Eve was made out of a part of Adam, so the church is part of the Lord Jesus. The church is called His bride as Eve was Adam’s bride.”267 Typologically, Adam and Jesus are wounded in the side to bring forth the life of Eve and the Church respectively. As Adam’s wounded side produced Eve and thereby humanity, so Christ’s wounds provide the way for mortals to return to God the Father. As the second Adam and as the Savior, Christ champions fallen humanity. Eve represents all those born of women, who become the Church and join Adam/Christ in a covenantal relationship. Furthermore, “Adam and Eve were commanded to be one, and, in like manner, Christ and His Church are to be one.”268 In this allegorical scenario, the Church (Eve) works through the mediator Christ (Adam) to become unified as the scriptural Bridegroom and Bride (Revelation 18:23; Isaiah 61:10; Joel 2:16).

Restored Perspective

Stepping outside the Pauline text for a moment, insights from the restoration also shed

light on this perspective.269 In this dispensation, Elder Bruce Hafen explains, “The concept of interdependent, equal partners is well-grounded in the doctrine of the restored gospel.”270 The partnership is more important than either of the single entities. With the restored understanding of vicarious work for the dead, the sealing of eternal partners may happen on either side of the veil. Men and women continue to progress and can be sealed by the Holy Spirit of Promise to fulfill their eternal potential (D&C 132:18-19). If mortals remain single in the afterlife, they cannot be completely glorified (D&C 132:17).

because of, on top of, beside, and about 20 other such meanings. All are valid, depending on the interpretation of the passage. Adam ruling “with” Eve, is in keeping with LDS doctrine outlined in D&C 132:19-20 (personal correspondence in author’s possession).

264 Bruce C. and Marie K. Hafen, “Crossing Thresholds and Becoming Equal Partners,” Ensign (August 2007): 27. 265 Hugh Nibley, Old Testament and Related Studies (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book; Provo, UT: FARMS, 1986), 93.

266 In addition to Paul’s reference, Luke refers to two men as “son of God,” Adam and Jesus (Luke 3:38; 22:70). 267 Gaskill, Savior and the Serpent, 115; quoting Ambrose. It appears that Adam conveys the command to Eve, who walks by faith. Gaskill sees this as significant: “Again, according to scriptural accounts, Eve had less information than Adam—she could not see as clearly, as it were—and thus Adam was to be her guide, to whom she was to cling. Similarly, you and I have less information about the things of salvation than do Christ and His prophets—we labor under a veil, as it were—and hence they must be our guides, to whom we must cling. To take matters into our own hands is to bring heartache and trials into our lives (as Eve did metaphorically into hers).” Ibid., 119. 268 Ibid., 114.

269 Elder M. Russell Ballard, Conference Report, April 2013. 270 Bruce C. and Marie K. Hafen, “Crossing Thresholds and Becoming Equal Partners,” Ensign (August 2007): 27.

It is the mutuality of men and women that brings glory. Without the union of man and woman, their work of procreation and eternal glory cannot be achieved. The inter-reliance of the couple, unified to do God’s work, allows them to develop into a glorified state. They jointly hold “the patriarchal priesthood,” meaning, “the priesthood shared by husbands and wives who are sealed.”271 I think Paul refers to this glorious union in these verses (1 Corinthians 11:8-9).

11:10 “For this cause ought the woman to have power

on her head because of the angels.”

In verse 10, Paul concentrates on the doctrine that this head covering designates a woman’s power and authority to act in that ordinance. Women become agents of authority or “power / exousia.” The KJV translates the word exousia in this case as “power,” and the RSV as “veil.” The NIV comes closest to the original Greek with the term “authority.” 1 Corinthians repeatedly addresses the topic of authority—specifically, the need to respect authority, who has the authority, and what that authority is.272 Here Paul returns to the subject again and focuses on women’s authority to act in church worship. Clarifying even further, the YLT translation reads, “because of this the woman ought to have a token of authority upon the head, because of the messengers” (YLT).273 Similarly, the Anchor Bible commentary describes the woman’s veil as “a sign of the power received from the Lord (v.11) and of the dignity she has to worship and praise God in the presence of the angels.”274

Paul returns to the creation theme in the last phrase of verse 10, referring to the angels that protect the creative order of Eden.43 Not only do angels guard “the way of the tree of life” (Moses 4:31), but they also watch over woman and give her power “on her head” (1 Corinthians 11:10).275 Perhaps in reference to these sentinel angels, Paul teaches that women need this sign of authority on their heads.276 Covered with “authority / exousia,” it is possible that during worshipful prayer, the veil signaled the messenger angels to provide the woman with the word of God or prophecy. Or perhaps, when the woman wore her emblem of authority, it signaled to the

271 Ludlow, Encyclopedia of Mormonism, “Priesthood, Patriarchal,” 3.1135. From the perspective of the restoration, “the patriarchal order of the priesthood is the right of worthy priesthood-holding fathers to preside over their descendants through all ages; it includes the ordinances and blessings of the priesthood shared by husbands and wives who are sealed in the temple.”

272 1 Corinthians 7:37; 9:4-18; 11:10; 15:24.

273 The translations of the KJV, NIV, NRSV, EVS, ASV, etc. all state that the head covering refers to a woman’s authority or power. Other loose paraphrases, like the Good News Bible from 1966, chose simple words for the benefit of children and foreigners—therefore not adhering as strictly to the original text—reading: “On account of the angels, then, a woman should have a covering over her head to show that she is under her husband's authority.” Similarly, the Weymouth New Testament from 1903 reads, “That is why a woman ought to have on her head a symbol of subjection.” However, these translations speak more of their culture than they do of the text. 274 Joseph A. Fitzmyer, The Anchor Yale Bible: First Corinthians (New Haven, CT: Yale-Anchor, 2008), 417. Fitzmyer summarizes, “the genuine force of exousia is best brought out by the simple translation, ‘a woman ought to have authority over her head,’ in the sense that, in covering it she actively exercises control over it, ‘so as not to expose it to indignity.’”

275 Another powerful image of a sacred veil is found in Exodus 26:33, “the veil shall divide unto you between the holy place and the most holy.” The temple veil takes on the role of the Savior. 276 David W. Bercot, ed., A Dictionary of Early Christian Beliefs (Peabody, MA: Hendrickson Publishers, 1998), 667. The early Christian father, Tertullian (c. 198), understood the angels referenced by Paul to be devils: “This refers to the event, when on account of ‘the daughters of men,’ angels revolted from God.” Similar ideas spread throughout Christianity. angels that the mouthpiece was now ready to receive divine instruction to testify.277

Imparting the same gospel, though removed by a dispensation from Paul, Brigham Young notes that angels guard the entrance to heaven where both women and men give them “signs and tokens” to return to the presence of God.278 President John Taylor references these teachings of Paul’s as he addresses women on similar truths about angels and gender:

Thou hast obeyed the truth, and thy guardian angel ministers unto thee and watches over

thee. Thou hast chosen him you loved in the spirit world to be thy companion. Now,

crowns, thrones, exaltations, and dominions are in reserve for thee in the eternal worlds, . . .

Thou wilt be permitted to pass by the Gods and angels who guard the gates, and onward,

upward to thy exaltation in a celestial world among the Gods, to be a priestess queen upon

thy Heavenly Father’s throne, and a glory to thy husband and offspring, to bear the souls of

men, to people other worlds (as thou didst bear their tabernacles in mortality) while eternity

goes and eternity comes; and if you will receive it, lady, this is eternal life. And herein is

the saying of the Apostle Paul fulfilled, that the man is not without the woman, neither is

the woman without the man, in the Lord; that man is the head of the woman, and the glory

of the man is the woman. Hence, thine origin, the object of thy ultimate destiny. If faithful,

lady, the cup is within thy reach; drink then the heavenly draught and live.279 In addition to the ideas of John Taylor and Brigham Young, Joseph Smith’s translation of this verse suggests another interpretation.

Joseph Smith makes only one change to 1 Corinthians 11 in his inspired version: he changed the word “power” in verse 10, to “covering.” 280 In Joseph Smith’s mind, a woman was “to have a covering on her head because of the angels.”281 In this context, when female saints

277 Hans Conzelmann, A Commentary on the First Epistle to the Corinthians (Philadelphia, PA: Fortress, 1988), 189. As mentioned earlier, biblical scholars have very different interpretations of this passage. Without the perspective of the restoration, Conzelmann interprets these “angels” as fallen angels that originated from “sexually libidinous,” from demons who had sex with mortal women. Reverend Lockwood quoted early Church fathers (Ambrose, Ephraim, and Primasius) who thought the angels referred to bishops or presbyters, but Lockwood argues that the New Testament usage of “angels” designates “supernatural beings.” Lockwood, 1 Corinthians, 374. In a different direction, the Anchor Bible commentary sees the angels as “guardians of order of nature and so are concerned with proper respect for God in worship.” Orr and Walther, 1 Corinthians, 261. These interpretations contribute to the “jumbled mess” of 1 Corinthians 11 (see footnote 251). 278 Brigham Young, Journal of Discourses (London: Latter-day Saints’ Book Depot, 1855), 2:31. When President Brigham Young dedicated the cornerstone of the Salt Lake Temple on April 6, 1853, he taught the saints about the role of angels in connection with their endowment. “Your endowment is, to receive all those ordinances in the House of the Lord, which are necessary for you, after you have departed this life, to enable you to walk back to the presence of the Father, passing the angels who stand as sentinels, being enabled to give them the key words, the signs and tokens, pertaining to the Holy Priesthood, and gain your eternal exaltation in spite of earth and hell.” 279 John Taylor, “The Mormon,” August 29, 1857, in Latter-day Prophets Speak: Selections from the Sermons and Writings of Church Presidents, ed. Daniel H. Ludlow (Salt Lake City, UT: Bookcraft, 1993), 10. The cut portion reads, “and the way is opened for thee to return to the presence of thy Heavenly Father, if thou wilt only abide by and walk in a celestial law, fulfill the designs of thy Creator and hold out to the end that when mortality is laid in the tomb, you may go down to your grave in peace, arise in glory, and receive your everlasting reward in the resurrection of the just, along with thy head and husband.”

280 Joseph Smith’s translation of 1 Corinthians appears to have taken place in the early 1830s, over a decade before the temple endowment was revealed to the saints in 1842. Perhaps the prophet would have asked and received more clarification on these verses about women veiling during prayer after he introduced the endowment. 281 Thomas A. Wayment, ed., The Complete Joseph Smith Translation of the New Testament: A Side-by-Side Comparison with the King James Version (Salt Lake City UT: Deseret Book, 2005), 272; emphasis added. cover their heads with veils to pray and prophesy, they function as “priestesses’” with divinely acknowledged power. A priestess’ veil becomes part of her “robes of righteousness” and opens the door to a female version of the ministry of angels (Moroni 7:29-33, 37; D&C 29:12; 109:76).

11:11-12: “Nevertheless neither is the man without the woman,

neither the woman without the man, in the Lord.

For as the woman is of the man, even so is the man also by the woman; but all things of God.

Paul ends his explanation by stressing the complete interdependence of men and women: woman was created from man, while man is born of woman. Paul’s claim encompasses the Edenic creation and birth process. In this unique role, each mother opens the veil to mortality, just as Jesus opened the veil of immortality. A woman’s womb symbolizes a veil of life as spirit children pass from heaven to earth through her. In this task, woman acts as a veil.

Verses 11 and 12 focus on the union within a husband-wife relationship. God organized this union as a covenant with Him (D&C 132:15). Hugh Nibley describes the covenantal partnership between God, a husband and wife as a system of checks and balances:

There is no patriarchy or matriarchy in the Garden; the two supervise each other. Adam is

given no arbitrary power; Eve is to heed him only insofar as he obeys their Father—and

who decides that? She must keep check on him as much as he does on her. It is, if you will,

a system of checks and balances in which each party is as distinct and independent in its

sphere as are the departments of government under the Constitution—and just as dependent

on each other.282

Through this trio of unity we understand the qualifications of eternal relationships.

Paul seeks to strengthen the unity and mutuality among husbands, wives, and God. To do so, he has to combat a culture of divorce across the Roman Empire; historians estimate adults in the middle and upper classes had four to five divorces each.283 In contrast to these disposable relationships, Paul promotes marital longevity through unity and kindness: “Let every man have his own wife, and let every woman have her own husband. Let the husband render unto the wife due benevolence: and likewise also the wife unto the husband . . . If any brother hath a wife . . . and she be pleased to dwell with him, let him not put her away” (1 Corinthians 7:2–3, 12-14). Consistently, Paul acknowledges the worth of women as equal to men. His request for a woman to wear a head covering during ordinances has nothing to do with gender inequality and everything to do with her relationships and authority to participate in Christian ordinances.

11:13: “Judge in yourselves: is it comely that a woman pray unto God uncovered?”

In this new Christian order, Paul teaches the primitive saints that women may pray or prophesy, and her head covering is the evidence of her authority to act in that manner. The word

282 Nibley, Old Testament and Related Studies, 93. 283 Stagg, Woman in the World of Jesus (Philadelphia, PA: Westminster Press, 1978), 86; Ben Wirtherington, Women and the Genesis of Christianity (NYC: Cambridge University Press, 1984), 20. David Instone-Brewer, Divorce and Remarriage in the Bible: The Social and Literary Context (Grand Rapids, MI: Eerdmans, 2002), 73. “Seneca complained that there are women who do not number the years by consuls but by husbands; they divorce to marry and they marry to divorce (De beneficiis 3.16.2l).”

“comely / prepon” also means “to stand out, to be conspicuous, eminent, becoming, seemly, or fit.” Paul concludes this subject by reminding the Corinthian saints, who had been disposed to contentions in the past (see 1 Corinthians 11:16), that they were not a law unto themselves on this matter. Paul calls for a unity of the faith among all the churches of God—even in the practice of women covering their heads when praying and prophesying. He asks the saints to take responsibility for themselves and judge if a woman covering her head during special prayers could signify the order of creation with divine relationships between God and mortals.

To summarize this section, within Paul’s list of corrections to the Corinthian saints (“but I would have you know,” 1 Corinthian 11:3), he expounds on the issue of women covering their heads during special prayers in early Christian ordinances (11:2). As he explains these principles, he recognizes and encourages the unity between husbands and wives. His instructions capture the order of creation—a fortifying link between women, men, Christ, and God—that endowed humanity with God’s power. A woman covering her head represents “power on her head” in the presence of angels (11:10). Essentially, Paul asks whether it is “not better to pray and prophesy with humility before God and with a sign of her authority?” For Paul, the sanction derived from the creation allows God’s glory (referring to man) to pray with his head uncovered; and by the same token, humanity’s glory (referring to woman) should humbly commune with God with her head covered.

II. 1 Corinthians 14:31-35

Women Prophesy in Church Worship

Following Paul’s discussion on a woman’s praying and prophesying, he spends three chapters teaching the appropriate use of the gifts of the Spirit (1 Corinthians 12-14). He exhorts the saints to prophesy in a manner to edify, exhort, “and comfort” one another (1 Corinthians 14:3). He also cautions the Corinthian saints that their public expressions of the gifts of the Spirit must be illuminating. These chapters sound as if their worship services were less than orderly. Some saints spoke in tongues without an interpreter, people spoke at the same time as others, and a general irreverence prevailed. Paul hopes to improve their public worship services by establishing order. He discourages the use of tongues without an interpreter, and encourages prophecy over speaking in tongues (1 Corinthians 14:4-5, 23-25).

In the adjoining chapters of 1 Corinthians 11-14, we find at least five sections in which the apostolic church leader follows the Lord’s example by urging women as well as men to speak, teach, or prophesy (1 Corinthians 11:5, 12:7-11, 14:3-4, 24, and 31).284 At times the KJV uses pronouns that hide the multiple gender implications of the Greek. For example, the KJV of 1 Corinthians 14:3 uses “he” while the Greek and most other English translations open the text to both genders, as we read in the NIV translation, “But the one who prophesies speaks to people for their strengthening, encouraging and comfort.” Paul invites all saints to seek the gifts of the Spirit: “each one is given the manifestation of the Spirit to profit withal” (1 Corinthians 12:7, ASV); similarly, he speaks to both men and women to share the gift of prophecy in chapter 14.

14:31: For ye may all prophesy one by one,

284 Also outside this Epistle, see Galatians 3:28; Philippians 4:2-3; and chapter 2 of this book.

that all may learn, and all may be comforted.

Public worship in early Christianity was filled with the outpouring of the gifts of the Spirit on men and women. Specifically, the gift of prophecy, can refer to foretelling the future, as well as exhorting, inspiring, and strengthening one another. In the apostolic church, all the saints were asked to join their testimonies and gifts to bless one another.

14:32-33: And the spirits of the prophets are subject to the prophets.

For God is not the author of confusion, but of peace, as in all churches of the saints.

Repeatedly throughout this chapter Paul instructs the saints on reverence in their worship services. He asks them not to speak at the same time (14:23, 29-30), so that everyone can understand (14:11, 14-15, 19, 27-28), and to build the church (14:6, 26). Here in verse 32, he refers to prophets as a group of people. Acts 13:1 lists five prophets in a congregation of the early church: “Now in the church at Antioch there were prophets and teachers: Barnabas, Simeon called Niger, Lucius of Cyrene, Manaen . . . and Saul.” The Old Testament also refers to groups of prophets (1 Samuel 10:10-13; 2 Kings 2:3, 5). Other Epistles refer to false prophets (2 Peter 2:1). Biblically, prophets represent all those who speak for God, or those who testify of Christ (Amos 3:7; 1 John 4:2-3; Revelation 19:10).285 In this light, Paul asks all those who prophesy to share their testimonies in an orderly fashion.

14:34-35: Let your women keep silence in the churches:

for it is not permitted unto them to speak; but they are commanded to be under obedience,

as also saith the law. And if they will learn any thing,

let them ask their husbands at home: for it is a shame for women to speak in the church.

These two puzzling verses seem to contradict Paul’s previous support of women in 1 Corinthians 11:5, 14:31, and over a dozen verses included in the analysis below. Verses 34 and 35 stand out in glaring opposition to Paul’s previous advice, and we are left to wonder why the text contradicts itself. When we find contradictory passages that stifle women’s worship, we should examine them in light of other positive statements from the same author and the Lord. In an alternative interpretation by John W. Welch, we find more sensitive wording: “Women should be reverent (sigatosan, KJV, “keep silent”) and not chatter (lalein; KJV, “speak”), but be supportive [hypotassō, KJV, “under obedience”].”286 However, most Greek scholars do not soften Paul’s words.287 Nor does an examination of other reputable English translations resolve the blatant conflict of messages between these two verses and the previous chapters.

These two verses may be a tangential thought that fits into the broader section of 1 Corinthians’ discussion on disorderly conduct in meetings. It is feasible to imagine that because the Greek and Jewish culture restricted many women in their public worship, perhaps the social freedom newly found in Christianity incited some women to speak or act beyond propriety (or at least beyond the previous norm). Were Corinthian women interrupting the meetings with

285 The Prophet Joseph Smith also referred to prophets as those who testified of Christ. Ehat and Cook, ed., The Words of Joseph Smith, 10-11.

286 Welch and Hall, Charting the New Testament, 2002, 15-15. 287 Bauer, A Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, 922, 582, 1042. questions? Do we have another translation that sheds light on this passage, or could the verse have been added later by a scribe? I want to examine these two possibilities.

1 Corinthians 14:34-35

NIS NIV JB _____ ‘

The women are to keep Women should remain silent Women are to remain quiet silent in the churches; for in the churches. They are not in the assemblies, since they they are not permitted to allowed to speak, but must be have no permission to speak, are to subject in submission, as the law says. speak: theirs is a themselves, just as the Law If they want to inquire subordinate part, as the Law also says. If they desire to about something, they should itself says. If there is learn anything, let them ask ask their own husbands at anything they want to know, their own husbands at home; home; for it is disgraceful for a they should ask their for it is improper for a woman to speak in the church. husbands at home: it is woman to speak in church. shameful for a woman to

speak in the assembly.

The Joseph Smith translation (JST) modifies the meaning entirely by changing “speak” (KJV) to “rule” (JST): “it is not permitted unto them to rule in the church” (1 Corinthians 14:34).288 It transforms the discussion from speaking to authority and ruling. Was the problem that women usurped authority? 1 Corinthians discusses authority repeatedly. Elsewhere, though, Paul explicitly supports female ministering (including Tabitha, Chloe, Phebe, Lydia, and Priscilla).289 With the perspective of the JST change, it sounds like Paul has a particular kind of ruling in mind. One wonders what problems the Corinthian saints had that warranted this reprimand (and other reproofs). Were they correcting the presiding elder? A few verses earlier, Paul instructs church members to listen respectfully when someone else is speaking (“hold his peace,” 1 Corinthians 14:30). Not knowing the circumstances inhibits our full understanding.

The second explanation is that perhaps these two verses were not written by Paul at all.290 Some textual scholars claim that they were not in the original text, but added as a side note in the margin, added later.291 If Paul’s Epistle does not include these two verses (1 Corinthians 14:34-35), then he does not contradict himself. It does not seem plausible that he would contradict himself within the same section of the same letter where at least six times he encourages women

Smith's Translation of the Bible—A History and Commentary (Provo, UT: Brigham Young University), 1975. 289 See chapter 2 and Appendix 3. 288 For more information on the Joseph Smith Translation see, Robert J. Matthews, A Plainer Translation: Joseph 290 Or perhaps, as part of Paul’s rebuttal, these words were added as a quotation from the slogans of the Corinthian elitists in a sarcastic tone (as Paul quotes their statement earlier in 1 Corinthians 7:1). 291 New English Translation of the Bible (Grand Rapids, MI: Zondervan, 2019), 2202. A footnote of this verse reads:

“Some scholars have argued that vv. 34–35 should be excised from the text (principally G. D. Fee, First Corinthians [NICNT], 697–710; P. B. Payne, “Fuldensis, Sigla for Variants in Vaticanus, and 1 Cor 14.34–5,” NTS 41 [1995]: 240–262). This is because the Western witnesses (D F G ar b vgms Ambst) have these verses after v. 40, while the rest of the tradition retains them here. There are no mss that omit the verses. Why, then, would some scholars wish to excise the verses? Because they believe that this best explains how they could end up in two different locations, that is to say, that the verses got into the text by way of a very early gloss added in the margin.” For more see page 2202-2203. to speak or join in public worship (NIV: 1 Cor 11:5, 12:7-11, 28-29; 14:3-4, 24, 31). If we look at the greater Pauline corpus, we find twelve more positive sections on women sharing in worship (NIV: Romans 12:1,7; 16:1-3; Galatians 3:28; 6:5-6, Ephesians 4:8, 4:11, 29; Philippians 4:2-3; 2 Timothy 2:2; Titus 2:3-4).292

Furthermore, textual critics note a break in the flow of Paul’s thought between verse 33 and 36, which also suggests that an editor added the two troublesome verses later as his own interpretation. These two verses also match the heretical view of women from the end of the first century and may have been added by a copyist or compiler a few decades later.293

Whenever there is a contradiction between two Scriptures, we have the responsibility to compare biblical doctrine with the revelations of the restoration. In this case, women speak, teach, counsel, testify, exhort, and administer in the restored church. They may prophesy and pray as priestesses in their homes, church services, public gatherings, and temples. Joseph Smith revealed that women should “expound Scriptures, and to exhort the church, according as it shall be given thee by [God’s] Spirit” (D&C 25:7). However, women do not preside or “rule” over the priesthood leaders as pointed out in the JST version of 1 Corinthians 14:34.

In conclusion, the apostolic church battled great diversity that affected the saints’ ability to accept and live Jesus’ teachings. In the Epistles we find evidence that the saints struggled with keeping doctrine pure—including accepting women as equal participants in worship. We find passages where the apostles tried to clarify and teach the principles and ordinances that Christ taught. However, in the currently available New Testament translations, we also find statements that contradict the Lord’s teachings regarding women’s worship. Fortunately, the majority of the Epistles encourage Christian women to join in public worship. Specifically, in 1 Corinthians, women are empowered to pray and prophesy as part of their devotion and sanctification.

292 The New International Translation (NIV) is the most consistent with including both genders when the Greek uses it.

293 Dianne Bergant, Robert J. Karris, ed., The Collegeville Bible Commentary (Collegeville, MN: Liturgical Press, 1989), 1129.

63
