Marriage: From Arranging to Cohabitation

Whereas the first chapters looked at Christ’s physical emancipation of women and the effect that had on women in the early Christian church, we now look at the spiritual power our Redeemer unleashed. His example and teachings rejuvenate not just women themselves, but all aspects of the world of women. These changes to family life were quieter and less obvious.

Just like the Jews who were so intent on finding a conquering Messiah to overthrow their Roman oppressors that they missed the Son of God who came as a suffering servant (Isaiah 49, 52, 53)—so too we may miss the subtle yet emancipating changes that Christ provided for family life if we only look for a gallant, daring liberator. Christ sowed new social and spiritual seeds that had the potential to provide a loving, nurturing, healthy family life, but in some cases took years and even centuries to germinate and bear fruit.294

This chapter provides a historical overview of how Jewish marriages began in the late Second Temple era. This protocol provides an insightful backdrop to familiar New Testament stories. Woven in between accounts of arranged marriages, betrothals, ceremonies and feasts, we find Jesus and His apostles planting empowering principles about personal revelation, the Atonement, the Holy Ghost, trials, and consecration.

Cultural and Scriptural Background

Jews honored marriage as a religious duty to fulfill God’s commandment given in the Garden of Eden. Adam needed a “help meet” (KJV) or “a strength corresponding to him” (ISV)

294 This slow germination may be attributed, in part, to the fact that very few people read the Lord’s teachings for centuries. As soon as Christians began regularly reading the New Testament, changes began culturally, politically, economically, and emotionally that allowed the Lord’s word to grow in more hearts. Over time the Lord’s words have borne fruit.

64

or “his one before” (Genesis 2:20, TEB295), because “it was not good that the man should be alone” (Moses 3:18). “Therefore, shall a man leave his father and his mother, and shall cleave unto his wife: and they shall be one flesh” (Genesis 2:24; Moses 3:24). The Old Testament persuades men to “live joyfully with the wife whom thou lovest all the days of thy life” (Ecclesiastes 9:9) and “rejoice with the wife of thy youth” (Proverbs 5:18).

Proverbs linked marriage with wisdom and heavenly approval: “Whoso findeth a wife findeth a good thing, and obtaineth favor of the LORD” (Proverbs 18:22). Nearly a thousand years later, during the intertestamental period, we read the Jewish philosopher Ben Sira restating the importance of marriage with a slight variation: “Where there is no wife, a man will become a fugitive.”296 Later still, rabbis still felt strongly enough about marriage that they declared that a “Jew without a wife” is one of the groups “excommunicated by Heaven.”297

At the time of the New Testament, marriage was a prerequisite for certain professions, “An unmarried man may not teach scribes . . . [nor] herd cattle.”298 Celibacy was uncommon among Jews, except among certain strict Essenes.299 Polygamy was permitted, as it was in the Old Testament, yet it appears that most marriages were monogamous, probably for financial reasons.300

New Testament Examples

The New Testament unabashedly promotes marriage: “Marriage is honourable in all” (Hebrews 13:4). The word “honourable” can also be translated as “esteemed . . . beloved . . . dear.”301 The Gospels and Epistles have several noble examples of individuals and married

295 The TEB translation of Genesis 2:20 includes a pre-Eden relationship between Adam and Eve. To better understand the context of this quote, here is the TEB of Genesis 2:18-20: “And YHVH ELOHIM said, “Not good— the soil-man being by himself, I will make for him a help, as his one before.” And YHVH ELOHIM shaped from the soil every living thing of the field, and every flyer of the skies, and he made come toward the soil-man to see what he would call to it; and whatever the soil-man would call to it—each living life-breather—that was its name. And the soil-man called names to every animal, and to the flyer of the skies, and to every living thing of the field; and to Soil-Man he did not find a help, as his one before.” The translation note for “his one before” reads, “one facing him, before or opposite him, as his corresponding counterpart.”

296 Ben Sira, Ecclesiasticus, 36:30.

297 Babylonian Talmud, Pesahim 113a. There were seven groups who were not eligible for heaven. The quote continues, “one who has a wife but no children; one who has children but doesn't raise them in the study of the Torah; one who has no phylacteries on his head or on his arm, no fringes on his garment, no mezuzah on his door; and one who won't put shoes on his feet.” The Talmud instructed men to love their wives; “Who loves his wife as himself and honors her more than himself . . . to him the text refers, Thou shalt know that thy tent is in peace.” Babylonian Talmud: Yebamoth, 62b.

298 Jacob Neusner, The Mishnah: A New Translation (New Haven, CT: Yale, 1988), Qiddushin, 4:13a; 4:14a; Interesting in the middle of this rabbinic debate on teaching, one rabbi inserted, “nor may a woman teach scribes” (4:13b).

299 Josephus, Wars, 2.8.2; Antiquities, 18.1.5. Josephus explained that some groups of Essenes viewed woman as unfaithful and remained celibate, while other Essenes married (Wars, 2.8.12). Also see Skolnik, Encyclopaedia Judaica, 6.511.

300 Neusner, ed, Judaism in the Biblical Period, 437. “The Israelite kings openly practiced polygamy but were castigated for it (Deuteronomy17:17). Prophets, priests, and other prominent biblical figures were monogamous. Social and economic obligations imposed on a husband to support each wife equally (Exodus 21:10).” At the time of the New Testament, polygamy was usually practiced only as a levirate marriage (marrying your departed next of kin’s wife to raise up seed to the deceased, Genesis 38:8; Deuteronomy 25:5). 301 Strong, Exhaustive Concordance of the Bible, 91; Greek dictionary for “honourable / Timios or timiotatos.”

65 couples who work together in furthering God’s work (i.e., Mary and Joseph, Zacharias and Elisabeth, Zebedee and Salome, Simon Peter and his wife, Chuza and Joanna, and Priscilla and Aquila). The Lord’s apostles urge “the younger women [to] marry, bear children, guide the house, give none occasion to the adversary to speak reproachfully” (1 Timothy 5:14).

Jesus’ teachings on relationships differ from the cultural norm. He taught mutual respect and the need to change one’s heart. He denounced anger and called for reconciliation. Jesus taught His disciples to love as He does (Matthew 5:24; 5:38-42, JST; John 13:34). He honored and respected women as equals of men (Matthew 9:22; 26:10; Luke 10:42; John 20:15-17, etc.). He taught principles to develop unity, love, trust, fidelity, mutuality, and service in marriage (John 13:34; 17:21-23; 1 Corinthians 11:11; Ephesians 5:28; Titus 2:4; etc.).

Cultural Background

The Old Testament includes the story of an arranged marriage between Isaac and Rebekah (Genesis 24). The New Testament has no explicit account of an arranged marriage, but they are assumed to have taken place, as other sources from the era illuminate. One rabbi gave ultimate authority for matchmaking straight to God. He claims that since the creation of the world, God has kept busy as a marriage broker: “He sits and makes matches, assigning this man to that woman and this woman to that man.”302

The ultimate authority for arranging marriages may have come from God, but in practice, either the father, or next of kin, tightly controlled the arrangement of each child’s marriage.303 It was an extremely important duty of fatherhood: “Marry thy daughter well, and then shalt do a great work, and give her to a wise man.”304 The rabbis saw a well-matched couple as a guarantee for a stable home, which then led to a durable nation.305

The ideal healthy Jewish young man married at eighteen (although there are historical examples ranging from age thirteen to twenty-four).306 The rabbis taught, “a man who does not marry by the age of twenty has sinned.”307 Displeasing God may have been bad enough, but if a Roman man were still single by age twenty-five, or a woman by age twenty, they had to pay an extra state tax.308

The ideal Jewish girl married a little younger—usually between the ages of twelve to fifteen. The day after a girl’s twelfth birthday, she was no longer a minor “young girl / na’rah;” and the day after she turned twelve and a half she could legally be married.309 Given the young ages of their marriages, their culture of gender segregation, and their inexperience socially, it is

302 Midrash Genesis Rabbah 68.4.

303 Mishnah, Ketuboth, 4:4. “The father has authority over his daughter as touching her betrothal.” Intercourse was the only way to cement a levirate marriage.

304 Ben Sira, Ecclesiasticus, 7:27.

305 Neusner, ed, Judaism in the Biblical Period, 223-224. 306 Mishnah, Avoth, 5:21; Kiddushin, 29b. Glover, Jewish Laws and Customs, 231; Campbell, Marriage and Family in the Biblical World, 186, footnote 20. Neusner, ed, Judaism in the Biblical Period, 224. 307 Mishnah , Kiddushin, 29b.

308 Campbell, Marriage and Family in the Biblical World, 144. 309 Mishnah, Kiddushin, 2.1; “A man may give his daughter in betrothal while she is still in her girlhood either by his own act or by that of his agent.”

66 not surprising that arranged marriages seemed the best cultural option.310 Every Jewish father or guardian had twelve years to find a spouse for his daughter. A girl under twelve / q’tannah, was completely under her father or guardian’s control. But by age twelve, she was allowed to voice some of her desires.311 Then came the important age of twelve and a half when she became “a maiden of full age / bogeret.” Supposedly, if the father waited until then to find her husband, he lost full control of the decision. After twelve-and-a-half, the daughter could reject her father’s choice of a husband up to “four or five times.”312 Preferably, a compatible union was found before that magical age.

The father’s task of arranging marriages became complicated by familial, financial and political motivations. Jewish etiquette dictated that marriages remained within specific social circles—gentry married gentry, laborers married laborers.313 The lowest division of Jewish social hierarchy allowed marriages between proselytes, freed slaves, and illegitimate children.314

In some situations, a son’s desires could influence his father’s decision. The Jewish historian

Josephus (AD 37-101) advised young men who felt a fancy toward a young girl to “demand her in marriage of him who hath power to dispose of her, and is fit to give her away.”315 His language of “demand her” and “dispose of her” may have developed from a warped outcome of arranged marriages, which over the generations tended to make marriage into a market and women into a commodity.316

Years later, the financial vocabulary became more common as the Talmud speaks of its

advantage to solicit the best wife:

Let a man always sell all he has and marry the daughter of a scholar. If he does not find the

daughter of a scholar, let him marry one of the daughters of the great men of the generation.

If he does not find the daughter of one of the great men of the generation, let him marry the

310 Ben Sira, Ecclesiasticus, 26:10-11; 22:3. Ben Sira advised fathers to keep their daughters inside: “If thy daughter be shameless, keep her in straitly, lest she abuse herself through overmuch liberty. . . . a foolish daughter shall be to his loss.” In a commentary on these verses, Violet Brunton interprets, “Woman did not go out in public alone. If your headstrong daughter wandered outside on her own, she would make you 'the talk of the town' by displaying her beauty to men (42: 11-12); an over-anxious father might well imagine her ...” John Snaith, The Cambridge Commentary on the New English Bible—Ecclesiasticus (New York: Cambridge University Press, 1974), 133. As discussed in chapter 1, young women were usually kept indoors, but if they were ever in the company of men, Ben Sira cautioned men to not look or linger if women were present, “Behold not everybody's beauty: and tarry not among women.” Ben Sira, Ecclesiasticus, 42:12.

311 Mishnah , Yebamoth, 13.1.

312 Mishnah, Yebamoth, 13.1. The famous rabbi Hillel (60 BC to 20 AD), wrote much on the subject and dictated that a girl of twelve-and-a-half “may exercise right of refusal four or five times” in the selection of her husband. In reaction to this limit, the more lenient rabbinic school of Shammai retorted, “The daughters of Israel are no [such] ownerless property!” Shammai allowed the underage girl to stay in her father’s home until “she is come of age,” meaning the onset of puberty. See Appendix 2.

313 Louis H. Feldman, Meyer Reinhold, Jewish Life and Thought among Greeks and Romans (Fortress Press, 1996), 13. By AD 388, the Theodosian Code 3.7.2 forbade Jews to marry Christians; “No Jew shall take Christian woman in marriage, neither shall a Christian marry a Jewess. Indeed, if anyone shall commit something of the kind, his crime shall be considered as adultery with the right to accuse allowed the general public.” 314 Mishnah, Kiddushin 4:1.

315 Josephus, Against Apion, 2:25. The whole quote reads, “[Our law] commands us also, when we marry, not to . . . take a woman by violence, nor to persuade her deceitfully and knavishly; but demand her in marriage of him who hath power to dispose of her.” Josephus should be credited for denouncing rape and deception, but his use of “demand her in marriage . . .” still sounds insensitive to a woman’s feelings. 316 Ben Sira, Ecclesiasticus, 36:26. Quotation is on page 43.

67

daughter of the heads of synagogues. If he does not find the daughter of the heads of

synagogues, let him marry the daughter of a charity treasurer. If he does not find the daughter

of a charity treasurer, let him marry the daughter of an elementary school-teacher.317

This hierarchy of professions also speaks of the financial nature of purchasing a bride that prevailed at the time. The wealthier the family, the more power one had to arrange a marriage.

Marriage within the Extended family

Fathers often arranged marriages within their extended families to ensure compatibility and preserve family property.318 Especially if a young woman were an heiress (i.e., she had no brothers), Moses instructed her to marry within the family tribe to keep family inheritance constant (Numbers 36:1-12). If she did not, when she married and moved into her husband’s family home, she lost her inheritance of property.

Closer to the time of the New Testament, the apocryphal book of Jubilees (c. 120 BC)

recommended marriage with a cousin (Jubilees 4:15, 16, 20, 27, 28). Josephus includes several examples of marriages between an uncle and niece (although a marriage between and an aunt and nephew were forbidden).319 Marriages with a sibling were forbidden as were other close kin.320 Many families remained in the same location for generations, so marrying within the community often meant marriage within the extended family.

Marriage within the Priesthood Lineage

The highest honor for an Israelite daughter was to marry a descendant of Aaron, or secondly a Levite, so that her sons could hold the priesthood and serve in the temple.321 The law of Moses instructed those with priestly lineage to choose a virgin from a worthy Levite family (Leviticus 21:14).322 This carried down to the time of the New Testament, where we read from Josephus, who was a priest himself, that a priest should find a bride with proper Levitical lineage “without having any regard to money, or any other dignities.”323 While a priest was allowed to

317 Babylonian Talmud , Pesah, 49b.

318 Numbers 36:1-12; Ilan, Jewish Women in Greco-Roman Palestine, 77.

Also see Alfred Kingsley Glover, Jewish Laws and Customs (Well, MN: WA Hammond, 1900), 230. 320 Neusner, ed, 319 Josephus, Antiquities, XVII.1:3; XVIII.5.4; XIX.9:1. Wars I.28:4; and marriage with a cousin Wars I.24:5 etc. Judaism in the Biblical Period, 441. The forbidden relationship of an aunt and nephew is also

recorded: “Marriages between an aunt and nephew, marriage to a brother’s wife or to a wife’s sister while the wife is alive (even after a divorce), marriage to the wife of an uncle, marriage to a son or daughter in law, and marriage to someone already married.”

321 Jacob Neusner, Sifre to Numbers: An American Translation and Explanation, vol. 2 (Atlanta, GA: Scholars Press, 1986), Numbers Seventy-Eight, 1.S. Mishnah, Kiddushin 4:1. In the same social class as Levites are physically impaired priests from Aaron, and pure Israelites from any of the other tribes. 322 All male descendants of Jacob’s son Levi held the Levitical priesthood, but the higher honor was given to those direct descendants from Aaron who held the Aaronic Priesthood. While Levites took care of the more secular tasks of running the temple, the priests performed the majority of the temple sacrifices. They acted as mediators between God and men at the altar by placing an animal on the altar and sprinkling its blood on the horns and corners of the altar (Leviticus 4:7, 25). Aaronic priesthood holders could function as priests, chief priests, or the one reigning high priest.

323 Josephus, Against Apion, 1.7. The full quote reads, “He who is partaker of the priesthood must propagate of a wife of the same nation, without having any regard to money, or any other dignities. But he is to make a scrutiny,

68 marry the daughter of a Levite or pure Israelite, if a priest married the daughter of a priest, it conveyed a twofold honor.324

New Testament Examples

In Luke’s account of the birth narratives, he carefully includes the detail that Zacharias the priest marries one “of the daughters of Aaron,” the priestess Elisabeth (Luke 1:5).

Elisabeth Within the cultural context of arranged priestly marriages, this detail confirms that

And Zacharias’ family obediently observed the guidelines of the Torah to keep their

Zacharias priesthood lineage pure.

Luke further provides more noble attributes of Zacharias and Elisabeth: “they were both righteous before God, walking in all the commandments and ordinances of the Lord blameless” (Luke 1:6). Luke probably emphasizes these details to combat the cultural baggage that taught that barrenness was a sin.325 Zacharias and Elisabeth seem to bridge the old and the new covenant as they epitomize a devout Old Testament couple—even echoing Abraham and Sarah’s infertility—while they bridge the new covenant as disciples and witnesses of the Promised Messiah.

Joseph Although the nativity narratives are silent on the ages of Mary and Joseph at

and their betrothal, we can infer that they follow the traditional rules, as Joseph is

Mary described as “just,” which also means “equitable . . . innocent, holy . . . meet,

righteous” (Matthew 1:19).326

Matthew chooses Joseph as his main character in his nativity narrative and in every reference portrays him as a conscientious, law-abiding Jew (Matthew 1:19-20, 24; 2:13, 19). This suggests that Joseph was less than twenty years old. We are left to assume that the angel Gabriel visits Mary sometime between age twelve and fourteen, as she is already betrothed to Joseph but has not yet shared bed and board: “the angel Gabriel was sent from God unto a city of Galilee, named Nazareth, to a virgin espoused to a man” (Luke 1:26-27). Artists tend to depict Mary in her late teens or early twenties, but historical records from the time suggest she would have been closer to thirteen, a very young bride by modern standards. Nevertheless, God often calls and empowers youth as His leaders, and Mary fits that pattern.327 Artists also depict Joseph as much older with grey or balding hair, but this idea comes from a later tradition that developed around the theory that Mary was a virgin for life.328

and to take his wife’s genealogy from the ancient tables. And this is our practice not only in Judea, but wheresoever any body of men of our nation do live; and even there an exact catalogue of our priests’ marriages is kept; I mean at Egypt and Babylon, or in any other place of the rest of the habitable earth, withersoever our priests are scattered; for they send to Jerusalem the ancient names of their parents in writing.” 324 Brown, Birth, 258. In the Old Testament priests were advised to marry within their tribe, “Let them marry to whom they think best; only to the family of the tribe of their father shall they marry” (Numbers 36:6). Women who were direct descendants of Aaron (as Elisabeth was Luke 1:5) were to marry in the Aaronic lineage to keep the priesthood lineage pure. Moses encouraged marriages within the same tribe, but by the time of Jesus, in general situations, this practice was not strictly followed.

325 Read more on infertility as a punishment for sins in chapter 7, “childbirth.” 326 Strong’s, Exhaustive Concordance of the Bible, 24, of the Greek Dictionary section dikaios. 327 For example, the prophet Samuel (1 Samuel 3:8-11), David son of Jesse (1 Samuel 16:12-13), Nephi and Jacob sons of Lehi (1 Nephi 2:16; 2 Nephi 2:2-4), Joseph Smith (JS-H 1:7-20), etc. 328 When the Roman church began teaching that Mary was a virgin for her whole life, they struggled with verses in Mark 6:3 and Matthew 13:55 that state that she had at least seven children; “Is not this . . . the son of Mary, the

69

Jesus did not eradicate arranged marriages, but He did plant principles with the potential to grow into the freedom of choice.329 God initiates agency in the Garden of Eden: “thou mayest choose for thyself, for it is given unto thee” (Genesis 2:21, JST). Teachings on agency flow through the Old Testament: “Choose you this day, whom ye will serve . . . but as for me and my house, we will serve the LORD” (Joshua 24:15).330 In the New Testament Jesus gently tutors Martha on the importance of choice: “one thing is needful . . . Mary hath chosen that good part” (Luke 10:42). These subtle seeds of choice developed the power to grow into emancipation. Truth became the means to find freedom: “and the truth shall make you free” (John 8:32). Jesus chose His twelve apostles, and they in turn chose Stephen and others (Luke 6:13; Acts 6:5).

The apostles carry the message on: “whatsoever a man soweth, that shall he also reap” (Galatians 6:7-8). The greatest freedoms and opportunities of all come from choosing to follow God as Jesus exemplifies: “I seek not mine own will, but the will of the Father” (John 5:30); and He prays, “not as I will, but as thou wilt” (Matthew 26:39). The Lord also applies agency as He “learned . . . obedience by the things which he suffered” (Hebrews 5:7-8; also 11:25). Jesus, and his namesake Joshua, set the biblical stage for the freedom of choice.331

brother of James, and Joses, and of Juda, and Simon? and are not his sisters here with us?” To harmonize the biblical list of Jesus’ siblings with the later Roman-Christian thought about Mary’s virginity for life, a story developed that claimed Joseph was an older widower with children. This way he could have fathered the other six plus children mentioned, been widowed, and then married the young Mary without ever consummating their marriage. Those who claim that Mary remained a virgin for life have adopted the story that Mary merely raised several stepchildren. We have no scriptural evidence for this conjecture. The story is found in the apocryphal Protevangelium of James (also known as the Nativity of Mary or Apocalypse of James) that dates to the second century but appears to quote an older text. See Lynne Hilton Wilson’s article, “The Confusing Case of Zacharias,” in: Religious Educator as re 14, no. 2 (2013) 107-123.

329 Interestingly, it is not until the Protestant reformation, when many people started reading the Bible, that we see many of Jesus’ subtle teachings having a major social impact. Once the printing press brought the price of Bibles within an affordable range for people to own, and once a large portion of the population became literate, we find the Christian world reading the Bible. It is then that many emancipating teachings of Jesus took root. For example, those who came to the new world for religious freedom built their society on the teachings of the Bible. They read and implemented its teachings. As a result, over generations we see emancipating social changes for slaves, women, children, and society at large.

330 Proverbs 1:29 rebukes the people’s bad choices, “they . . . did not choose the fear of the LORD.” 331 Restoration Scriptures, though half the size of the Bible, have three times as many verses on agency—see topics including desire, obey, choose, free, judge, agency, freedom, prove, willing, opposition, etc.

70

Cultural Background

The Jewish marriage ceremony took place in two stages, usually a year apart.332 The Bible refers to the first half as either an “espousal” or “betrothal,” yet no English word correctly identifies this first step of Jewish matrimony.333 This unique Jewish custom described the beginning of the Jewish marriage covenant. More than an engagement and more than a ceremony, the betrothal included making vows between the couple that were as binding as the marriage, but usually without the consummation.334

The betrothal included a legal marriage contract or ketubah drawn up as a purchase agreement of the husband’s property: “a woman is acquired” by her husband.335 Marriage became a financial purchase involving both the bride’s and groom’s families. The contract included the groom’s payment of a “bride price.” The minimum sum was 200 denarii for a virgin, with no maximum (a denarius was one day’s minimum wage, thus 200 days’ labor).336 The groom paid this to the bride’s father but the money eventually was to go to the bride if her husband died or divorced her without a religious cause (see section entitled “divorce” later in chapter 6). If the families were wealthy, the bride’s father also paid the groom a dowry.

The monetary aspect of the marriage agreement brought up a debate between the rabbis about the “difference between the acquisition of a wife and the acquisition of a slave.”337 In addition to their similar workloads, wives and slaves or servants also overlapped legally, financially, and sexually.338 A wife differed from a slave in that she kept the things she brought into the marriage as her “right of possession (but not of disposition).”339 Also, if her husband died or divorced her, a wife received her “bride price,” but a slave was not reimbursed if there were a death or dismissal. If kidnapped, a wife, and not a slave, had to be ransomed.340 We are left to speculate on the difference of feelings.

Once the fathers or guardians agreed on a monetary contract, the families took the first step toward making the sacred marriage vows. Two witnesses recorded the transaction as the couple made their formal vows under a wedding tent or “canopy /chuppah.”341 The betrothal ceremony

332 Mishnah , Ketuboth, 5:2 “a virgin is granted twelve months wherein to provide for herself.” Also see Campbell, Marriage and Family in the Biblical World, 186.

333 In Greek “erusin” and in Hebrew, “'aras.” See Deuteronomy 28:23-30; 2 Samuel 3:14; Hosea 2:19-20; Matthew 1:18; Luke 1:27; 2:5; 2 Corinthians 11:2).

334 W.F. Albright and C.S. Mann, The Anchor Bible Series-Matthew (New York: Doubleday, 1971), 7; “the penalty for fornication with one person while betrothed to another was death for both guilty parties.” 335 Mishnah, Kiddushin 1:5. Eugene J. Lipman, The Mishnah: Oral teachings of Judaism (Norton, 1970), 192; “The text does not read, ‘a man acquires a woman,’ but deliberately says, ‘a woman is acquired’ to teach us that a woman can be married only with her knowledge and consent ... A Hebrew slave is acquired by money or by contract.” 336 Mishnah, Ketuboth, 4.7; 5.1.

337 Jeremias, Jerusalem, 367. Also from Eugene J. Lipman, The Mishnah: Oral teachings of Judaism (Norton, 1970), 192.

338 Gail Susan Labovitz, Marriage and Metaphor: Constructions of Gender in Rabbinic Literature (Lanham, MD: Lexington, Rowman and Littlefield, 2009), 59, 109, 133, 161.

339 Jeremias, Jerusalem, 368.

340 Mishnah , Horayoth. 3.7.

341 Skolnik, Encyclopedia Judaica, 13.568. The bridal canopy was initially a tent or room where the wedding festival took place. However, in some cases, even without the formal wedding ceremony and feast, if two witnesses hear a bridegroom say to his betrothed, “Behold, you are consecrated to me with this cohabitation according to the

71 concluded with a prayer over a statutory cup of wine, which the couple drank. If the families had the means, a celebration followed. From the moment of the ceremony, the couple held their relationship as consecrated, as though they had wed. The betrothed girl could become widowed, divorced, and punished by death for adultery.342 The ideal Jewish couple remained celibate during their betrothal.

New Testament Example

Joseph The New Testament records one betrothed couple: Mary and Joseph. When Joseph

Vacillates discovers Mary’s pregnancy, he agonizes over his duty to divorce her for adultery,

as they had already made their vows. “When as his mother Mary was espoused to

Joseph, before they came together, she was found with child of the Holy Ghost. Then Joseph her husband, being a just man, and not willing to make her a publick example, was minded to put her away privily” (Matthew 1:18-19). The Gospels describe Joseph as an upright, virtuous descendant of David who obeyed the Mosaic law.

Joseph feels duty-bound to end his marriage contract until an angel of the Lord intervenes and provides freedom from his agony.343 “Joseph, son of David, do not be afraid to take Mary as your wife; for the Child who has been conceived in her is of the Holy Spirit” (Matthew 1:20, ASB). Joseph’s personal revelation not only liberates him from his obligations to the Mosaic law, but it also strengthens and empowers him with the knowledge that Mary was innocent and pure, that the Messiah was coming, and that he had an important role to play as the adoptive father of the Son of God.

One of the sanctioning seeds of emancipation that Jesus offers the world is the ability to receive personal revelation: “ask, and it shall be given you; seek, and ye shall find; knock, and it shall be opened unto you . . . . your Father which is in heaven give good things to them that ask him” (Matthew 7:7, 11). Later Jesus’ disciples reiterate the theme, “If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God, that giveth to all men liberally, and upbraideth not; and it shall be given him” (James 1:5). God’s answer to Joseph’s conundrum of marriage or divorce offers hope to all who have deep questions. Jesus provides a tool to access the powers of heaven and liberation.344

law of Moses and of Israel.” Followed by cohabitation, the couple was considered married. Ibid., 13.570. One symbol of the wedding tent was a type of tabernacle where the couple came before God to make their covenants. 342 Mishnah, Ketuboth 1.2; Yebamoth, 4:10; 6:4; Gittin, 6:2; also see Campbell, Marriage and Family in the Biblical World, 63, 221-222.

343 Deuteronomy 22:20-21 states it a religious duty to stone a girl who was not a virgin at marriage. 344 Sometimes current revelation contradicts past revelation. For example, the Israelites dietary laws are not repeated in the Word of Wisdom. With Abraham’s sacrifice of Isaac, personal revelation trumped the earlier law of God. Similarly, Joseph of Nazareth had to break the Law of Moses to follow the angel’s direction to marry Mary.

72

Cultural Background

About a year after the betrothal, Jewish families prepared for the wedding ceremony. Wedding preparations culminated three days before the ceremony–which usually occurred on a Wednesday–when even the groom was required to devote himself to the preparations. 345 The bride adorned herself for her wedding by bathing, dressing, and putting on perfume. Her hair was left completely unveiled. This was the only public exposure of her hair in her adult life.346 The bride and groom often wore a wreath or gold headdress. A procession of townspeople singing, dancing and carrying torches, paraded from the groom’s home to the bride’s home and back again. Once they arrived, the groom took his bride into his family home where the families had a wedding canopy or chuppah prepared.347

Under the canopy, the groom gave his bride a ring and completed their wedding vows: “You will be my wife according to the law of Moses.”348 Traditional promises were pronounced by the husband—to redeem his wife if she were captured, to give their sons the ketubah upon the wife’s death, to provide maintenance for their daughters until they were married, and, if the husband died, to require the sons to provide for their mother or else return the ketubah.349 Ten men gathered to give a prayer or blessing.350 The ceremony was finalized by a benediction over a cup of wine, and the bride became consecrated to the groom. Great rejoicing and feasting followed.

New Testament Example

One example of a wedding processional stands out in the Gospels: the parable of the ten virgins.351 Matthew placed the parable directly after the great prophecy of the Lord’s Second

345 Campbell, Marriage and Family in the Biblical World, 206. Wednesdays were chosen as the day for a virgin’s wedding. “This is explained in the Babylonian Talmud by the fact that the court sat on Thursdays and thus if the groom claimed that the bride had not been a virgin he could immediately complain to the court.” Thursday was the

Encyclopedia Judaica, 13.566. 346 Mishnah wedding day for a widow so that her husband could devote three days to her before he returned to work. Skolnik, , Ketuboth 2.1; “She went forth [to the marriage] in a litter and with hair unbound . . .” (brackets in

Danby’s translation). Skolnik, Encyclopedia Judaica, 13.565; “Until the destruction of the temple both the bride and groom wore distinctive headdresses, sometimes of gold.”

347 Skolnik, Encyclopedia Judaica, 13.565.

348 Campbell, Marriage and Family in the Biblical World, 190. A typical marriage contract or ketubah read as follows: “This ketubah before God and man that on this . . . day . . . the holy covenant of marriage was entered between bride-groom and his bride, at . . . Duly conscious of the solemn obligation of marriage the bridegroom consecrated to me as my wife according to the laws and traditions of Moses and Israel. I will love, honor, and cherish you; I will protect and support you; and I will faithfully care for your needs, as prescribed by Jewish law and tradition.” The bride made the following declaration to the groom: “In accepting the wedding ring I pledge you all

Neusner, ed, Judaism in the Biblical Period, 411. 349 Mishnah my love and devotion and I take upon myself the fulfillment of all the duties incumbent upon a Jewish wife.” , Ketuboth 4.12.

350 Mishnah, Megillah, 4.3.

351 The parable of the ten virgins is also referenced in modern revelations: D&C 33:16-17; 45:56-57; 63:54.

73

Parable Coming in order to illustrate the preparation needed for that great event (Matthew 24

of Ten and 25:1-13).352

Virgins The main character of this parable is the bridegroom, or “Son of Man”

(Matthew 25:13).353 In the parable, ten close unmarried friends of the bride wait for

the arrival of the bridegroom.354 Five of them join the joyous group of loved ones making up the bridegroom’s processional, escorting the bride to his home for the wedding ceremony. If the procession occurred at night, the cultural practice of the time included bringing torches or a lamp to light the way. Prudent people kept an extra flask of oil.355

The purpose of the parable was to use the marriage preparations and covenant as a symbolic backdrop to discuss the covenantal criteria required to prepare spiritually and receive the Lord at His coming. Those who spiritually prepare to covenant with the Lord join His covenant people.356 The Savior facilitates more light to shine on His covenant children to prepare them for His coming.357

The Doctrine and Covenants describes the virgins’ lamps as a symbol of the Holy Spirit: “I spake concerning the ten virgins for they are wise and have received of the truth and have taken the Holy Spirit as their guide and have not been deceived—verily I say unto you, they shall not be hewn down and cast into the fire, but shall abide the day” (D&C 45:56-57). Modern revelation explains how that can happen: “. . . The power of my Spirit quickeneth all things. Wherefore, be faithful, praying always, having your lamps trimmed and burning and oil with you, that you may be ready at the coming of the Bridegroom” (D&C 33:16-17).358 Jesus’ teachings can fill one with the Spirit (oil or anointing), leading one to become more Christlike.359

the Lord’s Second Coming. It can be found in the Pearl of Great Price, as Joseph Smith-Matthew. 353 In Matthew’s typical style, he began, “then shall the kingdom of heaven be likened unto . . .” (Matthew 25:1). 352 Joseph Smith’s translation of Matthew 24 changed the order of most verses, organizing the chapter to separate Matthew used this phrase, “kingdom of heaven” thirty-one times, and it is not mentioned anywhere else in the Bible. Daniel 2:44 uses the same words, but not the exact phrase, “In the days of these kings shall the God of heaven set up a kingdom.”

354 The Greek word for virgin, parthenos, also means the more general, unmarried young women. 355 The first pressing of olives produced the most precious oil for temple anointings, the second pressing for eating, and the third for light.

356 Bruce A. Van Orden and Brent L. Top, eds., The Lord of the Gospels: The 1990 Sperry Symposium on the New Testament, 20. President Spencer W. Kimball explained: ‘“The kind of oil which is needed to illuminate the way, light up the darkness is not shareable. How can one share a tithing receipt; a peace of mind from righteous living; an accumulation of knowledge? How can one share faith or testimony? How can one share attitudes or chastity, or a mission? How can one share temple privileges and security? Each one must obtain that kind of oil for himself.’ We must cultivate their own spiritual level of faith. To carry an empty vessel (church membership without covenants, without the Spirit) one is in severe self-delusion and doesn’t admit it is empty.” 357 Scripture on the Lord’s Second Coming include Matthew 24 (JST); Luke 21:25-28; D&C 45; also see D&C 34:6; 84:28; 128:24; 133:19, 25, 46; etc.

358 In this parable and throughout the Scriptures, the Lord drew on the marriage covenant to represent His followers entering into a divine contract with Him. He describes membership in His kingdom, and marriage with Him. Isaiah 51:1, “Where is the bill of your mother’s divorcement?” For more marriage imagery between God and His people, also see Isaiah 54:6; Hosea 2:1-11; Malachi 2:14-15; etc.

359 The name Christ, which is Greek for the Hebrew verb / mashach / messiah, means “to anoint.” The Promised Messiah is the Anointed One who offers His anointing with those who become His sons and daughters.

74

Cultural Background

If the families had the means, a weeklong feast followed the wedding ceremony (Genesis 29:27; Judges 14:10, 17). Friends and family of the bride and groom who had traveled from out of town, gathered for a reunion and feasting.360 Meals were arranged at the homes of the bride and groom to strengthen family bonds between the two families. During the celebration, the ten men who gave the groom’s blessings during the ceremony repeated it multiple times.361 New Testament Examples

The Gospel of John describes the “beginning of miracles” at a marriage feast. John carefully chose and crafted this account as the first of Jesus’ seven miracles.362 John describes Jesus’ purpose in performing this miracle as a means “through which he revealed his glory” (John 2:11, NIV). It teaches the most emancipating message of the gospel: the power of the atonement.

Christ’s first miracle also testified of His last mortal miracle, His atoning sacrifice. John filled his Gospel with example after example of Jesus’ superiority to the law of Moses.363 Throughout John’s retelling of the Lord’s seven miracles and seven sermons,364 he emphasizes

360 Michael L. Satlow, Jewish Marriage in Antiquity (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2001), 178; “There are many stories about rabbis who make feasts for their sons (but almost never for their daughters), often at the home of other rabbis.”

361 Satlow, Jewish Marriage, 178. The blessings were not recorded until the time of the Talmud. There the blessings mentioned Adam and Eve, and the marriage metaphor between God and Zion. 362 The other Gospels include many more of the Lord’s miracles, but only the Gospel of John includes this story. The seven miracles mentioned in John are: Wedding at Cana (2:1); 4:46 Healing of official’s son (4:46); Healing of paralytic (5:1); Multiplication of loaves and fishes (6:1); Walking on water (6:19); Healing blind man (9:1); Raising Lazarus from the dead (11:1). John also organized his Gospel to include seven sermons by Jesus. The number seven appears a favorite of Johnnanine literature as we also see seven used in the Book of Revelation in connection with: churches, spirits, golden candlesticks, lamps, stars, seals, horns, angels, trumpets, thunders, crowns, heads, and plagues.

363 The Gospel of John does not mention Mary’s name anywhere. The Gospel of Mark never uses the name of Jesus’ legal father, Joseph.

364 Raymond Brown, An Introduction to the Gospel of John (New York: Doubleday, 1997), 30. This leading Catholic scholar, finds seven discourses recorded in John’s account during Jesus’ ministry, prior to the Last Supper: 1. Born again—Nicodemus born of water and of spirit (John 2:2-21) 2. Living water—women at the well (John 4:10-26)

75 that Jesus tore down the apostate or incomplete traditions to make room for a liberating restoration of truth.365

This miracle is layered in symbolism and typology for those who have eyes to see. The story begins at a wedding feast in Cana, a small-town neighboring Nazareth.

On the third day a wedding took place at Cana in Galilee. Jesus’ mother was there, and

Jesus and his disciples had also been invited to the wedding. When the wine was gone,

Jesus’ mother said to him, “They have no more wine.” “Woman, why do you involve

me?” Jesus replied. “My hour has not yet come (John 2:1-4, NIV). Coming from a culture that did not speak God’s name out of respect, and coming in a Gospel where the author never mentions his own name, perhaps John, out of respect chose not to mention Mary by name throughout his Gospel. Or perhaps figuratively, John refers to Mary as “woman,” hearkening back to Genesis where Eve is identified as “woman” (Genesis 2:22).366 Whatever his motive, it was polite (John 19:26).

Extending proper generosity to guests was a serious obligation in the ancient world. In their culture, failing to do so would have been a breach of hospitality. Running short of wine had even led to lawsuits in the day.367 The modus operandi recommended not serving all the wine initially for the guests, but holding some back for later, and serving the best first.

At the feast, Mary is concerned because they had run out of wine. The point that she felt responsible for the wine suggests that the wedding may have been for one of Mary’s close family relations.368 She also directs the servants, “Whatsoever he saith unto you, do it,” indicating that she held a position of responsibility at the feast (John 2:5).

Teaching Perspective. There are many different lenses that one can use to interpret this miracle. On a didactic level, there are some very clear and direct teachings. For example, Mary, who, as Christ’s first disciple, specifically directs the servants to follow Christ: “Whatsoever he saith unto you, do it” (John 2:5). Mary’s counsel can directly bless families as they do what the Lord directs. Another specific teaching comes from John 2:6, “There were set there six water pots of stone, after the manner of the purifying of the Jews, containing two or three firkins apiece.” (John 2:6). Jesus commands the servants, “Fill the water pots with water. And they fill them up to the brim” (John 2:7). This teaching has been used to emphasize the need to completely fill one’s life with the word of Lord and with the Holy Ghost.

Physical Perspective. On a physical level, Jesus changed water stored in stone vessels into wine. The stone pots held a lot of water—which in turn produces a lot of wine—108 to 150

365 For example, Jesus showed the incompleteness of the Jewish washings at the wedding of Cana, the false prejudices against race, gender, and sinners in Samaria with the woman at the well (discussed in chapter 1), and healing the lame and blind men on the Sabbath to communicate appropriate worship. The Lord restored doctrines and truth with each of the seven miracles in John.

366 Raymond E. Brown, The Gospel and Epistles of John: A Concise Commentary (Collegeville, MN: The Order of St. Benedict, 1988), 28-29.

367 Kent Jackson, and Robert Millet, Studies in Scriptures, vol 5 (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book, 1986), 113. 368 Matthew 13:55 and Mark 6:3 list Mary’s four sons and unnamed daughters. Some have speculated that this was Jesus’ wedding, but age customs suggest that He would have married a decade earlier or even younger.

76 gallons. That would have been from 2,000 to 3,000 servings! That amount would have provided plenty for a feast in Cana, plus a year’s supply of wine for the couple.369

The curious nature of the water pots does not come from their size though, but their purpose. These pots are exceptional in that they are for purifying. Stone pots were ritually “clean,” unlike the normal clay, wood, or reed vessels that Jews considered “unclean” (Leviticus 11:33; and Mark 7:3-4; Isaiah 66:20). John specifically mentions that they are stone containers for the “Jewish custom of purification” (NASB) or “ceremonial washing” (NIV, John 2:6) ceremonial washings. He also points out the specific number, six.

Numerical Perspective. On a symbolic level, John frequently uses numbers figuratively, and this story was no exception.370 Throughout his Gospel and Book of Revelation, he uses the number six to represent incomplete or imperfect (because six is one less than seven—the number of completion).371 John uses six in triplicate—666—for the wicked beast as something totally imperfect (Revelation 13:18).

At the marriage in Cana, “there were six water pots of stone.” John uses six to underscore that the Jewish purification was incomplete. The ritual washing of the lower Mosaic law–for which these pots are generally used–is imperfect in and of itself because its purpose was to prefigure a more perfect cleansing through the Messiah (Alma 13:16). Raymond Brown proposed that the six pots of water became complete only with Jesus’ addition of His wine—

‘“They have no wine,’ becomes a poignant reflection on the barrenness of their purifications.”373 374 Likewise human purification becomes perfect only through Christ’s atoning blood. symbolic of His blood—as the seventh ingredient.372 Thus Mary’s observation in John 2:3,

To help us make this connection on a theological level, John mentions that the miracle happens on “the third day” (John 2:1).375 This could refer to the third day of the wedding party, but it appears that John wants it to mean more as he specifically tells his readers to look for a

369 Craig Evans, Jesus and His World: The Archaeological Evidence (Louisville, KY: John Knox Press, 2012), 13. The estimated population of Nazareth at the time is between 200 and 400. Cana may have been a similar size or smaller, which provides a basis for the number of wedding guests.

370 We see John’s uses of symbolic numbers especially in the book of Revelation (i.e., numbers seven, twelve, one hundred forty-four thousand, etc.). Alonzo Gaskill wrote, “It is the idea that anciently numbers were used as common symbols for ideas or beliefs . . . numbers were highly symbolic in biblical times. John uses them because he expects his readers to see the metaphorical meaning, rather than the literal number” (unpublished, Commentary on the Book of Revelation). The Bible itself defines some of the symbolism. Forty is the purification period (Leviticus 12:2-4, also see Genesis 7:4, 12, 17; 8:6; Exodus 16:35; 24:18; Matthew 4:2; Mark 1:13; etc.), seven is used for completeness. Multiples of twelve are often found for God’s order (Revelation 7:5-8; 21:12, 14; Genesis 35:22; Exodus 24:24; Numbers 7:3).

371 Seven develops its scriptural symbolism starting in Genesis with the days of creation. Seven is used throughout the Bible to represent something whole, finished, or perfect; see Appendix 1, “Numbers with Biblical Symbolism.” 372 Brown, The Gospel and Epistles of John, 27.

373 Brown, Anchor: John I-VII, 105.

374 Jesus used wine as the symbol of His atoning blood both in his Bread of Life Sermon and the sacrament (John 6:54-56; Matthew 26:28; Mark 14:24; Luke 22:20).

375 John used the “third day” for symbolic reasons, as a careful counting shows that this was actually the seventh day he references. John begins with Jesus’ baptism as day one, and then lists five days up to the call of Philip. The next reference to time is, “the third day” which would be the seventh day (John 1:29; 35, 39, 43; John 2:1). Symbolically, Jesus’ “third day” was the perfect day.

77 way that the making of wine “revealed his glory” (John 2:11, NET).376 The miracle is recorded in this way to highlight the Savior’s cleansing atonement, death, and resurrection.

Over half of the references in the four Gospels to the number three foreshadow or describe the time that Christ spent in the tomb.377 A few sentences after the marriage at Cana, John includes Christ’s prophecy, “Destroy this temple, and in three days I will raise it up” (John 2:19). It does not seem accidental that John includes these two symbolic references so close together in the narrative. It is as if John wants his readers to see the references to three as a revelation of Jesus’ mission. Outside of the Gospel of John, the best example comes from Jesus’ prophecy: “For Jonas was three days and three nights in the whale’s belly; so shall the Son of man be three days and three nights in the heart of the earth” (Matthew 12:40).

Prophetic Perspective. On the prophetic level, the multiplying of wine at the wedding feast fulfills Messianic prophecies.378 We read prophetic images of an abundance of wine in Proverbs 9:4-5, “Come, eat of my bread, and drink of the wine which I have mingled.”379 The miracle at the wedding of Cana answers this prophecy on one level. But on another level, the abundance of wine could have spoken of Christ’s blood offering, symbolizing the sacrament wine, having the enormous capacity to heal the sins of the world (Mosiah 3:11, 16; D&C 20:40). Prophetic images of atoning wine are reflected in Jacob’s blessing to Judah, when he promises that his son’s posterity would include a “lawgiver,” who “bind[s] his foal unto the . . . choice vine; he washes his garments in wine, and his clothes in the blood of grapes” (Genesis 49:10-11). This Messianic prophecy speaks to the pain that Christ would undertake in His atonement—He “treadeth the winepress of the fierceness and wrath of the Almighty God” (Revelation 19:15).

Typological Perspective. On a typological level, Jesus’ first miracle in Cana–turning water to wine–is reminiscent of Moses’ first miracle as a prophet–turning water to blood in Egypt (Exodus 7:19). Both miracles typify Christ’s atonement, although, both the miracle of Moses turning ponds, rivers, and streams into blood, and the miracle of Christ turning water into wine pale in comparison to the transformation of water into blood in Christ’s body as a means of bringing to pass the salvation of humanity. The typological significance of these miracles is that they help the reader to reflect upon and better understand the process and beauty of the Atonement. When Jesus suffers in Gethsemane, “he sweat was as it were great drops of blood falling down to the ground” (Luke 22:44; also see Mosiah 3:7). The water from Christ’s body (his sweat) literally turns to blood as He took upon Himself the pains and sins of the world.

The symbols of this first miracle at the wedding in Cana proclaim Jesus’ glory on several levels—historical, physical, symbolic, numerical, theological, prophetic, and typological. They

376 The third day may also refer to the days after Philip’s call (John 1:43). 377 I found twenty-five references of “third” or “three” that spoke of the time Jesus’ body lay in the tomb, or his mission, and twenty-three that spoke only to the number, with ten references that could be argued as a symbolic representation of Christ’s death. See Matthew 12:40;13:33;15:32; 16:21; 17:4; 17:23; 18:16; 18:20; 20:3; 20:19; 22:26; 26:44; 26:61; 27:40; 27:63; 27:64; Mark 8:2; Mark 8:31; 9:5; 9:31; 10:34; 12:21; 14:5; 14:41; 14:58; 15:25; 15:29; Luke 1:56; 2:46; 4:25; 9:22; 9:33; 10:36; 11:5; 12:38;12:52; 13:7; 13:21;13:32; 18:33; 20:12; 20:31; 23:22; 24:7; 24:21; 24:46; John 2:1; 2:6; 2:19; 2:20; 12:5; 21:11; 21:14; 21:17. 378 Alfred Edersheim, Jesus the Messiah (New York: Longmans, Green and Co, 1898), 163—calculated that the Old Testament includes 456 prophesies of the Messiah.

379 Also the prophet Amos foretold of an abundance of wine in the Messianic era, “Behold, the days come, saith the LORD, that the plowman shall overtake the reaper, and the treader of grapes him that soweth seed; and the mountains shall drop sweet wine” (Amos 9:13-15).

78 all seem to converge on the need to apply Jesus’ purification through His atoning blood. Jesus provides His abundant new wine for disciples to enjoy “immortality and eternal life” (Moses 1:39). And like the vessels of water, when incomplete human vessels allow Jesus to enter their lives, they change and became purified into something better. Elder Neal A. Maxwell observes, “While the wine produced in the miracle at Cana is long gone, Jesus' blessings, both personal and universal, continue with us to this very day. . . . His working out of the miracle of the Atonement gives us each everlasting blessings.”380

In the New Testament, Jesus’ prophecies twice of His Second Coming using a marriage feast as the background. Making and renewing covenants are often tied to feasts in the ancient world.381 Jesus uses marriage feasts as a teaching tool to continue the Old Testament figurative relationship between God (the husband) and Zion or Jerusalem (His bride).382

● A Marriage for the King’s Son (Matthew 22; also see D&C 58:11; Luke 14:16-24)

In this parable, Jesus describes the preparations for a royal wedding to which a king first invited the expected guests, but when He “sent forth his servants to call them that were bidden to the wedding: and they would not come” (Matthew 22:2-3).383 Shockingly, the king’s guests reject his invitation even though they would have probably been individuals of high standing in the kingdom (Matthew 22:4-7). Such disrespect for a royal summons may sound unlikely, but the ungrateful guests embody the chosen people, who reject Jesus. 384 Then the king invites all those on the streets, “and gathered together as many as they found, both bad and good” (Mt 22:10).385

The parable adopts the biblical imagery of a feast, representing the completeness and richness of life in God’s kingdom (Isaiah 25:6; Revelation 19:7-10).386 The opulence of the feast 380 Neal A. Maxwell, Even As I Am (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Co., 1982), 7. “. . . How blessed we are to have ‘proofs’ of the longevity of His Lordship!”

381 All three of the great Jewish feasts were to renew their covenants. The Passover feast is the great covenant feast (Exodus 12:43; Numbers 9:12; 2 Kings 23:21; Nehemiah 8:13-9:3; etc.). 382 Also, modern revelation uses a wedding feast to symbolize Jesus’ Second Coming; “After that cometh the day of my power; then shall the poor, the lame, and the blind, and the deaf, come in unto the marriage of the Lamb, and partake of the supper of the Lord, prepared for the great day to come” (D&C 58:11). 383 After Matthew’s unique introduction the storyline is similar to the text found in Luke 14:16-24, but without the wedding setting. Interestingly, Luke places a different marriage venue a few verses ahead where the text warns against self-righteousness, “When thou art bidden of any man to a wedding, sit not down in the highest room; lest a more honourable man than thou be bidden of him” (Luke 14:8).

384 Raymond Brown, Joseph Fitzmyer, Roland Murphy, The New Jerome Biblical Commentary (Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1990), 665.

385 God’s generous invitation opens the doorway for the gospel message to go to the Gentiles as they may represent the outcasts.

386 Marriage, childbirth, widowhood, and divorce also took on symbolic attributes in the Bible. Isaiah 62:5 offers a good example, “As the bridegroom rejoices over the bride, so shall thy God rejoice over thee.” The first few chapters of Jeremiah use marriage symbols of betrothal, divorce, and reconciliation to describe the covenant relationship between Jerusalem and God; “I remember thee, the kindness of thy youth, the love of thine espousals . . . but thou hast played the harlot with many lovers; yet return again to me, saith the LORD” (Jeremiah 2:2; 3:1). In addition to God’s marriage with Zion, we read of the birth of God’s son, Israel, “You have seen how the Lord your God bore you as a man bears his son” (RSV Deuteronomy 8:5; also see Hosea 11:1; Jeremiah 31:9). The Old Testament refers to Zion and Jerusalem as the bride of Jehovah based on symbolism of their covenant together and

79 includes a fattened calf, slaughtered and prepared. The parable mentions the slaughtered animal three times (Matthew 22:4, 8).387 This is important because Jesus becomes the fattened calf of “the sin offering,” even “a great and last sacrifice” or “red heifer” that will carry the sins of the world (Leviticus 9:8; Alma 34:10; Numbers 19:2). Or does the preparation and slaughter suggest an eschatological urgency of the Lord’s Second Coming? The feast is ready now—will the guests come while it is still available? Either interpretation invites the reader to come and join the wedding feast.

At the end of the story, after the outcasts from the streets arrive at the feast, “both bad and good” (Matthew 22:10), the king sorts out his guests:

And when the king came in to see the guests, he saw there a man which had not on a

wedding garment: And he saith unto him, Friend, how camest thou in hither not having a

wedding garment? And he was speechless. Then said the king to the servants, Bind him

hand and foot, and take him away, and cast him into outer darkness; there shall be weeping

and gnashing of teeth. For many are called, but few are chosen (Matthew 22:11-14). This guest did not conform to the king’s dress code nor did he meet the requirements of the kingdom. Refusing to put on the clean wedding garment may represent one’s refusal to apply the Lord’s atonement. The word atonement means among other things, “to cover, purge, to make reconciliation.”388 Or perhaps the King requires the guests to wash and dress in his “robes of righteousness” (D&C 29:12) as a symbol of their repentance, but some refuse to repent.389 The parable distinguishes between God’s invitation and God’s reward. He invites all, but only a “few are chosen”—those who willingly repent of their sins and accept the complete “covering” of the Atonement (Matthew 22:14).390

● Marriage Supper of The Lamb (Revelation 19:7-9)

The second allegorical marriage feast comes from the book of Revelation and teaches about enduring to the end. This parable has only two characters: The Lamb, representing Christ, and

Revelation to Israel,” Biblical Theological Bulletin 26, 1996, 99-102. 387 In the parable of the two brothers or prodigal son, we see another “fatted calf” who was slain for the prodigal Israel always as their son. John Schmitt, “Gender Correctness and Biblical Metaphors: The Case of God’s (Luke 15:27-28).

388 Hugh Nibley, Approaching Zion, 558-559. “The basic word for atonement is kaphar, which has the same basic meaning in Hebrew, Aramaic, and Arabic, that being ‘to bend, arch over, cover; . . . to deny, . . . to forgive, . . . to be expiated, . . . renounce.’ The Arabic kafara puts the emphasis on a tight squeeze, such as tucking in the skirts, drawing a thing close to one's self. Closely related are Aramaic and Arabic kafat, meaning a close embrace, which are certainly related to the Egyptian hpet, the common ritual embrace written with the ideogram of embracing arms. It may be cognate with the Latin capto, and from it comes the Persian kaftan, a monk's robe and hood completely embracing the body. Most interesting is the Arabic kafata, as it is the key to a dramatic situation. It was the custom for one fleeing for his life in the desert to seek protection in the tent of a great sheik, crying out, ‘Ana dakhiluka,’ meaning ‘I am thy suppliant,’ whereupon the Lord would place the hem of his robe over the guest's shoulder and declare him under his protection.” We see this image in the Book of Mormon too (see 2 Nephi1:15; 4:33; Alma 5:24).

389 Perhaps it means that the King of Kings extends His invitation to sinners, but expects them to repent in order to enter the banquet or His Kingdom. Matthew repeated the Lord’s call for righteous obedience in the Sermon on the Mount (Matthew 5-7).

390 This includes the need to obey God’s commandments, and enter into His ordinances (D&C 121:34-37; also see D&C 49:26; 52:16; 97:25; 138:58; Mormon 7:5).

80 his bride, representing the church. Christ hosts the wedding supper of the Lamb “at His second coming when he symbolically claims his bride, the faithful members of his church.”391 By that time the church or “wife hath made herself ready” (Revelation 19:7) and “it was given to her to clothe herself in fine linen, bright and clean; for the fine linen is the righteous acts of the saints” (Revelation 19:8, ASV).392 John the Revelator explains that the bride’s fine white linen is made from righteous living.

The clothing description of white linen corresponds to the clothing worn by priests when serving in the temple (Exodus 39:27-42; Leviticus 6:10; Ezekiel 44:17-26).393 On the Day of Atonement, before the high priest went into the Holy of Holies, he changed from his colorful robe into “holy garments” of white linen to commune with God at the veil (Leviticus 16:23).394 At the wedding supper in Revelation 19, the sacrificial Lamb provides the pure clothing of sanctification for all who had proven worthy to attend the wedding, or the sealing of the saints. At that time, the bride or the church may wear the priestly temple clothing as she goes before the Lord.

The feast symbolizes the blessings of the covenant, “Blessed are they which are called unto the marriage supper of the Lamb . . . . Come in unto the marriage of the Lamb, and partake of the supper of the Lord, prepared for the great day to come” (Revelation 19:9). Modern revelation further teaches that the marriage of the Lamb will take place in the New Jerusalem on Mount Zion (3 Nephi 20:22; D&C 84:2).395

391 Ludlow, Encyclopedia of Mormonism, 2.860; D&C 109:73-74. 392 Parry, Temples of the Ancient World, Tvedtnes, “Priestly clothing in Bible Times,” 671, 677. Priests replaced their every-day garb and donned sacred vestments (Exodus 28:40) which figuratively removed the priest from this world and prepared him to enter the presence of God. As with most religious ritual, symbols underlined their priestly clothing to portray righteousness and purity.

393 Ezekiel 44:17-26 describes the priestly linen clothing worn in Solomon’s Temple, grooming standards, and their dietary restrictions from wine: “When they enter in at the gates of the inner court. . . . they shall be clothed with linen garments . . . linen bonnets upon their heads, and shall have linen breeches upon their loins . . . and when they go forth into the utter court . . . they shall put off their garments wherein they ministered, and lay them in the holy chambers, and they shall put on other garments; and they shall not sanctify the people with their garments. Neither shall they shave their heads, nor suffer their locks to grow long. . . . Neither shall any priest drink wine, when they enter into the inner court. . . . And they shall teach my people the difference between the holy and profane, and cause them to discern between the unclean and the clean.”

394 Leviticus 16:4, 32, “He shall put on the holy linen coat, and he shall have the linen breeches upon his flesh, and shall be girded with a linen girdle, and with the linen mitre shall he be attired: these are holy garments; therefore shall he wash his flesh in water, and so put them on. . . . And the priest, whom he shall anoint, and whom he shall consecrate to minister in the priest's office in his father's stead, shall make the atonement, and shall put on the linen clothes, even the holy garments.” Also see Leviticus 16:23.

395 Restoration Scriptures on the marriage supper of the Lamb build on John’s theme as they describe the rich and learned, wise and noble who are invited before “the day of my power; then shall the poor, the lame, and the blind, and the deaf, come in unto the marriage of the Lamb” (D&C 58:6-12). While dedicating the Kirtland Temple, the Prophet Joseph Smith prayed that the saints would prepare to rise and meet Christ; ‘That our garments may be pure, that we may be clothed upon with robes of righteousness, with palms in our hands, and crowns of glory upon our heads, and reap eternal joy for all our sufferings” (D&C 109:76). The metaphorical marriage covenant is used as the image to describe eternal joy—in all its emancipation.

81

Cultural Background

The last stage of finalizing a marriage was consummation. By the time of the Mishnah, “A wife [was] acquired in three ways. . . . by money, by writ, and by intercourse.”396 The latter was the only way to confirm a levirate marriage.397 Old traditions speak of displaying the “tokens of virginity” or blood-stained bed sheets after the wedding night (Deuteronomy 22:13-21).398 This ancient practice provided evidence of the bride’s virginity to protect her family against lawsuits.399 Though we have little evidence that by the end of the Second Temple era anyone displayed their blood stained sheets, a young Jewess was still expected to be a virgin on her wedding night.

Different Jews interpreted the importance of the connubial relationship in various ways.

Josephus limited marital intimacy “only for . . . procreation.”400 Similarly Tobit reads, “thou gavest to him Eve for a helper. And now, Lord, thou knowest that not for pleasure’s sake, but solely for the desire of children, I take a sister to wife.”401 Philo agreed with Genesis that Adam “knew” his wife sexually, but felt the patriarchs’ children came directly from God, without intercourse.402 The same philosopher supported marriage, even to the degree of counseling warriors to marry any captured young girls. But out of compassion for a captive’s feelings, Philo added, “leave her alone for thirty days, and allow her without fear of disturbance to mourn . . . after this, live with her as your lawful wife.”403

At the time of Herod’s Temple, most couples married in their teens and moved into the groom’s family home for the first few years. This meant the young bride needed to work alongside her mother-in-law to maintain the house. In addition to the myriad of household

in Jewish Law (Clark, NJ: Lawbook Exchange, 2004), 11. 397 Mishnah 396 Mishnah, Kiddushin, 1:1; Louis M. Epstein, The Jewish Marriage Contract: A Study in the Status of the Woman 398 , Kiddushin, 1:1.

Campbell, Marriage and Family in the Biblical World, 46. Epstein, Jewish Marriage, 13. After a study of Jewish

marriage contracts, Epstein concluded that consummation “became a real legal factor in the marriage.” There is also evidence of this in Deuteronomy where sexual contact led to marriage, “If a man find a damsel that is a virgin, which is not betrothed, and lay hold on her, and lie with her, and they be found; Then the man that lay with her shall give unto the damsel's father fifty shekels of silver, and she shall be his wife; because he hath humbled her, he may not put her away all his days” (Deuteronomy 22:28-29; also 21:11-13). The ideal followed the prescribed order— first money, a contract, and then consummation. Yet, in the ancient Israelite world, if intercourse occurred first, the couple was still considered married for life.

399 Paul J. Achtemeier, Harper Collins’ Bible Dictionary (San Francisco, CA: HarperCollins, 1996), 1205. 400 Josephus, Against Apion, 2.25; “What are our laws about marriage? That law owns no other mixture of sexes but that which nature hath appointed, of a man with his wife, and that this be used only for the procreation of children.” He censures homosexuality as it is unable to produce children. Child bearing takes a prominent position in his list of values.

401 Tobit VIII, Vulgate translation.

402 Philo, De Cherubim, XII, 41. “The helpmeets of these men are called women, but are in reality virtues.” 403 Philo, On the Virtues, 111f. “Holiness requires that she who is to enter a husband’s bed, not as a hired harlot, trafficking her youthful bloom, but either for love of her mate or for the birth of children, should be admitted to the rights of full wedlock as her due.”

82 chores—from harvesting to cooking and carding to weaving—the young bride also had to learn how to please her mother-in-law. Many homes included multiple generations living under the same roof. If the young husband was able to earn enough for a private home, the couple often moved next door.

A young girl entering marriage not only had to learn to meet the needs of a new family, but also had to learn to obey her new master. In devout Jewish households, a new husband claimed his new title: “rab” or “rabbi,” which meant “master,” “my great one,” or “honorable sir.” His wife used this title to express her servile relationship to him.404

A young bride went from acting as a servant to her father to acting as a servant to her husband: “She continues under the authority of the father till she enters into the control of the husband at marriage.”405 As the philosopher Philo summarized , “wives must be in servitude to their husbands, a servitude not imposed by violent ill-treatment but promoting obedience in all things.”406 Many Jewish records describe a similar servant-master inequality between the genders, where a husband acts as a master and his wife an obedient servant.407

The most fundamental duty for a Jewish man was to rule his home.408 The husband owned

all the property in the home—including any land, goods, and people (Numbers 26:55).409 He was the legal voice and had legal responsibility to care for his household (Jeremiah 35:6-10; Proverbs 6:20). That responsibility also carried obligations to his wife that included: “providing food, clothing, shelter, and medication and fulfilling his connubial duty.”410 If he did not accomplish these duties, his wife could demand them before a court.411

404 Jeremias, Jerusalem, 369.

405 Mishnah, Ketuboth 4:5.

406 Judaeus Philo, Philo (Boston, MA: Harvard University Press, 1954), 9. 425; “On the Embassy to Gaius.” 407 Stagg, Woman in the World of Jesus, 34.H.

408 Skolnik, Encyclopedia Judaica, “Family” 6.691. 409 Skolnik, Encyclopedia Judaica, 6.92, “Family: Functions of family members.” 410 Mishnah, Horayoth, 3.7. The husband must try to save his wife if she were taken captive. The Mishnah outlines the order in which family members should be redeemed. Consistent with ancient Jewish thought, a husband’s life was saved first, but a woman was clothed first; “A man must be saved alive sooner than a woman, and his lost property must be restored sooner than hers. A woman’s nakedness must be covered sooner than a man’s and she must be brought out of captivity sooner than he. When both stand in danger of defilement, the man must be freed before the woman.”

411 Mishnah, Ketuboth, 4:8-9; 5:6-8.

83

New Testament Examples

The New Testament has many diverse family units. They differ in size, age, nationality, social standing, and relationship.412 The four Gospels describe the Lord interacting in several family units, quietly teaching values through His example, especially the values of compassion, selflessness, impartiality, mercy, and love. Peter’s mother-in-law lived with Peter’s family in Capernaum. When Jesus visited them, He noticed that the older woman was ill with a fever; “He touched her hand and the fever left her” (Matthew 8:15, NIV). The Lord exemplifies awareness of other’s needs and service. A man with leprosy begged the Lord for His attention, and “Jesus moved with compassion” touched and healed him (Mark 1:41).

We see another example of the Lord’s compassion as He approached the city gate of Nain. Jesus came upon a funeral procession and observed a widow mourning the loss of her only son. In Luke 7:13, we read that the Lord “had compassion on her, and said unto her, Weep not.” After comforting her, He did all within His power to help her. Jesus had compassion again on the families that follow him for three days by providing nourishment for them (Mark 8:2). The Lord’s awareness of others’ needs, His selfless service, compassion, and action teach values that can bless all those who follow His example.

The Lord renounces selfishness and inspires impartiality in relationships: “A servant is

not greater than his master” (John 15:20 NIV; also13:16). Furthermore, He urges service by introducing an additional recipient: “Inasmuch as ye have done it unto one of the least of these my brethren, ye have done it unto me” (Matthew 25:40). The word “brethren” here, and in many of cases in the KJV, often refers to both genders as “fellow believers” or “brothers and sisters” (NET). The Lord’s universal message applies to both husbands and wives, siblings and parents, friends and foes.

In the Beatitudes, Jesus plants even more spiritual seeds that potentially strengthen family bonds. He calls on His disciples to extend mercy and to become peacemakers (Matthew 5:7, 9). Later in the Sermon on the Mount, the Lord teaches the need to communicate and forgive:

412 The New Testament includes many examples of dynamic couples and various family units that biblical readers will recognize, including:

● Zacharias, Elisabeth, and their son John

● Mary and Joseph, Jesus, James, Joses, Simon, Judas, and daughters ● Zebedee and Salome, their sons “of thunder”—James and John ● Simon Peter and his wife, his mother-in-law, and brother Andrew ● Jairus and his little daughter

● Siblings Mary, Martha, and Lazarus

● A centurion and his servant

● A blind man and his parents

● A Syrophenician mother and her possessed daughter ● John Mark, his mother Mary, and Uncle Barnabas ● Chuza and his wife Joanna

● Priscilla and Aquila

● Eunice, her son Timothy, her mother Lois, and her Greek husband ● A widow and her son

This list is not exhaustive, but shows the diversity of biblical family life.

84

If you are offering your gift at the altar and there remember that your brother or sister has

something against you, leave your gift there in front of the altar. First go and be reconciled to

them; then come and offer your gift” (Matthew 5:23-24, NIV).

All these behavioral models required a cultural paradigm shift, which opened the way for sweeter family relationships.413 Following the example of their Lord, the apostolic church also taught much about the mutuality of marriage which we will discuss next in chapter 5.

413 A few other verses from the Gospels that promote families are: Matthew 1-2; 5:32; 7:11; 18:2-5; 19:14; 9:36-37; 10:14-15; 9:47; 18:16-17; 22:2; Mark 10:11-12; Luke 1-2; 15:6; 16:18; 20:34; John 2:2; 8:39 14:21; 19:27.

85
