Mutuality in Marriage: From Apostles to Prophets

Notwithstanding the way that Jesus honored women and children, some sections of the New Testament Epistles leave the reader questioning the role of marriage in the early apostolic church. Generally speaking, the New Testament Epistles provide positive endorsement and support of marriage.414 A husband and wife should love and respect each other (Ephesians 5:33). Husbands should honor their wives “as being heirs together of the grace of life” (1 Peter 3:7). A wife should love and stay with her husband and children (1 Corinthians 7:10; Titus 2:4). Paul chose church leaders who were “the husband of one wife, having children who believe, . . . above reproach as God’s steward, not self-willed, not quick-tempered, not addicted to wine, not pugnacious, not fond of sordid gain, but hospitable, loving what is good, sensible, just, devout, self-controlled” (Titus 1:6-8; NASB, 1 Timothy 3:2). Divorce was also discouraged (1 Corinth-ians 7:11; Mark 10:4-8), except in certain circumstances (1 Corinthians 7:15; Matthew 5:32).

However, there are a few verses in the Epistles that elicit questions about early Christian teachings on marriage. When the apostles’ writings seem inconsistent with Christ’s restored truths about women and marriage, then they are either in error, or we need to take a closer look. This chapter addresses these apparent inconsistencies about marriage. It looks at three passages in 1 Peter 3, 1 Corinthians 7, and Ephesians 5, all of which deserve an explanation. It does this by including the context for the apostles’ writings and by presenting the passages in a variety of translations.415 It also compares the biblical apostles’ writings with those of latter-day apostles. This deeper examination confirms that the early Christian church did in fact endorse Christ’s

414 Tradition credits apostles Peter and Paul as the only two authors that speak specifically on spousal relations in the Epistles. However the authorship of several Epistles is debated by scholars. A few of the letters that include discussions of marriage include: Romans 7; 1 Corinthians 7; 1 Timothy 4-5; Ephesians 5; Hebrews 13; 1 Peter 3. 415 It is not just the translation that conveys different meaning, but it helps. President J. Reuben Clark wrote, “[I hope to] provoke in some qualified scholars having a proper Gospel background, the desire and determination to go over the manuscripts and furnish us, under the influence and direction of the Holy Ghost, a translation of the New Testament that will give us an accurate translation that shall be pregnant with the great principles of the Restored Gospel. We shall then have a reliable record of the doings and sayings of our Lord and Master Jesus Christ.” J. Reuben Clark, Why the King James Version (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book, 1956), viii–ix.

86 emancipation of women and revolutionary ideas about the mutuality of marriage in a joint partnership.

I. 1 Peter 3:1-9

In this Epistle, Peter included a nine-verse code of conduct for marriages.416 The chief apostle gave advice on what to do if a wife converted to Christianity but her husband did not (1 Peter 3:1), how to become unified through cooperation without fear or intimidation (1 Peter 3:6), and how to live with compassion and kindness toward one’s spouse (1 Peter 3:8). Peter’s brief commentary begins, however, with a few words that seem inconsistent with Christ’s liberating teachings on women. The first verse is the most difficult to understand.

1 Peter 3:1

KJV NEB Welch-Hall417 Likewise, ye wives, be in In the same way you women A wife’s obedience subjection to your own husbands; must accept the authority of your to her unChristian that if any obey not the word, husbands so that if there are any husband may they also may without the of them who disbelieve the gospel influence the word be won by the conversation they may be won over, without a husband. of the wives. word being said.

The first step in understanding this verse is to look at its context. In the previous verses Peter discusses Jesus’ perfect submission to His perfect Father.

Christ suffered for you, leaving you an example, that you should follow in his steps, “He

committed no sin, and no deceit was found in his mouth.” When they hurled their insults at

Him, He did not retaliate; when He suffered he made no threats. Instead, He entrusted

Himself to Him who judges justly . . . now you have returned to the Shepherd and Overseer

of your soul (1 Peter 2:21-25, NIV).

Just as Jesus responded to difficulties without retaliation and strove for perfect unity with the Father, the verse in 1 Peter 3:1 explains that a husband and wife should strive for similar unity with each other. Peter appeals to women to work together with their husbands—whether or not their spouses are Christian. Indeed, Peter understood that a wife’s example had the potential to inspire a husband, and boost his understanding and acceptance of the gospel.

Sometimes this section in 1 Peter is denounced for what seems a misogynist attitude. Part of that impression comes from the translators’ choice of “subjection” or “submission” for the Greek hupotasso. Peter uses hupotasso six times in this letter and the KJV translators use

416 The Epistle of first Peter was probably written during Peter’s Roman imprisonment before AD 64. It appears that a scribe (Silas or Mark) wrote it for Peter as it is written in elegant Greek with no traces of “Semitisms” (Hebraic or Aramaic phrases). In this Epistle, Old Testament Scriptures are quoted from the Greek Septuagint which also suggests that the writer was more comfortable with Greek than Hebrew. Joseph Smith must have admired Peter’s Epistles as he is quoted as saying, “Peter penned the most sublime language of any of the Apostles” (Smith, History of the Church, 5:392).

417 Welch and Hall, Charting the New Testament, 15-15, offers a paraphrase, not literal translation.

87

“submit” or “subject.” Examples include, “submit yourself to every ordinance” (1 Peter 2:13, also 2:18); and later, “Likewise, ye younger, submit yourselves unto the elder. Yea, all of you be subject one to another, and be clothed with humility: for God resisteth the proud, and giveth grace to the humble” (1 Peter 5:5).

Hupotasso is a favorite word across the Epistles, where we find it forty times in various forms, most of which are from Paul. (In fact, Paul’s uses hupotasso in his spousal code of conduct sections from Colossians 3:18-19 and Ephesians 5:21-24, just as Peter does here.418) This word was initially a Greek military term meaning “to arrange in a military fashion under the command of a leader.” But more applicable here, it also developed a nonmilitary meaning, “a voluntary attitude of giving in, cooperating, assuming responsibility, and carrying a burden.”419

The New Testament uses this word, hupotasso, to communicate cooperation—not controlling domination. The message of cooperating in mutuality by assuming responsibility would have left flabbergasted both the Jews and Greco-Romans of the time.

This requirement was the new, radical idea that Christian husbands also were to love and

submit to their wives rather than control them. Perhaps this concept of mutual submission

was so radical for the Christians that the church eventually lost sight of this teaching and

reverted to the behavior of the surrounding culture—insisting only on the submission of

wives, but not that of husbands . . . the mutuality and equality of the first couple were

forgotten.420

In a family setting based on this Christian principle, both husband and wife engage in this voluntary cooperative order between God and each other—not from fear or controlling oppression, but out of love and a desire for unity.

God gave both men and women different supporting roles to play in the synergistic spousal relationship. In their different roles, they each submit at different times. The Lord told Abraham to submit to his wife’s counsel in Genesis 21:12 (regarding Hagar). Both roles are equally important, and both genders must develop humility, selflessness, sacrifice, and love as prerequisites for Eternal Life.

Submission to God’s plan for families focuses on love, cooperation and harmony. Yielding to what is best for the whole family curbs pride and self-centered behaviors. Elder Boyd K. Packer described a modern application of this teaching both in the church and marriage: “In the church there is a distinct line of authority . . . in the home it is a partnership with husband and wife equally yoked together, sharing in decisions, always working together.”421 The goal is unity.

The next verse of Peter’s code of-conduct offers the means whereby an unbelieving spouse might come to accept Christ’s gospel.

418 Paul’s family code of conduct sections in Ephesians 5:21-24 and Colossians 3:18-19 overlaps with 1 Peter 3, so we do not repeat those definitions in the last section of this chapter. One important detail needs to be pointed out. Ephesians 5:22 KJV reads, “Wives, submit to your husbands as to the Lord.” But the Greek verb is not placed there. “The oldest manuscripts omit ‘submit yourselves,’ supplying it from” the previous verse where Christians were to submit together in unity to God. Jamieson-Fausset-Brown Bible Commentary (Grand Rapids, MI: Zondervan, 1961), Ephesians 5:22. The oldest manuscripts read, “. . . wives, to your own husbands, as to the Lord.” 419 Bromiley, TDNT, viii.41, hypotassetai.

420 Parales, Hidden Voices: Biblical Women, 132.

421 Boyd K. Packer, “The Relief Society,” Ensign (May 1998), 73.

88

1 Peter 3:2

KJV NJB NAS Welch-Hall422

‘

While they behold When they see the As they observe By her chaste your chaste reverence and your chaste and conduct coupled conversation purity of your way respectful with respect coupled with fear of life. behavior. The KJV word “conversation” in verses 1 and 2 actually comes from the Greek “anastrophe / manner of life, conduct, behavior.” Modern English translations use a derivation of “behavior,” rather than the KJV “conversation.”423 Peter admonished a Christian wife to love and respect her husband—even if he is not a Christian. Peter gave husbands the same counsel in verse 7: “Likewise, husbands, live with your wives in an understanding way, showing honor to the woman . . .” (NIV). But first, Peter illustrated his point with the biblical example of Abraham and Sarah.

Peter held up Sarah and Abraham as the model unified couple.424 He called women to become “daughters” of Sarah by following her example.425 Her example is that she voluntarily took responsibility to achieve unity by cooperating. Women become daughters of Sarah as they live as Sarah did. Looking at verses 3, 4, and 5 together, Peter asked women to adorn their character with goodness as Sarah did, rather than worrying about outward adornments.

1 Peter 3:5-6

KJV NJB NAB _____ ‘

For after this manner in the That was how the holy women For this is also how the holy old time the holy women of the past dressed themselves women who hoped in God also, who trusted in God, attractively—they hoped in once used to adorn adorned themselves, being in God and were submissive to themselves and were subjection unto their own their husbands; like Sarah, subordinate to their husbands: Even as Sara who was obedient to Abraham, husbands; thus Sarah obeyed Abraham, calling and called him her lord. You obeyed Abraham, calling him lord: whose daughters are now her children, as long him lord. You are her ye are, as long as ye do well, as you live good lives free children when you do what and are not afraid with any from fear and worry. is good and fear no amazement intimidation.

422 Welch and Hall, Charting the New Testament, 15-15. 423 RSV, NEB, JB, NAS, NIV, NEB, etc.

424 1 Peter quotes Genesis 18:12 from the Greek Septuagint (LXX). 425 Jesus and John the Baptist, teach a similar idea—Jesus in John 8:39, “If ye were Abraham's children, ye would do the works of Abraham;” and John 1:12; “But as many as received Him, to them gave He power to become the sons of God.” For John the Baptist statements also see Matthew3:9; Luke 3:8; and later by Paul in Galatians 3:7.

89

Verse 6 presents a new verbal difficulty. Here Sarah called her husband Abraham “master” or “lord.” Her use of this title insinuates a lack of equality between spouses, a kind of dominion different from cooperation. But in the ancient world, referring to a husband as “lord” was a common practice and people often used formal titles in conversation. The word had a hierarchical meaning but was also a common way to refer to a man.426 In the Judaic world of Jerusalem at that time, “the wife was obliged to obey her husband as a servant would a master— the husband was called rab [short for rabbi]—indeed this obedience was as a religious duty.”427 This passage reflects cultural differences between our time and theirs and does not negate Peter’s underlying principles that encouraged couples to express mutual love and offer selfless service to one another.

It is interesting to note, however, that the Lord addressed people by their names: Mary, Martha, and Lazarus, His apostles, and with special significance, Mary Magdalene at the tomb (John 20:16). Furthermore, two of the Gospels describe Jesus correcting someone who addressed Him with an honorific title: “a man ran up to him and fell on his knees before him. ‘Good teacher,’ he asked, ‘what must I do to inherit eternal life?’ ‘Why do you call me good?’ Jesus answered. ‘No one is good—except God alone’ (Mark 10:18 NIV; also Matthew 19:16-17). Our Savior called his friends by their names and reserved venerating titles for God.

Verse 6 ends with Peter’s clarifying instructions to Christian women: “fear no intimidation” (NAB). Other translations seem to promote greater emotional strength: “let nothing terrify you” (RSV) or do not “give way to fear or worry” (JB). In the Roman Empire and Jewish world, many women lived in fear of their husbands. Arranged marriages were not necessarily built on a foundation of love, and a wife was often considered her husband’s servant or property.

Wives were completely dependent on their husbands for substance, and too often were the victims of their wrath. As we will discuss in chapter 6, when a husband became upset at his wife, he could easily divorce her—even for something as minor as burning his toast. The threat of divorce left some wives paralyzed in a state of fear.428

It appears that Peter wanted Christian women to free themselves from fear, including fear of incurring their husbands’ wrath and from inhibiting worry. He counseled women that they should perform their duties toward their families and society without trepidation or intimidation. Even more stunning against the backdrop of the New Testament setting, the Lord’s message empowered women in their divine roles.

To support women to act with confidence, Peter next instructs husbands to honor their wives.

426 Bauer, A Greek–English Lexicon of the New Testament, 459. The Greek New Testament uses “lord / kurios” for both God and humans. The latter is used for “one who has come of age and controls his own property . . . master of the house . . . designation of any person of high position . . . the husband in contrast to the wife . . . of a father by his son.”

427 Jeremias, Jerusalem, 369.

428 Ben Sira, Ecclesiasticus, 25:26. Charles, The Apocrypha and Pseudepigrapha, 2.134. Stagg, Woman, 34.

1 Peter 3:7

KJV NEB Welch-Hall429 ‘

Likewise, ye husbands, In the same way, you dwell with them according husbands must conduct your A husband should live to knowledge, giving married life with according to revealed honour unto the wife, as understanding: pay honour truth, giving honor to his unto the weaker vessel, to the woman's body, not wife, treating her as a and as being heirs together only because it is weaker, tender, instrument and of the grace of life; that but also because you share also recognizing that they your prayers be not together in the grace of God will be heirs together of hindered. which gives you life. Then the gift of life.

your prayers will not be

hindered

It is hard to determine what the author meant by women as “a tender instrument” or “the weaker vessel” (1 Peter 3:7). 430 One translation proposes a physical definition with “weaker than you are” (GW). Generally speaking, females have smaller bone structure and less muscle mass than males.431 Yet Peter’s overall message was not about anatomy. He wants husbands to support and be considerate of their wives. Just as Peter praised Sarah for honoring her husband, he asks husbands to honor their wives. His message throughout this passage is for spouses to cherish each other.

In 1 Peter 3:7, Peter prefaced his explanation with the phrase, “according to knowledge” of truth—which included the revelation that spouses can become “heirs together” through the eternal nature of marriage.432 Even though “eternal marriage” and “celestial marriage” are not phrases found in the New Testament, 1 Peter 3:7 alludes to that principle with the phrase, “being heirs together of the grace of life.”433 When a husband and wife become “heirs together,” both have the potential to receive exaltation (D&C 131:1-4; 132:19-25).434 The Epistles teach this idea

429 Welch and Hall, Charting the New Testament, 15-15. 430 Strong, Exhaustive Concordance of the Bible, 81. Greek dictionary for “vessel / skeuos: . . . implement, equipment or apparatus,” or figuratively, “a wife as contributing to the usefulness of the husband.” For an overview of use in the New Testament see Mark 11:16; Luke 8:16; Acts 9:15; 10:11; 1 Thessalonians 4:4; 2 Timothy 2:21. 431 John Elliott, Anchor Bible, 1 Peter (NYC, NY: Doubleday & Random House, 2000 reprint), 568. Even before scientific precision measured these genetic issues, Aristotle made a similar observation, “For the divine made one strong and the other weaker so that the latter would be more protected as a result of her timidity and the former more ready to defend as a result of his manliness . . . the one provides things from the outside, the other preserves the things inside.”

432 “Heirs together” also speaks of receiving one’s calling and election, which Peter mentions in 2 Peter 1:10. The Prophet Joseph taught this was an ordinance only given to worthy couples (Ehat and Lyndon W. Cook, Words of Joseph Smith, 209). The word, gnosis is defined as: “knowledge signifies in general intelligence, understanding: the general knowledge of Christian religion, the deeper more perfect and enlarged knowledge of this religion, such as belongs to the more advanced, especially of things lawful and unlawful for Christians; moral wisdom, such as is seen in right living.”

433 Bauer, A Greek–English Lexicon of the New Testament, 340. The definition for “life / zoe” includes: “1) life in a physical sense . . . 2) supernatural life belonging to God and Christ which believers will receive in the future, but which they also enjoy here and now.”

434 Ezra Taft Benson, "What I Hope You Will Teach Your Children about the Temple," Ensign (Aug 1985): 9. of becoming heirs of eternal life at least four other times (1 Peter 3:7; 2 Peter 1:10; Romans 8:17; Titus 3:7).435 Joseph Smith learned that this gift is only given to married couples who are sealed by the Holy Spirit of Promise (D&C 132:19). With the sealing, the power and blessings of the patriarchal priesthood are “shared by husbands and wives who are sealed in the temple.”436

Verse 7 ends with a warning that a husband cannot communicate with God if he does not communicate respectfully with his wife.437 This concept is a radical shift from rabbinic teachings of the time that discouraged open and honest communication between husband and wife. Conversations were severely limited with all women, both within the family and without. The Mishnah taught that speaking to women was a waste of time and could be morally dangerous. 438

Peter challenged these cultural barriers by insisting that developing harmony in personal relationships was necessary to experience harmony with God in prayer. Both the Lord and His apostles urged couples to communicate, make amends, respect and listen to each other—to foster the Spirit of God in relationships as well as in prayer (i.e., Matthew 5:23-24; 25:40; etc.). Peter concluded his instructions on marriage by reiterating the primacy demonstrated by the Savior and the Father in 1 Peter 2:21-25, and by the Savior’s command at the Last Supper: “Be one” even as “I and my Father are one” (John 17:22; 10:30).

1 Peter 3:8-9

KJV NET NIV_ ‘ Finally, be ye all of one Finally, all of you be Finally, all of you, be like-mind, having compassion harmonious, sympathetic, minded, be sympathetic, one of another, love as affectionate, compassionate, love one another, be brethren, be pitiful, be and humble. Do not return evil compassionate and humble. courteous: Not rendering evil for evil or insult for insult, but Do not repay evil with evil for evil, or railing for railing: instead bless others because or insult with insult. On the but con-trariwise blessing; you were called to inherit a contrary, repay evil with knowing that ye are blessing. blessing, because to this you thereunto called, that ye were called so that you may

should inherit a blessing. inherit a blessing.

Peter focused on the qualities of love, meekness, and courtesy necessary for believers in their marriages and in every other interaction, both inside and outside of the church, with friends or with strangers (1 Peter 3:11-17). The Master teaches that Christians no longer live the old law of “an eye for an eye” but, as disciples of Christ, they must return good for evil, kindness for cruelty, and forgiveness for pain (Matthew 5-7). Peter carried on Jesus’ message and emphasized that love, compassion, humility, and unity were especially crucial in marriage. It appears that many of the early church members needed to learn the significance of applying charity in spousal relations because Paul gives similar counsel.

435 Larry E. Dahl and Donald Q. Cannon, Encyclopedia of Joseph Smith's Teachings (Salt Lake City, UT: Bookcraft, 1997), “Degrees of Glory.” Ehat and Cook, Words of Joseph, 211. Joseph Smith taught that all prophets and apostles taught from the perspective of knowing the fullness of truth. Also see D&C 132:5, 7, 13, etc. 436 Ludlow, Encyclopedia of Mormonism, “Priesthood, Patriarchal,” 3.1135. 437 Smith, History of the Church, 1.131. Joseph Smith did not receive revelation when out of harmony with Emma. 438 Mishnah , Avoth 1:5. As quoted in chapter 1, “Communication.” Babylonian Talmud, Nedarim. 20a.

II. 1 Corinthians 7

Like Peter’s comments on marriage, Paul’s advice to the Corinthians also includes passages that need close examination. His advice on spousal unity (7:3), false practices (7:2-11), and child rearing in mixed-faith marriages (7:12-16) fall in between his efforts to correct two deviant sexual behaviors: in chapter 6, he tackles the libertines who argued that everything sexual was permissible; and in chapter 7, he speaks to the ascetics who stood on the other end of the sensual spectrum, contending that anything sexual should be forbidden.

The first half of 1 Corinthians 7 contains several challenging verses, starting with verse 1.

1 Corinthians 7:1

__________________________ ______________________

KJV [JST] NIV ISV_____ ‘

Now concerning the things Now for the matters you Now about what you whereof ye wrote unto me wrote about: "It is good for a asked: “Is it advisable for [JST saying]: man not to have sexual a man not to marry. It is good for a man not to relations with a woman." touch a woman [?].

Most translations clarify that verse 1 is a restatement of a question the Corinthians had asked— not a statement of Paul’s opinion. 439 While we do not hot have background for the Corinthians’ question, Paul’s response in verse 2 shows that he strongly disagrees with the original statement about “touching” or having sexual relations with women.

In verse 2, Paul censured immorality and championed marriage. The KJV word “fornication” is taken from the Greek “pornea,” which means all illicit sexual relations. As discussed in chapter 3 of this book, Corinth had the reputation as one of the sexual capitals of the ancient world—the phrase “to play the Corinthian” meant to visit a house of prostitution, and to be “a Corinthian business man” described a whoremonger.440 Given this cultural context, it is not surprising that Paul spent much of his letter to the Corinthians addressing the law of chastity.

439 Smith, History of the Church, 5:261. The Prophet Joseph gave his advice on how to understand scriptural passages, “I have a key by which I understand the Scriptures. I enquire what was the question which drew out the answer.” Paul answered at least six questions in the second half of 1 Corinthians—each identified by his formula, “now concerning” or “now touching.” 1) 7:1 on marriage and divorce, 2) 7:25 on virginity; 3) 8:1 food offered to idols; 4) 12:1 Spiritual Gifts; 5) 16:1 collection for Jerusalem; 6) 16:12 Apollo. There were other questions that Paul answered without the same introductory formula (i.e., 7:17; 9:1).

440 John L. McKensize, The Dictionary of the Bible (NYC, NY: Touchstone, 1995, MacMillian, 1965), 149.

1 Corinthians 7:2

KJV [JST] NIV ISV_________ ‘

Nevertheless, [JST: I say] to But because of immoralities, Let every man have his own avoid fornication, let every each man is to have his own wife, and let every woman man have his own wife, and wife, and each woman is to have her own husband to let every woman have her have her own husband. marry. own husband.

Paul clearly spoke out in favor of marriage and openly supported marital intimacy, deeming it

meaningful, if for nothing else than to assist in living the law of chastity.

1 Corinthians 7:3-4

KJV [JST] NIV_______________ ‘

Let the husband render unto the wife due The husband should fulfill his marital duty to benevolence: and likewise also the wife unto his wife, and likewise the wife to her the husband. The wife hath not power of her husband. The wife does not have authority own body, but the husband: and likewise also over her own body but yields it to her the husband hath not power of his own body, husband. In the same way, the husband does but the wife. not have authority over his own body but

yields it to his wife.

Paul used this opportunity to teach the potential of physical and emotional unity between

husband and wife. He spoke positively and candidly about intimacy within the bonds of marriage (also 1 Corinthians 7:28).441 Within reason, each spouse should serve their companion’s private needs. This might be difficult to discern in the KJV, which discreetly cloaked Paul’s word choice as, “benevolence,” but the RSV uses more vivid language, “conjugal rights.” In verse 5, Paul asks couples to give themselves selflessly to each other.

Paul developed his ideas on the importance of physical intimacy in marriage by directing couples to “not deprive” (NIV) or “not refuse one another” their “conjugal rights” (1 Corinthians 7:5, 3, RSV). This fulfilled the command given to Adam and Eve to be “one flesh,” which Jesus also repeated (Genesis 2:24; Matthew 19:5-6; Mark 10:7-8). The only exception to this, in Paul’s opinion, was a period of abstinence if they jointly “consent / sumphonos / harmonious agreement or compact.” His use of “time / kairos” refers to an “opportune or seasonable time, the right time, or a limited period of time.”442 The last word in verse 5, “incontinency / akrasia,” is

441 Ruden, Paul Among the People, 101. “Paul comes up with something altogether new: husbands and wives must have sex with each other on demand, because they both need it—it’s the reason they got married. According to these verses [1 Corinthians 7:3-5] they may need it equally. The rules for marriage treat human sexuality as a part of nature that needs expression” (also see Ruden, 107-108) Paul’s Christian teachings on sex stand in contrast to his contemporary, Josephus, who taught that sex was for procreation only. See footnote 434. 442 Strong’s, Exhaustive Concordance of the Bible, 45, #2540. The Mishnah stipulated that a period of abstinence should last no longer than a week to six months month depending on the circumstances: “If a man vowed to have no usually translated “lack of self-control.”443 Basically, Paul teaches that it is unwise to abstain from sex for too long in marriage or one might be tempted to have sex with someone else. In a straightforward manner, Paul advocated sexual relations within marriage—unless a reciprocal decision was made for a short period of abstinence.

1 Corinthians 7:5

KJV [JST] NIV Aramaic Bible__ ‘

Defraud ye not [JST “part ye Do not deprive each other Do not deprive one another not”] one [JST “from”] the except perhaps by mutual except when you both agree other, except it be with consent and for a time, so that in a time which you devote consent for a time, that ye you may devote yourselves to to fasting and prayer, and may give yourselves to prayer. Then come together you shall again return to fasting and prayer; and come again so that Satan will not pleasure, lest Satan tempt together again, that Satan tempt you because of your you because of the desire of tempt you not for your lack of self-control. your bodies. incontinency.

Paul prefaced the next section with a disclaimer—it was only his opinion and not a “commandment” from God.

1 Corinthians 7:6-8

KJV [JST] NIV Aramaic Bible____ ‘

But I speak this by I say this as a concession, not I say this as to the weak, not permission, and not of as a command, I wish that all by commandment. For I commandment. For I would of you were as I am. But each wish that all people might that all men were even as I of you has your own gift from be like I am in purity, but myself. But every man hath God; one has this gift, another every person is given a gift his proper gift of God, one has that. Now to the unmarried from God, one in this way after this manner, and and the widows I say: It is and one in that way. But I another after that. I say good for them to stay say to those who do not therefore to the unmarried unmarried, as I do. have a wife and to widows, and widows, It is good for that it benefits them if they them if they abide even as I. should remain as I am.

intercourse with his wife, the School of Shammai say: [She may consent] for two weeks. And the School of Hillel say: For one week [only]. Disciples [of the Sages] may continue absent for thirty days against the will [of their wives] while they occupy themselves in the study of the law; and laborers for one week. The duty of marriage enjoyed in the Law [Exod. 21:10] is: every day for them that are unoccupied; twice a week for labourers; once a week for ass-drivers; once every thirty days for camel-drivers; and once every six months for sailors” (Mishnah, Ketuboth, 5.6, brackets included in the Danby translation). 443 The New Testament uses this word only one other time—Jesus denounces the Pharisees, “they are full of extortion and excess / akrasia” (Galatians23:25).

Paul’s disclaimer is needed, as the difficult passage brings up several questions. After Paul spoke positively about marriage from verses 2 to 5, his statement in verse 8, that “it is good for them to stay unmarried, as I do,” seems odd—especially in light of the rest of the Pauline library which repeatedly supports mutuality in marriage (1 Corinthians 11:11; Ephesians 5:21-6:4; Colossians 3:18-21; 1 Timothy 2:15; etc.).444

At this point one may wonder if Paul were currently a widower. 445 Although the early saints knew Paul’s marital status at the time, we do not. We do know that he was a strict Pharisee before his conversion to Christianity (Philippians 3:5) and claimed to obey all The Law, which included marriage (1 Corinthians 9:5). Yet, in verse 8, Paul explained that being a missionary was like being unmarried or widowed. This role demanded sexual self-restraint. In this light, Paul called for celibacy in the limited context of missionary service or “consent for a time” (1 Corinthians 7:5). Keep in context that just a couple of sentences earlier, Paul defended marital sex as something good and needed (1 Corinthians 7:3-5, especially clear in the ESV and NET Bible).

Another explanation may be found in his statement regarding having a “proper gift of God” found in verse 7. Perhaps this refers to a spiritual gift (which Paul elaborates on in 1 Corinthians 12:1) or a calling in the church (1 Corinthians 14:12; 1 Timothy 4:14; 2 Timothy 1:6). He also alludes to his missionary call in verse 22. So perhaps this “gift” was a missionary call to travel– something that would require separation from one’s spouse for a time, and therefore temporary celibacy. If this were the case, then his directive on celibacy may be consistent with his previous counsel on marriage if the former were written specifically for those called as missionaries for a specific period of time.

1 Corinthians 7:9

KJV [JST] ISV Aramaic Bible

‘

But if they cannot contain, let However, if they cannot control But if they do not endure, them marry: for it is better to themselves, they should get let them marry. It is marry than to burn [JST better married, for it is better to marry beneficial for them to take a to marry than that any should than to burn with passion. wife rather than to burn commit sin]. with lust.

In verse 9, the JST emphasized the need for self-control by changing “burn” to “commit sin.” Most translations infer sexual desires.446 Paul asked missionaries to focus on the Lord’s work—with or without a wife.

Next Paul turns to the subject of divorce. He points out that this is no longer his opinion. In the Sermon on the Mount, Jesus asked His chosen disciples to live the celestial law of marriage where eternal spouses do not separate (Matthew 5:32 “. . . saving for the cause of fornication”). 444 The NRSV footnote of 1 Corinthians 11:11 reads, “In the Lord, in Christ, thus among Christians, Not independent of man . . . of woman suggests mutuality, and some interpreters believe equality as well.” Even though this commentary suggests equality is a higher aim, in my thinking mutuality should be the goal. 445 Anderson, Understanding Paul, 104. “One tendency here is to see Paul as a widower, serving the Lord rather than remarrying. But another option is persuasive; he was using himself as an example of sexual self-control” (1 Corinthians 7:7).

446 Bruce, Corinthians, 68. Jews used “burn” as an idiom for one who fell into fornication and therefore would “burn” in Gehenna / hell.

In contrast to this higher law, in Jewish society divorces were easily obtained (as we will discuss in chapter 6).447 Under their law, “a man takes a wife and possesses her. She fails to please him because he finds something obnoxious about her, and he writes her a bill of divorcement, hands it to her, and sends her away from his house” (Deuteronomy, 24:1).448

In the Roman world divorce was so common that historians estimate most adults (in the middle and upper classes) had four to five divorces each. 449 We see the influence of the Roman divorce culture infiltrating the Jewish culture through people like Herod the Great who married ten times, and his son Herod Antipas who married his brother’s ex-wife.450 Paul deplored these societal norms and promoted Christ’s higher law of forgiveness and love.

1 Corinthians 7:10-11

KJV [JST] ISV Aramaic Bible___ ‘

And unto the married I To the married I give this but the Lord): A wife command, yet not I, but command (not I, but the must not leave her the Lord, Let not the wife Lord): A wife must not husband. But if she does depart from her husband: separate from her husband. leave him, she must But and [JST removes But if she does, she must remain unmarried or else and] if she depart, let her remain unmarried or else be be reconciled to her remain unmarried, or be reconciled to her husband. husband. Like-wise, a reconciled to her husband: And a husband must not husband must not and [JST changes to “but”] divorce his wife. abandon his wife let not the husband put To married people I give away his wife. this command (not really I, .

Paul’s encouragement to work things out in marriage offered the empowering hope of reconciliation, repentance, and forgiveness. Verse 11 included the option to “be reconciled” after a divorce. The law of Moses limited divorced reconciliation, to the extent of forbidding remarriage to a woman that a man had previously divorced in certain cases.451 But Paul called for reconciliation—which could refer to a variety of associations between divorced couples—all of which may offer healing. Christ’s higher laws extend even to divorced partners: “Blessed are the peacemakers” (Matthew 5:9-10).

In verses 12 through 14, Paul returns to his own advice on the same question that Peter dealt with, namely, interfaith marriages. In this new religion, both apostles valued marriage to the degree that they discouraged tearing apart families, even if the couple held different religious beliefs.

447 Jeremias, Jerusalem, 371.

448 Skolnik, Encyclopedia Judaica, “Divorce: In later Jewish Law” 5.711.The translation is unique to the Encyclopedia Judaica.

449 Stagg, Woman in the World of Jesus, 86; Wirtherington, Women, 20. 450 Herod Antipas was the tetrarch of Galilee and Peraea during Jesus’ ministry. He first married the daughter of the King of Arabia, but left her to take his brother Philip’s wife, Herodias. John the Baptist rebuked them, which put in motion his beheading.

451 According to Deuteronomy 24:1-4, once a Jewish man divorced his wife, if she remarried, but was left alone again (either by death or divorce), the first man could not remarry her.

When the Prophet Joseph Smith “translated” or revised these verses, he received further revelation about the problems Paul addressed (now recorded in D&C 74).452 He learned that the Corinthians had a specific question about how a Jewish-Christian couple should raise their children. The core issue was how to raise children when one spouse still wanted to raise the children under the law of Moses.453

1 Corinthians 7:12-14

KJV [JST] ESV Aramaic Bible_ ‘ But to the rest speak I, not the To the rest I say (I, not the But to others I am saying, Lord: If any brother hath a Lord) that if any brother has a not my Lord, if there is a wife that believeth not, and wife who is an unbeliever, and brother who has a wife who she be pleased to dwell with she consents to live with him, is an unbeliever and she is him, let him not put her he should not divorce her. If willing to stay with him, let away. And the woman which any woman has a husband who him not leave her. And hath an husband that is an unbeliever, and he whichever wife has a believeth not, and if he be consents to live with her, she husband who is not a pleased to dwell with her, let should not divorce him. For the believer, and he is willing to her not leave him. For the unbelieving husband is made stay with her, let her not unbelieving husband is holy because of his wife, and leave her husband. That man sanctified by the wife, and the unbelieving wife is made who is an unbeliever is the unbelieving wife is holy because of her husband. sanctified by the wife who sanctified by the husband: Otherwise your children would believes, and that woman else were your children be unclean, but as it is, they are who is not a believer is unclean; but now are they holy. sanctified by the husband holy. who believes, otherwise their

children are defiled, but now

they are pure.

Paul felt so strongly about this that he “wrote unto the church, giving unto them a commandment, not of the Lord, but of himself, that a believer should not be united to an unbeliever; except the law of Moses should be done away among them” (D&C 74:5). Paul called on Christian parents to work as hard as they could to teach their children the truth—which in this case meant that Christ fulfilled The Law.

In verse 15, Paul gave an exception regarding when divorce was appropriate. Christ indicated

in both the Sermon on the Mount and His conversation with the Pharisees, that the only

452 D&C 74 was received on January 25, 1832. See verses 1, 5-7. 453 D&C 74:2, “the unbelieving husband was desirous that his children should be circumcised and become subject to the law of Moses, which law was fulfilled.” According to section 74, Christianity teaches the saints that the law of Moses was not required for their children’s salvation. If a couple raised their children living the laws of Moses (sometimes summarized as “circumcision”), it ignored Christ’s role in fulfilling The Law. The dispute dealt with devout Jews believing that they were actually saved through the law of Moses. They feared that by neglecting details like circumcision, they would be doomed to Gehenna / hell. Paul wanted this Jewish teaching “done away” (D&C 74:6). Christian doctrine declared that children are “holy being sanctified through the atonement of Jesus Christ” (D&C 74:7). Mormon 8:8 repeated this. exception for a divorce was sexual sin.454 But Paul added another exception, namely, in cases when a saint’s non-believing spouse left the marriage.

1 Corinthians 7:15

KJV [JST] NET Aramaic Bible____ But if the unbelieving depart, But if the unbeliever wants a But if he who does not let him depart. A brother or a divorce, let it take place. In believe separates, let him sister is not under bondage in these circumstances the separate. A brother or sister such cases: but God hath brother or sister is not bound. is not in bondage in such called us to peace. God has called you in peace. cases. God has called us to

peace.

If reconciliation did not work, then Paul did not want a divorced Christian to feel under the bondage of breaking God’s law. In such cases, Paul counsels the divorced spouse to seek God’s “peace.” Paul defines what he meant by “God’s peace” in another letter: “And God’s peace shall be yours, that tranquil state of a soul assured of its salvation through Christ, and so fearing nothing from God and content with its earthly lot, of whatsoever sort that is” (Philippians 4:7, Amplified Bible). In the Jewish world, divorce carried a heavy stigma, and Paul hoped for healing through Christ for those who had experienced a divorce. The same still holds true.

Paul continues to address the issue of mixed faith marriages in hope that believing spouses could be an influence in teaching the gospel of Christ to their family.

1 Corinthians 7:16

______________________________________________________________________________

KJV/JST NIV Aramaic Bible_______’ For what knowest thou, O wife, How do you know, wife, For what do you know, whether thou shalt save thy whether you will save your woman, if you will save husband? or how knowest thou, husband? Or, how do you know, your husband, or you, O man, whether thou shalt husband, whether you will save man, if you will save your save thy wife? your wife? wife?

This verse on inter-faith marriages is less confusing if we clarify which spouse, is the believer. For example, “How do you know, [believing] wife, if you might convert your [non-believing] husband, or you, [believing] husband, might convert your [non-believing] wife?” (NIV). Paul hopes that by living Christ’s teachings, the believing spouse could bless his or her household and bring others to Christ—who could ultimately save them.

454 Matthew 5:32; 19:3, 9; Mark 10:2, 11, 12; Luke 16:18.

III. Ephesians 5:25-33

The Epistle to the Ephesians speaks about a husband and wife’s obligation to love each other. In the middle of the Epistle, the author includes a Christian family code of conduct, with a beautiful section on mutual love and respect between spouses.

Ephesians 5:25-33

KJV [JST] NIV________________ ‘‘

Husbands, love your wives, even as Christ Husbands, love your wives, just as Christ also loved the church, and gave himself for it; loved the church and gave himself up for her 26) That he might sanctify and cleanse it with 26) to make her holy, cleansing her by the the washing of water by the word, 27) That he washing with water through the word, 27) might present it to himself a glorious church, and to present her to himself as a radiant not having spot, or wrinkle, or any such thing; church, without stain or wrinkle or any other but that it should be holy and without blemish. blemish, but holy and blameless. 28) In this 28) So ought men to love their wives as their same way, husbands ought to love their wives own bodies. He that loveth his wife loveth as their own bodies. He who loves his wife himself. 29) For no man ever yet hated his loves himself. 29) After all, no one ever hated own flesh; but nourish-eth and cherisheth it, their own body, but they feed and care for even as the Lord the church: 30) For we are their body, just as Christ does the church— members of his body, of his flesh, and of his 30) for we are members of his body. 31) “For bones. 31) For this cause shall a man leave his this reason a man will leave his father and father and mother, and shall be joined unto his mother and be united to his wife, and the two wife, and they two shall be one flesh. 32) This will become one flesh.” 32) This is a is a great mystery: but I speak concerning profound mystery—but I am talking about Christ and the church. 33) Nevertheless let Christ and the church. 33) However, each one every one of you in particular so love his wife of you also must love his wife as he loves even as himself; and the wife see that she himself, and the wife must respect her reverence her husband. husband. Of note, the Epistle speaks more about a husband’s duty to love his wife than it does the wife’s duty to her husband. The author uses ninety-two Greek words instructing men, and only forty words of guidance to women.455

From verses 25 to 31, the author reaches back to scripture from three different dispensations that spoke of love in conjunction with marriage. It starts with Jesus’ higher law, known as the “new commandment” that He taught at His Last Supper: “love one another; as I have loved you” (John 13:34). The author adds the promise that if the couple abides in love, Jesus will sanctify their marriage. Next he applies part of the Mosaic law of love: “thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself” (Leviticus 19:18) to marriages by teaching husbands to “love [your] wives as [your] own bodies” (Ephesians 5:28). Then Ephesians 5:31 returns to the creation account as a template for marriage: “a man leave his father and his mother, and shall cleave unto his wife” (Genesis 2:24).

455 Parales, Hidden Voices: Biblical Women, 130.

Paul uses the word “love” three times in these verses.456 Although the Greeks had four different words for love, Paul elaborates on “charity / agape / love” and gives it a special definition in Christianity.457 He fills an entire chapter by quoting an older document that enlarged its meaning.458 A portion of 1 Corinthians 13 became a handbook of instructions on how to internalize charity with the motivating claim that charity was “the greatest” gift of the Spirit (1 Corinthians 13:13).459 The prophet Mormon cited a similar passage and added, “Charity is the pure love of Christ” (Moroni 7:47). In Ephesians 5:25-33, the author uses the same word, “agapao / love.” By adding this special definition for charity, these verses in Ephesians become even more powerful: “the husband has pure love toward his wife, as Christ has pure love for the Church.”460

The passage ends with a call for spouses to join in a modified system of checks and balances in marriage: 461 “let each one of you love his wife as himself, and let the wife see that she respects her husband” (Ephesians 5:33, ESV). The overriding message not only in Ephesians 5:33, but throughout the New Testament, is for saints to love their spouses and respect each other. The same message is preached in Christ’s restored church.

Latter-day Prophets and Apostles on Marriage

The Lord restored the emancipating work to heal family relations and elevate women and children again as part of this dispensation of the fullness of times (D&C 76:95). Modern Scripture honors marriage as a divine law. The Lord echoed biblical passages when He told the restored church, “Thou shalt love thy wife with all thy heart, and shalt cleave unto her and none else” (D&C 42:22). Marriage “is ordained of God” (D&C 49:15). Spouses comfort and forgive each other (D&C 25:5; 132:56); the “twain shall be one flesh . . . that the earth might answer the end of its creation” (D&C 49:16). The eternal potential of marriage is outlined in D&C 132:19:

. . . if a man marry a wife by my word, which is my law, and by the new and everlasting

covenant, and it is sealed unto them by the Holy Spirit of promise, . . . [they] shall inherit

thrones, kingdoms, principalities, and powers, dominions, all heights and depths—then

456 There are four “prison letters” supposedly written when Paul was on “house arrest” (c.AD 61-63), that share many similarities: Colossians, Philemon, Ephesians and Philippians. When the New Testament was canonized, tradition credited Ephesians as Pauline, though modern biblical scholars doubt this. Textual scholars question the authorship of Ephesians because it does not send personal greetings, nor does it appear that the audience knew the author personally (1:15; 3:2-3; 4:21). This absence is especially odd as Paul was a missionary in Ephesus for three years just prior to his first Roman imprisonment. The letter may have also been a circular letter written to a larger audience as nowhere in the Epistle does it state it was to the Ephesians. 457 Greek had at least four words to express love: eros for erotic love; storge for affection or parental love; philo for friendship or brotherly love; agape for self-sacrifice or according to the Gospel of John, God’s pure love. The latter

agape as charity in 1 Corinthians 13:3-13. 458 Anderson, two words are used interchangeably by many Greek authors. But Paul appears to separate them with his exposé on Understanding Paul, 117. There is evidence that the citations on “charity” from 1 Corinthians 13 came

from an earlier Christian record of Jesus’ sayings. Bishop Clement of Rome wrote a letter around AD 97 quoting, “love endures all things” and nine other statements about love—quoting Jesus—not quoting Paul. Furthermore, Jesus gave parallel priority to love in John 13:35 and 14:15. If this were a document from Jesus’ sayings, it helps us understand why Mormon also quoted it in Moroni 7.

459 The Greek word, “agape /love” is translated in the New Testament 86 times as “love,” 27 times as “charity.” 460 Welch and Hall, Charting the New Testament, 15-15. 461 Nibley, Old Testament and Related Studies, 93. Quote on page 125.

shall it be written in the Lamb's Book of Life, . . . and shall be of full force when they are

out of the world; and they shall pass by the angels, and the gods, which are set there, to

their exaltation and glory in all things, as hath been sealed upon their heads, which glory

shall be a fulness and a continuation of the seeds forever and ever. It is clear from these statements that part of the restoration of all things included eternal covenantal marriage relationships.

In addition, the Lord revealed to the Prophet Joseph Smith principles of leadership that wives and husbands should likewise apply to their family relationships: “the powers of heaven cannot be controlled nor handled only upon the principles of righteousness . . . no power or authority can be maintained . . . only by persuasion, by long-suffering, by gentleness and meekness, and by love unfeigned” (D&C 121:36-41). This principle has extra meaning in light of the patriarchal priesthood that both spouses share jointly.462

In the restored church the family unit stands paramount, and in the ideal family, a wife and husband work together at the head of their family: “Every father is to his family a patriarch and every mother a matriarch as coequals in their distinctive parental roles.”463 As Elder Russell M. Nelson explains, a husband and wife’s “stewardships, equally sacred and important, do not involve any false ideas about domination or subordination.”464 Similarly, Elder L. Tom Perry teaches that in marriage there is “not a president or a vice president. The couple works together eternally for the good of the family . . . They are on equal footing.”465

The aim for such a marriage and family is sanctification. As a husband and wife serve the Lord and submit their will to Him, they become one in purpose.466 The Lord chose to submit in love to those in political power to die for humanity. Following this example, God called spouses to acquiesce selflessly in love to each other to become more Christlike. As they serve each other and are valiant in their testimonies of God, they in turn receive the greatest blessings restored in the gospel: through the patriarchal priesthood. This is the “fulness of the priesthood, which is the highest order of priesthood, [and] is attained only through an eternal union of male and female.”467 Whether that marital relationship is developed in this life or the next, prophets have promised that these blessings of exaltation will come to all worthy saints.468

462 Ludlow, Encyclopedia of Mormonism, “Priesthood, Patriarchal,” 3.1135. In this book see page 188 and footnotes 502, 307, and 471.

Proclamation to the World,” Ensign (November, 1995). 464 Russell M. Nelson “The Sacred Responsibilities of Parenthood,” 463 James E. Faust, “The Prophetic Voice,” Ensign (May, 1996): 6. Also see Gordon B. Hinckley, “The Family: A Ensign (Mar 2006): 29-30.

465 L. Tom Perry, “Fatherhood, an Eternal Calling,” Ensign (May 2004), 71. The quote continues, “They plan and organize the affairs of the family jointly and unanimously as they move forward.” 466 Valerie Hudson, Richard Miller, “Equal Partnership in Marriage,” Ensign (April, 2013). “Latter-day Saint theology teaches that gender difference does not superimpose a hierarchy between men and women: one gender does not have greater eternal possibilities than the other.”

467 Ludlow, Encyclopedia of Mormonism, “Priesthood, Patriarchal,” 3.1137. The quote continues, “. . . sanctified by the sealing ordinances in a temple of the Lord and ratified by the Holy Spirit of promise (D&C 132:18-19). Those so united, who honor their covenants with each other and the Lord, will in the Resurrection inherit exaltation and eternal life.”

468 Joseph Fielding Smith, Doctrines of Salvation, 2.76. “You good sisters, who are single and alone, do not fear, do not feel that blessings are going to be withheld from you. You are not under any obligation or necessity of accepting some proposal that comes to you which is distasteful for fear you will come under condemnation. If in your hearts you feel that the gospel is true, and would under proper conditions receive these ordinances and sealing blessings in the temple of the Lord; and that is your faith and your hope and your desire, and that does not come to you now; the Lord will make it up, and you shall be blessed-for no blessing shall be withheld.”

In conclusion, by breaking away from their Judaic and Greco-Roman cultures, the writers of the New Testament launched a new vision for mutually supportive and loving marriages. The Lord and His apostles taught disciples about relationships by focusing on charity and unity. A close, caring, selfless, happy relationship in marriage was different from anything in the neighboring cultures—as different as Jesus’ new commandment, or turning the other cheek (John 13:34; Matthew 5:39). It became a “part of the Christian charter.”469

Jesus came to empower humanity on many levels. In restoring the importance of spousal and family connections, He unveiled the symbiotic relationship between God and humanity. If families do not love and serve each other, not only do they ignore each other, they also “did it not to me” (Matthew 25:45; D&C 42:38). Jesus demonstrated through His own love and care that religious life intimately connects human relations.

Christ emancipated women and families from oppressive cultural baggage. We find evidence of the changes He brought in the early Christian church writings. The Epistles attributed to the apostles confirm and continue the teachings of Jesus in the Gospels describing marriage in a revolutionary way. Though some of the Epistles seem incompatible with Christ’s teachings on marriage, when we take a closer look at seemingly troublesome passages and examine them in the light of their full context as well as restored truths, we find support for Christ’s innovations related to women and mutuality in marriage.

469 Ruden, Paul Among the People, 102.
