Unfulfilled Marriage: From Divorce to Widowhood

Divorce and widowhood in the Jewish world of the first century were often emotionally and financially devastating. Understanding this context allows us to understand better the power and relevance of Christ’s parables and teachings. It also helps us to see some of the subtle ways in which Christ and His apostles modified these traditions to emancipate women, marriages, and families. We will see this as we look at this chapter’s examples of unfulfilled marriage, divorce, and widowhood in the New Testament.

Unfulfilled Marriage

Cultural Background and Baggage

Literature from the late Second Temple era speaks of both happy and unhappy marriages.470 As Ben Sira expounded, “A good wife is a good gift; she shall be given into the bosom of him that feareth God.” 471 Nevertheless, right after this positive statement, later scribes slipped in a negative example: “An evil wife is a plague to her husband. What is the remedy? Let him drive her from his house [i.e., divorce her], and he shall be healed from the plague of her.”472 Philo offers examples of happy marriages when he looks back at the patriarchs. Sarah, Rebekah,

470 Ben Sira, Ecclesiasticus, 26:1-4. An example of a happy relationship comes from a paraphrasing of Proverbs 31: “Happy is the husband of a good wife: for the number of his years is double. A virtuous woman rejoiceth her husband: and shall fulfill the years of his life in peace. A good wife is a good portion, she shall be given in the portion of them that fear God, to a man for his good deeds. Rich or poor, if his heart is good, his countenance shall be cheerful at all times.”

471 Ben Sira, Ecclesiasticus, 26:3.

472 Arthur Ernest Cowley, Adolf Neubauer, eds., The Original Hebrew of a Portion of Ecclesiasticus (Oxford England: Oxford University-Clarendon Press, 1897), 24. and Leah are the examples of virtuous women, but he speaks of no positive examples of women in his day.473

Most late Second Temple writings now available describe unfulfilled marriages. Rarely was the spousal relationship associated with joy.474 A man’s drooping hands and weak knees came from “the wife who does not make her husband happy.”475 This account did not acknowledge the husband’s attitude, responsibility, nor accountability for his own feelings. Ben Sira spoke far more of the pain of having an “evil” or “wicked” wife than of any pleasure they shared.

The term “evil wife” had a broad definition as one who broke the commandments, including one who did not silently submit to her husband’s control.476 Ben Sira defines a “wicked woman” as one who socializes outside of her home: “Give the water no passage; neither a wicked woman liberty to gad abroad. If she go not as thou wouldn’t have her, cut her off from thy flesh. . . . The wickedness of a wife changes her appearance, and darkens her face like that of a bear. Her husband takes his meals among the neighbors.”477 Ben Sira bemoaned, “An evil wife is an ox yoke which chafes; taking hold of her is like grasping a scorpion . . . Any wound, but not a wound of the heart! Any wickedness, but not the wickedness of a wife!”478 Elsewhere he continues, “I would rather dwell with a lion and a dragon than dwell with an evil wife.”479 He continues to blame an “evil wife” for causing “a dejected mind, a gloomy face and a wounded heart.”480

After the time of the New Testament, rabbis labeled a man “wicked” if he did not control his wife. For example, a husband was “wicked” if he allowed his wife to “go outside with her head uncovered . . . and she spins in public and baths with men.”481 One has to wonder if they really felt that spinning in the fresh air was as immoral as bathing with men. Supposedly, by going outside without being veiled, a woman used seditious behavior to persuade men to look at her, inviting adultery. Later rabbis made a list of supposed “sins” (including idleness) that were a breech in fidelity, as they would lead to adultery.482

473 Philo, On the Cherubim; and on the Flaming Sword. Part 2, XII. 474 Philo, Yonge, trans., 160. Philo describes a slave who wanted to remain with his master for life as saying, “I have loved my master, my wife, and my children. . .” Yet, in the complete collection of Philo’s writings, joy and wife / woman are never linked, but he speaks of joy in other settings. One of those was the patriarch Joseph’s joy in being reunited with his family again in Egypt.

475 Ben Sira, Ecclesiasticus, 25:23b.

476 Charles, The Apocrypha and Pseudepigrapha of the Old Testament, 2.134. 477 Ben Sira, Ecclesiasticus, 25:12-18. He continues, “[the husband] cannot help sighing bitterly. Any iniquity is insignificant compared to a wife’s iniquity; may a sinner’s lot befall her! A sandy ascent for the feet of the aged— such is a garrulous wife for a quiet husband.”

478 Ben Sira, Ecclesiasticus, 26:7, 25:13. The preceding verse reads: “There is grief of heart and sorrow when a wife is envious of a rival, and a tongue-lashing makes it known to all” (27:5-6). 479 Ben Sira, Ecclesiasticus, 25:16.

480 Ben Sira, Ecclesiasticus, 25:23a.

481 Babylonian Talmud , Gittin 90 a, b: “This corresponds to the way of a bad man who sees his wife go out with her hair unfastened and spin cloth in the street . . . with her armpits uncovered and bathe with the men. . . . Such a one it is a religious duty to divorce, as it says, because he hath found some unseemly thing in her … and he sendeth her out of his house.”

482 Mishnah , Ketuboth, 5:5.

For many, a wife had value and significance inasmuch as she enabled her husband to keep God’s commandments to marry and raise a family.483 A wife became a means to an end—the end being posterity. Also tied to the commandments, an unhappy union was seen as the cause that led men to break God’s laws.

Anyone who marries a woman unsuitable for him violates five negative commandments:

“Do not take vengeance” (Leviticus 19:18), “Do not bear a grudge,” “Do not hate your

brother” (19:17), “and you shall love your neighbor as yourself” (19:18), “that your brother

may live with you” (25:36), and the consequences are nothing less than removing fertility

and increase from the world.484

Husbands blamed their wives for their own behaviors and attitudes. A lack of personal responsibility prevailed in unfulfilled marriages.

New Testament Examples of Changes by Jesus

This cultural backdrop of blaming the woman is needed when we look the story of the woman taken in adultery (John 8:3-11).485 The scenario offers an example of another one of Jesus’ emancipating tools. The scene falls on Jesus’ visit to Jerusalem for the Feast of the

Woman Tabernacles—which included the Torah reading for the punishment of adultery.

Accused The scribes and Pharisees attempted to ensnare Jesus by setting up another “no

of Adultery win” situation.

The whole encounter appears to be a farce. If the woman were “in the very

act,” where was the guilty man? The law of Moses required both parties be stoned (John 8:5; Leviticus 20:10). Most commentaries view the woman as a pawn used by the scribes and Pharisees to trap Jesus. The accuser posed a question that would violate a law with either answer: “This they said, tempting him, that they might have to accuse him” (John 8:6). If Jesus released the woman, He broke the law of Moses; if He had her killed, He violated the Roman law.486 Or perhaps the Pharisees wanted to test Jesus’ prophetic ability? In any case, the battle of the Jews against the Romans played a large part in the Jewish anticipation and acceptance of the Messiah.

Jesus refused to play their games and “stooped down, and with His finger wrote on the ground, as though he heard them not” (John 8:6). In Roman legal practice, the judge first wrote the sentence and then read it aloud.487 Jesus’ answer put the burden back on His questioners. As Jesus turned the situation around, the woman was no longer on trial—they were. “He that is without sin among you, let him first cast a stone at her” (John 8:7). Jesus’ example silently spoke to the importance of avoiding unrighteous judgment. He spoke of hypocrisy, and He spoke of

483 Philo , Yonge, trans., 272. “And what is the duty of man except most firmly to believe those things which God asserts?” Later rabbis counted 613 commandments from the Torah and ten thousand oral laws. See Appendix 1, “Oral Laws and Commandments.”

484 Ilan, Jewish Women in Greco-Roman Palestine, 79. 485 This story is missing from the best Greek manuscripts of the Gospel of John. Some place it in Luke’s Gospel (where the Greek matches better).

486 The law of Moses states that anyone—male and female—caught in adultery is to be stoned (Leviticus 20:10; 22:15; as well as Ezekiel 15:38-40). Another question not answered in John’s narrative is whether the Sanhedrin already tried the woman in their standard practice and why they wanted Jesus to duplicate or validate their verdict. The Roman law is outlined by Brown, The Anchor Bible: John I-XII, 337. 487 Ibid., 334. Many have speculated on what Jesus wrote. An old Christian tradition, traced to Jerome, suggests that Jesus wrote the sins of the accusers in the dirt. Another connects the finger/handwriting of judgments with Daniel 5:24. All are speculation; the author is silent. forgiveness. The accusers left the scene either because Jesus pricked their own consciences or He did not respond as they had hoped.

The scene closed in climactic drama: the “sinful and the Sinless” alone together.488 Regardless of whether the charges were made up, Jesus acted as a serene judge balancing justice and mercy. He did not condone the sin but offered the great challenge, “sin no more!” (John 8:11). Only when one forsakes sin can God completely rejuvenate one with His Spirit and love.

Divorce

Cultural Background and Baggage

First century marriages seemed doomed to fail—beginning with an arranged union to appease financial and social motives, a segregated lifestyle, lack of communication, unequal opportunities, authoritarian habits, and a master-slave relationship.489 For centuries before and after the New Testament, divorce resulted in social disgrace for Jewish men, woman, and children. The Old Testament refers to divorce as treachery against one’s companion and a breach of the covenant (Malachi 2:10-16). In the same way, a few centuries later, during the intertestamental period, the Apocrypha warned that a man who “breaketh wedlock . . . shall be punished” by God.490 This communal disapproval lasted until well after the Second Temple period, where we read a mournful lamentations on divorce “ye cover the altar of the Lord with tears, with weeping and with sighing, insomuch that he regardeth not the offering any more, neither receiveth it with good will at your hand.”491 This section covers the: who, why, and how of divorce, and “what” it meant to women.

Who: A Husband’s Right

During the Second Temple era, divorce was the unilateral choice of the husband. Later Jewish law enumerated five exceptions when a woman could leave her husband: “[If] he that is afflicted with boils, or that has a polypus, or that collects dog excrements, or that is a coppersmith or a tanner.”492 Some diseases or professions were so vile that a wife was not expected to stay in the same environment as her husband. That said, it was a rare event when a woman left her husband. Ben Sira believed that the repercussions for a woman’s leaving one marriage and entering into another brought curses for generations.493

488 John Milton, Paradise Lost (London: Collins, 1874), 98. 489 See chapter 1, “Communication” pages 27-28.

490 Ben Sira, Ecclesiasticus, 23:18-21; “A man that breaketh wedlock, saying thus in his heart, Who seeth me? I am compassed about with darkness, the walls cover me, and no body seeth me; what need I to fear? the most High will not remember my sins: Such a man only feareth the eyes of men, and knoweth not that the eyes of the Lord are ten thousand times brighter than the sun, beholding all the ways of men, and considering the most secret parts. He knew all things ere ever they were created; so also after they were perfected he looked upon them all. This man shall be punished in the streets of the city, and where he suspecteth not he shall be taken.” 491 Babylon Talmud, Gittin 90b.

492 Mishnah, Ketuboth 7.10. One of the exceptions when a woman could leave her husband included being married to a tanner. The smells associated with tanning were so abhorrent that no one was expected to live in the same place. Yet, Acts 9:43-10:32 refers to the apostle Peter staying with Simon the tanner. Was it the only place available to Peter? Was Simon humbled through his profession to make him more open to receive Christianity? 493 Ben Sira, Ecclesiasticus, 23:22. “Thus shall it go also with the wife that leaveth her husband, and bringeth in an heir by another. For first, she hath disobeyed the law of the most High; and secondly, she hath trespassed against her
