Why: Uncleanness

A man could “put away” his wife if she transgressed the law of Moses or any Jewish custom (Matthew 19:3-9), as well as for relatively trivial mistakes.494 How, where, and to whom she spoke, what she wore, cooked, or cleaned could all potentially lead to a divorce. Not only were her words and actions culpable, but she was also held responsible for her husband’s emotional and romantic feelings.495 The rabbis detailed hundreds of examples of what they felt were “just causes” for a man to divorce his wife. They divided their legal grounds to justify a divorce into two major categories: 1) a religious duty, and 2) legal vindication of the husband.

—Divorce as a Religious Duty. The law of Moses allowed a husband to divorce his wife if he found “some uncleanness in her” (Deuteronomy 24:1). Over a thousand years later the rabbis categorized exactly what they interpreted as “unclean.” If a wife violated one of the causes outlined on this list, the husband had a “religious duty” to divorce her without paying her ketubah (the “bride price”).496 Rabbis from the early first century AD interpreted this verse in two different ways. Either “uncleanliness” related to adultery, which was punished by death,497 or “uncleanliness” included anything displeasing to the husband.498 In the latter category, five forms of a wife’s “uncleanliness” required divorce: 1) childlessness, 2) feeding her husband untithed food, 3) having intercourse during her menstrual cycle, 4) not preparing a dough-offering, or 5) not fulfilling a vow.499 The latter case of fulfilling a vow became tricky because a wife did not have sole control of her religious vows—her husband did.500

own husband; and thirdly, she hath played the whore in adultery, and brought children by another man. She shall be brought out into the congregation, and inquisition shall be made of her children. Her children shall not take root, and her branches shall bring forth no fruit. She shall leave her memory to be cursed, and her reproach shall not be blotted out.”

494 Mishnah Gittin 1-9. Under Roman law, a Roman woman could instigate a divorce. 495 Ben Sira, Ecclesiasticus, 25:21; “Stumble not at the beauty of a woman and desire her not for pleasure.” 496 See chapter 4, “Marriage.” The ketubah was a sum of money prescribed at the marriage settlement, as the price the groom had to pay his bride if he divorced her, thus allowing her to have something to live on for a period of time.

497 Genesis 20:6; 26:10; Leviticus 20:10, 22; Deuteronomy 22:22, 24. Mishnah Gittin, 9.10. School of Shammai (who probably lived from 50BC to 30 AD) limited “uncleanliness” to adultery. 498 Mishnah, Gittin, 9:10. The School of Hillel (60 BC-AD 20) claimed that anything “unclean,” included anything displeasing or unbecoming to the husband.

499 Mishnah, Ketuboth 7.6.

500 As part of their religious worship, Israelite men and women made vows to consecrate their lives to God, or in the words of the Old Testament, to “bind” their souls “with a bond” (Numbers 30:2). Moses gave husbands jurisdiction over vows made by their wives (Numbers 30:8, 13). On the surface, this aspect of the law of Moses appears to restrict the autonomy of women. If done with genuine love and concern for the individual, though, the Mosaic law could foster cooperation and unity among family members. Moses taught that a father or husband, as the head of a family, should be intimately involved in his loved ones' lives and should give them spiritual direction. A well-known biblical vow is that of a Nazarite. Numbers 6:1-2 states that both men and women can “separate themselves to vow a vow of a Nazarite.” We see examples of that in Manoah’s wife and Samson’s mother (Judges 13), in Samuel (1Samuel 1:11), and John the Baptist (Luke 1:15). There were also vows of abstinence (Numbers 30), vows of commitment (Genesis 28:20), a voluntary or a free-will offering (Leviticus 7:16), vows to fight (Numbers 21:2), and monetary vows (Deuteronomy 23:21). For more see Tony W. Carledge, Vows in the Hebrew Bible and the Ancient Near East (Sheffield, England: JSOT Press, 1992), 12.

Even though “childlessness,” or infertility, plagued Old Testament prophets—Abraham and Sarah, Jacob and Rebekah, Elkanah and Hannah, to name a few—the rabbis felt authorized to dictate when infertility became a “religious duty” for divorce:

If a man took a wife and lived with her for ten years and she bore no child, he may not

abstain [any longer from the duty of propagation]. If he divorced her, she is permitted to

marry another, and the second husband may also live with her [no more than] ten years. If

she miscarried [the period of ten years] is reckoned from the time of her miscarriage.501 Though not everyone lived this, those men who followed the oral laws felt it was legitimate for a man to divorce his wife for infertility. 502

—Divorce as legal vindication. The Mishnah includes a long list of “just causes” for a man to divorce his wife. Ben Sira counseled husbands, “Allow . . . no boldness of speech in an evil wife. If she does not go as you direct, separate her from yourself.”503 The rabbinical debate included that a woman should be divorced for burning her husband's bread or dinner,504 “spinning in the street” (which included her doorway) or “speaks to any man.”505 Other objections, “if spittle is found on the bed curtain,” or “if shoes lie under the bed.” (The shoes and spittle were evidence that a stranger had been there.506)

Threats of divorce controlled nearly every detail of behavior. If a woman “speaks inside her house so that her neighbors hear her voice,” she was labeled a “scolding woman” which was cause for divorce.507 Perhaps the most arbitrary, Rabbi Akib (ca. AD 120-140) rationalized, “even if he found another fairer than she, for it is written, ‘And it shall be if she find no favour in his eyes,’” he felt a divorce was justified.508

How: Obtaining a Bill of Divorcement

The divorce process itself was simple: the husband wrote a “bill of divorcement” that

included a date, his signature, and witnesses' names.509 The bill of divorcement may be written with anything or on anything—“ink, caustic, red dye, gum, copperas, or with whatsoever is lasting . . . on an olive-leaf or on a cow’s horn (and he must give her the cow) or on the hand of a slave (and he must give her the slave).”510

501 Mishnah; Yebamot 6:6 (brackets original to translation). The schools of Hillel and Shammai decided a wife or husband could fine the other for not cohabitating once a week. Ketuboth 5:6-7. 502 Philo, Special Laws, 3.35. “Those who marry maidens in ignorance at the time of their fitness or unfitness for successful delivery of children, and, when they learn much later on through their childlessness that they are barren, do not send them away, deserve our pardon.”

503 Ben Sira, Ecclesiasticus, 25:25-26.

504 Mishnah, Gittin 9.10. “If she spoiled a dish for him, for it is written, because he hath found in her indecency in anything.”

505 Mishnah, Ketuboth 6.6.

506 Babylonian Talmud, Yebamoth, 24b-25a. “Only the woman lying face upwards could have spat on that spot. Intercourse may therefore be suspected.”

507 Mishnah , Ketuboth 6.6. Abba Saul justified divorce “if she curses his parents in his presence.” 508 Mishnah, Nashim, Gittin, 9.10.

509 Mishnah, Nashim, Gittin 1-9. Gittin 2.4. “All [men] are qualified to write a bill of divorce, even a deaf-mute, an imbecile, or a minor” (Mishnah, Gittin, 2.4).

510 Mishnah , Nashim, Gittin, 2.3.

Even though the divorce process was simple, most Jews remained married. Financial and social restraints kept marriages together. Husbands had to pay a minimum of 200 days’ wages to their wives if the divorce was due to “legal vindication.” More emotionally costly, the social contamination deterred the spread of divorce.511 These restraints allowed Jewish marriages to remain intact more frequently than Greco-Roman marriages, but the constant threat disabled their relationships.

What this Meant to Women

The unilateral threat of divorce overshadowed Jewish marriage relationships with insecurity and distrust.512 This relentless intimidation left many women living in an environment of fear. Those wives lived in constant anxiety over the possibility of offending their spouses and thereby facing destitution and social disgrace. To avoid that, a wife tried to comply with every demand her husband made. Circumstances like these stunted marriage unions that should have had the potential for security, confidence, and love.

New Testament Examples

The social restrictions from the late Second Temple period fated marital relationships to fall short of their divine potential. Yet the Savior restored truths to help unfulfilled marriages and offered healing to wounded spouses. In the case of divorce, Jesus denounced the current customs and returned marriage to its paramount position. When the Pharisees tried to entice Jesus, “tempting him” into a debate on the emotional topic of divorce, He refused to deal with the minutiae of their oral laws (Matthew 19:3, Mark 10:2). Instead He reinstated one of the four commandments given in the Garden of Eden: “What God hath joined together, let not man put asunder” (Mark 10:9 echoing Genesis 1:28; 2:24). Luke 16:18 recorded a still stronger condemnation against divorce: “whosoever putteth away his wife and marrieth another, committeth adultery; and whosoever marrieth her that is put away from her husband committeth adultery” (see also Matthew 5:32). Jesus restored the paradisiacal law.513

These higher decrees are still the ideal in Jesus’ restored church: “Thou shalt love thy wife with all thy heart, and shalt cleave unto her and none else” (D&C 42:22). However, we do not live in a paradisiacal world, and living prophets allow divorced persons to remarry in temples without the charge of adultery.514 In this dispensation, remaining married is not necessarily the best option (D&C 10:63).515 The Edenic archetype stands as a goal, but if divorce does occur, disciples of Christ should forgive seventy times seven and not cast stones (Matthew 18:22). 511 Jeremias, Jerusalem, 371.

512 Ben Sira, Ecclesiasticus, 25:26. The Greco-Roman world differed where many adults married and divorced four or five times. See Appendix 2.

513 Paul repeated it for the apostolic church, “Let not the wife depart from her husband … let not the husband put away his wife” (1 Corinthians7:10-11).

514 The law of marriage outlined in Matthew 5 and 3 Nephi 12, is not currently applied in the LDS church. One is not considered an adulterer if one marries twice. Even though the Lord’s high law is a noble ideal, the challenges and sins of this generation do not allow some to live this law fully. Modern prophets allow temple cancellations and do not hold couples who marry after a divorce guilty of adultery. All who earnestly try to receive First Presidency approval are allowed to enter into the temples of God and are pronounced clean. 515 Theoretically, reconciling marital difference is best, but in practice it is often difficult to incorporate. Many devoted Christians “do not now live in the kind of family situation they desire or deserve.” Elder Bruce Hafen lamented, “Of course Church doctrine encourages marriage and discourages divorce, but marrying is not always

Within this cultural context of divorce, we can appreciate the social scar that an

Zacharias infertile couple carried. It makes Zacharias and Elisabeth seem all the more

and admirable for remaining married even after decades of childlessness (Luke 1:7, 18).

Elisabeth

Luke emphasized

that they “had God's approval” as they “followed all the Lord's commands and regulations perfectly” (Luke 1:6, GW). They endured the emotional pain of wanting children, the social shame of barrenness, and the spiritual confusion of why their prayers had not been answered. Through it all, they did not submit to the oral traditions that governed divorce, but instead held to the higher law given to Adam, for a husband to “cling to his wife” (Genesis 2:24, ISV). The years of trials that they endured before John the Baptist’s birth must have refined them and their relationship with God (D&C 122:7).

The example of Zacharias and Elisabeth personifies the principles of obedience and sacrifice. They endured their trial and developed during the process of purification. They set an example of fidelity to each other and God, while overcoming social pressures. The Lord promises to exalt those who follow Him, no matter how difficult the trials and disappointments of life become: “For my Father's will is that everyone who looks to the Son and believes in him shall have eternal life, and I will raise them up at the last day” (John 6:40, NIV). God offers eternal emancipation to the obedient.

Widowhood

Cultural Background

When a woman’s husband died, for the first time in her life, she was not beholden to

husband upon marriage. The Mishnah speaks of widowhood as synonymous with a woman’s 516 freedom: “A wife . . . can get her freedom by divorce, or through her husband's death.” anyone. As a child, her father had control over her, and that charge was transferred to her This

freedom was not relished, though, as it often resulted in abject poverty. For this reason, most Jewesses did not remain widows for long. There were tax incentives, too. In an attempt to bolster the families among Roman citizens, Caesar Augustus enacted reforms to legally and financially pressure fertile widows and divorcees to remarry within two years.517 He added a penalty tax to citizens who were widowers and divorcees who did not have at least three children.518

When a widow remarried, the minimum “bride price” or ketubah, paid for her was half that of a virgin.519 Usually second marriages remained in the same social circle as first marriages.520 Also a widow did not uncover her head on the wedding day as she had previously, because she was no longer a virgin. To ensure some form of a marriage celebration for a widow, the rabbis

under our control, and there are times when divorce is the better choice. Our Church leaders have long taught that, despite divorce or being single, no eternal blessing, even celestial glory, will be denied those who are true and faithful.” Bruce C. Hafen, “Marriage, Family Law, and the temple,” J. Reuben Clark Law Society Annual International Broadcast, January 31, 2014, Salt Lake City, UT.

516 Mishnah, Kiddushin, 1:1.

517 Witherington, Women and the Genesis of Christianity, 23. For more, see Appendix 3. 518 th Jackson J. Spielvogel, Western Civilization 7 ed. (Belmont, CA: Thomson & Wadsworth, 2009), volume 1, 152; “Augustus also revised the tax laws to penalize bachelors, widowers, and married persons who had fewer than three children.”

519 Mishnah, Ketuboth, 1.2.

520 Except for the high priest, who was not allowed to marry a widow according to Leviticus 21:14. suggested that the ceremony take place on Thursdays, thus allowing the new husband to “rejoice with her for three days.”521 If an older widow did not remarry, she often returned to the home of her father, brother, or son for economic support (Genesis 38:11; Leviticus 22:13).

The law of Moses called for the children to honor their fathers and mothers—which included a reversal of roles when the children needed to take care of their aging parents, especially widowed mothers; “Hearken unto thy father that begat thee, and despise not thy mother when she is old” (Proverbs 23:22; also Exodus 20:12; Deuteronomy 5:16). Mosaic laws also called for the community to care for widows: “. . . the widow(s), which are within thy gates, shall come, and shall eat and be satisfied; that the LORD thy God may bless thee” (Deuteronomy 14:29; also 24:17-22; 26:12-13; Isaiah 1:17; Jeremiah 22:3). Yet in practice this did not always happen (Mark 12:42).

But during the Second Temple era, a few wealthy Jews found their way out of this responsibility. The Gospel of Mark referred to this practice as “corban.”522 In the parlance of the time, corban referred to an early commitment to donate one’s estate to the temple or some other religious purpose upon one’s death. From the moment of promising the future donation, corban immobilized all assets for anyone other than the man himself. This meant the greater family’s needs were ignored. The problem lay not in the donation, but in not assisting aged widows or other needy family members who were still alive. This donation enabled a man to use his funds while he was alive for himself, while ignoring the needs of his extended family, all the while, appearing noble in the eyes of the community.

New Testament Example

The early Christian leadership showed a particular concern for widows, which stemmed from their Master’s example. All three synoptic Gospels record Jesus condemning the Jewish leaders for not caring for widows: “Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! for ye devour widows' houses, and for a pretense make long prayer: therefore ye shall receive the greater damnation” (Matthew 23:14; also see Luke 20:46-47). Luke seems particularly interested in the downtrodden and social outcasts. He authored half of the references to widows in the New Testament.523 Luke called attention to their plight of loneliness, dependency, and destitution. He included the report of The Twelve acknowledging the widows' neglect “in the daily ministration” that led to the calling of seven valiant men to oversee their needs (Acts 6:1).

Luke and Mark both recorded the story of the well-known, though unnamed, widow and her offering at the temple (Mark 12:42; Luke 21:2). They place the story during the last week of Jesus’ life as He taught in the “Court of the Women,” a 200-square-foot temple courtyard where men, women, and children were allowed to worship.524 Around the perimeter ran a covered

521 Mishnah, Ketuboth 1.1. “A virgin should be married on a Wednesday and a widow on a Thursday, for in towns the court sits twice in the week, on Mondays and on Thursdays; so that if the husband would lodge a virginity suit he may forthwith go in the morning to the court.”

522 Josephus, Against Apion, I.22. “Corban . . . declares what a man may call a thing devoted to God.” 523 Luke 2:37; 4:25, 26; 7:12; 18:3, 5; 18:3; 20:47; 21:2, 3; Acts 6:1; 9:39, 41. Luke’s examples in Acts demonstrate how Christ’s high regard for women was passed on to the apostolic church. 524 The synoptic Gospels (Matthew, Mark, and Luke) place everything that happened in Jesus’ Jerusalem ministry in the last week of His life. Their Gospels only include one trip to Jerusalem, so everything Jesus did in Jerusalem was telescoped into that time frame. John, on the other hand, includes several trips to Jerusalem, including three for Passover. John spreads the Jerusalem events in Jesus’ life over the course of the three-year ministry (i.e., the cleansing of the temple is done at the beginning of his ministry). John’s chronology is generally more trusted. colonnade with thirteen containers, each labeled for its own charitable contributions. These pots were narrow at the top and wide at the bottom like a trumpet, and hence were called

Widow’s “trumpets.”525 Donors placed their offerings in the appropriate trumpet, thus sparing

Mite them any public interaction with the sacrificing priest. Jesus pointed out the widow

as she generously donated her all—two mites—into the temple treasury: “All of

these people have given what they could spare. But she, in her poverty, has given everything she had to live on” (Luke 21:4, GW). Luke and Mark emphasized the public display of the rich man’s donation, although the message that Jesus underscored had little to do with money. He teaches the importance of giving one’s all in worship—no matter how meager that offering.

The Lord chose a widow to illustrate this point—not the high priest, or an Aaronic priesthood holder, or a rabbi, but a destitute single woman. He chose her in part for her poverty, but most of all for her devotion and complete consecration to the Lord. She became another female witness of another restored truth. Her full consecration shows her love and trust in God to provide for her. She went to a holy place to consecrate her time and means to His service. Unlike her culture that ignored her needs, Jesus pointed her out as a great example and will reward her for it. Just as He noticed this widow’s donation, He also notices every sincere sacrifice of time, talent, and energy, no matter the size.

In addition to honoring a widow by using her as an exemplar, Christ also preached against those who took advantage of widows. He condemned corban because it removed a man’s

Corban financial responsibility to his kin. He began his condemnation of corban by quoting:

Moses said, Honour thy father and thy mother, and, Whoso curseth father or mother, let

him die the death: But ye say, If a man shall say to his father or mother, “It is Corban,” that

is to say, a gift, by whatsoever thou mightest be profited by me; he shall be free. And ye

suffer him no more to do ought for his father or his mother; making the word of God of

none effect through your tradition (Mark 7:10-13).

This censure empowered families and especially widows by placing a man’s responsibility to his relatives ahead of his social standing and philanthropic donations.

James Another church leader, James, the brother of the Lord, also speaks out in behalf of

widows when he teaches, “Pure religion and undefiled before God and the Father is this, to visit the fatherless and widows in their affliction, and to keep himself unspotted from the world” (James 1:27).

The apostle Paul devoted nearly an entire chapter in

Paul his short first letter to Timothy, to the needs of widows. One wonders if Timothy had a

congregation of widows under his care. Paul asks the church members to step up their care to “honor widows who have no other family members to care for them” (1 Timothy 5:3 ISV). Paul rebukes those who do not take care of widowed family members (5:8). He counsels the widows to put their “hope in God and continue night and day to pray and to ask God for help” (1 Timothy 5:5, NIV).

Jesus calls His disciples to meet the physical, emotional, and spiritual needs of widows and others in need. He condemns the selfish and liberates the needy with instructions to meet other’s needs. He also empowers those in need: “blessed are the poor in spirit, who come unto me; for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. And again, blessed are they that mourn; for they shall be

525 Alfred Edersheim, Temple and its Ministry and Services as they were at the time of Christ (Grand Rapids, MI: Wm. B. Eerdmans, 1886 reprinted 1987), 48. comforted” (Matthew 5:5-6, JST). Widows held a special place in Jesus’ ministry, and He set the example for His disciples to likewise acknowledge them and meet their needs.526

Poor in Women and Mourning

Spirit

Cultural Background and Baggage

From the moment of a death, family and friends of the deceased united in ritualized mourning. The first seven days of mourning were known as Shiva, a time when “they were prohibited from conducting business or doing other work, from bathing, cutting the hair, engaging in sexual relations, wearing leather shoes, or otherwise engaging in pleasurable activities.”527 Wailing and dramatic expressions of sorrow were carried out by hired mourners who were usually women (although there are also records of professional male mourners). They beat their breasts, tore their hair, clapped their hands, and ripped their clothing to show distress.528 The KJV often uses the word “weep” when referring to the mourning at death, but the Greek is better translated as “wail” (Mark 5:38; 14:72; 16:10; Luke 22:62; John 11:31, etc.).

The Mishnah recorded the prescribed precedent for husbands who lost a wife: “Even the poorest Israelite should hire not less than two flutes and one wailing woman.”529 A hired “wailing woman” cried and shrieked to dramatize sorrow. The hired mourner dressed in sackcloth, wept overtly, howled for hours, and threw dirt on her head.530 Initially, this tradition was meant to show remorse, but it evolved into meaningless theatrics and status symbols. New Testament Example

In John 11, the description of mourning at the death of Lazarus lies in sharp contrast to the practices of the day. It is a story of sincere, heartfelt grief. The story demonstrates how honest grief can lead to peace and hope through Christ. It is a story of the Lord’s compassion and the power of His teachings. Martha and Mary faced a devastating loss when their brother Lazarus died.531 The name of their home town, Bethany, was appropriately known as the house of the afflicted (John 11:17 JST; Luke10:38-42).532

Raising When Lazarus first became ill, his sisters sent for Jesus, who had spent the winter east

Lazarus

526 Jeffery R. Holland, “Care for the Poor,” Ensign (Nov 2014). “In our day, the restored Church of Jesus Christ had not yet seen its first anniversary when the Lord commanded the members to ‘look to the poor and … needy, and

‘they shall not suffer.’ That is language God uses when He means business.” 527 Neusner, ed., administer to their relief that they shall not suffer’ [D&C 3835]. Note the imperative tone of that passage— Judaism in the Biblical Period, “mourning.”

528 In addition, there were certain rules for those in mourning. For example, you cannot cut your hair for thirty days. Steinberg, Encyclopedia of Jewish Medical Ethics, 954. 529 Mishnah Ketuboth, 4.4; quoting Rabbi Judah (born AD 135) who codified the Mishnah. 530 1 Maccabees 2:14, 3:47 includes a description of a Jewish man and his family morning his wife; “And Mattathias and his sons tore their garments, and they covered themselves with haircloth, and they lamented greatly . . . And they fasted on that day, and they clothed themselves with haircloth, and they placed ashes on their heads, and they tore their garments.” We see a related style of mourning used for repentance in Jonah 3:6-8 and Matthew 11:21. 531 Matthew 26:6 and Mark 14:3 both mention another male figure, belonging possibly to the home of Lazarus, Mary, and Martha—“Simon the leper.” Feasibly, Simon may have been their father, Martha’s spouse, or another family member either deceased or living elsewhere due to his leprosy. 532 Freedman, Eerdmans’ Dictionary of the Bible, 168.

of the Jordan River in Perea (John 10:40; 11:3).533 When Jesus heard about Lazarus’ illness, He said, “This sickness is not unto death, but for the glory of God, that the Son of God might be glorified thereby” (John 11:4; repeated for emphasis again in 11:40). If Jesus were only performing the miracle to heal a dear friend, He would have gone immediately, but He had other motives. And while He delayed, Lazarus died.

His timing emphasized His priority to teach in addition to heal. He told His disciples that He waited to go “to the intent ye may believe” (John 11:15).534 As with all miracles, the timing is especially important. Many Jews believed the spirit of the deceased stayed near the dead body for three days, so Jewish tombs were usually sealed after three days. Because Jesus delayed His healing until the fourth day, no one could doubt that Lazarus was completely dead (John 11:6).

No longer beset by misplaced priorities, though desperate for the Lord’s arrival, Martha waited near the road and was the first to greet Jesus. John includes parts of the Lord’s

conversation with Martha—a conversation that set the stage for the theme of

Mary and resurrection. Christ says to her, “I am the resurrection, and the life” (John 11:25). To

Martha’s Faith which Martha replies: “Yea, Lord: I believe that thou art the Christ, the Son of God,

which should come into the world” (John 11:27). Martha developed a firm

testimony that Jesus is the Christ / Messiah, which gave her grounding even during this time of deep sorrow (see similarities to Peter’s testimony in table 1 of chapter 1). She may not quite understand everything that will happen to her brother, but she believes one thing with certainty— Jesus is the promised Messiah—and that is all we really need to know. Ironically, restoring Lazarus’ life spurred the Sanhedrin to plot Jesus’ death (John 11:53).

When Mary arrives, she falls down at the Savior’s feet and weeps—a good place and attitude for all disciples to meet Him (we find most of Mary’s interactions with Jesus in the same position). The Lord’s reaction to Mary’s sorrow is one of the most touching scenes in the Bible: “When Jesus saw her weeping . . . he was intensely moved in spirit and greatly distressed, and . . . . Jesus wept (John 11:33, 35, NET). When Jesus joins her in weeping, it validates the need to “mourn with those that mourn” (Mosiah 18:9).535 Although He knew full well that Lazarus would rise, he still fully engaged with her in her grief. Also, before He performed the miracle, Jesus looked upward and thanked His Father for hearing Him (John 11:41-42; also John 17:1;

533 In the winter, following the Feast of Dedication, Jesus left Palestine and stayed in Perea (John 10:40). The boarder for Perea is only twenty-five miles from Bethany. Now, in early spring, shortly before the Passover, Jesus will cross the Jordan River again back into Judea. Symbolically, Jesus retraces Israel’s path and crosses from “the world” to “the Promised Land” where he will soon unite with His Father. Raymond Brown sees this miracle as the conclusion of the first half of the Gospel of John (sometimes described as the Book of Signs) and acts as an introduction to the second half—Jesus’ passion and resurrection (Brown, The Gospel and Epistles of John, 61; Anchor Bible: John I-XIII, 420).

534 Jesus assured his disciples “Our friend Lazarus sleepeth; but I go, that I may awake him out of sleep / exupnizo” (John 11:11). The Greek word for “sleepeth” is koimao and is used 18 times in the New Testament. Usually it really means to fall asleep, and only once is it translated “death,” so it is understandable why the disciples became confused.

535 Twice among the Nephites Jesus also expressed love through tears of gratitude and compassion (3 Nephi 17:5-7, 10). “In the midst of their prayers and full faith, and the blessing of their children, Jesus himself wept after exclaiming, ‘And now behold, my joy is full’ (3 Nephi 17:20-22). Also God wept during Enoch’s vision (Moses 7:28). In daily life such joyful tears are the release of the long strain of expectation, the fulfillment of hope. One would hardly expect Jesus to lack the emotions expressed by idealistic mortals. So a significant dimension of Third Nephi is the Lord of experience. Christ's character there has substance and actuality” (Wilford Griggs, ed., Apocryphal, 93). One apocryphal source speculates, “Lazarus came back to life just twelve seconds after Jesus spoke or in sketching Lazarus' later career as ‘treasurer of the church at Philadelphia’ and dying ‘when 67 years old, of the same sickness that carried him off when he was a younger man at Bethany” (ibid.).

Matthew 14:19). Then “He cried with a loud voice, Lazarus, come forth. And he that was dead came forth” (John 11:43-44).

Although Lazarus would later die, Jesus opened the door for him and all children of Adam and Eve to have immortality (Mormon 9:13; D&C 138:14). Jesus himself becomes “the first fruits of them that slept”—the first resurrected being (1 Corinthians 15:20).536 He teaches this to Martha in Bethany: “I am the resurrection, and the life: he that believeth in me, though he were dead, yet shall he live: And whosoever liveth and believeth in me shall never die” (John 11:25-26). Mary and Martha believed Him, which allowed them to express sincere and honest grief in contrast to the extreme cultural practices that thwarted the Spirit.537 Jesus provided liberation from death, physically and spiritually, for each person born on earth—but for the here and now, He also teaches healing precepts that bring hope and peace in times of sorrow.

536 This verse comes from the greatest chapter in the New Testament on the resurrection: “For since by man came death, by man came also the resurrection of the dead. For as in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive” (1 Corinthians 15:21-22). Filled with the universality of that great hope, Paul wrote to the Corinthian saints, “O death, where is thy sting? O grave, where is thy victory? The sting of death is sin; and the strength of sin is the law” (15:55-16).

537 Richard G. Scott, Ensign, November 2009; “The inspiring influence of the Holy Spirit can be overcome or masked by strong emotions, such as anger, hate, passion, fear, or pride. When such influences are present, it is like trying to savor the delicate flavor of a grape while eating a jalapeño pepper. Both flavors are present, but one completely overpowers the other.” Similarly, at the same conference, Vicki Matsumori taught, “If we provide a still and quiet time each day when we are not bombarded by television, computer, video games, or personal electronic devices, we allow that still, small voice an opportunity to provide personal revelation and to whisper sweet guidance, reassurance, and comfort to us” (Vicki Matsumori, Ensign, November 2009).
