Children: From Childbirth to Vocation

.

The world of women consisted mainly of interacting in their homes with children and servants.538 This chapter looks specifically at the social background of children and the next chapter, slaves or servants. In most homes, children shared the same category of work as servants or slaves.539 The New Testament uses the word pais synonymously for child, servant, and slave (i.e., the centurion’s servant, Jairus’ daughter, the lunatic, children crying in the temple, etc., are all identified by the same Greek word).540 Each had to stand up in the presence of their master or father “to greet him, and perhaps even to bow down before him. He [the child or slave] could not stand or sit in his place, speak in his presence, contradict him, or respond sharply to him. This was the way of the Torah.”541

The discussion in this chapter on children begins with childbirth and birth defects, and then turns to how they were raised, disciplined, educated, socialized, and apprenticed.

Childbirth

Cultural Background and Baggage

The Old Testament places enormous value on children: offspring are divine creations in the image of God and endowed with dominion over the earth (Genesis 1:26-27). Devout Jewish couples welcomed children as a blessing from God, “an heritage of the LORD” (Psalms 127:3). The oldest commandment known in Eden promoted childbirth: “God said unto them, Be fruitful,

538 Paula S. Fass, The Routledge History of Childhood in the Western World (NYC: Routledge, 2013). Jewish family life was also subjected to certain Roman laws. For more see Appendix 4. 539 Philo, Yonge, trans., 2.116. When Philo looked back on Abraham’s marriage to Hagar he perceived her dual relationship of slave and child, “[When] he calls her handmaiden, he confesses both facts, both that she is a slave and also that she is a child; for the name of the handmaiden suits both these circumstances.” In Hagar’s case, the young servant girl also had the role of wife.

540 Matthew 8:8, 13; 17:18; 21:15; Luke 8:51; also see Matthew 12:18; Luke 1:54; 1:69; 2:43; 7:7; 9:42; etc. 541 Shaye J. Cohen, From the Maccabees to the Mishnah (Philadelphia, PA: Westminster Press, 1987), 122. and multiply, and replenish the earth” (Genesis 1:28). All children were welcomed in abundance: “Thy wife shall be as a fruitful vine by the sides of thine house: thy children like olive plants round about thy table” (Psalms 128:3).

Bringing children into the world was an act of co-creation with God.542 Thousands of years after Eden, rabbis debated what exactly the commandment to “Be fruitful, and multiply, and replenish” meant (Genesis 1:28). Josephus claimed that the sole purpose of marriage was to multiply and replenish the earth.543 The rabbinic school of Hillel (60 BC to 20 AD) elaborated on how many children one should have and concluded each couple should have at least one boy and one girl who lived. At the same time, the school of Shammai interpreted this to mean that each couple was to have at least two boys.544 Male children were generally preferred: “As soon as a male comes into the world peace comes into the world.”545 Woman played the key role in fulfilling the commandment to bear children, and felt responsible if it did not happen.

The absence of children was considered not only a tragedy, but also a divine chastisement.546 As mentioned in chapter 6, a man had the duty to divorce his wife after ten years of infertility.547 Yet fertile women bore children at a great cost. Of the women whose age of death is known, 54 percent died in their childbearing years.548 This does not mean they all died in childbirth, but probably a large percentage did. Some rabbis had a warped perspective and blamed a woman’s death during childbirth on specific sins: “For three transgressions do women die in childbirth: for heedlessness of the laws of the menstruant [sic], the dough-offerings, and the lighting of the [Sabbath] lamp.”549 Children were precious, in part, because few lived. Anthropologists estimate that one third of the babies born at this time died in the first year of life, and one half of the survivors died by the age of ten.550 New Testament Example

The Lord and His apostles adopted the image of childbirth to speak of the emancipating spiritual cleansing of “being born again” (John 3:3-8). The phrase, “born again” has a double meaning in Greek—“anew” as well as “down from above,” or “from the top.” The symbolism of a rebirth is clear and powerful. Giving birth requires sacrifice, pain—often nigh unto death—

542 Campbell, Marriage and Family in the Biblical World, 80. 543 Josephus, Against Apion, 2.199. Levirate marriage, in particular was only for procreation. 544 Mishnah, Yebamoth 6.6.

545 Babylonian Talmud, Niddah, 14 III.15, credited to rabbis Isaac and Ammi. Campbell, Marriage and Family in the Biblical World, 145, 125. For a Jew, it was a heinous sin to kill a baby because of gender. But in the Roman sphere, there are letters in which a husband instructed his wife to “expose” (leave it outside to die) their baby after birth if it were a girl, but raise it if it were a son (Stagg, Woman in the World of Jesus, 85-86). 546 Hennie J. Marsman, Women in Ugarit and Israel: Their Social and Religious Position in the Context of the Ancient Near East (Boston, MA: Brill Academic Publishers, 2003), 196. Across the ancient Near East, “being blessed with children was regarded more important than the possession of riches . . . Childlessness was connected with sin . . . A barren woman was considered a pitiful person” (192, 196; 197). 547 Luke 1:25; 2 Esdras 9:45; “I prayed to the Most High. Then after thirty years, my God answered my prayer and had mercy on my distress; he took not of my sorrow and granted me a son. What happiness he gave to my husband and myself and to all our neighbors! What praise we gave to the Mighty God!” Psalms 113:9, “He maketh the barren woman to keep house, and to be a joyful mother of children. Praise ye the LORD.” 548 Ilan, Jewish women in Greco-Roman Palestine,118. 549 Mishnah, Shabbath, 2.6.

550 Campbell, Marriage and Family in the Biblical World, 143. Christian Laes claims that less than fifty percent of those lived fifteen years. Children in the Roman Empire: Outsiders Within (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2011). water, and blood. Out of these come life and exquisite joy. The same elements emulate, albeit in a minuscule degree, Jesus’ suffering to bring forth our eternal lives. As a result of Jesus’ agony, blood, and sacrifice, sons and daughters of Adam and Eve can find emancipation from their fallen immortal state. Jesus uses these birth symbols when teaching Nicodemus, “Except a man be born of water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God” (John 3:5; also see Moses 6:59–60). Jesus’ freedom from our fallen immortal state offers us immortality and the potential of eternal lives.

By emphasizing rebirth, the importance of a natural birth as the chosen people loses significance. Some Jews believed that, as descendants of Abraham, they were saved

Born automatically from eternal torture (Luke 3:8; 16:24).551 But Jesus corrected this

Again falsehood by teaching that our natural birth is not enough to enter the Kingdom of

God: “Think not to say within yourselves, We have Abraham to our father: for I say

unto you, that God is able of these stones to raise up children unto Abraham” (Matthew 3:9). In its place, the Lord explained, “That which is born of the flesh is flesh; and that which is born of the Spirit is spirit” (John 3:6; also see Moses 6:59-60). The more one accesses the Spirit of the Lord, the more one can appreciate God’s liberating forgiveness.

In addition to the emancipation of being born by the Spirit, the New Testament begins with the most sacred moment in the history of the world up to that point—Jesus’ birth. It was the most

important birth in the history of the universe. Only the Gospels of Matthew and Luke

Jesus’ speak of this hallowed event (Matthew 1-2; Luke 1-2).552 The miraculous birth of the

Birth Lord included many ironies that speak to the liberation of women and outcasts. The

first witnesses in the New Testament were those who usually were not allowed to act

as legal witnesses in their society—women and shepherds.553 One of those, a poor young virgin, gave birth to the Son of God in a makeshift barn-cave because the locals did not understand the significance of the birth.554 Yet the birth set in motion the earthly mission of the Savior, which ended in the greatest emancipation of all: the redemption of sin and death so that Adam and Eve’s posterity might eat of the tree of life without their sins.555

551 Brown, Birth, 68. “The import of the Hebrew is that in Abraham’s seed all the peoples of the earth will bless themselves or invoke blessings on another.”

552 Mark and John’s Gospel do not mention Jesus’ birth, but begin chronicling His life at the baptism. Yet, 1 Nephi 11:20, also references it.

553 Josephus, Antiquities, IV.8:15; Mishnah, Shebuoth, 4:1. 554 Brown, Birth of the Messiah, 401-402.

555 Nearly all the ideas in Luke’s and Matthew’s nativity narratives have double meanings as Jesus’ birth prefigures His death and resurrection. We may have missed some of these powerful foreshadowing and their subsequent liberation. Seven illustrations follow:
