Cultural Background and Baggage

Jews mistakenly assumed that God caused birth defects, illness, accidents, afflictions, or a child’s premature death because of sin.556 Likewise, they interpreted healthy births as a sign of righteousness, and held the misconception that God rewarded a woman’s righteousness by removing her labor pains.557 When Josephus retold the story of Moses’ birth, he repeated this myth by telling that Moses’ mother, Jochebed, delivered Moses without pain as a divine reward for her righteousness.558 Somehow they failed to understand the concept that even righteous people suffer—consider prophets like Job and Abraham.

Jewish legends perpetuated a false impression of birth defects.559 Their society incorrectly presumed that physical imperfections made one a sinner, because priests with birth defects were not allowed to serve at the altar of the temple: “No man that hath a blemish of the seed of Aaron the priest shall come nigh to offer the offerings of the LORD made by fire” (Leviticus 21:21, 17-23). These misinterpretations emotionally and spiritually crippled both those with blemishes as well as their mothers, who were often blamed for them.560 Related to the same erroneous belief, rabbis interpreted Exodus 20:5, “I the LORD thy God am a jealous God, visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the children unto the third and fourth generation of them that hate me,” to mean that the sins of the parents could leave a mark on their infant.561 Not only did those with disabilities have to live with their limitations, but also with the social stigma that they may be guilty of a grievous sin. Other times the parents of disabled children were blamed for the disability.

The rabbis debated over whose fault birth defects were: the parents or child?562 Well after

the New Testament times, the Talmud claimed that blindness was a “punishment for specific sins—such as the taking of bribes, feigning blindness, negligence in feeding the poor, improper

even King Solomon was swaddled. Mangers were often moveable large rocks with a trough carved out or else “a cavity in a low rock shelf.” Luke’s message also emphasizes the fulfillment of Isaiah 1:3, “The ox knows its owner, and the donkey knows the manger of its lord, but Israel has not known me.” At his death Jesus was again wrapped in linen and placed on another rock shelf (John 19:40-41).

5). The birth and death accounts include unusual signs in the heavens as a witness of the great events (Luke 2:9; Matthew 2:2, 9, 27:45, 51).

6). The Magi offered gifts traditionally for a king, and Jesus is crowned and mocked as a king of the Jews (Matthew 27:29, 31, 41).

7). Wicked men sought to kill both the baby and man (Matthew 2:19, 20; 21:15; 27:1–2). Herod sought to “destroy” Jesus at night (Matthew 2:13-14). And “the chief priests and the elders” worked through the night to persuade “the multitude that they should ask Barabbas and destroy Jesus” (Matthew 26:47–56; 27:20). For more details and sources see Lynne Hilton Wilson’s article: “Jesus’ Atonement Foretold through His Birth” in Richard Holzapfel and Kent Jackson eds., To Save the Lost: An Easter Celebration (Provo, UT: Religious Studies Center, 2009), 103. 556 Avraham Steinberg, ed., Encyclopedia of Jewish Medical Ethics (Jerusalem Israel: Feldheim, 2003), 34, “Any illness may result from sin.”

557 Steinberg, Encyclopedia of Jewish Medical Ethics, 171. 558 Josephus, Antiquities, II. 9:4; Jochebed “the mother's labor was such as afforded a confirmation to what was foretold by God; for it was not known to those that watched her, by the easiness of her pains, and because the throes of her delivery did not fall upon her with violence.”

559 Steinberg, Encyclopedia of Jewish Medical Ethics, 107. 560 Mishnah, Shabbath, 2.6. Rabbis blamed the cause of death during childbirth on the sins of the mother. 561 Brown, The Anchor Bible: John I-XII, 371.

562 Margaret Barker, Creation: A Biblical Vision for the Environment (London and NYC: T & T Clark, 2010), 232. behavior during cohabitation, and faulty education for one’s son or pupil.”563 The “improper behavior” included keeping one’s eyes open during conception. Blindness was so heinous that some felt it was better to kill the infant.564

Changes by Jesus

Jesus deplored the prejudices that further crippled those already physically or mentally challenged. Again He reversed their cultural perception. Outward defects had nothing to do with inward cleanliness and vice versa: “Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! for ye are like unto whited sepulchres, . . . ye also outwardly appear righteous unto men, but within ye are full of hypocrisy and iniquity (Matthew 23:27-28). He teaches His disciples that they should avoid sin—not avoid those people with blemishes to the degree that “if thine eye offend thee, pluck it out, and cast it from thee: it is better for thee to enter into life with one eye, rather than having two eyes to be cast into hell fire. Take heed that ye despise not one of these little ones” (Matthew 18:9-10).

Jesus corrected the fallacy that birth defects were the result of sin when he healed the man born blind.565 This concept was so entrenched in their beliefs that even Jesus’ disciples needed

Healing correction. When they saw the blind man, they asked, “Master, who did sin, this

The Blind man, or his parents, that he was born blind?” (John 9:2). Clearly, a belief in some

type of pre-earthly existence underscored the disciples’ question (as does Jeremiah

1:5; Job 38:4, 7; Psalms 82:6).566 Without denouncing pre-mortal existence but attacking the heresy, “Jesus answered, Neither hath this man sinned, nor his parents: but that the works of God should be made manifest . . . As long as I am in the world, I am the light of the world” (John 9:3, 5).

Jesus then made a mud paste by spitting “on the ground, and made clay of the spittle, and he anointed the eyes of the blind man with the clay, And said unto him, Go, wash in the pool of Siloam” (John 9:6-7). Jesus subtly evoked the Genesis creation accounts by working with “clay” and identifying Himself as the “light of the world” (John 9:5, 7; Genesis 1:3).567

Society told this man that his birth defect was a result of sin, but Christ did not lay that blame on him. Instead, He empowered him with the opportunity to exert the faith to be healed. Jesus assisted him to develop faith by sending him on a journey to wash off the clay in the pool of Siloam. The name, Siloam, means “sent” (John 9:7).568 Jesus was the One sent from God who

563 Steinberg, Encyclopedia of Jewish Medical Ethics, 107. 564 Ibid., 106; “Blindness was a very common condition in antiquity. Throughout the bible where human blemishes are cited, blindness is always mentioned first. A blind person in ancient cultures was considered very lowly and was the subject of scorn, ridicule and even death. A newborn determined to be blind was not allowed to survive. If the blindness was not recognized until he grew up, he became a beggar.” 565 Steinberg, Encyclopedia of Jewish Medical Ethics, 106. “In antiquity, blind people filled the cities and temples as alms collectors. Most blind people did not reach their potential, were considered worthless to society, were frequently hungry and sometimes starved to death. Blindness was universally considered to be a great tragedy, and mostly as punishment for sin.”

566 The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints’ doctrine of a pre-mortal life is not generally shared by Jews or Christians currently.

567 The clay also reflects Enoch: “And the Lord spake unto Enoch, and said unto him: Anoint thine eyes with clay, and wash them, and thou shalt see” (Moses 6:35).

568 Different archeologists have labeled more than one pool in Jerusalem as potentially as Siloam, but a blind man would be challenged to get to any of them on his own. In Solomon’s Temple, the Levites retrieved water in a golden pitcher from Siloam (Shiloah in Hebrew) on the “last and great day of the feast” of Tabernacles to pour over the in turn sent the blind man on a journey to receive his sight.569 Jesus healed the man of blindness, but he was not fully healed until he was fully converted by “the One Sent.”

The healed man did not return to find Jesus, possibly because he did not know how to find Him or he was distracted. So Jesus sought him out—as He does with all of us stricken with spiritual myopia. When Jesus found him, a precious conversation developed which completed the man’s healing. Jesus asked him “Dost thou believe on the Son of God?” The man still in spiritual darkness asked, “Who is he, Lord that I might believe on him? (John 9:36). Jesus’ poignant answer reemphasized the miracle, “Thou hast both seen him, and it is he that talketh with thee” (John 9:37). The man’s faith and spontaneous worship was touching: “Lord, I believe. And he worshipped him” (John 9:38).

The healed man and the Pharisees should have recognized this miracle as a sign of the promised Messiah.570 Isaiah prophesied that only One could “open the blind eyes, to bring out the prisoners from the prison, and them that sit in darkness out of the prison house” (Isaiah 42:7).571 Perhaps the Jews missed the miracle’s significance because they were looking for a conquering perfect Messiah,572 not one who broke their Sabbath laws.573 A Jewish oral law banned spitting in the dirt on the Sabbath because it could be considered “cultivating,” which was one of the thirty-nine forms of work forbidden on the Sabbath.574

sacrifice, in memory of the rock of Rephidim (John 7:37; Exodus 17:1-6). Brown, Gospels and Epistles of John, 56. It was also to this pool that the Lord pointed and cried, “If any man thirst, let him come unto me and drink” (John 7:37).

569 The early Church Fathers Tertullian and Augustine saw the pool of Siloam as symbolic of baptism and used this story of healing the blind man to prepare converts for baptism (Brown, The Anchor Bible: John I-XII, 380-1). 570 While the Old Testament prophets raised the dead, healed the lame, closed the heavens, opened the seas, and miraculously provided food—no one but the promised Messiah could heal the blind. Mark 8:22-26; 10:46-52, also gives two examples of Jesus healing the blind.

571 Also see Isaiah 42:6-7; Psalms 146:8; Exodus 4:11; Mosiah 3:5. 572 Mark Harding, Early Christian Life and Thought in Social Context (NYC: T&T Clark International, 2003), 323. The Messianic hope of the time was outlined by the Psalms of Solomon (69-40 BC) and focused on a conquering Messiah: “He will have Gentile peoples serving him under his yoke, and he will glorify the Lord publicly in the whole world. He will pronounce Jerusalem clean . . . He will have nations come from the ends of the earth to see his glory . . . He will be a righteous king over them, taught by God, there will be no unrighteousness among them during his reign, because everyone will be holy, and their king will be the Lord Messiah . . . And he himself will be free from sin, in order to rule such a great people. He will expose officials and drive out sinners by the strength of his word.

573 Jacob Neusner, The Mishnah: Religious Perspectives (Boston, MA: Brill, 1999), 119; “One may not perform an act of healing on the Sabbath.” Several oral laws also prohibited healing on the Sabbath. If one dislocated a joint or broke a bone on the Sabbath the oral laws forbad one to set the fracture because once in place the victim’s body would work to heal itself, thus breaking the Sabbath. Mishnah, Shabbath, 22:6. “They may not . . . set a broken limb. If a man’s hand or foot is dislocated, he may not pour cold water over it, but he may wash it after his usual fashion.” One could take out a thorn with “a sewing-needle” as long as the needle was not used for sewing. Ibid, 17:2. Certain foods, like Greek hyssop, were often used for medicinal purposes, so they made a law not to spice foods with it on the Sabbath as it might be a means for healing. Ibid., 14:3. On the other hand, a rabbi Meir gave permission to use certain cures on the Sabbath: “a nail of one that was crucified” to cure a festering wound, or a locust’s egg to cure an ear ache, or a jackal’s tooth to cure sleepiness (if the jackal were alive) and sleeplessness (if the jackal were dead). Ibid., 6:10. These folk-medical treatments were permissible, but no general cures. 574 Rabbis redefined the fourth commandment, “remember the Sabbath day, to keep it holy” (Exodus 20:8), to include “forty save one” forbidden forms of work on the Sabbath. (1) sowing, (2) ploughing, (3) reaping, (4) binding sheaves, (5) threshing, (6) winnowing, (7) cleansing crops, (8) grinding, (9) sifting, (10) kneading, (11) baking, (12) shearing wool, (13) washing, (14) beating, (15) dyeing, (16) spinning, (17) weaving, (18) making two loops, (19) weaving two threads, (20) separating two threads, (21) tying [a knot], (22) loosening [a knot], (23) sewing two stitches, (24) tearing in order to sew two stitches, (25) hunting a gazelle, (26) slaughtering or (27) flaying or (28)

Each of the seven miracles that John’s Gospel mentions, show Jesus tearing down a falsehood and demonstrating a sign of his Messiahship (John 20:30). Jesus repeatedly performed miracles on the Sabbath to tear down the erroneous laws that were strangling the day of rest.575 In this case, Jesus also enabled the healed man (and all those who believed in the miracle), not only with sight, but also with faith. That position of empowerment to see Him “eye to eye” is available to all who are blinded in some way and need healing and sanctification by His Light (Isaiah 52:8). John 9 chronicled Jesus’ assault of several incorrect doctrines, starting with a misunderstanding of birth defects, Sabbath laws, and ending with accepting the Savior as the Light of the World.

Parenting Young Children

Cultural Background and Baggage

From the time of Adam, God commanded fathers and mothers to “teach . . . unto your children, that all men, everywhere, must repent, or they can in no wise inherit the kingdom of God” (Genesis 6:59, JST; Moses 6:57; also see 6:61-62; Deuteronomy 4:10; 6:7, 11:19; Psalms 34:11, etc.). The Lord repeated the sacred responsibility to Aaron, “teach the children of Israel all the statutes which the LORD hath spoken unto them by the hand of Moses” (Leviticus 10:11). Jewish parents often named their children using words that expressed their faith and aspirations for them.576

One of the patriarchal duties passed down from the Old Testament included blessing one’s children. Isaac blessed Jacob and Esau (Genesis 27:27-40), Jacob blessed his twelve sons (Genesis 49:28), and Moses blessed his congregation, “Consecrate yourselves today to the LORD, even every man upon his son, and upon his brother; that he may bestow upon you a blessing this day” (Exodus 32:29). Regardless of the children’s ages, God commanded them to respect and honor their parents (Exodus 20:12; Deuteronomy 5:16).

During the time of Herod’s Temple, children were considered a blessing, in part because they served their fathers and were an economic advantage. By the age of five or six, children in the country contributed to the family coffers by gathering firewood and working in the vegetable garden.577 Children washed their father’s face and feet, dressed and fed him.578 Children and servants both took orders from their masters and gave their time to please them. Fathers dictated what and where their children ate, how they were educated, what vows they made, and collected

salting, (29) curing its skin, (30) scraping it or, (31) cutting it up, (32) writing two letters, (33) erasing in order to write two letters, (34) building, (35) pulling down, (36) putting out fire, (37) lighting fire, (38) striking with the hammer, and (39) taking aught from one domain into another. Ibid, 7:2 (numbers added). They elaborated on each of those 39 types banned forms of labor to fill the entire second division in the Mishnah (tractate of Moed: Shabbath). For example, the Mishnah forbade “carrying” on the Sabbath. So the next level of micromanagement included what was included in “carrying” (i.e., a handful of straw, a dried fig’s bulk of foodstuff, a piece of leather, enough red clay to make a seal, carrying a dead man out of his house on a couch, and biting finger nails or pulling out a hair). Mishnah, Shabbath, 7:4; 8:3, 8.5, 10.5, 6. 575 The New Testament writers recorded stories of twenty-six healings by Jesus (some count more, others less due to duplicates). It appears that the Gospel authors and the Lord Himself, deliberately healed on the Sabbath many times. Eight Sabbath healings are specifically mentioned (Matthew 8:14; 12:9-13; Mark 1:21-28, 29-31; 3:1-6; Luke 4:33-39; 6:6-11; 13:10-17; 14:1-6; John 5:1-15; 7:23; 9:1-13).

576 Campbell, Marriage and Family Life in the Biblical World, 53. 577 Campbell, Marriage and Family life in the Biblical World, 81. 578 Jeremias, Jerusalem, 154, 363-364. any money they found or earned.579 Jewish children under age twelve were identified as minors. According to the oral Mosaic tradition, children, as minors, were not liable in court or legal matters until “age thirteen and one day,” but “liability for heavenly punishment begins at twenty years of age.”580

Rabbis also gave fathers specific directions when raising a son: “He must circumcise him, redeem him, teach him the Torah, take a wife unto him, and teach him a trade.”581 Unlike girls, boys were impelled to go to synagogue for study and worship and to Jerusalem for pilgrimage feasts (Passover, Pentecost, and Feast of the Tabernacles or Booths).582 Most Jewish families in Palestine lived in an agricultural environment, which often meant that a child worked beside his or her father on the land as a financial necessity.583 If food or money became scarce, a Jewish father had the legal right to sell his children (under the age of twelve) and his wife into slavery.584 Patriarchal control over children left little room for the modern idea of child labor laws or children’s rights.

The plight of Jewish children during this era was not entirely grim. Parents devoted much time and effort to their children, especially in their infancy. Mothers nursed their babies for at least eighteen months, usually twenty-four, and some doubled that time.585 Fathers also sacrificed for them, as Ben Sira remembered: “The father waketh for the daughter when no man knoweth, and the care for her taketh away his sleep, when she is young, lest she pass away the flower of her age, and when she is married, lest she should be hateful.”586

Jews from the time of the late Second Temple era interpreted Moses’ commandments on raising children in their own way. For example, Moses teaches that children should “honour thy father and thy mother” (Exodus 20:12); and from the time of Solomon, “My son, hear the instruction of thy father, and forsake not the law of thy mother” (Proverbs 1:8).

Yet these two commandments received a different spin in Ben Sira’s interpretation: he felt children were to honor their fathers and recognize the rights of their mothers.587 He asserted that God would atone for children’s sins and hear their prayers if they showed ample respect to their fathers: “Whoever honors his father atones for sins, and whoever glorifies his mother is like one who lays up treasure. Whoever glorifies his father will have long life, and whoever obeys the Lord will refresh his mother.”588 Ben Sira mentions both parents repeatedly, yet he required a higher level of respect for fathers than for mothers.

579 Mishnah, Ketuboth, 4:1-2, 4; 5:6; Jeremias, Jerusalem, 368. 580 Steinberg, Encyclopedia of Jewish Medical Ethics, 682. “The rabbinic divisors disagree as to whether or not the father is punished for his son’s sins committed before age thirteen because of poor training or, contrariwise, whether or not the son is punished for his father’s sins.”

581 Babylonian Talmud, Kiddushin, 29a. The rabbinic commentary added a post script, “Some say he must teach him

career.” Mishnah, Avoth 5:21. 582 For more examples see Appendix 2. to swim also.” The ideal Jewish man started providing for his family around the age of twenty: “20 to pursuing a 583 Thurston, Women in the New Testament, 15-16. 584 Mishnah, Ketuboth, 3.8. “She that is a minor is subject to right of sale . . . if she is passed her girlhood she is not subject to right of sale.”

585 Babylonian Talmud, Kethuboth, 60a.; Nedarim, 2.1. Also see, Ilan, Jewish Women in Greco-Roman Palestine, 121.

586 Ben Sira, Ecclesiasticus, 42:9.

587 Ben Sira, Ecclesiasticus, 3:2 “For the Lord honored the father above the children, and he confirmed the right of the mother over her sons.”

588 Ben Sira, Ecclesiasticus, 3:3-9. “For kindness to a father will not be forgotten, and against your sins it will be credited to you; in the day of your affliction it will be remembered in your favor; as frost in fair weather, your sins will melt away. . . . he will serve his parents as his masters. Honor your father by word and deed, that a blessing

To protect their children’s chastity, the best Jewish parenting practices kept children, especially girls, indoors as much as possible.589 This may have initially been motivated by a desire of protection, but the means that many patriarchs justified to achieve it potentially crippled agency and love. With children rarely in public, their infrequent presence was unfamiliar and often looked down on. As adults were not accustomed to having children in public settings, they often considered children a nuisance and in need of frequent corrections.590 Ben Sira counseled children to “discipline the mouth” or to be silent, just as he counseled for women.591 Children were also considered powerless and governed by their elders.592 Changes by Jesus

Initially entrenched in the Jewish culture, Jesus’ disciples attempted to remove children from public gatherings. All three synoptic Gospels tell the story of when the disciples rebuked those who brought children to Jesus: “Then were there brought unto him little children, that he should put his hands on them, and pray: and the disciples rebuked them” (Matthew 19:13; Mark 10:14; Luke 18:16). Mark added, “When Jesus saw it, he was much displeased” (Mark 10:14). It appears that the disciples were so laden with their cultural baggage that they could not instinctively feel the value of nurturing children. Jesus’ response turned the social hierarchy upside down: “Suffer the little children to come unto me, and forbid them not: for such is the kingdom of God” (Mark 10:14; Luke 18:16). Children who had been treated as servants in their homes were now acknowledged as citizens of celestial realms.

Jesus inverted the cultural hierarchy of the home by honoring children, not masters. Mark’s Gospel recorded the Lord tenderly embracing a child as an example for all to follow: “when he

Jesus had taken him in his arms, he said unto them, Whosoever shall receive one of such

Embraces children in my name, receiveth me” (Mark 9:36-37; similar to Luke 9:48). This

a Child restored an empowering truth about the value of children. Another time Jesus

reversed the social ranking with even more clarity: “And Jesus called a little child

unto him, and set him in the midst of them, And said, Verily I say unto you, Except ye be converted, and become as little children, ye shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven. Whosoever therefore shall humble himself as this little child, the same is greatest in the kingdom of heaven” (Matthew 18:2-4).

In the Lord’s order, the wealthy, robe wearing, educated, wise ones receive Jesus’ warning, not His acclaim: “Beware of the scribes, which desire to walk in long robes, and love greetings

from him may come upon you, For a father’s blessing strengthens the houses of the children, but a mother’s curse uproots their foundations.”

589 Ben Sira, Eccleasiasticus, 42:10-11. Ben Sira told fathers to guard their daughter “in her virginity lest she should be corrupted, and be found with child in her father's house: and having a husband, lest she should misbehave herself, or at the least become barren. Keep a sure watch over a shameless daughter: lest at any time she make thee become a laughingstock to thy enemies, and a byword in the city, and a reproach among the people, and she make thee ashamed before all the multitude.”

590 Ben Sira, Ecclesiasticus, 42:5. “But of these things, be not ashamed . . . of frequent correction of children, and of smiting an evil-disposed servant.”

591 Ben Sira, Ecclesiasticus, 23:7-15. “Hear, my children [concerning] the discipline of the mouth, He that keepeth [it] will not be ensnared. But the sinner is ensnared by his lips, And the reviler and the arrogant will stumble through them. . . . There is a manner of speech that is to be compared with death . . . Accustom not thy mouth to unseemly manner [of speech], For there is a sinful thing in that” (brackets in original). 592 Richard N, Holzapfel, Eric D. Huntsman, Thomas A. Wayment, Jesus Christ and the World of the New Testament (SLC, UT: Deseret Book, 2006), 117. in the markets, and the highest seats in the synagogues, and the chief rooms at feasts . . . the same shall receive greater damnation” (Luke 20:46-47). He revered serving others, not dictating orders. Jesus’ inherent values jump off the pages of Scripture: He loves children. He treats them sensitively. He serves them. He taught that the kingdom of heaven will be made up of pure humble servants. Disciples follow the Lord’s example with interactions with children.

Jesus attacked the practice of selling one’s wife or child into slavery by using it as a deplorable example in one of His parables: “But forasmuch as he had not to pay, his lord commanded him to be sold, and his wife, and children, and all that he had, and payment to be made” (Matthew 18:25). The parable continues to show the master softening as he “was moved

with compassion,” and forgives the man’s gargantuan debt so that the debtor’s

The Parable family did not have to be sold into slavery (Matthew 18:27). Unmerciful of the Jesus often exaggerated details of His parables for their storytelling value, and here the sum of moneys involved is magnified to prove his point. The first

Servant man owed ten thousand talents—the equivalent of 12.5 billion dollars in 2020. In

the historical setting, Josephus recorded that the total value of Herod’s Temple treasury was ten thousand talents. 593 It would have been impossible for one man to accumulate this debt at that time. But Jesus used the backdrop of slaves, debt, and prison to describe the size of His atonement. No matter how enormous our debt, God can forgive and emancipate those in His debt.

When we look at Jesus’ healing miracles, we find several illustrations of His sensitive compassion towards children. Across the four Gospels we find seventeen healings of adults and at least six of children.

1) Roman centurion’s servant or child (Matthew 8:5-13; Luke 7:1-10) 2) Jairus’ daughter (Matthew 9:18-26; Mark 5:22-24, 38-43; Luke 8:41-42, 49-56) 3) Canaanite woman’s daughter (Matthew 15:21-28; Mark 7:24-30), 4) Boy with devil (Matthew 17:14-21; Mark 9:17-29; Luke 9:38-43) 5) Widow’s son raised (Luke 7:11-17)

6) Nobleman’s son at Capernaum (John 4:46-54)

The raising of Jairus’ beloved daughter demonstrates not only the Lord’s care of children— and power over death—but also shows Him rejecting another social custom that encumbered the Jews’ spiritual sensitivity. In Luke’s account, as the Lord arrived at the death bed, an entourage of mourners had begun wailing: “And all wept, and bewailed her” (Luke 8:52).594 Once the Lord

Jairus’ restored a peaceful home, “He took the damsel by the hand, and said unto her,

Daughter Damsel, I say unto thee, arise” (Mark 5:41).

593 Andrew Teasdale, “Herodian Times and Historical Backgrounds: Herod the Great’s Building Program,” BYU Studies (fall 1996-97): 36.3. “Thus, the unforgiving servant may in fact represent the king or the temple high priest into whose hands God had entrusted the keeping of that huge amount of sacred wealth. No one else in Judea could conceivably have held that kind of money. Thus, the political upshot of the parable may well be this: despite the great debts and offenses of the rulers of the temple against God, they can be readily forgiven by God, so long as they beg his forgiveness and worship him. When asked, however, to be generous to a commoner in need of a small amount, the rich rulers of the temple will be unmoved, and as a consequence, they will be held personally accountable for the loss of the entire temple treasury.”

594 See chapter 6, “Widowhood.” Also Paul similarly asked the dramatic mourners to leave the room before he raised Tabitha in Acts 9:40-42.

As discussed in chapter 6, Jewish mourning had become a ritualized dramatization.595 A hired “wailing woman” cried hysterically, shrieked for hours, dressed in sack cloth, threw dirt on her head, and made a frenzied theatrical demonstration. In addition to raising the little girl from the dead, Jesus’ example teaches the opposite.596 Jesus saw the howling as a mockery of grief and not conducive to the Spirit, so “he put them all out” (Luke 8:54). In addition to raising the little girl from the dead, Jesus’ example teaches the inappropriateness of insincerity. His removal of the irreverent (and paid!) mourners stripped off yet another layer of cultural baggage that offended the Spirit. By so doing, Jesus teaches that those who mourn have a greater potential to receive the Spirit or Comforter in peace and sincerity. Those who mourn can be lifted by the Spirit at the sacred moment when loved ones pass through the veil from the second estate.597

Discipline

Cultural Background and Baggage

Jewish literature on childrearing from this era included a spectrum of advice on how to discipline children. On one end of the spectrum we read, “Lay not a hand in violence . . . on tender children.”598 Ben Sira counseled fathers to spend time with their sons in worthwhile pursuits: “Instruct thy son, and labor about him, lest his lewd behavior be an offence to thee.”599 Working beside a child allowed for shared meaningful experiences. There must have been parents who offered generous gifts to their children, as Jesus acknowledged, “If ye then, being evil, know how to give good gifts unto your children . . .,” leaving us with the hope that many did love their children (Matthew 7:11).

On the other end of the spectrum, we find very severe corporeal punishment used to discipline. Discipline was the duty of the father. Ben Sira preached that the way to teach children to fear God was for fathers to discipline them physically: “Stripes and correction are at all times wisdom.”600 He elaborated by giving several suggestions to wise or “loving fathers” to “not spare the rod,” and “break him in and beat him sound while he is still a child.”601 He continued:

He that loveth his son, frequently chastiseth him, that he may rejoice in his latter end . . . A

horse not broken becometh stubborn, and a child left to himself will become headstrong.

Give thy son his way, and he shall make thee afraid: play with him, and he shall make thee

sorrowful. Laugh not with him, lest thou have sorrow, and at the last thy teeth be set on

edge. Give him not liberty in his youth, and wink not at his devices. Bow down his neck

595 Mishnah, Ketuboth, 4.4; quoting Rabbi Judah who codified the Mishnah (born AD 135). 596 1 Maccabees includes a similar description of a Jewish man and his family mourning; “And Mattathias and his sons tore their garments, and they covered themselves with haircloth, and they lamented greatly . . . And they fasted on that day, and they clothed themselves with haircloth, and they placed ashes on their heads, and they tore their garments” (2:14, 3:47). Jonah 3:6-8 and Matthew 11:21 related this style of mourning for repentance, too. 597 In a similar account in Luke 7:11-17, the Lord raised the widow's son on the way to the grave. 598 Walter T. Wilson, The Sentences of Pseudo-Phocylides (Gottingen and Berlin: Hubert & Co., 2005), 162. Also “Be not rash with your hands; bridle wild anger” (ibid., 115). Pseudo-Phocylides is a Greek apocryphal account that claimed an earlier authorship. The lack of Hebraic citations and the use of the Septuagint, as well as other textual and linguistic details, have led scholars to date it between 100 BC and AD 100. 599 Ben Sira, Ecclesiasticus, 30:13 (modernized spelling). 600 Ben Sira, Ecclesiasticus, 22:6.

601 Ben Sira, Ecclesiasticus, 30:1, 2, 12; “He who disciplines his son will find profit in him.”

while he is young, and beat his sides while he is a child, lest he grow stubborn, and regard

thee not, and so be a sorrow of heart to thee.602

It appears that Ben Sira felt a father should manifest his love through chastening, suppression, control, physical punishment, and a lack of play and laughter.

Discipline was also used to keep children, women, and servants submissive.603 One purpose

of discipline was to teach a child to respect or fear their authorities and God. Ben Sira further teaches that it was better to have a child “that feareth God, than a thousand ungodly children. And it is better to die without children, than to leave ungodly children.”604 Changes by Jesus

Jesus vehemently denounced those who hurt children: “Whoso shall offend one of these little ones which believe in me, it were better for him that a millstone were hanged about his neck, and that he were drowned in the depth of the sea” (Matthew 18:6; similar to Mark 9:42 and Luke 17:2). The Greek verb used for “offend / skandalizo” (KJV) also meant “entrap, i.e., trip up . . . entice to sin, apostacy.”605 The Lord equated a death sentence as better than life for those who lead a child to doubt their innate faith in God, or who teach a child to sin. Intentionally teaching children falsehoods and extinguishing their faith is serious sin.

The Lord liberated children and also those who are shackled with the baggage of violence. He also teaches the abused to stand up for themselves, while still being willing to forgive: “If thy brother trespass against thee, rebuke him; and if he repent, forgive him” (Luke 17:3). The

liberating principle of forgiveness unlocks one imprisoned by emotional pain, scars,

Forgive and fear. By applying forgiveness, even to those who have wronged one, the

wounded victim is enabled to heal and grow from the experience (D&C 122:7). The

Lord taught the reciprocal nature of learning to forgive: “if ye forgive men their trespasses, your heavenly Father will also forgive you” (Matthew 6:14; similarly in Mark 11:26; Luke 6:37). Those who have wounds that need healing from abuse can be restored by implementing Jesus’ power-filled words and atonement.

Discipline also included forgiveness. The apostle Peter thought he was being munificent by suggesting that Christians should forgive others seven times—as the Jews limited forgiveness to three offences.606 But “Jesus said to him, ‘I do not say to you up to seven times, but up to seventy times seven’” (Matthew 18:21-35). The Lord then illustrates what He meant with the parable of a king who wished to settle accounts with his servants. Jesus teaches a very different principle from the way Peter understood it. To the Lord, forgiveness is not quantitative but qualitative.607

Rather than correcting with harsh discipline, the Lord restored truths that had the power to motivate change and bring those He taught closer to the Spirit. The Savior’s goal in disciplining the errant world was to restore, not to destroy: “When he went ashore he saw a great crowd, and he had compassion on them, because they were like sheep without a shepherd. And he began to teach them many things” (Mark 6:34). He teaches principles that strengthened His disciples to 602 Ben Sira, Ecclesiasticus, 30:1, 8-12.

603 Jeremias, Jerusalem, 371-375.

604 Ben Sira, Ecclesiasticus, 16:3-4.

605 Strong, Exhaustive Concordance of the Bible, 81; Greek dictionary for “offend / skandalizo.” 606 Rabbis interpreted Amos 1:3 and Job 33:29 as “twice and thrice.” Bruce R. McConkie, The Mortal Messiah: From Bethlehem to Calvary (SLC, UT: Deseret, 1981), 3.91. 607 Alfred Edersheim, Jesus the Messiah, 125. correct their own behavior. When necessary, He still called for repentance, but Jesus spoke and acted with love and encouragement (John 8:11; 13:34-35). Discipline should restore peace: “Blessed are the peacemakers: for they shall be called the children of God” (Matthew 5:9).

The apostles confirmed that the best way to foster change was to teach the words of God: “All scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for

correction, for instruction in righteousness” (2 Timothy 3:16; John 7:17). Jesus

Discipline by used story-telling or parables to condemn sin and to change His listeners for the

Teaching better. From Mark’s perspective, “But without a parable spake he not unto them:

and when they were alone, he expounded all things to his disciples” (Mark 4:34).

Children’s Education

Cultural Background and Baggage

Jews valued education. A child’s education differed depending on his or her gender, wealth, and location. Girls studied mainly domestic skills from their mothers, while all young men who had the capacity and the means studied to read the Law. Ecclesiasticus called on fathers to take the role as teacher: “He that instructeth his son shall be praised in him, and shall glory in him in the midst of them of his household. He that teacheth his son, maketh his enemy jealous, and in the midst of his friends he shall glory in him.”608

Boys

Local rabbis welcomed the most promising young men in the community to the synagogue, their homes, or yeshiva when the boys reached age five to begin their education of The Law.609 Rabbis summarized an ideal boy’s education and subsequent life:

5 to Scripture, 610

10 to Mishnah,

13 to fulfilling commandments,

15 to Talmud,

18 to the bride chamber, 611

608 Sirach, Ecclesiasticus, 30:2-3.

609 Jews often studied the Scriptures in their own language. “Inscriptions dug up by archeologists show that even in Jud[ea] Jews knew and used some Greek—how much is hard to say, but half of all Judean Jewish inscriptions from Jesus’ time are in Greek. Jesus and his followers probably knew some Greek terms, phrases and ideas, though the rabbis prohibited the study of Greek philosophy.” The Dead Sea Scrolls also include Hebrew biblical scrolls. Scholars wonder if Stephen were Samaritan, as he cites the Samaritan Torah. However, “variants of the Hebrew biblical text, as the Dead Sea Scrolls have revealed, were more widespread than previously appreciated.” Tremper Longman III, David E. Garlandintor, The Expositor’s Bible Commentary, rev. ed 10, Luke-Acts (Grand Rapids, MI: Zondervan, 2009). David Peterson, Acts of the Apostles (Grand Rapids, MI: Eerdmans, 2009), 272. “There are several examples of Stephen's modifying biblical texts, using a fragment from another context to amplify and explain the significance of what he is alluding to or quoting. Acts 7:5 uses a portion of Deut 2:5.” 610 Each community had as many Scripture scrolls as they could afford. After the five books of The Law, the most frequently cited scrolls in the New Testament were Psalms and Isaiah. 611 Mishnah, Kiddushin, 29a. Young men pursuing their education had to balance the timing of their marriage with their studies. Rabbis debated which should come first. Reading their debate gives a feel for what these men thought of marriage: “If one must study and is about to marry, he studies first and marries later. But if he cannot do without a

20 to pursuing a career, 612

30 to authority,

40 to discernment,

50 for the counsel,

60 to be an elder,

70 for grey hairs,

80 for special strength,

90 for bowed back,

100 as a corpse.613

This superlative summary of life fit only the most healthy, advantaged, and brightest Jewish males. Yet the list is helpful to see the value that Jews placed on education—especially in religious matters—and marriage.614 When not in school or studying, sons helped with the family chores. This was not the case in wealthy or aristocratic homes where servants or slaves took over the children’s work so that their education could broaden into Greek or a host of other topics.615

Girls

A Jewish girl’s education centered on the domestic arts learned at home. Mothers taught their daughters to spin, weave, cook, tend their younger siblings, and do needlework.616 Girls learned these skills quickly, as they were usually betrothed for marriage at twelve years old. In addition to learning how their mothers ran a home, they also learned from their mothers-in-law for the first few years of marriage, since the young bride and groom lived with the groom’s family.

Between the time of the Solomon’s Temple and Herod’s Temple, unhealthy cultural changes demeaned girls and women, curtailing their ability to learn and contribute. We see the influence of cultural baggage penetrating into the field of girls’ education in the rabbinical interpretations of Old Testament passages. For example, Exodus 35:25 underscored the importance of the domestic art of spinning: “All the women that were wise-hearted did spin with

wife, he marries first, and then he studies. Rab[bi] Yehuda said in the name of Samuel: the law is that he marries first and studies later. Said Rabbi Yohanan: What? with a stone around his neck he can study the law?” 612 Mishnah, Kiddushin, 4:14. Once a young man received his religious education, the Mishnah instructed fathers to teach their sons a skill, but not “a craft that is practiced among women.” The Jews sharply separated their occupational choices by gender.

613 Mishnah, Avoth 5:21. Each translation differs slightly. One reads, “twenty for pursuing a vocation, at the age of thirty for entering into one’s full vigor, at the age of forty for understanding, at the age of fifty for counsel, at age sixty one attains old age.” Philip Blackman, Mishnayoth, (New York: The Judaica Press, 1963), 537. The last item at the end of the ideal man’s life was longevity. The length of life fits into historical possibilities. Pliny (a Roman philosopher, writer, and naturalist, who lived during the time of the New Testament) reported ninety people living in his area who were “at least 100 years” old. Alessandro Launaro, Peasants and Slaves: The Rural Population of Roman Italy—200BC to AD 100 (New York City, NY: Cambridge University Press, 2011), 186. As a biblical reference points, King Herod died at age 69 or 70, Caesar Augustus at 76, but Anna lived to over 100, according to one reading of Luke 2:36.

614 Josephus, Life 2; Jewish War 2.8.2-13.

615 In addition to learning the religious law, sons (and occasionally daughters) of wealthy Jews also studied Greek, math, and science.

616 Jeremias, Jerusalem, 363. Some fathers also intervened in different aspect of their daughter’s education as Philo suggests: “The husband seems competent to transmit knowledge of the laws to his wife, the father to his children, the master to his slaves” (Philo, Hypothetica, 7:14). their hands.” But centuries later, rabbis interpreted this verse depreciatively: “a woman has no wisdom except in handling her spindle.”617

Another more significant scriptural comparison, deals directly with a girl’s education. The prophet Jeremiah called on women to learn from the Scriptures: “hear the word of the LORD, O ye women, and let your ear receive the word of his mouth, and teach your daughters” (Jeremiah 9:20). Once the women learned their Scriptures, Jeremiah called on them to teach their daughters.

However, six hundred years later, rabbis debated whether their daughters should be allowed to study the law of Moses. Although some rabbis in the Mishnah permitted a father to “teach scripture to his sons and daughters,”618 later writers recorded misogynist thoughts like this: “And you shall teach them to your sons—not your daughters.”619 “If a man gives his daughter a knowledge of The Law it is as though he taught her lechery.”620 “A father should not teach his daughter Torah because certain acumen is gained from it which she may use to hide her immorality. . . . It is also possible that she may use her knowledge of the Torah to attract men to her.”621 Not quite as restrictive, another rabbi argued that a girl should know the punishments of

Law.”622 If females were not to learn the full Law, it is not surprising that the Mishnah prohibited 623 them from being teachers. adultery. For this purpose, he said, “A man ought to give his daughter a knowledge of The Cultural baggage like this kept the vast majority of Jewish girls

illiterate.

Changes by Jesus

Jesus valued education, and He provided the example of the ideal path of Christian maturation. However, unlike the above male checklist of accomplishments, our Lord’s path is a process of becoming “complete in goodness, as your Heavenly Father is complete” (Matthew 5:48, WNT). The process is consistent across gender, class, and age. It includes learning humility, gratitude, obedience, sacrifice, empathy, forgiveness, faith, hope, and charity. A dispensation later the Lord further revealed resources for learning: “seek ye out of the best books words of wisdom; seek learning, even by study and also by faith” (D&C 88:118).624

617 Ilan, Jewish Women in Greco-Roman Palestine, 191. Skolnik, Encyclopedia Judaica, 6.323. 618 Mishnah , Nedarim 4.3.

619 Babylonian Talmud, Kiddushin, 29b.

620 Mishnah, Sotah, 3.4. Rabbi Eliezer spoke out against educating women more than most rabbis, perhaps because he suffered under the tongue of his well-educated wife. His wife was the sister of the leader of the Sanhedrin, Gamaliel. It is feasible that in that wealthy home, young girls were educated too, or else they may have had the opportunity to overhear lessons. The Talmud mentioned a few females who learned the oral laws. Wirtherington, Women and the Genesis of Christianity, 7.

Talmudic sources and classic commentators (Brooklyn, NY: Mesorah Publications, 1981), III.58. 622 Mishnah 621 Nosson Scherman, The Mishnah: A New Translation with a Commentary, Yad Avraham anthologized from , Sotah, 3.4.

623 Mishnah, Kiddushin, 4:13; “. . . nor may a woman be a teacher of children.” The same passage also prohibits single men from teaching: “An unmarried man may not be a teacher of children.” 624 The breadth of the Lord’s learning extends to “things both in heaven and in the earth, and under the earth; things which have been, things which are, things which must shortly come to pass; things which are at home, things which are abroad; the wars and the perplexities of the nations, and the judgments which are on the land; and a knowledge also of countries and of kingdoms—That ye may be prepared in all things when I shall send you again to magnify the calling whereunto I have called you” (D&C 88:79-80).

John the The Lord’s ideal education allows freedom from ignorance, emancipation from sin,

Baptist and the development of spiritual traits and gifts. Internalizing all these qualities

& Jesus allows a disciple to “come unto Christ and be perfected in Him” and to deny “all

ungodliness” (Moroni 10:32). In Luke’s description of childhood, we see the young

John the Baptist and Jesus developing according to a righteous, perfect model. Luke carefully crafted a parallel pattern for the education of two boys.625

John the Baptist Jesus ‘ And the child grew, And the child grew, and waxed and waxed strong … strong in spirit, 626 filled with wisdom in spirit (Luke 1:80). and the grace of God was upon him (Luke 2:40)

Luke added a double portion of virtues to God’s Firstborn.627 More than any other mortal, God endowed Jesus with complete or perfect wisdom and grace. 628 After the Lord turned twelve, Luke added to his commentary on Jesus’ education: “And Jesus increased in wisdom and stature, and in favour with God and man” (Luke 2:52). Those who strive to follow Jesus’ educational path are compelled to seek for wisdom along with physical, spiritual, and social growth.

While the Jews emphasized religious learning from their rabbinic commentary of The Law, Jesus called on men, women, and children to learn from the source of The Law: “learn of me; for

“Learn I am meek and lowly in heart: and ye shall find rest unto your souls” (Matthew

of me” 11:29). Jesus includes children in the audience when He teaches, heals, and feeds

over five thousand in Galilee (Matthew 14:21) and does similarly later for the four

thousand (Matthew 15:38). These young girls and boys, along with the adults, are nourished physically and spiritual through the Bread of Life.

The Lord made an educational transformation when He revealed truths “unto babes” that older folks could not learn (Matthew 11:25). He turned the education roles utterly around and called on His disciples not only to learn meekness and purity from children, but also to “become

625 Fitzmyer, Luke I-IX, 419, “The infancy narrative continues in the spirit of traditional Jewish piety. This episode tells of the circumcision, naming, and manifestation of Jesus and is the parallel to the circumcision, naming, and manifestation of John” (also see 372). Luke’s Parallel Structure comparing John the Baptist and Jesus: 1. Annunciations by Gabriel (Luke 1:5-25; compared to 1:26-38)

626 Actually, the KJV is unique in including the word “spirit” in this parallel phrase for Jesus. Even translations taken from the same Greek text do not include “spirit” in Luke 2:40 (i.e., RSV). The absence may be accidental, or else a scribe may have been unwilling to confirm that Jesus had to grow in the Spirit (Brown, Birth, 469). 627 Philo, Special Laws, II.123-139. The Mosaic laws of inheritance allowed the oldest son to receive twice or a “double portion” of what the other sons received (Deuteronomy 21:17). If there were three sons, with 400 denarii available—the inheritance would be divided by four so the oldest son received 200 and the others 100. For an example see 2 Kings 2:9.

628 Luke highlights Jesus’ unique quality of “grace / charis” or “favor / charis.” The King James Bible used two different English words, but the Greek is the same. “ Charis” was a significant word for the New Testament authors as it has multiple innuendos and meanings they repeated it over 150 times. It “denotes effective divine power.” James D. G. Dunn, Romans 1-8 (Dallas, TX: Word Books, 1988), 17. Jesus’ development was gradual and he gained favor as he developed; “he received not of the fulness at first, but continued from grace to grace, until he received a fulness; And thus he was called the Son of God” (D&C 93:13-14). as a child” (Matthew 18:3; similarly Luke 18:17). The Savor promised those who learn from Him, that they “will become children of your Father in heaven” (Matthew 5:45, ISV). It is significant that the highest reward attainable is the position of a child in the Father’s kingdom.

Vocation

Cultural Background and Baggage

An important aspect of a young man’s growth included an apprenticeship or some other means to become self-supporting and provide for a family. From the time of Adam, God taught the need to work: “Adam began to till the earth, and to have dominion over all the beasts of the field, and to eat his bread by the sweat of his brow, as I the Lord had commanded him. And Eve, also, his wife, did labor with him” (Moses 5:1). The LDS scripture cannon include nearly one thousand references to “work,” establishing an unmistakably strong labor ethic.

One rabbi felt that a father who “does not teach his son a trade, teaches him to rob.” And then the rabbinic banter erupted, “Teaches him to rob? How is that?—we may say: as though he taught him to rob.”629 Another rabbi argued, “I should lay aside every trade in the world and teach my son only Torah. . . . It keeps him from all evil when he is young, and it gives him a future and a hope when he is old.”630

The vast majority of Jewish men in Palestine worked in some agriculturally based occupation. Ninety percent of Jews living in Palestine at the time of the New Testament had a vocation that supported farming or fishing villages.631 Neither farming nor fishing were considered prestigious vocations.

The most esteemed professional positions were those for the educated: the head of the synagogue, a scholar, or an elementary school teacher.632 The most prestigious jobs maintained a man’s religious cleanliness and avoided contamination by Gentiles, blood, disease, or death (Leviticus 10:10; Isaiah 52:11; Ezekiel 44:23).

The Mishnah taught that it was more important to have a clean and honest trade than a high-paying one:

And let him pray to him to whom belong riches and possessions. For there is no trade

which does not involve poverty or wealth. For poverty does not come from one’s trade, nor

does wealth come from one’s trade. But all is in accord with a man’s merit . . . a man

should not teach his son to be an ass driver, a camel driver, a barber, a sailor, or a

herdsman, or a shopkeeper. For their trade is the trade of thieves . . . the best among

physicians is going to Gehenna, and the best of butchers is a partner of Amalek.633

629 Babylonian Talmud, Kiddushin, 29a.

630 Mishnah, Qiddushin, 4:14m, r; the quote continues: “For a man eats its fruits in this world, and the principle remains for the world to come. But other trades are not that way. When a man gets sick or old or has pains and cannot do his job, lo, he dies of starvation. But with the Torah it is not that way” (4:14 n-q). 631 Thurston, Women in the New Testament, 15-16. Unfortunately, those who left first-hand historical writings from this era were the literate aristocracy, the minority who lived in urban settings. Readers must take this into account when reading first hand writings.

632 Babylonian Talmud, Pesah, 49b.

633 Mishnah: Qiddushin, 4:14. Gehenna was hell and Amalek a pagan nation.

Certain professions were shunned because of their dishonest or “unclean” reputation, like a dung-collector, copper smelter, tanner, goldsmith, peddler, weaver, tailor, and bath attendant.634

Herdsmen were another example of those untrusted, because so many shepherds deceitfully allowed their herds to feed on other men’s property.635 Judaic courts of law would not accept a shepherd’s witness as legitimate.636 Even though we find positive references to shepherds in the Bible—such as King David and Psalms 23:1, “The LORD is my shepherd; I shall not want”— when we read later rabbinic literature we find “unfavorable references to herdsmen,” labeling them “dishonest and thieving.”637

Tax collectors were included among the “wicked” who were not allowed to act as a witness because they were suspected of collecting more money than their due and falsely attributed taxable items.638 Supposedly, Theocritus, a third century Greek poet was asked what the worst wild beast was, and he answered, “On the mountains, bears and lions; in the city, publicans.”639 The Jews felt even more strongly because a publican worked for the Romans and had to affiliate with gentiles, so Jews labeled publicans as sinners (Matthew 21:31; Mark 2:15l Luke 15:1; etc.). They tried to avoid marriages with them: “Take not a wife out of a family where there is a publican, for they are all publicans.”640

Changes by Jesus

An ideal Christian was not defined by his vocation, skills, nationality, or rank but by the condition of his or her heart and faith: “Now the end of the commandment is charity out of a pure heart, and of a good conscience, and of faith unfeigned” (1 Timothy 1:5). Ironically, the vocational outcasts are often highlighted in the New Testament as righteous, humble, devoted

Good followers of God. Jesus himself chose to adopt the symbol of “the good Shepherd”

Shepherd (John 10:11, 14; also Hebrews 13:20; 1 Peter 5:4) and the Good Samaritan (Luke

& 10:33-35).641 Rarely did the key figures in the New Testament fall into the category

Samaritan of holding a privileged Jewish vocation—in reality, the opposite was true (except

for a few men like Saul/Paul in the apostolic church).

Jesus’ followers often came from the less than desirable social groups (for example, tax collectors and soldiers from Matthew 8:5-13; 9:1-13, and Simon the tanner from Acts 9:43-634 Jeremias, Jerusalem, 304-305.

635 Jeremias, Jerusalem, 305; “. . . A similar suspicion weighed on herdsmen who did not enjoy a very good reputation. As proved by experience, most of the time they were dishonest and thieving; they led their herds on to other people’s land, and pilfered the produce of the herd. For this reason it was forbidden to buy wool, milk, or kids from them.” Also see Brown, Birth, 420.

636 Josephus, Antiquities, IV.8:15; Mishnah, Shebuoth, 4:1. The list of unacceptable witnesses include ten classes of people: women, slaves, minors, lunatics, deaf, blind, wicked, contemptible, relatives and interested parties. Shepherds fell among the wicked as they grazed their flocks on other’s lands. 637 Jeremias, Jerusalem, 306, also see 305, 374.

638 Skolnik, Encyclopedia Judaica, 21.116.

639 Fredric William Farrar, The Life of Christ (New York City: Dutton, 1874), 247. 640 Ibid., The Romans hired tax collectors in each region to enforce their 1% income-tax, 1/10 ground tax on production, a poll or head tax levied on all men over fourteen and girls over twelve up until age sixty-five, and an “indirect tax,” which covered imports and exports that crossed a major street or harbor. The tax ranged from 2.5% to 12.5%, providing plenty of room for favors or extra charges or partiality. Edersheim, Jesus the Messiah, 133. Eerdmans, Dictionary of the Bible, 1278; Bromiley, The International Standard Bible Encyclopedia, Hagner, “Tax Collectors,” 741-743.

641 John W. Welch, “The Good Samaritan: A Type and Shadow of the Plan of Salvation,” BYU Studies 38, no. 2 (1999): 50-115.

10:32). The Gospels name half of The Twelve apostles’ occupations: Four to six were fisherman (Peter, Andrew, James, John, and possibly Thomas and Nathaniel / Bartholomew from John 21:1-3), one tax collector (Matthew / Levi), 642 and one familiar enough with finances to act as treasurer (Judas Iscariot). Usually a son inherited the occupation of his father, so we assume that Zebedee, the father of James and John, was also a fishermen, that Saul’s father was a tent maker; and that Jesus followed Joseph’s footsteps as a builder (either a stonemason, craftsman, or carpenter643).

642 The apostle Levi (Luke 5:27, 29) son of Alphaeus (Mark 2:14), is often equated with Matthew (Matthew 9:9). John Welch argues that one did not name a child Levi unless they were of the Tribe of Levi. This opens the question, was the apostle a tax collector for the temple rather than for Rome (private discussion with John Welch). 643 The Greek word used in Mark 6:3, specifies a builder, “Is not this the carpenter / tekton / builder?” Stone is more prolific in Palestine than lumber, so much of the building was done stonemasons. Mark 6:3 could have been translated, “Is not this the stonemason?”

John the Baptist’s Teachings on Vocation

When the publicans and Jewish soldiers came to John the Baptist and asked him for counsel, he did not tell them to change their occupations—even though both groups came from the socially unclean end of the Jewish professional continuum:

Then came also publicans to be baptized, and said unto him, “Master, what shall we do?”

And he said unto them, “Exact no more than that which is appointed you.” The soldiers

likewise demanded of him, saying, “And what shall we do?” And he said unto them, “Do

violence to no man, neither accuse any falsely; and be content with your wages” (Luke

3:12-14, with quotation marks added).

Instead of condemning their livelihoods, John the Baptist emphasized their need for integrity, kindness, and less about their pay scale. Lineage and profession were not important. As John the Baptist taught, “Therefore bear fruit in keeping with repentance; And do not presume to say to yourselves, ‘We have Abraham as our father,’ for I tell you, God is able from these stones to raise up children for Abraham’” (Matthew 3:8-9).

Jesus’ Teachings on Consecration

The Scriptures advocate hard work, with an emphasis on the Master’s work. The Lord pled with his disciples to prioritize their time and means: “Lay not up for yourselves treasures upon earth, where moth and rust doth corrupt, and thieves break through and steal; But lay up for yourselves treasures in heaven” (Matthew 6:19-20). He transformed the vocational hierarchy by teaching that the most worthwhile work disciples can perform is to follow Him. Those who followed Him clothed, fed, and served others (Matthew 25:34-40).

The Lord elevated “apprenticeships” from money making to kingdom building. Jesus asked the fishermen to leave their nets and “Follow me, and I will make you fishers of men” (Matthew 4:19; Mark 1:17). At the end of His mission, He called His apostle to “Feed my lambs . . . Feed my sheep” (John 21:15-17). He repeated similar counsel to this dispensation: “I say unto all the

Feed my Twelve: Arise and gird up your loins, take up your cross, follow me, and feed my

lambs sheep” (D&C 112:14). The membership was also called to share the good news,

“The thing which will be of the most worth unto you will be to declare repentance

unto this people, that you may bring souls unto me, that you may rest with them in the kingdom of my Father” (D&C 15:6; also 16:4-6). This call is not tied to gender or age, but desire (D&C 4), as the Master will enable all who choose this path.

Christ also spoke against garnering wealth when a rich man asked Him how to “inherit eternal life” (Mark 10:17; Luke 18:18). Jesus answered by first addressing the need to obey the commandments (Mark 10:19). The man justified himself: “Master, all these have I observed

Rich from my youth” (Mark 10:20). Jesus admired the young man’s past obedience and saw

Man into his heart, “beholding him loved him” (Mark 10:21). So Jesus attempted to teach a

higher law: “One thing thou lackest: go thy way, sell whatsoever thou hast, and give to

the poor, and thou shalt have treasure in heaven: and come, take up the cross, and follow me” (Mark 10:21). 644 But the rich man “went away grieved: for he had great possessions” (Mark 10:22).

644 In the parallel account in Matthew 19:21, the citation begins, “If thou wilt be perfect.”

The rank of the world is not the rank of heaven, and Jesus lamented, “How hardly shall they that have riches enter into the kingdom of God!” (Mark 10:23). Money becomes a problem when it becomes one’s cherished desire: “where your treasure is, there will your heart be also” (Luke 12:34). Jesus clarified that misplaced priorities became a function of one’s heart: “A good man out of the good treasure of his heart bringeth forth that which is good; and an evil man out of the evil treasure of his heart bringeth forth that which is evil” (Luke 6:45).645

Apostles’ Teachings on Self Sufficiency

It was very important to the early missionaries and apostles that they not be a burden on

the church. Paul felt so strongly about taking responsibility to provide for himself and family that he asserted, “If any provide not for his own, and especially for those of his own house, he hath denied the faith, and is worse than an infidel” (1 Timothy 5:8). Part of that included using one’s means generously to care for those in need as the church collected funds for the poor (Luke 12:33; Acts 10:4; Romans 15:26; etc.).

The apostles taught the need to give even to one’s enemies: “Therefore if thine enemy hunger, feed him; if he thirst, give him drink” (Romans 12:20). The Jerusalem Christians lived a form of the law of consecration built on a strong foundation of work and faith (Acts 2:44-45). They knew that “The earth is the Lord's, and everything in it" (1 Corinthians 10:26; Psalms 24:1) and thus acted as accountable stewards—not owners—of their means.646 From the principles of agency, generosity, and love, the early saints across the empire donated their means to support their fellow saints in need (Romans 15:25-27). They strove to have no poor among them (Deuteronomy 15:4).

645 The Book of Mormon also addresses this in Jacob 2:19, “And after ye have obtained a hope in Christ ye shall obtain riches, if ye seek them; and ye will seek them for the intent to do good—to clothe the naked, and to feed the hungry, and to liberate the captive, and administer relief to the sick and the afflicted.” 646 Steven C. Harper, ‘“All Things Are the Lord’s”: The Law of Consecration in the Doctrine and Covenants” in Andrew H. Hedges, J. Spencer Fluhman, and Alonzo L. Gaskill, ed., The Doctrine and Covenants: Revelations in Context (Provo and Salt Lake City: Religious Studies Center, Brigham Young University, and Deseret, 2008), 212– 128.
