Servitude: From Slaves to Students

This chapter provides a cultural overview of servitude during the late Second Temple

period, as it related to family life. Many of New Testament examples demonstrate the Lord elevating the underprivileged and teaching the emancipation of love, faith, hope, service, and forgiveness. Jesus turned the traditional social hierarchy upside down by honoring those who served: “he that is greatest among you shall be your servant” (Matthew 23:11). He did not call for emancipation of servitude, instead He taught masters to serve. Cultural Background and Baggage

Much of the social order of the Roman Empire stemmed from the servant-master relationship. At the time of Jesus, itt saturated their culture and infiltrated the lives of women and children.647 A census across the Roman Empire from AD 47 documented that one-third of the population was enslaved or worked as servants.648 Some large cities had higher percentages, including Jerusalem, which recorded that fifty-percent of the population were servants or slaves. To fully appreciate how many slaves there were, a normal middle-class Roman citizen owned eight slaves.649 The only families that did not have a servant in the Greco-Roman world were

647 Ben Sira, Ecclesiasticus, 3.1,7, “Listen to me your father, O children; and act accordingly, that you may be kept in safety. . . . He will serve his parents as his masters.” Jeremias, Jerusalem, 369; “The wife was obliged to obey her husband as she would a master.”

648 Bromiley, The International Standard Bible Encyclopedia, Bartchy, “Servant” 4.420. Tim G. Parkin, Old Age in the Roman World: A Cultural and Social History (Baltimore, MD: John Hopkins, 2003), 183. As a reference point from United States history, as early as 1690, half of the population in the Carolina colonies was enslaved. Edwin Gaustad and Leigh Schmidt, The Religious History of America (San Francisco: HarperCollins, 2004), 103. Across the Roman Empire, at different times, estimates range between six and sixty million people were slaves. Junius P. Rodriguez, The Historical Encyclopedia of World Slavery (Santa Barbara, CA: ABD-CLI, 1997), 7.548. 649 Heshey Zelcher, A Guide to the Jerusalem Talmud (Universal Publishers, 2002), 92. “The middle-class citizens often owned eight slaves, the rich from five hundred to a thousand, and an emperor as many as twenty thousand.” those in hopeless poverty. There is evidence that some slaves even owned a slave of their own.650 Many people chose servitude over starvation and sold themselves into slavery for the benefit of room and board.651

Slaves vs. Servants

In both Greek and Hebrew, the same word describes a servant and a slave, though a servant and a slave were treated quite differently.652 Many of the slaves were war prisoners or “booty” from Rome’s foreign conquests.653 Some servants were paid, others were merely given bed and board in lieu of wages. Some were treated with respect, others were terribly abused. The trademark of a slave was scars across his or her back from whippings.654 Masters considered slaves their personal property, and as such, slaves had no legal rights of their own to demand justice. A master’s personal property included slaves, servants, wives, and children.655

Although many Jews were sold into slavery during times of persecution, in ideal circumstances, Jews did not enslave fellow Jews.656 (The Essenes forbade keeping any servants, due to their strict interpretation of The Law which prohibited slavery, so they worked and lived “all in common.”657).

However, when economic need demanded it, male and female Jews worked for other Jewish families. After six years of labor, the Torah provided a means that a poor man could escape the cycle of indentured servitude: “If thou buy an Hebrew servant, six years he shall serve: and in the seventh he shall go out free for nothing” (Exodus 21:2).658 The sabbatical year

650 Bromiley, The International Standard Bible Encyclopedia, 4.544. 651 Keith Crim, ed. The Interpreter’s Dictionary of the Bible (Nashville, TN: Abingdon, 1976), Supplementary volume 830.

652 The Greek New Testament used doulos for slave and servant, and in Hebrew the Old Testament, 'ebed. 653 Campbell, Marriage and Family in the Biblical World, 135. Many Greco-Roman slaves served only for a specified time to pay their debts. Like a servant, some slaves were paid and could buy their freedom from their owners. If the slave enjoyed a good relationship with his master, upon his release, the master often helped the slave financially to start up a new life on his or her own. Once male or female slaves were free in the Greco-Roman world, they could become shopkeepers, artisans, or domestics. A freed slave could take the plebeian name of his/her former owner as his clan name.

654 Rawson, ed., Marriage, Divorce, and Children in Ancient, 161. 655 Neusner, The Economics of the Mishnah, 65. “The household encompassed the householder, Jacob Neusnerother employees utilized as needed, as well as his livestock, movables, and real property. The householder’s will reigned supreme, and his decisions governed.”

656 Zelcher, A Guide to the Jerusalem Talmud, 92; “Following both major revolts by the Jews of Israel against the Roman empire in the year 70 and 135, hundreds of thousands of Jews were killed, or sold as slaves.” 657 Philo, Hypothetica 11.4. “None of them allows himself to have any private property . . . but they put everything into the public stock and enjoy the benefit of them all.”

658 The law of Moses stipulated that if a male servant received a wife from his master, he could not take his wife or children with him when released: “If he came in by himself, he shall go out by himself: if he were married, then his wife shall go out with him. If his master have given him a wife, and she have borne him sons or daughters; the wife and her children shall be her master's, and he shall go out by himself” (Exodus 21:3-4). This is where the situation became tenuous. Many men chose to remain in the employ of someone else rather than leave their family. So The Law added, “And if the servant shall plainly say, I love my master, my wife, and my children; I will not go out free: Then his master shall bring him unto the judges; he shall also bring him to the door, or unto the door post; and his master shall bore his ear through with an aul; and he shall serve him for ever” (Exodus 21:5-6). The pierced ear was often filled with a hoop, so that servant for life was known by a hoop in his ear. included freeing slaves (Deuteronomy 15:12; Leviticus 25:39-42). In the Roman world slaves were released by age thirty.659 Many were given their freedom prior to that age.660

Generally, most servants were treated like serfs in the feudal system.661 Servants who worked in the city often had a higher standard of living than poor free men who worked in the country off the land. Not all were subordinate either—especial those that served as tutors, physicians, nurses, managers of the household, and close companions.662 Some owners treated their house servants or slaves as part of the family, gave them a comfortable living, and mourned over them when they died.663 Yet, when the Mishnah listed the order that one should redeem family members if taken captive, servants and slaves are not even mentioned.664

In the Jewish world, Philo defended those in this lesser class on the social ladder and called for mutual respect: “Unless you treat your servants with gentleness, do not treat those of the same rank as yourself socially. Unless you behave decorously to your wife, never bear yourself respectfully to your parents. If you neglect your father and your mother, be impious also towards God.”665 Despite a low social status, Philo called for similar treatment toward servants, slaves, a wife, and parents.666

Changes by Jesus

Jesus attacks the “master-servant” social mentality as He teaches the principles of partiality, fairness, and freely serving: “The disciple is not above his master, nor the servant above his lord” (Matthew 10:24). His apostles resumed the message of fairness: “Masters, give unto your servants that which is just and equal; knowing that ye also have a Master in heaven” (Colossians 4:1). The Lord overturned the social ladder: “whosoever of you will be the chiefest, shall be servant of all” (Mark 10:44).

Again and again Jesus praised those who voluntarily served their fellowmen as the model behavior, “Blessed is that servant, whom his lord when he cometh shall find so doing” (Luke 12:43). Jesus was less concerned about abolishing slavery than He was about developing both masters and slaves into good stewards: “Well, thou good servant: because thou hast been faithful in a very little, have thou authority over ten cities” (Luke 19:17). As the mortal sense of equality is warped—all must trust in God’s omniscience—He will reward generously.

Luke tells of a servant who became a beloved family member: “A certain centurion's servant, who was dear unto him, was sick, and ready to die. And when he heard of Jesus, he sent unto him the elders of the Jews, beseeching him that he would come and heal his servant” (Luke

659 Bromiley, International Standard Bible Encyclopedia, 4.545. Campbell, Marriage and Family in the Biblical World, 135. Some sources record a release at age thirty, others thirty-five or forty. The process releasing a slave was known as manumission.

660 Ibid. “Pertinent inscriptions indicate, however, that large numbers, approaching 50 percent, were set free prior to their thirtieth year.”

661 Rodriguez, The Historical Encyclopedia of World Slavery, 7.555. 662 Bromiley, International Standard Bible Encyclopedia, 4.544. 663 Winer, Life in the Ancient World, 176.

664 Mishnah, Horayoth. 3.7.

665 Philo, Yonge, trans., 2,172.

666 Ibid., 252. When hospitality was needed, everyone pitched into help. Philo explained “For no one in the house of a wise man is ever slow to perform the duties of hospitality, both women and men and slaves and freemen, are most eager in the performance of all those duties towards strangers; therefore, after having feasted and belighted, not so much with that was set before them, as with the good will of their entertainer, and with his excessive and unbounded zeal to please them.”

7:3). Jesus healed the servant from a distance, giving verbal praise to the centurion’s faith and nonverbal affirmation to the centurion’s love for his servant: “I have not found so great faith, no,

Centurion's not in Israel” (Luke 7:9).

Servant Jesus did not discriminate by rank, and He healed a slave as readily as He

did the daughter of the synagogue’s leader. His parables were filled with stories

of servants—sometimes as the good example, sometimes as the bad (Matthew 18:26-32, 25:26-30; Mark 12:4; Luke 20:10-11). One’s caste was not an issue, but how one behaved within one’s role is what mattered. Repeatedly, Jesus tore through layers of false traditions, bigotry, and bias that paralyzed relationships. He liberated His future followers to eradicate prejudices and injustices.667

Jewish Female Slaves

Cultural Background and Baggage

Unlike her male counterparts, a Jewess slave owned by a Jewish man was rarely liberated every seven years. Earlier Israelite history set the precedent for this: “If a man sell his daughter to be a maidservant, she shall not go out as the menservants do” (Exodus 21:7). Female slaves were identified as the property of their masters and thus available for sexual use.668 Rabbi Hillel admitted, “Whoever multiples female slaves multiplies promiscuity and whoever multiplies male slaves multiplies thieving.”669

If a slave girl were set free, she could not marry another Jew because most female slaves were no longer virgins, her options in the Jewish culture was slavery or prostitution. Many Jewish bondswomen chose to remain domestic servants and concubines, rather than the alternative.

Unfair as it may sound, the Torah provided a means where the master could actually divorce a slave-wife: “If she please not her master, who hath betrothed her to himself, then shall he let her be redeemed . . . he hath dealt deceitfully with her” (Exodus 21:8). In the Old Testament, polygamy was also practiced with a slave-wives (i.e., Hagar, Zilpah, Bilhah). If a Jewish man consummated a marriage with a servant girl but then took another wife, The Law instructed that he must continue to provide for the servant-wife: “her food, her raiment, and her duty of marriage, shall he not diminish. And if he do not these three unto her, then shall she go out free without money” (Exodus 21:10-11).

New Testament Example

The Gospel of Luke shares a sweet dimension of servitude at Jesus’ annunciation. When the angel Gabriel came to Mary and revealed God’s plan for His Son’s birth, she willingly submitted: “Behold the handmaid of the Lord; be it unto me according to thy word” (Luke 1:38). “Handmaiden” comes from the Greek word for a female slave / doule. Mary committed to be the Lord’s servant in whatever He required. She basically said, “I will do anything you ask, I will do

667 Many of the Lord’s teachings did not find their fruition until people began reading the Bible and adopted His messages. The seeds of truth He planted have taken millennia to germinate and grow. 668 Thurston, Women in the New Testament, 23. In the Roman world, “female slaves could also be sent out to work as prostitutes. Children born to slave women were her owners’ property.” 669 Bromiley, International Standard Bible Encyclopedia, Q-Z, 545. everything within my power to fulfill your plan.” She was also saying, “I am willing to carry your child.” What remarkable faith—and it was not blind! In that society, she would not have

Mary the used the word “handmaiden / doule” lightly.

Handmaid With the vast number of servants—and as more a child herself—Mary

of the Lord probably had an idea of what it meant to be a servant or slave. Likewise, she

probably knew the consequences of being a disobedient slave. Coming from a

culture where young girls were generally kept indoors, where communication with a betrothed was limited, where children were equated with slaves, and where adulteress and unwed mothers were stoned, Mary’s humble acquiescence to become God’s handmaiden is even more poignant.

Runaway Slaves

Cultural Background

Though both the Jews and Romans had a built-in date for freedom for their slaves, there was enough torture and abuse that many slaves ran away. The law of Moses provided mercy for a runaway slave. If the fugitive asked for refuge in a new community, all were to welcome him and “not oppress him” or return him to his last owner (Deuteronomy 23:15-16).

In the Roman Empire, though, runaway slaves became such a problem that laws were created to keep them in submission. Decrees called for a runaway to be returned to the owner, yet cases show some slaves were killed.670 Caesar Augustus enacted a law to kill all the slaves in the household if there was evidence that a master was killed by a slave.671 If slaves were the lowest level on the social ladder, a runaway slave was “subhuman . . . a lost cause.”672

If and when runaway slaves were found, they were often branded on their foreheads with “an ‘F’ for fugitive.”673 History speaks of a cruel, concerted effort in “Roman fugitive-slave hunting.” The slave masters “bore the basic onus of recovering their runaways, [and] employed harsh methods to deter the escape of slaves who were considered disobedient or flight risks. These measures might include heavy chaining, permanent disfigurement from identifying brands, intentional scars, and most commonly, tattooed letters.”674 Changes by Christianity

Paul wrote about finding a runaway slave. In his shortest Epistle, he composed a beautiful chiasmus to Philemon, one of his early Christian converts from Colossae. The impetus to write his friend came from finding Philemon’s runaway slave while Paul was in Rome. When he came in contact with a new Christian covert, Onesimus, Paul learned that he was a runaway slave of none other than Paul’s old friend Philemon.

670 Christopher J. Fuhrmann, Policing the Roman Empire: Soldiers, Administration, and Public Order (Oxford, England: Oxford University Press, 2012), 24. If a slave’s master was not found, the slave was assumed to be the murderer and crucified.

671 Fuhrmann, Policing the Roman Empire, 23-24. “Fear of a large-scale slave uprising was probably a significant motive behind the Roman state's measures against slave flight. . . . In one controversial case under Nero, more than four hundred slaves were executed.”

672 Ruden, Paul among the People, 156. A runaway slave “bore all of the loathing and fury . . . that come when absolute privilege is disappointed.”

673 Douglas Connely, Forgiveness: Making Peace with the Past (Madison, WI: InterVarsity Press, 2005), 61. 674 Fuhrmann, Policing the Roman Empire, 29.

As an apostle and Roman citizen, Paul thought it wisest to send the runaway

Onesimus back to his owner, accompanied by Paul’s letter requesting ample forgiveness and

fellowship for the prodigal, Onesimus. The law called for the runaway to return to

slavery, but as a Christian, Paul asked his friend to treat the returning slave as he would treat the apostle: “receive him as myself” (Philemon 1:17). Paul pressed Philemon to welcome Onesimus back no longer as a slave, but as a friend in the gospel without retribution: “If he hath wronged thee, or oweth thee ought, put that on mine account . . . I will repay it” (Philemon 1:18-19). Paul requested emancipation for Onesimus: “[I have] confidence in thy obedience I wrote unto thee, knowing that thou wilt also do more than I say” (Philemon 1:21). It appears that Paul took extra care with this delicate subject, as he carefully crafted the entire letter as poetry and used puns and word play with names.675 We do not know what happened to Onesimus after he left Paul.676

Master Teacher-Student Relation

Cultural Background

Servitude also had a place in the academic setting of a master teacher and pupil relationship in the Judeo-Greco-Roman settings. Out of devotion to one’s teacher, a student often chose to do everything for his master that a slave would usually do.677 In hopes of spending more time with

675 Onesimus means profitable; Philemon means loving, or friendship. The Chiasmus is adapted from Welch-Hall, Charting the New Testament, 15-20.

A Epistolary (1–3)

B Paul’s prayers for Philemon (4)

C Philemon’s love, faith, and hospitality (5–7)

D Paul could use his authority (8)

E But prefers to make supplication (9–10)

F Onesimus a convert of Paul’s (10)

G Paul has made Onesimus profitable (11)

H Receive Onesimus as Paul’s own bowels (12)

I Paul retained Onesimus as Paul’s minister in the bonds of

the gospel (13)

J Without Philemon’s willing consent Paul will not require

Philemon to take Onesimus

J’ Perhaps the reason Onesimus left was so that Philemon

could take Onesimus back forever as a fellow saint (15)

I’ Not as a servant but as a brother in the Lord (16)

H’ Receive Onesimus as Paul’s own self (17)

G’ Paul will repay any wrong Onesimus has done (18–19)

F’ Philemon indebted as a convert to Paul (19)

E’ Paul makes supplication to Philemon (20)

D’ Although he could ask for obedience (21)

C’ Paul requests hospitality of Philemon (22)

B’ Philemon’s prayers for Paul (22)

A’ Epistolary—Good wishes (23–25)

676 Colossians 4:9 also mentioned a Christian named Onesimus. Orthodox Christians and others claim a man named Onesimus became a bishop in Ephesus, though which Onesimus was that? 677 Judith R. Baskin and Kenneth Seeskin, The Cambridge Guide to Jewish History, Religion, and Culture (New York, NY: Cambridge University Press, 2010), 313. “The intentional community of the Rabbis was centered on the master-disciple relationship; through this link between teacher and student, the full import of life according to the Torah of Moses could be appreciated and acquired. . . . Students would apprentice with a master, often for many his teacher, a disciple helped his master get dressed, eat, wash his face—everything except foot care. Even a master teacher did not have his pupils or disciples take off his sandals and wash his feet because it was too demeaning a task for anyone but a slave or a child.

Changes by Jesus

The prophet John the Baptist alluded to this teacher-student relationship when referring to the Savior. John illustrated his relationship to Jesus, when he acknowledged, “One mightier than I cometh, the latchet of whose shoes I am not worthy to unloose.” It was as if he humbly and

John the poignantly confessed, “I’m not worthy to be the Messiah’s student or disciple, let

Baptist alone worthy to act as His slave” (paraphrasing Luke 3:16).

This same background also sheds light on why Peter so vehemently opposed

Jesus’ offer to wash his feet: “Never shall You wash my feet!” (John 13:8, NASB). Peter could not fathom asking his beloved Master—whom he believed was the Son of God—to act as his slave. But Jesus had higher things to teach: “You do not realize now what I am doing, but later you will understand. . . . If I wash thee not, thou hast no part with me” (John 13:7-8, NIV).678 Irrepressible and impassioned Peter immediately submitted to the Lord’s will: “not just my feet but my hands and my head as well!” (John 13:9, NIV).

Jesus Peter had learned through previous experience that his Master transformed

Washes social norms: the poor in spirit will become rich, the meek will inherit the earth, and

Feet the persecuted will inherit the heavens (Matthew 5:1-8). The Lord’s new lesson

revolutionized the tiered social strata. In contrast to the cultural norm, in divine

kingdoms, masters serve.

Finally, Jesus himself took on the role of the suffering servant as Isaiah prophesied.

He hath no form nor comeliness; and when we shall see him, there is no beauty that we should desire him. He is despised and rejected of men; a man of sorrows, and

Isaiah acquainted with grief: and we hid as it were our faces from him; he was despised,

Suffering and we esteemed him not. Surely he hath borne our griefs, and carried our sorrows:

Servant yet we did esteem him stricken, smitten of God, and afflicted. But he was wounded

for our transgressions, he was bruised for our iniquities: the chastisement of our peace was upon him; and with his stripes we are healed (Isaiah 53:2-5).

This servant was not treated as a member of the family, loved, or admired. He was not even acknowledged or honored “in his own country,” but His own people abused and tortured Him (Mark 6:4). Though Jesus never sinned, He willingly took the punishment of others without complaint.

years, learning direct teachings and observing how a rabbinic Jew was to behave. These explicit and inferred rules governed all aspects of human life, from ritual matters and legal rulings to ethical maxims and daily behaviors.” 678 The Lord restored “the washing of feet” as an ordinance to the Prophet Joseph Smith. The prophet then shared it with the saints in the Kirtland Temple in 1836. See, Dean C. Jessee, compiled and ed., The Personal Writings of Joseph Smith (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book, 1984), 181. “In the Kirtland Temple in 1836, after attending to the ordinance of the washing of the feet, Joseph Smith said he had ‘completed the organization of the church, and…[had given] all the necessary ceremonies’ (History of the Church, 2:432). However, four days later, he was given greater keys of authority and knowledge which he did not confer on the leaders of the Church until the Nauvoo period (see D&C 110).” Ehat Cook, Words of Joseph Smith, 140.

He was oppressed, and he was afflicted, yet he opened not his mouth: he is brought as a

lamb to the slaughter, and as a sheep before her shearers is dumb, so he openeth not his

mouth. He was taken from prison and from judgment: and who shall declare his

generation? for he was cut off out of the land of the living: for the transgression of my

people was he stricken. And he made his grave with the wicked, and with the rich in his

death; because he had done no violence, neither was any deceit in his mouth. Yet it pleased

the LORD to bruise him; he hath put him to grief: when thou shalt make his soul an

offering for sin, he shall see his seed, he shall prolong his days, and the pleasure of the

LORD shall prosper in his hand. He shall see of the travail of his soul, and shall be

satisfied: by his knowledge shall my righteous servant justify many; for he shall bear their

iniquities (Isaiah 53:7-11).

Isaiah’s prophecies about the righteous servant were fulfilled in the life of Jesus of Nazareth. 679

The Lord chose to serve rather than be served. He teaches the importance of service by His example and words, “If anyone would be first, he must be last of all and servant of all” (Mark 9:35, ESV). Jesus identifies himself as the servant of all: “For even the Son of man came not to be ministered unto, but to minister, and to give his life a ransom for many” (Mark 10:45). Jesus honors those who served voluntarily out of love. He denounces any kind of authoritative self-aggrandizement: “And whosoever shall exalt himself shall be abased; and he that shall humble himself shall be exalted” (Matthew 23:12). Jesus also valued relationships with children: “Let the little children come to me and do not try to stop them, for the kingdom of heaven belongs to such as these” (Matthew 19:14, NET). This was a radical departure from the cultural practice in the ancient Jewish world. By turning the cultural pecking order on its head, Jesus teaches that: “God is no respecter of persons” (Acts 10:34). God rewards a man for his humility not for his pride, and for his selfless service not his social status.

Conclusion

Jesus’ example and teachings counteract social bigotry that inhibit human respect and family unity. The cultural baggage of the ancient worlds had not only caused a gulf between fellow humans, but also between humanity and God. God shattered cultural restrictions and taught that all Christians should treat all humans equally.680 From the time of Jesus’ birth to the apostolic church, God elevated women and children to a place of dignity.

At the same time Jesus planted subtle seeds of truth that, when nurtured, have the potential to develop into respectful relationships founded on mutual support and love. All who internalize Jesus’ teachings can receive freedom from their own culture or other baggage by “relying wholly upon the merits of him who is mighty to save” (2 Nephi 31:19; also Alma 7:14; 34:18; D&C 133:47; Isaiah 63:1).

Because all fall short, Christ will repair the breach between humanity and God, and be-tween fellow human beings. His healing power comes as pure love. The work of becoming “one” through love opens up wonderfully brilliant possibilities. It potentially restores the promise of Eden—to live sublimely in the presence of God alongside those who are most dear to u

679 Isaiah 49:16 and 52:13-14 also include prophecies about a “suffering servant” as the promised Messiah. 680 Parales, Hidden Voices: Biblical Women, 50. In Parales opinion, the Lord “died to end relationships of dominance and submission based on power structures (Matthew 20:20-28).”

Appendix 1

Twelve Historic Definitions of Biblical

Names, Events, Dates, & Peoples

The church organization between the death of the Lord and the death of the apostles (approximately AD 100) is referred to as the Apostolic Church. The four Gospels and the Epistles are our firsthand source for information on Christian family life during this era.681 2. Babylonian Captivity

Political animosity arose between Babylon and Judea in the late seventh century BC. Some Israelites left Judea just prior to the final and most destructive Babylonian invasions, including Lehi and his family in 600 BC. Most Israelites were deported to Babylon in waves. The first wave took many educated and wealthy people, such as the prophet Daniel. Another large group included King Zachariah in approximately 587 BC. Their exile ended under King Cyrus in 538 BC (2 Chronicles 36:23).

Yet the majority of the Jews did not return to Palestine. By counting the number of exiled priesthood holders, we find that one sixth who were taken captive returned to Judea.682 Many had become Hellenized and chose to stay in Babylon or moved to lands across the Mediterranean. Those who did return found their land populated in part with Gentiles and they were no longer a separate people.

The time between the New and Old Testaments is known as the intertestamental period. Christians refer to the era from Malachi (c. 420 BC) to John the Baptist as “400 years of silence,” because it was the time without the voice of a prophet. A brief overview of what happened in the Jewish world during those centuries is described in Appendix 2 of this book.683

681 Luke wrote the book of Acts chronologically, however that is not the case with the Epistles. When fourth-century church leaders closed the canon and systematized the Christian scripture, they placed the Epistles in order by their length. The author who wrote the most was first, Paul, then James, Peter, etc. Each author’s epistles were arranged by length—except for Hebrews, who’s authorship was debated, so it was placed at the end of the Pauline corpus. 682 Raymond Brown, The Birth of the Messiah (New York: Doubleday, 1979 and 1999), 258 (pages taken from 1979 edition). “18,000 priests and Levites in Palestine in Jesus’ time.”

683 The Apocrypha can be found in some Bibles and includes: 1 and 2 Esdras, 1 and 2 Maccabees, Tobias, Judith, Ecclesiasticus or Wisdom of Sirach, Baruch .

Deuteronomy announced the pilgrimage feasts: “Three times in a year shall all thy males appear before the LORD thy God” (Deuteronomy 16:16). Jewish pilgrims from around the Roman Empire traveled to their holy city, Jerusalem, for special feast weeks. 684 During pilgrimages, Jerusalem’s population swelled from ten to possibly one hundred times its normal size of twenty-five to fifty-five thousand.685 The three major pilgrimage feasts spanned the warmer half of the year: Passover fell in the early spring, Pentecost fifty days later, and Feast of Tabernacles in the autumn (Exodus 23:16-17).686

a. Passover or Feast of Unleavened Bread remembers the flight of the children of Israel

out of Egypt on the night when God slew the first-born Egyptians. Hebrews sacrificed a lamb and spread the blood over their doors so that the destroying angel would pass over them. They left in haste without the required time for their bread to rise; hence, it is also known as the feast of unleavened bread (Exodus 12:17).

b. Pentecost, Feast of Weeks, or First Fruits, celebrates the first barley harvest, and

remembers the time when Moses led the fleeing children of Israel to Mount Sinai, and presented the people to the Lord (Exodus 23:16).

c. Tabernacles, Booths, or Sukkot marks the “ingathering” of the final harvest

(Deuteronomy 16:3; Leviticus 23:34). The feast renews the covenant between God and Israel—which at one time included reading the Torah every seventh year. The booths recalled the days when Israel wandered in the desert and the Lord illuminated the camp by night with a pillar of fire and by day with a cloud.

Although the feasts were initially for all, by the time of Herod’s Temple, rabbis

stipulated that women, children, and those incapable of the journey did not have to go.

All are subject to the command to appear excepting a deaf-mute, an imbecile, a child, one of doubtful sex, one of double sex, women, slaves that have not been freed, a man that is lame or blind or sick or aged, and one that cannot go up on his feet. . . . Who is deemed a child? Any that cannot ride on his father’s shoulders and go up from Jerusalem to the temple mount.687

684 The Jewish population (which included peoples from various tribes of Israel) were scattered throughout the Empire, but tended to cluster together in communities. . The five major Jewish city centers in the Roman Empire were: Jerusalem, Antioch, Alexandria, Jericho, and Rome Even though the New Testament writers use of “Jews” as a generalization for all Israelites, they also specify that Paul was a Benjaminite, Zacharias and Elisabeth from the tribe of Levi, and Anna from the tribe of Asher.

685 Jeremias, Jerusalem, 83. Bruce, New Testament History, 38. Historians looking at the whole country estimate the population of all Palestine between 500,000 and 600,000. Although Josephus’ numbers sound very exaggerated, he claimed that over two million pilgrims celebrated a Passover. Josephus, Antiquities, XVII.217; Jewish Wars, 2.12. 686 Judith Baskin and Kenneth Seeskin, The Cambridge Guide to Jewish History, Religion, and Culture (New York, NY: Cambridge University, 2010), 300. A more complete list of all the Jewish holy days span the whole year: spring—Passover, Leg B’Omer, Shauvot; summer—Tishb’av; fall—Rosh Hashanah, Yom Kippur, Sukkot, Shemini, Atzeret, Simchat Torah, Hanukkah; winter—tu B’Shevat, Purim. 687 Mishnah, Moed: Hagigah. 1.1. Rabbinic debate continued to ask, who is a child: “And the School of Hillel say: Any that cannot hold his father’s hand and go up.” Hillel, the father of Rabbinism, led a school for those who desired a strict interpretation of the Mosaic and oral laws.

This optional list did not keep women, children, or disabled from attending though. It is clear that many females joined in other religious celebrations, too.688

a. Pharisees or “separatists”: The most popular and lasting group during the late Second

Temple period. According to Josephus, they were “the most accurate interpreters of the laws.”690 Their Scripture included: The Law, Prophets, Writings, and oral laws. They emphasized purity from following the rites of the oral laws, tithes of money and food, and strict Sabbath observance.691 They also believed in the resurrection.

b. Sadducees: Sadducees focused their belief in the Torah and the temple.692 As a result,

when the temple was destroyed, few of their sect and writings survived. One Sadducean author’s writings were preserved in the Apocrypha as: Ecclesiasticus or Sirach. The Sadducee party filled most of the chief priests' seats at the time of the New Testament. They did not believe in life after death, instead they believed that “one is survived by one’s good reputation and by one’s children.”693

c. Essenes: The strictest observers of The Law, the Essenes believed that the Jews had

apostatized and that the office of high priest had been corrupted. Retreating from society, they believed they were a remnant to save apostatized Israel. Their “teacher of Righteousness” taught celibacy and predestination to develop and protect priesthood purity.694 They lived in communal groups where they shared ownership and supported themselves through manual labor. They purified themselves through daily cold mikveh baths and wore white linen as the priests did. They ate their meals together, the evening meal in silence.695

688 Mishnah, Taanith, 4:8. Rabbi Gamaliel reported: “There were no happier days for Israel than . . . [when] the daughters of Jerusalem used to go forth in white raiment; and these were borrowed, that none should be abashed which had them not. . . . And the daughters of Jerusalem went forth to dance in the vineyards. And what did they say? ‘Young man, lift up thine eyes and see what thou wouldest choose for thyself: set not thine eyes on beauty, but set thine eyes on family; for Favor is deceitful and beauty is vain, but a woman that feareth the Lord she shall be praised.”

689 In addition to these major groups, there were Hasidim, Sicarii, and others. See Appendix 2. 690 Josephus, Antiquities of the Jews, XIII. 297-298. He claims there were 6,000 Pharisees. 691 Paul J. Achtemeier, Harper Collins’ Bible Dictionary (San Francisco, CA: HarperCollins, 1996), 842. 692 David Noel Freedman, ed., Anchor Bible Dictionary, (New York: Doubleday, 1992), 5.892. This opinion is not held by all biblical scholars. Jerome and other early church Fathers connected the name Sadducee with “righteous / saddiq,” possibly connecting the Sadducees to the ancient high priest family name of King David’s high priest, Zadok. By the end of the Second Temple, the positions allocated for chief priests were often given to those Sadducees willing to play political roles as liaisons between the Jewish people and Roman leaders. Jealous vying for political appointments fostered ulterior motives between some of the priesthood leadership of the era. The four Gospels credit the chief priests and scribes for condemning Jesus to death: “But with loud shouts they insistently demanded that he be crucified, and their shouts prevailed” (Luke 23:23, NIV; see also: Mark 14:43; 55; Matthew 27:20, 41, 62, John 11:57; 18:3, 35).

693 Judith R. Baskin and Kenneth Seeskin, The Cambridge Guide to Jewish History, Religion, and Culture (New York City, NY: Cambridge University Press, 2010), 45. “Passages from the Wisdom of Ben Sira express ideas that were also central to Sadduceeism (14:16-19).”

694 Baskin and Seeskin, The Cambridge Guide to Jewish History, 46. 695 Skolnik, Encyclopaedia Judaica, 6.511. Philo claims there were 4,000 Essenes (6.510).

d. Zealots: The zealots were Jewish nationalists who resisted Roman occupation of Israel.

Judas the Galilean, the most famous of the Zealots, led a revolt against paying taxes to the Emperor in AD 6. Their final attempt at freedom in AD 66 led to the Jewish war and the fall of Jerusalem in AD 70 and Masada in AD 74.696

After the destruction of the Second Temple, Jewish rabbis compiled the teachings of their greatest rabbis from the Second Temple era into the Mishnah. It roughly covers thoughts from the third century BC to the third century AD (edited and compiled between AD 180 and 220).697 The word Mishnah means to repeat or retell a story. An elaboration of the Mishnah in the form of rabbinic debate was published in the Gemara (or interpretation). In the fifth century AD, both the Mishnah and Gemara were combined into the Talmud (which translates from Hebrew as “Learning” or “Instruction”).

In the Bible, numbers often had symbolic meaning and were used figuratively as well as literally. Here are two of the most common uses:

● 7—Whole, complete, perfect—stemming from God’s creation of the earth in seven

periods (Genesis 1:1-24); Noah’s experience with seven (Genesis 7:10; 8:10, 12); and every seventh day of the week being sanctified (Exodus 20:8-11). We find the number seven used regularly in the temple ritual (i.e., “And the priest shall … sprinkle of the blood seven times before the LORD” Leviticus 4:6, 16; 16:14, 19; etc.), and in the traditional feasts such as Pentecost: “Seven weeks shalt thou number unto thee: begin to number the seven weeks . . .” (Deuteronomy 16:9). We find Sabbatical years every seven years (Deuteronomy 15:1; 31:10), and Jubilee every seven time seven years (Leviticus 25:8). Jacob’s term of service for his wives and herds in Genesis 29 was seven years each. Pharaoh had a dream of seven cows foretelling the seven years of plenty and famine in Genesis 41. Solomon completed the temple in seven years in 1 Kings 6:38. Elisha prophesied a seven-year famine in 2 Kings 8:1. These are just a few examples of the biblical use of numbers to add meaning to its message.

● 40—Purification—stemming from a woman’s forty- day purification period after the

birth of a male, and forty times two for a female (Leviticus 12:2-8).698 It rained for forty days and nights on Noah’s ark (Genesis 7:4); the flood remained on the earth forty more days (Genesis 8:6); Moses prayed and fasted on Sinai for forty days and nights

696 Scott Hahn ed., Catholic Bible Dictionary (New York City, NY: Random House, 2009), 970. 697 Anat Feinberg, “Mishnah,” Skolnik, Encyclopedia Judaica, 14. 319-330. Rabbis Hillel and Shammai from the time of Herod’s Temple made up most of the “Law by the Scribes / Soferim.” Jewish scribes divided the Talmud into six sections called “Orders / Sedarim.” They comprise 63 Tractates / Massektoth,” with 36½ having a commentary or Gemara.

698 See footnote 158.

(for possibly two occasions, Deuteronomy 9:18); and the children of Israel wandered in the wilderness for forty years (Numbers 14:33; 32:13).

Rabbis carefully counted each law written in the Torah and found 613 separate commandments.699 They debated over the best way to implement and protect these Mosaic commandments and decided to “raise up many disciples and make a fence around The Law.”700 They figuratively fenced in their beloved Law of Moses with ten thousand commandments that became known as the “oral laws” or oral Torah. These extra rules systematized the law of Moses and governed a pious Jewish life. The oral laws functioned as a buffer zone around the Torah to avoid any chance of breaking one of the laws of Moses. For example, from the commandment to keep the Sabbath day holy came thirty-nine definitions of work, which then developed into hundreds of oral laws detailing forbidden work on the Sabbath.701 9. Scripture—Septuagint—Torah

After the Greeks conquered the Mediterranean nations, Greek became the universal

translated into Greek, known as the Septuagint (LXX). According to legend, the translation was 702 made by seventy-two Hellenistic Jews from Alexandria in seventy-two days. language of choice for several centuries. By 250 BC, the Hebrew sacred scriptures were

By the time of the New Testament, Jews across the Empire used the Septuagint or Greek

translation for their scriptures. Each of these books of scripture were a separate scroll. Many smaller Jewish communities only had a few of the scrolls. Almost every synagogue (place of worship for Jews) had a copy of the Torah, and wealthier communities had more scrolls. The New Testament quotes most often the Torah, Isaiah and the Psalms.703 This is consistent with the scriptural scrolls found in the Dead Sea caves—that were stored by 70 AD—where the most prevalent scrolls were Deuteronomy, Isaiah, and Psalms.

By the time of Jesus, the Jewish “Scriptures” included:

● “The Law,” also known as the first five books of Moses, the Torah, or Pentateuch (Genesis,

Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers, and Deuteronomy). Most Israelites across the Roman Empire,

including the Essenes, Pharisees, Sadducees, and even their distant relatives, the Samaritans,

699 Macy Nulman, Encyclopedia of Jewish Prayer (Lanham, MD: Rowman and Littlefield, 1996), 220. By the Middle Ages, prayer shawls incorporated 613 threads for the commandments; “According to the Talmud, wearing tzitzit is equal in merit with observing the entire Torah. The numerical value of the word tzitzit equals 613, the number of precepts in the Torah.”

700 Mishnah , Avoth, 1:1.

701 Mishnah, Moed: Shabbath, 7:4; 8:3, 8.5, 10.5, 6. See footnote 609 of this book for examples. 702 Stephen M. Wylen, The Jews in the Time of Jesus: An Introduction (New York: Paulist Press, 1996), 47. 703 Brown, Birth, 48. The New Testament authors recited many known Scriptures from the prophets. For example, in the Gospel of Matthew the author structured the book around fourteen Old Testament prophecies of the Messiah— each in conjunction with a phrase similar to this: “all this was done, that the scriptures of the prophets might be fulfilled” (Matthew 26:56). Matthew’s fourteen fulfillment citations can be found in: Matthew 1:22; 2:5b, 15, 17; 23; 3:3; 4:14; 8:17a; 12:17; 13:14a, 35; 21:4; 26:56; 27:9a. The number fourteen was significant in Hebrew orthography because it represented David.

held the Torah as their holiest writings.704 The “Law” was canonized by Ezra in 444 BC.

Whenever the New Testament refers to “the law” it refers to these five books of scripture.

● “The Writings” include Judges, Ruth, Esther, Chronicles, Ezra, Nehemiah, Ester, Job,

Psalms, Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, the Song of Solomon, and Lamentations (although different

translations of the Bible include different books).

● “The Prophets” were divided by length into major and minor prophets. They extended from

Joshua to Malachi, approximately 1300 to 450 BC

Closing the Canon

Most Jews did not feel the need to close the Jewish canon until after the destruction of the

Temple. The Law had been canonized for centuries, but other “Writings” were debated and the numbers fluctuated for centuries. Most biblical scholars agreed that the Pharisees closed their canon somewhere between 150 and 200 CE.705 10. Second Temple (538 BC to 70)

The Babylonians destroyed Solomon’s Temple in 586 BC. Approximately fifty years later, a portion of the Jews returned to their homeland. Shortly thereafter, the Jewish Governor Zerubbabel began the plans to rebuild their temple (Ezra 3:2; 4:2; 5:2; Ezekiel 1, 7; 2 Chronicles 3:1). Zerubbabel’s Temple, was finished in 516 BC. Other additions and updates were made over the next four centuries.

In 20 BC, the eccentric builder “King Herod the Great” began an extensive reconstruction of the temple. Technically speaking, Herod’s Temple (20 BC-70 AD) was still part of the Second Temple. With careful engineering and land-fill, Herod’s crews flattened and expanded the size of Mount Moriah’s natural peak to include a thirty-five-acre expanse.706 The extension incorporated remains from Solomon’s royal palace and stables.707 Ten thousand skilled craftsmen finished Herod’s designs eighty-three years later. A Jewish proverb exclaimed, “He that has not seen the temple of Herod has never known what beauty is.”708 Similarly, Josephus described its exquisite details:

704 nd Bernhard W. Anderson, Understanding the Old Testament, 2 Ed. (New Jersey: Prentice-Hall, 1957) 554-555.

Scripture (i.e., Ben Sira, Ecclesiasticus, Ezra 4). 705 Timothy H. Lim, The Jews had an open canon until AD 90, at the “Council of Jamnia,” a rabbinic academy sought to add more The Formation of the Jewish Canon (New Haven, CT: Yale Univ Press, 2013), 180.

706 David Noel Freedman, ed., Eerdmans’ Dictionary of the Bible (Grand Rapids, MI: Eerdmans Publishing, 2000), 1283. The temple expanse covered 144,000 square meters, or a little over 35 acres. Josephus, Against Apion, I. 22. Josephus described the lot: “There is about the middle of the city a wall of stone, whose length is five hundred feet, and the breadth a hundred cubits, with double cloisters; wherein there is a square altar, not made of hewn stone, but composed of white stones gathered together, having each side twenty cubits long, and its altitude ten cubits. Hard by it is a large edifice, wherein there is an altar and a candlestick, both of gold, and in weight two talents: upon these there is a light that is never extinguished, either by night or by day. There is no image, nor any thing, nor any donations therein; nothing at all is there planted, neither grove, nor anything of that sort. The priests abide therein both nights and days, performing certain purifications, and drinking not the least drop of wine while they are in the temple.”

707 History remembers King Herod the Great for his jealousy-motivated murders of thousands, and for his grandiose building programs. The latter included eight major fortresses (Masada, Machaerus, Herodium in Perea, Alexandria, Cypros, Hurcania, and the Herodium southeast of Bethlehem), two elaborate Hellenistic cities (Augustus and Caesarea Maritima), and his crowning jewel, the temple of Jerusalem. 708 Babylonian Talmud , Baba Bathra. 4a.

Now the outward face of the temple in its front . . . was covered all over with plates of gold

of great weight. Thus, at the first rising of the sun, it reflected back a very fiery splendor,

causing those who forced themselves to look upon it to turn their eyes away, just as they

would have done at the sun’s own (blinding) rays.709 Only seven years after its completion, in AD 70, the Romans destroyed the temple.710 Therefore references to the Second Temple era mean the time from when Zerubbabel initiated construction on the temple in 538 BC until the Romans destroyed Herod’s expanded temple in 70 AD. This overlaps with portions of the Old Testament, the intertestamental era, and New Testament. 11. Synagogue

During the Second Temple period, the word synagogue referred to either a religious service or a building.711 Often small neighborhoods of Jews gathered in larger homes for their worship. If a community had a large enough Jewish population and adequate funding, it might have a designated building of worship or synagogue.712 Synagogues were used for Scripture study, prayer, community meetings, storage of archives and Sabbath worship. They were also used as judgment halls, schoolhouses, treasuries, hostels, council halls, and banquet halls. In first

noon. They sang psalms, recited the shema (a special group of Scriptures found in Deuteronomy 713 6:4-9; 11:13-21; and Numbers 15:37-41) and eighteen benedictions. century Palestine, the Sabbath worship service began early Saturday morning and lasted until Men read a section from

709 Josephus, War, 5.222-23. The quote continues, “But this temple appeared to strangers, when they were at a distance, like a mountain covered with snow. For as to those parts of it that were not gilt, they were exceedingly white. On its top it had spikes with sharp points to prevent any pollution of it by birds sitting upon it.” Josephus also described two bronze pillars overlaid with gold, ten gold lampstands, seventy golden lamps, cedar and cypress gates covered with silver and gold, porticos made up of forty-eight bronze pillars, twelve metal legs of the laver, an altar, and four hundred bronze bells. Charlesworth, Jesus and Temple, 6-7. 710 Alec Garrard, The Splendor of the Temple (Grand Rapids, MI: Kregel, 2001), 12. Different historians claim different dates, for the start and finish of Herod’s Temple—but always within a year or two. For religious purity, only priests were allowed to work on the construction of the Sanctuary. King Herod trained ten thousand skilled artisans, one thousand of whom were priests, as stonemasons or carpenters to oversee the other nine thousand builders and one thousand machines. Supposedly, temple worshipers never missed a day of offering sacrifices throughout the decades of reconstruction. See Charlesworth, Jesus and Temple, 5; and Appendix 2. 711 Howard Clark Kee and Lynn H. Cohick, Evolution of the Synagogue (Harrisburg, PA: Trinity Press, 1999), 91. “The basic meaning of the Greek synagogue is ‘a gathering, a collection,’ and can be used either of people or of things . . . Jews in antiquity coined the word proseuche to designate a place (usually a building) of prayer.” See also 12, 14, 17, 20. Scripture scrolls were found in the synagogue in Masada. First century Jews referred to places of worship as synagogue and proseuche (Josephus, Against Apion, 14.216; 16.164; Vit. 277ff; 290; 295; BJ 2.289-92; Matthew 9:35; Mark 13:9; Luke 4:16-30; Acts 9:20; 13:15; 18:4, 17). 712 From the time of Herod’s Temple archaeologists have uncovered synagogues in Jerusalem, Masada, the Herodium, and Capernaum, and dating to 246-21 BC, near Alexandria. Before the destruction of Jerusalem, other buildings identified as synagogues appear in Magdala, Chorazin, Shuafat, Kiryat Sefer, and Jericho, and outside of

Judaica, 19. 364-366. 713 Skolnik Palestine in Delos, Ostaia, and Gamla. Michael Avi-Yonah, “Synagogue Historical Roots,” Skolnik, Encyclopedia , Encyclopedia Judaica, 1.73-34. From the time of the Second Temple, Jews offered a set “eighteen

benedictions,” which began by referring to God: 1. of the patriarchs, 2. nature, and 3. sanctification. The prayer then petitioned God for: 4. understanding, 5. repentance, 6. forgiveness, 7. redemption, 8. healing, 9. food, 10. gathering of exiles, 11. restore His righteous reign; 12. against heretics, 13. mercy for the righteous, 14. Jerusalem, 15. the the Torah, and the Prophets (i.e., Isaiah, Jonah, etc.) and expounded on it.714 Their service closed with the priestly blessing from Numbers 6:24-26.715 Synagogue worship differed for men and women.716 Women did not read the Torah, give their opinion, or verbally pray during the service.717

a. Ben Sira (born c. 170 BC718): The author of the longest book in the Apocrypha,

Ecclesiasticus (also known as Sirach, or the Wisdom of Sirach, or The Book of the All-

Virtuous Wisdom of Joshua ben Sira). His writings harmonize with Sadducees’ thought.

His writings are not included among the hundreds of scriptural citations in the New

Testament, but they are referenced in the Talmud. He worked in Jerusalem as a scribe and

associated with the intellectual aristocracy. His conservative voice called for obedience to

God’s laws and had a lasting influence on Jewish society.

b. Philo of Alexandria (20 BC-AD50): An educated devout Jewish writer from the

Hellenistic world of Alexandria, Egypt. He studied Greek as well as Jewish thought. He

admired Plato and envisioned himself a Jewish philosopher. He tried to reconcile biblical

teachings to Greek philosophy. His ideas heavily influenced Jewish and Christian thought.

c. Josephus (AD 37-100): A Jewish priest, Pharisee, military commander, and scholar. As an 719 eyewitness of Herod’s Temple, he is arguably our best source for temple information. After leading a rebellion in Galilee, he surrendered to the Romans. Titus took him to Rome to write the history of the Jews for his Roman captors. Scholars often question Josephus’ numbers and often assume they are exaggerated.

messianic king, 16. hear our prayers, 17. return God’s presence to the temple, and 18. thanks to God for all his mercies. The prayer had slight variations for certain Sabbath services or holy days. 714 Craig S. Keener, The IVP Bible Background Commentary (Downers Grove, IL: InterVarsity Press, 1993), 56. A Jewish man stood to read the assigned Scripture passage of the day and then sat down to discuss it. This signified the higher place of God’s word over man’s interpretation (see Luke 4:16, 20-21). 715 Joseph A. Fitzmyer, The Anchor Bible: The Gospel According to Luke I-IX (New York: Doubleday, 1981), 531. 716 Mishnah, Kiddushin, 4:13. The Mishnah forbade women from teaching in the synagogue. Gender separation and silencing in religious meetings led to prejudices about the religious nature of women. If participating in the public worship taught one to be more holy, then women missed out.

717 Dan W. Clanton, The Good, the Bold, and the Beautiful: The Story of Susanna and its Renaissance Interpretation—The Library of Hebrew Bible/Old Testament Studies (Bloomsbury T&T Clark Intern., 2006), 23. 718 Baskin and Seeskin, The Cambridge Guide to Jewish History, 45. This text claims Ben Sira wrote approximately 200–175 BC, while scholars move the dates a decade later or so. The citations from Ecclesiasticus in this book are from various Bible editions that include the Apocrypha (e.g., KJV, RSV), and Charles, ed., The Apocrypha and Pseudepigrapha of the Old Testament. For more see Appendix 2, “Ben Sira.” 719 James H. Charlesworth, ed., Jesus and Temple—Textual and Archaeological Explorations (Minneapolis, MN: Fortress Press, 2014), 2.

Appendix 2

Political, Social and Religious Changes

In Judea during the Intertestamental Era

Although this book deals with the era of the New Testament, this appendix provides some historical context to help the reader understand how and why things became the way they were by the time of the New Testament. Between the Old and New Testaments, political, religious, and social changes altered the way women were treated and how religion was perceived. This appendix briefly touches on six areas of change that affected Jewish families in the first century—changes to: politics, the law of Moses, women, family life, messianic hope, and temple rituals.

In 332 BC, Alexander the Great conquered Judea. For the next three centuries, Hellenistic rulers governed Israel.720 The Jews were allowed to continue to practice their religion as they pleased until 170 BC. At that point, Antiochus IV arrived in Jerusalem and severely persecuted the Jews. He marched into the city, burning, killing, and plundering everyone and everything.721 He decimated the Jewish leadership and removed the priesthood line of authority.722 He killed Jews who did not renounce the Torah and eat pork. Most upsetting, Antiochus IV sacked Zerubbabel’s Temple, installed images of pagan gods, rededicated the temple to a Greek god, and performed sexual rites in the temple court.723

Rather than submit to Antiochus IV’s demands, a few devout Jews, known as the Hasidim (pious ones), went into hiding in the foothills of Judea. One of those, a priest named Mattathias the Hasmonean, began a revolt with the help of his five sons. In the Apocrypha, Book of Maccabees, Mattathias gathered Jewish support against the Syrian assassins by crying out, “Let everyone who is zealous for the law and supports the covenant come out with me!” (1 Maccabees 2:27). His son Judas led their supporters to victory in the ensuing three-year guerrilla war. Judas earned the nicknamed Maccabee, or “hammer,” hence the rebellion’s name: the Maccabean Revolt. At the end of the revolt, another one of Mattathias’ five sons became the next high priest in Jerusalem.

As soon as the priests retook possession of their sacred city in 165 BC, cleansed Zerubbabel’s Temple. 1 Maccabees 4:37-40 reads:

720 Wylen, Jews in the Time of Jesus, 49. After Alexander’s death, his empire was divided between his two generals: Ptolemy in Egypt (from 301 to 200 BC), and Seleucids in Syria-Mesopotamia (from 200 to 140 BC). These dynasties bordered Israel and vied for the right to govern her. The Ptolemies did not restrict Jewish religious affairs. 721 Skolnik, Encyclopaedia Judaica, 2.203. Antiochus IV was a Seleucid ruler. 722 F. F. Bruce, New Testament History (New York: Doubleday, 1969), 3. Since the time of King David, the Zadok family held the office of high priest (2 Samuel 8:17; 15:24-29; 1 Kings 1:39; Ezekiel 44:15; 48:11; Nehemiah 11:11; etc.). But in 171 BC, an ardent Hellenizer named Menelaus bribed his way into the office of high priest. 723 Jonathan A. Goldstein, 1 Maccabees: A New Translation with Introduction and Commentary (Garden City, NY: Doubleday-Anchor Bible, 1976), 277; 156-157.

The entire army assembled, and they went up to Mount Zion. They saw the temple laid

desolate and the altar profaned and the gates burned and the courts overgrown with plants

as “in a thicket” or “like one of the mountains” and the chambers laid in ruins. They rent

their garments and made great lamentation and put on ashes. They prostrated themselves

upon the ground and sounded the signal trumpets and cried out to Heaven.724 After rebuilding the altar and purifying the sanctuary, they made new sacred vessels. The priests prepared the Holy Place by returning a menorah, table for shewbread, and incense altar to their traditional positions. The priests purified themselves and prepared to offer sacrifices for the temple’s rededication (1 Maccabees 4:41-53).

Unfortunately, no fire came down from heaven to burn the sacrifices as it had for Moses’ Tabernacle and Solomon’s Temple; no sign of the Divine Presence was visible (Exodus 40:34-38; 2 Chronicles 7:1-3). The Hasmonaean family of priests decided to move ahead in faith and determination and made their own fire (1 Maccabees 4:50-61; 2 Maccabees 10:1-8).

In a later rabbinic tradition, another story developed that associated a miracle with the rededication of the Second Temple. Traditionally, the dedication was to last for eight days (Leviticus 8:35-9:1, 5). But the legend claims that the priests did not have enough sacred oil to light the menorah for more than one day.725 Miraculously, the cruse of oil lasted for all eight days, giving continuous light to the temple.726 The rabbis described the miracle of the enduring light as the sign that God had accepted their efforts. Jews remember the miracle during Hanukah or “festival of lights.”

Following Mattathias’ and his sons’ deaths, the Hasmonean dynasty and other priestly families kept the temple functioning under Greek and Roman rule. Because the Jews felt outnumbered by the growing Gentile population in their land, the Hasmoneans sought to expand their numbers by annexing another Semitic line, the Idumeans, their distant cousins through Isaac’s son Esau, who lived in southern Palestine.727 Their expansion was not sufficient, and in 63 BC, the Roman general Pompey conquered Palestine. The Romans maintained control of Palestine until 300 AD.

In 47 BC, Julius Caesar gave the right to govern Judea to one of his friends, Antipater. Antipater’s family traced their genealogy though the Idumean race, who had been adopted into Judaism a century earlier. Antipater became governor of Galilee in 47 BC. His second son, Herod (73-4 BC)728 replaced him in Galilee. After several astute political moves and a marriage

724 Ibid., 272.

725 Ibid., 283; “The legend of the miraculous cruse of oil is probably derived from the old prayer ‘Al hannissim as understood by the rabbi. . . . First Maccabees, now rejected by pious Jews, told only of victories. Though, Second Maccabees told of miracles, it, too, if known, could be rejected as a work in Greek and as unreliable because of the author’s well-intentioned pious fictions.”

726 Ibid. Jewish feasts remembered miracles: Passover with the miraculous freedom from Egypt; Pentecost with Moses’ miraculous meeting with God on Mount Sinai; and later rabbis associated miraculous shelters with the Feast of Tabernacles.

727 Benedikt Eckhardt, ed. Jewish Identity and Politics Between the Maccabees and Bar Kokhba: Supplement to the Journal for the Study of Judaism (Leiden, Netherlands: Brill, 2011), 100-101. There is much debate as to whether or not the “Hasmonean expansion” of the Idumeans was a voluntary or forced conversion to Judaism. 728 nd Ernest L. Martin, The Birth of Christ Recalculated, 2 Ed. (Pasadena, CA: Foundation for Biblical Research, 1980). Herod, has a questionable death date as Martin elaborates. It is often estimated at 4 BC, because Josephus said it followed an eclipse and preceded Passover. Many scholars fix the eclipse of 12-13 March 4 BC, as Herod’s death date. However, Martin rejects that date in favor of one of the other solar and lunar eclipses near that time: “(1) Night of 15-16 September, 5 B.C.; (2) Night of 12-13 March, 4 B.C.; (3) Night of 9-10 January 1 B.C.; and (4) Early to the Jewish princess, Mariamne Hasmonean, Herod became king of Judea in 37 BC.729 The Jews did not receive him willingly, and much blood was shed before Herod gained control.

Even though the Jews despised Herod, he became known as Herod the Great. His skills in engineering and manufacturing were unparalleled in ancient Israel, and he was renowned throughout the ancient world for his ingenious and grandiose building projects. In addition to reconfiguring Mount Moriah in order to double the size of the Second Temple and its courtyards,730 he also engineered amazing water supplies to Jerusalem, the Judean Desert, and Masada, Antonia, and the Herodion. He designed and constructed elaborate fortresses and elegant cities such as Caesarea Maritima, which is particularly impressive because of its distinctive deep-water harbor.731

Josephus described Herod the Great as pathologically jealous (for example, he killed his wife Mariamne and his sons whom he saw as potential usurpers).732 In another demonstration of paranoia, he disassembled the Jews’ religious ruling council, the Sanhedrin, in order to protect his political control. King Herod robbed the office of high priest from the ancient lines of Aaron by arbitrarily dismissing and appointing new high priests as his political puppets as often as he wished.733 Herod appointed and dismissed his high priest and several chief priests depending on their political willingness to work with him, not on their religious integrity.734

This stripped the high priest’s office of its sacred nature. The natural outcome of this new order was rivalry between the chief priests for the powerful ruling position of high priest. Looking back on this time, the Talmud apologized: “In the First Temple, the high-priests served, the son succeeding the father, and they were eighteen in number. But in the Second Temple they got the high-priesthood for money; . . . they destroyed each other by witchcraft, so that some reckon 80 high-priests during that period.”735

These and several other upheavals in political and religious leadership left the Jews divided in their loyalties. The Jews from the late Second Temple era splintered into various opposing groups: Pharisees, Sadducees, Essenes, Zealots, Hasidim, Sicarii, and others.736 Each group claimed that its interpretation of the Torah was accurate, and the first four sects in the list evolved into the major parties during the time of the New Testament. The pharisaic rabbis lived a strict interpretation of Moses’ laws and codified thousands of additional oral laws. The Sadducees comprised the temple aristocracy, with a literal interpretation of The Law that they

April Sixth,” BYU Studies, vol. 22 (Summer 1982), 3.356. 729 Skolnik, evening of 29 December, 1 B.C.” Also see S. Kent Brown, Wilfred Griggs, H. Kimball Hansen, “Book Review: Encyclopaedia Judaica, 9.32. Herod demonstrated his political savvy in his ability to ingratiate himself

to different rulers. Initially he developed a friendship with Julius Caesar, followed by one with Cassius, Marc Antony, and later with Caesar Augustus.

730 Josephus, Antiquities, XV.11.5; Wars. V.5.1

731 Ehud Netzer, The Architecture of Herod the Great Builder (Tübingen: Mohr Siebeck, 2006). 732 Josephus, Antiquities, XVIII, 3-22. Herod ended up marrying ten women who gave him fifteen sons and daughters.

733 Moses directed Aaron, Eleazar, and each of his other worthy descendants to serve, in turn, as sole reigning high priest for his lifetime (Numbers 3:32; 4:16). During the Babylonian captivity, Ezekiel called those priests who descended from King David’s late high priest, Zadok (1 Kings 1:32-34; 1 Chronicles 16:39), to keep their lineage pure; “Neither shall they take for their wives a widow, nor her that is put away [divorced]: but they shall take maidens of the seed of the house of Israel, or a widow that had a priest before” (Ezekiel 44:22). 734 Jeremias, Jerusalem, 159.

735 Jerusalem Talmud, Yoma 1.1.

736 David Noel Freedman, ed., Eerdmans Dictionary of the Bible (Grand Rapids, MI: Eerdmans Publishing, 2000), 712. recorded in their “book of Decrees.”737 The Essenes rejected the authority of the temple priests as corrupt, and left society to create holy communities based on Levitical purity.738 Zealots fixated on overthrowing Roman occupation of Judea. In between all this diversity, most Jews longed for the re-emergence of a prophet or promised Messiah and freedom from Roman rule.

With the growing importance of the oral laws, the intertestamental period also saw a change in opinion towards women. By the time of the New Testament, we find a blatant difference in the attitudes toward women from those expressed in the Old Testament.739 To explore those differences we will compare a few of the writings on women from the Old Testament with the Apocrypha.

The book of Genesis shows examples of wives and daughters who were allowed to lead Israel (Judges 4:4-8), move freely in public life (Ruth 1:22), look after sheep (Genesis 29:6), draw water (Genesis 24:13; also 1 Samuel 9:11), visit each other (Genesis 34:1), and talk with men (Genesis 24:15-21; 29:11; also 1 Samuel 9:11-13). Great wives and mothers were venerated as exemplars, including five women identified as prophetesses.740 One of those, the prophetess Deborah, also served as a judge (Judges 4-5). Another prophetess, Hildah, counseled kings (2 Kings 22:14-19). In short, opportunities for women in the Old Testament were liberal in comparison to a Jewess’ options during the period of the New Testament.

The Old Testament honored many women by recording their stories. One such story is that of Ruth, the Moabitess convert, who chose to leave her people to worship Jehovah, which, in turn, supported her mother-in-law: “for whither thou goest, I will go; and where thou lodgest, I will lodge: thy people shall be my people, and thy God my God” (Ruth 1:16). Ruth also initiated her marriage to Boaz, who replied: “Fear not; I will do to thee all that thou requirest: for all the city of my people doth know that thou art a virtuous woman” (Ruth 3:11). Both King David and the promised Messiah are descendants of the union of Ruth and Boaz.

Another example of a noble female character from the Old Testament is Queen Esther who stood up for her people and her convictions before the Persian king (Esther 7). Her uncle testified of the hand of the Lord in her opportunity to save her people, “who knoweth whether thou art come to the kingdom for such a time as this?” (Esther 4:14).

Many other Old Testament writers spoke highly of women. Solomon eulogized a virtuous wife in Proverbs 31, leaving a clear picture of what the king valued in womanhood. For twenty verses he emphasized her independence, self-motivation, industry, service, virtue, preparedness, wisdom, and qualities as a partner. Isaiah praised nurturing mothers who possess attributes of God (Isaiah 49:15; 66:13).741

The Apocrypha stories are less well known, so they will receive a little more detail here. The book of Judith records an example of a strong woman who helped rebuild the Jewish nation after the Babylonian exile in the fifth century. Judith, the widow of Manasses, is an ancient type

737 Skolnik, Encyclopaedia Judaica, 15.455.

738 Ibid., 6.511.

739 Bromiley, International Standard Bible Encyclopedia, 1.1093. 740 Prophetesses mentioned in the Old Testament: Miriam (Exodus 15:20), Deborah (Judges 4:4), Hildah (2 Kings 22:14), Noadiah (Nehemiah 6:14), and Isaiah’s wife (Isaiah 8:3).

741 James H. Charlesworth, “Did Any Author in the Biblical Tradition Imagine God Having Female Breasts?” (Princeton, NJ: 2015), unpublished paper, in author’s possession. of “Joan of Arc” (Judith 8:7). She promised to deliver her nation from the Assyrians and volunteered for military service.742 The leaders in Jerusalem trusted her to lead them, even as a woman. She discreetly kept her Judaic purity by avoiding forbidden foods and maintaining her chastity. She also gained the trust of the enemy. According to the story, our heroine got Nebuchadnezzar’s general drunk and then cut off his head. In gratitude for saving the nation, the high priest Joakim personally blessed Judith (15:8). The book ends with a lengthy hymn of praise to Judith (16:1-17).743

Another book in the Apocrypha, Second Maccabees, praises a mother for upholding The

Law and honored her as an example for all to see: “Now the mother was to be admired above measure, and worthy to be remembered by good men” (2 Maccabees 7:20). She and her seven sons resisted the tyranny of the Syrians by facing a cruel death rather than eat pork.

[She] who beheld seven sons slain in the space of one day, and bore it with a good courage,

for the hope that she had in God: She bravely exhorted every one of them in her own

language, being filled with wisdom: and joining a man's heart to a, woman's thought She said

to them: I know not how you were formed in my womb: for I neither gave you breath, nor

soul, nor life, neither did I frame the limbs of every one of you. But the Creator of the world,

that formed the nativity of man, and that found out the origin of all, he will restore to you

again in his mercy, both breath and life, as now you despise yourselves for the sake of his

laws (2 Maccabees 7:21-23).

After watching the Syrians torture six of her sons, the overlord asked the mother to convince her youngest son to deny his faith so that he could live to be rich. Instead this noble woman upheld her faith and encouraged her son to do so as well.

Bending herself towards him, mocking the cruel tyrant, she said in her own language: My

son, have pity upon me, that bore thee nine months in my womb, and gave thee suck three

years, and nourished thee, and brought thee up unto this age. I beseech thee, my son, look

upon heaven and earth, and all that is in them: and consider that God made them out of

nothing, and mankind also: o thou shalt not fear this tormentor, but being made a worthy

partner with thy brethren, receive death, that in that mercy I may receive thee again with thy

brethren (2 Maccabees 7:27-29).

Because of this courageous act, the last son and mother were tortured until they, too, died. The text honors all eight family members for their bravery, faith, and integrity.

Later intertestamental writings do not share this positive view of women. One text in particular, Ecclesiasticus, borders on misogyny. Living in Jerusalem during the second century BC, Joshua Ben Sira worked as a scribe and sage and had a long-lasting influence. Archeologists and historians have found copies of Ben Sira’s text preserved in Masada, Dead Sea Scrolls,

742 This is one of the historical mistakes in the book—mixing up the Assyrian and Babylonian captivities of Israel. For more problems with the historicity of the text, see Michael D. Coogan, ed., The New Oxford Annotated Apocrypha: New Revised Standard Version, 4th ed. (England: Oxford University, Press, 2010), 31–36. 743 Judith 16:6-9. 2.

Septuagint, Apocrypha and Talmud.744 His proverb style writings include statements that demean women. It appears he was unhappy in his marriage as he wrote things like:

There is no poison above the poison of a serpent,

and there is no wrath above the wrath of a woman. . . .

[There is] little malice like the malice of a woman.

May the lot of the wicked fall upon her.

As a sandy ascent to the feet of the aged,

So is the woman of tongue to a quiet man.

Fall not through the beauty of a woman,

And be not ensnared by what she possesseth;

For hard slavery and a disgrace it is,

[If] a wife support her husband.

A humbled heart and a sad countenance

And a heart-wound, is an evil wife.

Hands that hand down, and palsied knees

For a wife that maketh not her husband happy.

From a woman did sin originate,

And because of her we all must die.

Give not water an outlet,

Nor power to a wicked woman.

If she go not as thou would have her

Cut her off from thy flesh.745

These verses (and the rest of his book) leave the reader assuming that the author believed that an ideal wife was a silent servant who submitted to all her husband’s commands and only spoke to praise him.

Between the two Testaments, many Jewish leaders reacted against the growing female freedoms allowed in Hellenistic society. Even though the Jews tried to remain a separate people, after they returned from their Babylonian captivity that became more and more challenging as the Greeks Hellenized the Mediterranean world from the fourth century on. By the time of the Second Temple, the majority of the Jews lived outside of Palestine.746 At the same time, within Palestine, Gentile neighbors brought some degree of Hellenization and Romanization to the

744 Skolnik, Encyclopedia Judaica, 3.376-377. Ben Sira’s Ecclesiasticus, is also known in Greek as Sirach, or the Wisdom of Sirach as described earlier.

745 Ben Sira, Ecclesiasticus, 25:15-26. Richard Green Moulton’s translation of the same verses reads, “Throw not thyself upon the beauty of a woman, and desire not a woman for her beauty. There is anger, and impudence, and great reproach, if a woman maintain her husband.”

746 Encyclopædia Britannica Online, s. v. "Diaspora", accessed March 23, 2015, http://www.britannica.com/

EBchecked/topic/161756/Diaspora. Going back to the sixth century BC, only a portion of the Jews returned to Palestine after the Babylonian captivity. “The largest, most significant, and culturally most creative Jewish Diaspora in early Jewish history flourished in Alexandria, in the first century BC, forty percent of the population was Jewish. Around the first century AD, an estimated 5,000,000 Jews lived outside Palestine, about four-fifths of them within the Roman Empire, but they looked to Palestine as the centre of their religious and cultural life.”

Jewish homeland. Hoping to maintain their old traditions and protect themselves from outside ideas, they developed a public and private division of life, with women living inside and men outside. Their houses were also arranged to discourage females from contact with any males outside their own homes. This female isolation and male domination generated a negative image of women over time.747

The seemingly pious practice of separation, the lack of communication between genders, and unrighteous dominion snuffed out the God-given marital mandate from Eden that directed husbands and wives to become “help meets” or co-equals: “And the LORD God said, It is not good that the man should be alone; I will make him an help meet for him . . . Therefore shall a man leave his father and his mother, and shall cleave unto his wife: and they shall be one flesh” (Genesis 2:18, 24). At the end of Joachim Jeremias’ treatise on Jerusalem at the Time of Jesus, he summarized, “We have therefore the impression that Judaism in Jesus’ time also had a very low opinion of women, which is usual in the Orient where she is chiefly valued for her fecundity, kept as far as possible, shut away from the outer world, submissive to the power of her father or her husband, and where she is inferior to men.”748 Generally speaking, by the time of the late Second Temple, women were not valued as equals with men, but viewed like servants. 4. Changes in the Messianic Hope

During the intertestamental period, rabbis and scribes combed through their Scriptures for promises of the coming Messiah. They looked for a conquering Messiah who would rid them of their foreign overlords. Rabbis counted 456 prophesies of the Messiah in the Old Testament.749 They collected prophecies that anticipated His coming, like the Psalms of Solomon, which was written during the late Second Temple period.

See, Lord, raise up for them their king, the son of David,

In the time which thou knowest, O God.

To reign over Israel thy servant;

And gird him with strength to shatter the unjust rulers…

He will possess the nations, to serve beneath his yoke;

He will glorify the Lord with the praise of all the earth,

He will cleanse Jerusalem in holiness, as it was of old,

That the nations may come from the ends of the earth to see his glory,

Bringing as gifts her sons who had fainted,

And to see the glory of the Lord with which God has glorified her.

A righteous king, taught by God, is their ruler, And

there will be no unrighteousness among them all his days,

747 See page 25, and chapter 1 “Segregation.”

748 Jeremias, Jerusalem, 359-376.

749Walter C. Kaiser, The Messiah in the Old Testament (Grand Rapids, MI: Zondervan, 1995), 29. “In some 558 rabbinic writings there are 456 separate OT passages used to refer to the Messiah.” The following numbers differ, but some claim the Pentateuch has seventy-five prophecies testifying of the coming Messiah, the Prophets 243, and

the writings 138. Carl E. Armerding, W. Ward Gasque, ed., A Guide to Biblical Prophecy (Eugene, OR: Wipf and Stock, 2001), 87.

For all will be holy, and their king the Anointed Lord.750 Exactly what they expected in their promised Messiah differed between Jewish groups and even within those groups.

Jews from the late Second Temple era could not agree if the promised Messiah was connected with the house of David (Genesis 49:10; Numbers 24:17; Micah 5:2), or the house of Joseph,751 or the priestly house of Aaron (as the Essenes thought).752 Zechariah 4:11-14 describes two anointed ones or Messiahs, often interpreted as one Messiah from Aaron.753 Another interesting tie to Aaron comes from Elisabeth. The only reference we have in Scripture to Mary’s blood lineage is through her kinswoman Elisabeth, “of the daughters of Aaron,” (Luke 1:5, 36).

Both New Testament genealogies give a lineage for Joseph (not Mary), and through different lineages, claim that Joseph was a descendant of David (Matthew 1:1, 16; Luke 3:23, 31). At that time, as an adopted son, Jesus would have claimed his father Joseph’s pedigree.754 However, if Mary shared a blood line with Elisabeth, “of the daughter of Aaron,” then Jesus may also have had an Aaronic blood line (Luke 1:5). Further evidence for this premise comes from an ancient document that listed Nazareth as a designated village where priests lived.755 Uncertain as this hypothesis is, it purports that Jesus’ mortal parentage also rendered Him both Priest and King (Hebrews 4:14).

The hope of a messiah waxed and waned over the years.756 Writings from the Dead Sea Scrolls describe three special Messiahs that represent, respectively, the “kingdom, priesthood, and prophecy.”757 By the time of the New Testament, we know of many who were primed and eagerly waiting for the Davidic Messiah’s arrival (i.e., Simeon the temple-goer in Luke 2:25-35; Anna the prophetess in Luke 2:36-38; the two disciples on the road to Emmaus in Luke 24:21; John and Andrew, who were first disciples of John the Baptist, as recorded in John 1:41; etc.).

750 Psalms of Solomon, 17:23, 32-36, quoted by F. F. Bruce, New Testament History (New York: Doubleday, 1969), 126. “The Psalms of Solomon have commonly been regarded as Pharisaic compositions, but they may more generally express the sentiments of any pious community cherishing the hope of Israel.” 751 Israel Knohl, “The Messiah Son of Joseph,” Biblical Archaeology Review (Sept/Oct 2008; vol. 34, no. 5), 58. There are Judaic traditions that speak of a Messiah ben Joseph. This idea is stated in the Babylonian Talmud, and also in a three-foot stone dating from around the first century BC that records the Messiah son of Joseph giving signs to David.

752 S. Kent Brown, Richard Neitzel Holzapfel, Between the Testaments: From Malachi to Matthew (2010), 197. 753 Coogan, Oxford History of the Biblical World, 189. Some Christians often interpret this as being fulfilled in the Aaronic line through John the Baptist and the Davidic line through Jesus of Nazareth. Amy-Jill Levine, Dale C. Allison Jr., John Dominic Crossan, eds., The Historical Jesus in Context (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2006), 113.

754 Brown, Birth, 89. At the time of the Second Temple, Jews traced their lineage through their paternal line. An adopted child would have assumed his new father’s genealogy. Because the two genealogies have more differences than similarities, some Bible readers rationalize that one is for Joseph and the other Mary—but this is neither scripturally nor culturally valid. “Even at first glance, however, this solution cannot be taken seriously: a genealogy traced through the mother is not normal in Judaism.”

755 Fitzmyer, Luke I-IX, 343. Even though Nazareth is not mentioned in the Old Testament, “a Hebrew inscription found in 1962 . . . listed the twenty-four priestly courses and the villages or towns where they were resident” with Nsrt, or Nazareth, as one of them.

756 Skolnik, Encyclopaedia Judaica, 14.111. “In the time of the Second Temple there was a greater variety of messianic figures than later.”

757 Ibid., “These two figures, the priest and the king, are important for the eschatology of the Dead Sea Sect. . . . The third figure occurring in the Dead Sea Scrolls with the two messiahs is the prophet of the Last Days. Thus, in the Dead Sea Scrolls there are three messianic figures.” LDS see the Prophet Joseph Smith as fitting the latter role. Also see 1 Maccabees 14:41.

The angel who appeared to the shepherds announced the Messiah’s birth, “Today in the town of David a Savior has been born to you; he is the Messiah, the Lord” (Luke 2:11, NIV).

Three decades later, locals debated, “Others said, ‘He is the Messiah.’ Still others asked, ‘How can the Messiah come from Galilee?’” (John 7:41, NIV). Yet others, like Andrew, recognized the fulfillment of the prophecies and felt a witness that Jesus was the promised anointed one. Excitedly, Andrew shared the news with his brother Peter, ‘“We have found the Messiah’ (which means Christ)” (John 1:41, ESV).

Many Jews, the Pharisees in particular, believed that the Mosaic law would save them eternally. During the Second Temple period, some Jews became obsessed with micromanaging each detail of the 613 commandments recorded in Genesis, Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers, and Deuteronomy (also known as The Law, Pentateuch, or Torah). They dissected Moses’ laws into ten thousand additional commandments known as the oral law. The Pharisees respected the oral laws as Scripture: “the authoritative interpretation of the Written Law.”758 The rabbinic tradition claimed that the oral laws were handed down from Moses as instructions on how to fulfill the commandments written in the Torah. Different groups of Jews interpreted them differently, and the Mishnah includes examples of different pharisaical schools of thought arguing over different ways to interpret The Law.759

God created The Law for a holy people, to prepare them to receive their Messiah (i.e., Isaiah 40:3; Malachi 3:1). Yet the Jews who accepted the oral laws as divine emphasized the minutiae of The Law, which often distracted them from seeing God’s overall purpose (2 Nephi 11:4; 25:24-27; Jacob 4:5). Over time, the oral laws became so important to the Pharisees that they “circumvent[ed] the Written Law.”760 They dedicated their lives to keeping each detail in order. The extra particulars of the oral laws restricted agency and brought an attitude of judgment and slavery to the oral laws. As one Jewish historian described, the oral laws became “the yoke of the kingdom of Heaven.”761

The oral laws affected, and in some cases crippled, the family unit. The daily routine of the home was tightly controlled by detailed boundaries. Every aspect of home life—from food preparation, cleaning, washing, eating, to Sabbath observance and one’s sex life—was governed by hundreds of laws. Some families concentrated more on how they washed their hands than on how they applied God’s central direction—to “love thy neighbour as thyself: I am the LORD.”(Leviticus 19:18).762

The New Testament often refers to the oral laws, or traditions of the elders, in a negative light (Matthew 15:3-6; Mark 7:5-13; Galatians 1:14). Jesus condemned them for crowding out the “weightier matters of the law, judgment, mercy, and faith” (Matthew 23:23). Luke 11:42 uses stronger language to denounce the oral laws: “Woe to you Pharisees, because you give God a tenth of your mint, rue and all other kinds of garden herbs, but you neglect justice and the love of

758 Ibid., 15.454.

759 Mishnah, Yadaim, 4:7, “The Sadducees say, ‘We cry out against you, O ye Pharisees, for ye declare clean an unbroken stream of liquid.’ The Pharisees say, ‘We cry out against you, O ye Sadducees, for ye declare clean a channel of water that flows from a burial ground.’. . .”

760 Ibid., 15.456.

761 Ibid., 15.456.

762 Wilfried Warnin, Literary Artistry in Leviticus (Leiden, Netherlands: Brill, 1990), 14. Leviticus 19:18 is claimed as the summit or chiastic center and heart of the Torah. This verse is the climax of the “Holiness Code.”

God” (NIV, also Matthew 23:23). Not only did the oral laws distract them from living God’s higher laws, it also blinded them from recognizing and receiving their promised Messiah. 6. Changing Temple Ritual

Temple worship also changed from Moses’ Tabernacle to Herod’s Temple. As Herod’s building project tripled the size of the temple and its courtyards, and the Jewish population grew and spread around the Roman Empire, temple worship adapted for the diverse population. The greater size gave a greater message—the God of the Jews is important. According to the law of Moses, God commanded each healthy Israelite to come to the temple to worship (Exodus 23:14; Deuteronomy 16:16-17). At the time of the late Second Temple, from all around the Roman world, Jews in the Diaspora made a pilgrimage to Jerusalem. The most devout Israelites made an annual pilgrimage to Jerusalem to offer sacrifice on their holy days. More specifically, by the time of Herod’s Temple, they came for at least one of the three week-long feasts each year in the spring, early summer, and fall: Passover (Pesach), Weeks or Pentecost (Shavuot), and Tabernacles or Ingathering (Sukkot)—the most important being Passover.

Jews prized their temple above all other places of worship. The Jews felt the temple mount in Jerusalem was the center of the earth.763 The Psalmist wrote:

On the holy mount stands the city he founded;

The LORD loves the gates of Zion

More than all the dwellings of Jacob.

Glorious things are spoken of you.

O city of God (Psalms 87:1-3, NRSV).

The temple, and even more specifically the Holy of Holies within the Sanctuary, was the most sacred place in the world to a Jew. The Mishnah outlined “ten degrees of holiness” to describe their temple precincts.764

The land of Israel is holier than all lands …

The walled cities [of the Land of Israel]

Within the wall [of Jerusalem] is more holy

The temple Mount is more holy …

The rampart is still more holy

The Court of the Women is still more holy

The Court of the Israelites is still more holy

The Court of the Priests is still more holy

Between the porch and the altar is still more holy than it

The sanctuary is still more holy than it …

The Holy of Holies is still more holy than they.

763 Charlesworth, ed., Jesus and Temple, 3.

764 Mishnah , Kelim, 1:6-9.

Jews carefully differentiated their divisions of sacred space. Ancient temples represented the principle of ordering the universe.765 Their reverence for their temple reverberates throughout the text as it illustrates the central role that Jerusalem and the temple held for them—with a special devotion for the Holy of Holies where the high priest symbolically entered into the Lord’s presence.766

765 Hugh Nibley, Temple and Cosmos (Salt Lake City, UT: FARMS, Deseret Book, 1992), 42, 15, 19. “Civilization is heirocentric, centered on the holy point of the temple. . . . The temple is also an observatory. That is what a templum is—a place where you take your bearings on things.” 766 The map of Herod’s temple was created by designer Matthew J. Mitchell. During the time of Solomon’s Temple, the Bible referred to the inner sanctuary of the Holy of Holies as “the oracle” (1 Kings 6:31). Unfortunately, by the time of the Second Temple, the Holy of Holies was empty—no Ark of the Covenant, no budding rod, no manna, no tables of The Law, no book of the covenant. Yet, after the destruction of Herod’s Temple, Jews faced the Holy of Holies when they prayed in remembrance of that holy space.
