Appendix 4

Greco-Roman Family Life within the New Testament

This appendix will briefly look at five aspects of the Greco-Roman world that relate to family life in the New Testament. It does not purport to provide an overview of the Roman world at the time of the Apostolic church, but only touches on significant historical connections with the Greco-Roman world that help one understand the New Testament better: 1) Hellenism, 2) Caesars and Domestic Reforms, 3) Population and Life expectancy, 4) Greco-Roman Family Life, and 5) Religious life.

The Greco-Roman world had a major influence on the culture and writing of the New Testament. The Greek penetration or Hellenization of the Euro-Asian-African world had been in progress for three hundred years before Christ’s birth. The extensive conquest by Alexander the Great (356-323 BC) started the process of unifying the Mediterranean portions of the three continents under one academic language: Greek. The use of a single language had a unifying effect on the Empire. It opened the doorway for multicultural communication in religion, philosophy, science, art, and business. For this reason, the authors of the New Testament wrote in Greek.790

Friction grew as Greek philosophy met Judaic ideals. This caused trouble when the Jews would not alter their customs, values, and theology to fit with Hellenized cosmopolitan ideas as other conquered nations did.791 The Jews reacted against the rising tide of hedonism by digging deeper into their own peculiar beliefs. Almost like a pendulum swinging to opposite poles, as the Greco-Romans gave more public opportunities to women, the Jews kept them more at home. We see this in dress: as the Greco-Roman women wore less clothing, the Jews covered their women more completely.

Yet over time, and in spite of the devoted efforts of the conservative Jewish leaders, some aspects of Greek thought did infiltrate Jewish homes. One of the best examples of this is the fact that Jewish scribes translated their holy writings (The Law, Prophets, and Writings) into Greek (LXX) allowing greater accessibility by the Jews living across the Empire.

Not all Greek and Roman ideology was hedonistic, and many aspects of Hellenism left a positive stamp on the world. Their advances in engineering, architecture, literature, and the arts continue to bless the world. We also see that breakthroughs in individual rights for men, women, and children happened during this time. The New Testament Epistles are sprinkled with names

790 Ben Whitherington, History, Literature, and Society in the Book of Acts (New York: Cambridge University Press, 1996), 327. Luke may have been the only Gospel written in the author’s mother tongue. Luke/Acts has the best Greek in the New Testament, with Hebrews as the closest competition (which one tradition holds was translated by Luke from Paul’s Hebrew).

791 Bromiley, International Standard Bible Encyclopedia, L. Morris, “Hellensism,” 2.680. “The cosmopolitans never could understand the obstinacy with which the provincials clung to their narrow outlook.” of Greco-Roman women.792 Yet, in the women’s Hellenized public world, “there was no approved public forum for any kind of women’s self-expression” from politics to the arts and religion.793

During his forty-five-year reign (31 BC to AD 14), 794 Caesar Augustus fostered a revival of Roman tradition, established peace, supported business and industry, made taxation more equitable, and enacted legislation to foster stronger families. From an ancient eastern perspective, Augustus did much to strengthen Roman family life. Prior to his reign, Roman fathers had the power of life and death over their wives and children.

Between 18 BC and AD 9, Augustus enacted laws that encouraged marriage and the production of children.795 If a Roman woman had three living children, she was rewarded by being released from guardianship—an imposed condition where women had an older male guardian watching over and advising them.796 (A non-Roman woman needed four children for the same benefit.) Also, having children improved the chance to inherit relatives’ or friends’ property. Augustus decreased the amount of money a childless husband could inherit from his progenitors. He also allowed politicians to hold an office longer if they had children—one year for each child.797

Augustus tried to strengthen the family by reviving morality in the Roman Empire and promoting chastity.798 He forbade “bequest” marriages and tightened divorce laws in an attempt to strengthen the family.799 He fined widows and divorcées for remaining single over two years if

792 Sarah Ruden, Paul Among the People: The Apostle Reinterpreted and Reimagined in His Own Time (New York: Pantheon Books, 2010), 81.

793 Ibid., 80. That said, we still understand that “No Greeks or Romans thought women should participate in government. . . . They had ritual functions. Some were priestesses. All citizen women took part in public ceremonies from time to time, on special occasions. They watched, or made the motions and spoke the traditional words (if any). . . . A few women created literature, but not for reciting in public. . . women elbow[ed] into discussions in the street.”

794 Jacob Abbott, History of Julius Caesar (New York and London: Harpers, 1899), 230. Initially the Senate appointed Julius Caesar a leader for a short period of a ten-year reign. In 44 BC they made him ruler for life and gave him the title, “Father of his Country.”

795 Campbell, Marriage and Family in the Biblical World, 144. As touched on in chapter 4, Augustus fined a married couple if they did not have a child by the time the wife was twenty and the husband twenty-five years old. Thurston, Women in the New Testament, 22. We still find unequal punishments between gender under Augustus’ government. Adultery became a public offense only for women, as it posed a threat to a citizen's succession and property inheritance.

796 nd Mary R. Lefkowitz and Maureen B. Fant, Women’s Life in Greece and Rome: A Source Book in Translation, 2

ed. (Baltimore, MD: John Hopkins University Press, 1992), 101. Quoting from Roman law, “Guardians are appointed for males as well as for females, but only for males under puberty, on account of their infirmity of age; for females, however, both under and over puberty, on account of weakness of their sex as well as their ignorance of legal matters.”

797 Campbell, Marriage and Family in the Biblical World, 150.

1990), 22-23. The previous edition was under the first name Ben. 799 George A. 798 Ann Witherington, Women and the Genesis of Christianity (Reprint, New York: Cambridge University Press, Buttrick, The Interpreter’s Dictionary of the Bible, “Roman Empire,” 4.105-106. As mentioned

earlier, he also fined males and females for remaining single past certain ages. Witherington, Women and the Genesis of Christianity, 23. The only Roman women not required to marry were the Vestal Virgins, women over fifty, or those with three children. they were still fertile and had not yet had three children.800 Yet, he was unable to stop the tide of immorality that plagued Roman life.801

Augustus also attempted to rectify other social values. He stimulated traditional religion in Rome by adding Julius Caesar’s name (his adopted father) to the list of Roman deities. He bolstered the official religion by building eighty-two temples throughout the Empire. Those temples housed festivals as the mainstay of religious life. He encouraged small home-run businesses by intentionally wearing wool clothes made by his wife and daughter, thus advertising his plan to re-establish traditional ideas. He also instituted reforms for slaves that improved their conditions throughout the Empire. Augustus did much to create a healthier family life, but his new legislation still fell short of gender equality, chastity before marriage, and fidelity during marriage.

Caesars from the New Testament Era

During the period of Jesus’ life and the apostolic church, eight emperors ruled the Roman world. From Augustus to Domitian, each Caesar intersected in some aspect with Christians mentioned in the New Testament. We will briefly look at each one and how they fit into the scriptural history.

TABLE: 3

Caesar Reign NT Citations Connection with the New Testament

Augustus 31BC - Luke 2:1 Luke draws attention to the ironic political

Caesar AD 14 dichotomy between Augustus and Jesus. Luke

63 BC- introduces Jesus as heir to “the throne of his father

AD 14 David,” the Son of God and Savior of the world

(Luke 1:32, 35, 47; 2:11)—all of which challenged

Augustus’ political propaganda. Posthumously,

the Roman senate declared Julius Caesar a god. So

Augustus used the titles of “son of god,” “prince

of peace” and “savior of the world” as Julius’ adopted son and the one who ended the Empire’s

civil wars. His birth became the new year. Luke

contrasts Augustus with the humble birth of the

actual Savior. The true King will not be of this

800 See chapter 6.

801 Ibid. “In his social reforms, the Emperor Augustus promoted the cults advocating chastity, childbirth, and strong familial bonds. Coupling this with Augustus’ effort to legally force widows and divorcées to marry, as well as the fine he placed on both males and females for remaining single past accepted ages, we can see how much Augustus desired to eliminate public and private situations where women were independent of men.” Initially Augustus granted a grace period of eighteen months for remarriage without a fine, but that was extended to two years. Suetonius claimed it was three years, but this is not supported elsewhere. Karl Galinsky, Augustan Culture: An Interpretive Introduction (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1996), 131. Mireille Corbier, “Divorce and Adoption as Roman Familial Strategies,” in Marriage, Divorce, and Children in Ancient Rome, eds. Beryl Rawson (England: Oxford University Press, 1991), 47-78. The question of whether Jews living in Judea were taxed does not have a clear answer.

world. The real Savior did not tax the whole world

but rather offered the universal gifts of forgiveness

and resurrection.

Luke linked Tiberius with the only exact date in

Tiberius AD 14-37 Matthew the New Testament, the beginning of John the

Caesar 2:17,21 Baptist’s preaching: “in the fifteenth year of the

Augustus Mark 12:17 reign of Tiberius Caesar” (Luke 3:1). Some claim

42 BC- Luke 3:1; this was a sabbatical year, which allowed many

AD 37 20:2; farmers to take the time off to hear this “voice of

23:2 one crying in the wilderness” (Luke 3:4). Jesus

John 19:12, referred to Tiberius when he said, “Render to 15 Caesar.”

Caesar AD 37-41 Caligula's rule marked the first time a Caesar set

Augustus out to persecute the Jews. Josephus recorded,

Germanicus “Gaius did not demonstrate his madness in

AD 12-41 offering injuries only to the Jews at Jerusalem, or

to those that dwelt in the neighborhood, but

suffered it to extend itself through all the earth and

sea, so far as was in subjection to the Romans, and

filled it with ten thousand mischiefs.” Gaius’

“mischiefs” included torturing women and

reproaching womanish behavior in men.

Claudius or AD 41-54 Acts 11:28; Acts 11:28 tells of a “great dearth … in the days of

Tiberius 18:3 Claudius Caesar.” He reigned during the last

Claudius decade recorded in Acts. Initially, he acted

Caesar conciliatory toward the Jews, though later expelled

Augustus them from Rome for rioting (Acts 18:3).

Germanicus

10 BC – AD

54

Nero AD 54-68 Acts 25:12; In 64 AD, Nero instigated an imperial persecution

Claudius 26:32; of Christians by burning Rome and blaming it on

Caesar 27:24; them. When Paul “appealed unto Caesar,” he most

Augustus 28:19 likely appealed to Nero (Acts 25:12; 26:32; 27:24;

Germanicus 28:19). Probably, Paul’s two-year house arrest fell

AD 37–68 under Nero's reign. In AD 66, Nero put his military

commander Vespasian in charge of the war against

the Jews. Origen, Tertullian, and Eusebius blamed

Nero for Peter's and Paul’s martyrdoms (c. AD 67-

68).

Vespasian AD 69-79 After a year of civil war, four Caesars claimed

Imperator authority. Ultimately, the military commander

Caesar Vespasian who conquered Jerusalem took the

Vespasianus throne. In AD 66, Vespasian began the siege of

AD 9 –79 Jerusalem, but left his son Titus to conquer Judea

in AD 70. Vespasian restored peace to Rome

throughout his decade long reign.

Titus AD 79-81 Matthew Titus, with four legions of soldiers from

Imperator 24:1-2 Alexandria, held the siege and conquered

Caesar Jerusalem. He ordered the destruction of Herod’s

Vespasianus Temple in AD 70, as prophesied by Jesus in

Augustus Matthew 24:1-2. Titus had a famous love affair in

A.D 41-81 Judea with a Bernice, who was the daughter of

Herod Agrippa I, and sister of Agrippa II (Acts

25:13, 23; 26:30). She supposedly joined Titus in

Rome to continue their affair for a time.

Domitian AD 81-96 Rev 1:9 Domitian is described as a despot. He proclaimed

Imperator himself, “lord and god.” Tradition credits him with

Caesar throwing the apostle John into a vat of boiling oil.

Domitianus Supposedly, when John came out unscathed,

Augustus Domitian sent him to the prison isle of Patmos

AD 51-96 where John received his apocalyptic vision

described in the book of Revelation (Revelation

1:9). 802

2) Population and Life Expectancy

802 Information in this chart was taken from: Brown, Birth, 415; Raymond Brown, Christ in the Gospels of the

Liturgical Year (Collegeville, MN: Liturgical Press, 2008), 115; Fitzmyer, Luke I-IX, 455; Josephus, Antiquities, XIX. 1.1, 1.5, 2.5; Wars, III 9:8; Matthew Bunson, Encyclopedia of the Roman Empire, rev. ed., (NYC: Infobase Publishing, 2002), 521; Anderson, Understanding Paul. 362-363.

During the latter half of the New Testament, historians estimate that twenty million people lived in the Roman Empire, ten percent of whom were Jews.803 The average life expectancy throughout the Empire was 25 to 35 years.804 Many people lived into their seventies and a few made it to 100, but with a high infant mortality rate, the average life expectancy age decreased.805 Only half of the children survived the first ten years of life. One-third of the babies who survived birth died during their first year of life. This means that a woman would need to have an average of five pregnancies to keep the population stable. Although children were encouraged for the growth of society, they did not have an easy life. As the historian Christian Laes explained, in the overpopulated city of Rome, possibly one third of the children were affected by poverty and thus suffered from “filth, hunger, and violence.”806

3) Greco-Roman Family Life

In Roman households, the father ruled over his wife, children and slaves. With slaves and servants to help run the home, Greco-Roman women were free to attend the market, recitals, festivals, and games. In each family, the oldest living male was known as the paterfamilias and directed the entire extended family. He ruled with a strong hand and had the power of life and death over everyone in his household. Legally the paterfamilias controlled ownership of property, inheritance, marriage, and divorce of his children (regardless of their age), grandchildren, and great-grandchildren. William Barclay described some of what that entailed.

A Roman father had by law absolute power over his family. If his son should marry, the

father continued to have absolute power both over him and any grandchildren there might

be. It began at the beginning. A Roman father could keep or discard his newborn child as

he liked. He could bind or scourge his son; he could sell him into slavery; and he even had

the right to execute him. True, when a father was about to take serious steps against a

member of his family, he usually called a council of all its adult male members, but he did

not need to. True, later on public opinion would not permit the execution of a son by a

father, but it happened as late as the time of Augustus. . . . If ever a people knew what

parental discipline was the Romans did.807 If an infant survived birth, the decision to keep or stop his or her life was often made by the paterfamilias. A letter from the time, written from a traveling husband to his pregnant wife,

803 Launaro, Peasants and Slaves: The Rural Population of Roman Italy, 47. The census of AD 47 counted just shy of six million male citizens (32). The rural population estimates follow. Table compares the different low count estimates (in the thousands) for Italy’s rural free population of:

AD AD 14 47

Total Roman Empire 6,200 7,500

Provinces 1,900 2,800

Italy 4,300 4,700

804 Campbell, Marriage and Family in the Biblical World, 143. People from higher classes lived longer than those from the lower classes.

805 Launaro, Peasants and Slaves: The Rural Population of Roman Italy. At age seventy, men were exempt from public service (493). And as mentioned in footnote 648, Pliny knew of ninety people “at least 100 years” old (186). 806 Christian Laes, Children in the Roman Empire: Outsiders Within (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2011). 43 (41-43).

807 William Barclay, The Letter to the Hebrews, revised edition (Philadelphia, PA: Westminster Press, 1976), 176-177. includes instructions regarding her delivery. If the baby were a female, the mother was to expose her outside the city wall (to die), but if it were a male she was to raise him.808 Augustus attempted to stop this practice through his family-focused legislation.

Several Roman leaders likewise fostered values to grow the family. The Roman philosopher Cicero (106-43 BC) praised a good family life for its positive influence on society in his book, Republic:

For the sake of life and the practice of living, a prescription has been made for recognized

marriages, legitimate children, and the sacred homes of the household gods . . . so that

everyone should enjoy common and individual blessings. For living well is impossible

without a good community and there is nothing happier than a well set-up polity.809 Cicero also felt “the urge to reproduce is an instinct common to all animals, society originally consists of the pair, next of the pair with their children, then one house and all things in common. This is the beginning of the city and the seedbed of the state.”810 He appreciated procreation and a unified family life. Writing simultaneously to Christian disciples, the stoic Socrates, or Musonius Rufus (c. AD 20-101), agreed that the purpose of marriage was to have children. “The husband and wife . . . should come together for the purpose of making a life in common and of procreating children, and furthermore of regarding all things in common between them, and nothing peculiar or private to one or the other, not even their own bodies.”811 Rufus’ aspirations demonstrate an aim of egalitarianism rarely achieved in the ancient world. Roman philosophers, like their Greek predecessors, saw “human behavior as a subset of animal behavior.”812 Being “animalistic” was used in a positive light here, as it promoted the desire to marry and have children as the natural order of creation.

Romans based their family life on the hope of procreation. However, infertility and infant mortality made that goal difficult for many couples. The following vignette was written about a devoted couple who were unable to have children but chose to remain married. At his wife’s death, the husband wrote a eulogy in remembrance of their loyal life together.

When you despaired of your ability to bear children and grieved over my childlessness, you

became anxious lest by retaining you in marriage I might lose all hope of having children

and be distressed for that reason. So you proposed a divorce outright. I must admit that I

flared up so that I almost lost control of myself; so horrified was I by what you had tried to

do that I found it difficult to retrieve my composure. To think that separation should be

considered between us before fate had so ordained, to think that you had been able to

conceive in your mind the idea that you might cease to be my wife while I was still alive,

although you had been utterly faithful to me when I was exiled and practically dead!813 Roman literature and epitaphs are full of examples of women who stood by their husbands during hardship or exile.

808 Ilan, Jewish Women in Greco-Roman Palestine. 4, 46-48, 52. 809 Campbell, Marriage and Family in the Biblical World, 132-33 quoting, Republic 5.7. 810 Ibid., 145, quoting the Republic, 1.38.

811 Ibid., 147.

812 Ibid., 144-145.

813 Ibid., 158, quoting Laudatio Turiae 1.31-33, 40-43.

The archetypal Roman family relationship was lasting and committed, although in practice most couples did not choose their partners, and families were broken up by divorce repeatedly.814 Upper-class marriages were often formed for political or financial reasons and ended in divorce. Roman plays and literature describe unfaithful husbands, affairs, multiple divorces, and broken homes.

Dramas usually describe “love” as being only for the young and nonexistent between the aged couple. In one of Plautus' plays (c. 184), the male lead Demaenetus says he’d, “rather drink bilge water” than kiss his wife. When his son asks if Demaenetus loves his wife, he responds, “Love her? I? I love her now for not being near.”815 Although it seems that many playwrights’ favorite topic is love, the literature rarely describes fidelity in marriage. Some plays were so explicit that Augustus banned certain works, for example, Ovid’s The Art of Love. Premarital and extramarital sex saturate Roman dramas.

According to Plautus, the model Roman bride was, paradoxically, a virgin. He portrayed an ideal young woman as brimming with virtue: “Personally I do not feel that my dowry is that which people call a dowry, but purity and honor and self-control, fear of God, love of parents, and affection for my family, and being a dutiful wife to you sir, lavish of loving-kindness and helpful through honest service.”816

In yet another play, the author goes to the other extreme and portrays the shame of a husband who was “henpecked” by his wife.817 Roman literature shows the double standard that women faced: they were expected to be chaste while living in a society that glorified explicit sexuality for men.

Arranged Roman Marriages

As mentioned above, the father or paterfamilias usually arranged Roman marriages, though the historical literature does include examples where the couple’s feelings were taken into consideration. From the late Republic (133-27 BC) forward, Roman law allowed a woman to initiate her second marriage, but she could not refuse a proposal unless it was proven that the groom was immoral.818 Marriage brokers also assisted in arranging upper-class Roman marriages. Roman fathers did away with the Greek practice (from 500 to 300 BC) of selling their daughters in a coemptio marriages. By the time Augustus became Emperor in 27 BC, the sale of one’s daughter to the highest bidder had been replaced by the powerful dowry as the motivator in arranged marriages.

Generally, youth obeyed their father’s marital arrangements. The historian Stagg quoted the story of a Roman young man who already had a young lover when his father chose his wife. The young man agreed to marry his father’s choice out of obedience yet kept his sweetheart as a mistress out of love.819 Period literature is full of stories where young couples fall in love and try

814 Stagg, Woman in the World of Jesus, 85. For example, Cicero’s first marriage—with the mother of his favorite child, Terentia—lasted thirty years. However, after they divorced, Cicero married an heiress younger than his daughter, and his wife married twice again. Winer, Life in the Ancient World, 175. 815 Stagg, Woman in the World of Jesus, 81. Ovid (ca. 43 BC- AD 17) wrote much of adult love. 816 Ibid., 94, quoting Plautus from Amphitryon II.839-842. 817 Ibid., p. 79.

818 Witherington, Women and the Genesis of Christianity, 21. 819 Stagg, Woman in the World of Jesus, 83. to change their parents’ betrothal arrangements.820 This example comes from a school textbook on rhetoric:

“You are to marry the wife I want you to marry,” says my father. What is that to the point?

Are you not aware that marriages are at our own choice? Our affections are not at your

beck and call; you cannot order us to love or hate whom you want. Marriage is only eternal

if it is a union brought about by mutual consent. When a wife is sought for me, the

companion of my bed, the partner of my life, she must be chosen for all eternity. In any

case, what is the good of compelling me against my will? If you do that, I will simply

divorce her.821

This school passage was obviously written from the perspective of a young man. Whether the father figure’s voice arranged the marriage, gave consent to the marriage, or broke up the marriage, young Greco-Roman couples were not free to make their decisions without the blessing of the head of the household.822

To avoid battles over the spousal choice, Roman fathers often had their daughters engaged by age ten. It is doubtful that young first-time brides could decline a marriage offer under any circumstance.823 The Roman law set the minimum age to marry at twelve but most waited until their teens to share bed and board.824 The ideal year for a Roman marriage was the year when a young woman began puberty. This assumed her chastity and amplified her childbearing potential. Young Roman men often waited to marry until they received their toga of manhood at sixteen or seventeen.825 If a young man served in the military, he often waited until his twenties to marry. To encourage a focused full-time army, sometime between A.D 14 and 41, low-ranking soldiers were forbidden to marry. In these cases, it was not uncommon in first-time Roman marriages for a groom to be nine or ten years older than his bride.826 Roman Engagement and Wedding Ceremony

When a couple became engaged, the prospective groom gave the young girl a ring of gold or iron with a pair of clasped hands carved on it. The ring was worn on the middle finger of the left hand. The marriage took place as soon as the girl matured (or between ages twelve and fifteen). A civil or religious authority married them in front of their family and friends. Often, the

820 Ibid., 80.

821 Campbell, Marriage and Family in the Biblical World, 153. 822 Ibid., 145.

823 Witherington, Women and the Genesis of Christianity, 20-21. 824 Campbell, Marriage and Family in the Biblical World, 144. The Greek women married a little later than the Romans—fifteen and sixteen years old. The Greek men of Athens were to choose only an Athenian citizen to marry. However, the Greek men also lived with courtesans or concubines, as well as foreign women, known as “companions.” This way the Athenians could limit their heirs without limiting their sex life. Witherington, Women and the Genesis of Christianity, 13. It appears that there was concern over the paterfamilias insisting on a divorce in some cases, as in AD 200, when a law was enacted that forbade the paterfamilias to break up a happy marriage. 825 This toga of manhood for citizens differs from the “toga clavata” for officers, and even more exclusive, the “toga picta” for the emperor. Hugh W. Nibley, Teachings of the Book of Mormon: Semester 3. Transcripts of lectures presented to an Honors Book of Mormon Class at Brigham Young University 1989-1990. Provo, UT: F.A.R.M.S., 1992.

826 Campbell, Marriage and Family in the Biblical World, 144. marriage took place during the last half of June, as a good luck omen for marriages.827 The bride wore a white tunic and a saffron-colored bridal veil topped by a wreath of marjoram or orange blossoms. After they signed the marriage license, the administrator read and sealed their contract as the couple clasped right hands. If it were a religious ceremony, there would be a prayer. If it were a civil ceremony, the groom asked his bride if she wanted to become “mother of the family.” She answered, “yes,” and she asked the groom if he wished to become “father of the family.” When he answered, “yes,” they were legally married. After the wedding feast, the Roman groom carried his bride over the threshold as they thought it an unlucky sign if she stumbled over the doorway.828 After the wife had stayed with her husband’s family for a full year, the marriage became final.829 Once married, husbands and wives did not generally show affection: “Never kiss your wife unless it thunders.”

Children and Servants in Roman Households

The Roman households usually included children and several slaves. The father gathered his household twice a day before the family hearth for prayers to various deities. Women, servants, and children worked spinning on their looms, preparing meals, and at various other domestic chores. This work often began at sunrise and lasted far past sunset.830 Children assisted in the serving of meals but did not join in the conversation.

Fathers usually taught their sons and daughters to read and write. In wealthier homes, a child’s education was augmented by a Greek nurse who also served as a tutor. At age six or seven, girls and boys went to school for six hours a day. They learned to calculate math with an abacus. Most girls stopped their formal education and became engaged by age ten, focusing on the domestic arts, painting, and music. Between ages twelve and fifteen, a married girl moved out of her parents’ home and into her husband’s family home. Young men continued their schooling by adding Greek and Latin grammar. By age fourteen, the sons of citizens added philosophy and public speaking to their education. At age seventeen, the young man could serve in the army. Slave children were not usually educated and could be separated from their families if their master sold them again.831

4) Greco-Roman Religious Life

The Greco-Roman world encompassed a diversity of religions—some polytheistic and others monotheistic. The more one understands about the Greco-Roman religions, the easier one understands why Jews reacted so vehemently against their Gentile neighbors and why Jesus taught a better way for both worlds. This section will first look at the state mythic religion, then the native cults, highlighting Diana and the Vestal Virgins, and finish with foreign cults, both legal and illegal.

Early Romans based their state religion on the supreme triad of Jupiter, Mars, and Quirinus. The Romans did not have a personal relationship with their gods, but rather their gods co-

827 Dunstan, Ancient Rome, 108.

828 Winer, Life in the Ancient World, 175-176.

829 Matthew Bunson, Encyclopedia of the Roman Empire, 352. It was a common law marriage after one year, but if the woman spent three nights away from her husband’s roof, she kept her own possessions. 830 Ruden, Paul Among the People, 74.

831 Winer, Life in the Ancient World, 172-177. operated on behalf of the state. Roman worship was public, not private. People performed public ritual, not out of belief, but to entice the gods to prosper the community. Later, emperor worship or the imperial cult became the state religion. The Senate attempted to deify a few emperors posthumously, starting with Julius Caesar. Augustus capitalized on this, and used the title, “son of god,” on his official nomenclature and coins throughout the empire. Augustus built temples to Julius and Romans worshiped him there. Emperor-worship unified the empire as provinces showed their loyalty to the past emperor. Worshiping past or present emperors did not replace worshiping other gods, but expanded their polytheism.

State Religions: Native Cults

Two basic categories divide the Greco-Roman religions at the time of the New Testament: native cults and oriental or “imported” religions. The native or Roman cults combined Latin and Greek gods. To ensure that they worshiped everyone they should, they added gods to their pantheon over time.832 State religious festivals were performed throughout the year to keep the public involved, including several women’s festivals.833 Often wealthier people played more prominent religious roles. Women who could financially support a festival served as the “festival priestess.” A husband’s religious or political preeminence often led to a more prominent role for his wife.

Paul’s experience in Ephesus with the Roman goddess Diana (or the Greek goddess, Artemis) became famous enough to make its way into the book of Acts. Diana was the goddess of the moon, animals, forest, hunting, and women in childbirth. The growth of Christianity threatened the Roman cult. An Ephesian silversmith egged on irate cult worshipers: “Not only this our craft is in danger to be set at nought; but also that the temple of the great goddess Diana should be despised, and her magnificence should be destroyed, whom all Asia and the world worshippeth” (Acts 19:27). A town clerk stopped the riot by assuring everyone that Diana was still the dominate religion: “Men of Ephesus, what man is there that knoweth not how that the city of the Ephesians is a worshiper of the great goddess Diana, and of the [image] which fell

832 The major Roman religious characters included: Jupiter: master or main god.

Juno: wife of Jupiter, a goddess of women and fertility—symbolized by a peacock and pomegranate. Mars: god of war, second-strongest god.

Venus: goddess of beauty and love.

Minerva: goddess of wisdom, learning, art, crafts, and industry—symbolized by an owl. Neptune: god of the sea—symbolized by a trident.

Ceres: goddess of the harvest—symbolized carrying a bundle of grain. Vulcan: god of the blacksmith and underworld. If he stoked his furnace too hard, volcanoes erupted. Bacchus: god of wine and partying—symbolized as a young man or faun with grapes. Mercury: messenger of the gods, the god of travelers and tradesmen—symbolized with wings on his helmet and

sandals.

Vesta: goddess of the home and hearth. Almost every household worshiped Vesta, and her temple kept a flame

always burning.

833 Thurston, Women in the New Testament, 24-25. March 1, Matronalia: matrons offered flowers to Juno on the anniversary of the dedication of her temple. April 1, Veneralia: Venus Verticordia and Fortuna Virilis celebrated rites preceding the consummation of marriage at the men’s baths. May 1, Bona Dea: honored the goddess of women by sacrificing at her temple. June 11, Matralia: Mater Matuta celebrated fertility rituals at her temple in the cattle market. July 6, Fortuna Muliebris: honored the women who marched to persuade Coriolanus to lift the siege on Rome. July 7 Nonae Caprotinae: celebrated women’s fertility by offering sap of a wild fig tree to Juno. Early December: the highest Roman magistrate offered sacrifices at his home to the goddess of women. down from Jupiter?” (Acts 19:35). In some places, her worshipers performed fertility rites, as she also represented the mother goddess. Diana was just one of many gods in the state religion, but the only one that made it into the New Testament by name.

Women’s Religions. Women also belonged to private religious organizations and exercised leadership functions without their spouse’s influence. Cults formed around social classes, occupations, and even stages of a woman’s life.834 Young girls worshiped the goddess Fortuna Virginitis. Young married women worshiped Fortuna Primigenia as the patroness of mothers and childbirth (who also gave virility and material success to men). Women who married only

encouraged women to practice marital fidelity. Prostitutes made up part of the Fortuna Virilis 835 that worshiped the god of sexual relations in men’s baths. once worshiped in the cult of Fortunata Muliebris. The cult of Venus Changer of Hearts Some sects specialized in training

young girls and boys to be “divine organs of inspiration and prophecy.”836 In the Greek cult of Apollo, only women were allowed to perform the office of the divine organ. The prophetess of Apollo (called a Pythoness) was a free-born Delphian widow who faithfully tended the temple fires and acted as an oracle. Women also led the processions in the secret rituals. Women played prominent roles in orgiastic rites such as the Greek Bacchanalia and Dionysian mysteries.

Vestal Virgins. The greatest religious honor given to a woman in Rome was to be chosen as a Vestal Virgin priestess. Six virgins served at a time. They tended Vesta’s state shrine in Rome’s Forum. They kept her sacred flame burning continuously.837 The fire represented male procreative power to give and sustain life, and the six virgins protected that procreative power of men. In a ceremony similar to a Roman marriage, the pontifex maximus chose virgins between the ages of six and ten from affluent reputable families who were free of bodily defects and had both parents living. The Vestal priestesses remained virgins for thirty years (or suffered the penalty of death). After their thirty years of service, they were free to marry, though few did.

The Vestal Virgins were among the most liberated woman in the Empire because they were not legally bound to fathers or husbands. “Their powerful position is interesting and ambiguous. They were virgins, wore the stola of matrons, and had the legal rights of men.”838 They were the only women in Rome who could drive in a two-wheeled chariot. When they traveled on the street a bodyguard or lector preceded them. They also had reserved seats on the imperial podium. Like Roman men, they could make their own wills, dispose of their own property, and testify in court. They also participated in public sacrifices. These six women received all these honors in the hopes that the tradition maintained the fertility.

State Religions: Foreign Cults

As the Empire expanded, the Romans tolerated and adopted new gods and religions (provided that the new forms of worship did not hinder the state). In addition to expanding their

834 Thurston, Women in the New Testament, 26.

835 Witherington, Women and the Genesis of Christianity, 23. 836 Ibid., 15.

837 Dunstan, Ancient Rome, 37.

838 Thurston, Women in the New Testament, 25-26. A stola was a fabric drape that was tied at the waist and fell to the feet, worn in public by married Roman women that identified her as married. pantheon, Roman officials recognized ten foreign or “imported” religions, one of which was Judaism. The State promised these members the legal right to practice without persecution. Converts to Judaism received the same protection. Initially, Christianity claimed Roman legal protection by piggy-backing on Judaism’s political protection.

One of the most popular (and initially illegal) cults among Greco-Roman women was the Egyptian all-powerful female goddess, Isis. Women identified with Isis as a goddess of loving mercy. The Isis cult glorified women, placing them as equal or superior to their male consorts. Either gender could join, hold office, and worship. It welcomed all classes of people and excluded no one. The Roman political leaders opposed it—even though the Isis cult approved of authority and autonomy for women, and stressed women’s traditional place in Roman society. The cult grew because it met the religious and emotional needs of many individuals, especially lower-class women.
