Thomas S. Monson, Inspiring Experiences That Build Faith: From the Life and Ministry of Thomas S. Monson ( 1994)

A Lesson in Reverence

When I was a boy in Primary, one day as we left the chapel for our classrooms I noted that our Primary president, Melissa Georgell, remained behind, sitting alone on the front row of benches. I paused and observed her and saw that she was weeping. I walked up to her and said, "Sister Georgell, why are you crying?"

She wiped her eyes with her lace handkerchief and said, "I feel that I'm a failure as a Primary president. I can't control the Trail Builders. Could you help me, Tommy?"

I promised her that I would. What I didn't know then is that I was the source of her tears. She had effectively enlisted me to aid in achieving reverence in our Primary. And we did achieve it.

The years flew by. Melissa, now in her nineties, lived in a nursing facility in the northwest part of Salt Lake City. Just before Christmas I determined to visit my beloved Primary president. Over the car radio, I heard the song "Hark! the herald angels sing; Glory to the newborn King!" I reflected on the visit made by wise men those long years ago. They brought gifts of gold, of frankincense, and of myrrh. I brought only the gift of love and a desire to say thank you.

I found her in the lunchroom. She was staring at her plate of food, teasing it with the fork she held in her aged hand. Not a bite did she eat. As I spoke to her, my words were met by a benign but blank stare. I gently took her fork and began to feed her, talking all the time I did so about her service to boys and girls as a Primary worker and the joy that was mine to have served later as her bishop. There wasn't so much as a glimmer of recognition, far less a spoken word. Two other residents of the nursing home gazed at me with puzzled expressions. At last they spoke, saying, "She doesn't know anyone—even her own family. She hasn't said a word for a long, long time."

Lunch ended. My one-sided conversation wound down. I stood to leave. I held her frail hand in mine and gazed into her wrinkled but beautiful countenance. "God bless you, Melissa," I said, "and merry Christmas."

Without warning, she spoke the words, "I know you. You're Tommy Monson, my Primary boy. How I love you."

She pressed my hand to her lips and bestowed on it the kiss of love. Tears coursed down her cheeks and bathed our clasped hands. Those hands, that day, were hallowed by heaven and graced by God. The herald angels did sing, for I heard them in my heart.
