Thomas S. Monson, Inspiring Experiences That Build Faith: From the Life and Ministry of Thomas S. Monson ( 1994)

Determined Magazine Representatives

When I was bishop of the Sixth-Seventh Ward in Salt Lake City, I noted that our record for subscriptions to the Relief Society Magazine was low. Prayerfully my counselors and I analyzed the names of the individuals whom we could call to be magazine representative. The inspiration dictated that Elizabeth Keachie should be given the assignment. I approached her with the task, and she responded, "Bishop Monson, I'll do it."

Elizabeth Keachie was from Scotland, and when she replied, "I'll do it," one knew she indeed would. She and her sister-in-law, Helen Ivory, commenced to canvass the ward, house by house, street by street, and block by block. The result was phenomenal. We had more subscriptions to the Relief Society Magazine than had been recorded by all the other units of the stake combined.

I congratulated Elizabeth Keachie one Sunday evening and said to her, "Your task is done."

She replied, "Not yet, Bishop. There are two blocks I have not yet covered."

When she told me which blocks they were, I said, "Sister Keachie, no one lives on those blocks. That area is all industrial."

"Just the same," she said, "I'll feel better if I go and check them myself."

Sister Keachie and her companion, on a rainy day, covered those final two blocks. On the first one, she found no home, nor did she on the second. She and Sister Ivory paused, however, at a driveway that was strewn with mud from a recent storm. Sister Keachie gazed down the driveway perhaps a hundred feet and there noticed a garage. This was not a normal garage, however, in that there was a curtain at the window.

She turned to her companion and said, "Sister Ivory, shall we go and investigate?"

The two sweet sisters then walked through the mud for forty feet to a point where the entire garage could be seen. Now they noticed a door that had been cut into the side of the garage, which door was unseen from the street. They also noticed that there was a chimney with smoke rising from it.

Elizabeth Keachie knocked at the door. A man of about sixty-five years of age, William Ringwood, answered. They then presented their story concerning the need of every home having the Relief Society Magazine. William Ringwood replied, "You'd better ask my father." Ninety-three-year-old Charles W. Ringwood then came to the door and also listened to the message. He subscribed.

Elizabeth Keachie reported to me the presence of these two men in our ward. When I requested their membership certificates, I received a call from the Membership Department at the Presiding Bishopric's Office. The clerk said, "Are you sure you have living in your ward Charles W. Ringwood?"

I replied that I was sure, whereupon the clerk reported that the membership certificate for him had remained in the lost file of the Presiding Bishopric's Office for many years.

On Sunday morning Elizabeth Keachie brought to our priesthood meeting Charles and William Ringwood. This was the first time they had been inside a chapel for a long while. Charles Ringwood was the oldest deacon I had ever met. His son was the oldest male member holding no priesthood I had ever met.

Brother Charles Ringwood was ordained a priest and then an elder. I shall never forget his interview with respect to seeking a temple recommend. He handed me a silver dollar, which he took from an old, worn leather coin purse, and said, "This is my fast offering."

I said, "Brother Ringwood, you owe no fast offering. You need it yourself."

"I want to receive the blessings, not retain the money," he responded.

It was my opportunity to take Charles Ringwood to the Salt Lake Temple and to attend with him the endowment session. That evening Elizabeth Keachie served as proxy for the deceased Mrs. Ringwood.

At the conclusion of the ceremony, Charles Ringwood said to me, "I told my wife just before she died sixteen years ago that I would not delay in getting this work done. I am happy this has been accomplished."

Within two months, Charles W. Ringwood passed away. At his funeral service, I noticed his family sitting on the front row of the White Chapel Mortuary in Salt Lake City, but I also noticed two sweet ladies sitting near the rear of the chapel, Elizabeth Keachie and Helen Ivory. As I gazed upon those two sweet women, I thought of the seventy-sixth section of the Doctrine and Covenants: "I, the Lord, am merciful and gracious unto those who fear me, and delight to honor those who serve me in righteousness and in truth unto the end. Great shall be their reward and eternal shall be their glory." (D&C 76:5-6.)
