Thomas S. Monson, Inspiring Experiences That Build Faith: From the Life and Ministry of Thomas S. Monson ( 1994)

Counsel from Harold B. Lee

Toward the end of World War II, I enlisted in the United States Naval Reserve. My training took place at the Naval Training Center, San Diego, California, where I later became attached to that facility on a permanent basis. As the months went by, I worked diligently to achieve the rank of Seaman First Class. I had excellent opportunities at the Naval Training Center serving as the personal secretary and administrative aide to the classification officer, Lt. Commander Joseph M. Santos.

One thing I did learn in the Navy was that the commissioned officers represented a privileged class, followed by the petty officers, with those below the rank of petty officer being grouped together with fewer privileges. Upon my discharge from the Navy, I reenrolled at the University of Utah and later entered the United States Naval Reserve unit at Fort Douglas, Utah, so that I might qualify to receive a commission in the United States Naval Reserve. I felt this was added insurance so that if there should be another conflict, I would at least have the opportunity to be a commissioned officer.

I labored to qualify in every respect for consideration as a commissioned officer. Upon graduating from the University of Utah, I submitted a list of my credits, a personal reference from my employment supervisor from several summers earlier at the United States Naval Supply Depot, Clearfield, Utah, and any other personal reference I could obtain in order to make my application as impressive as possible. My first application brought forth a request for additional information. This I obtained and then awaited the outcome.

In the meantime, my wife, Frances, and I were living at 508 South Second West and were members of the Sixth-Seventh Ward of the Temple View Stake. In March of 1950, there arrived in the mail from Washington, D.C., my commission as an ensign in the United States Naval Reserve. It was a beautiful certificate with my name in script lettering, and then those words I had long desired to see: a commissioned officer. At last my ambition had been achieved. Contained in the cover letter was a statement to the effect that I had thirty days to accept the commission. I smiled at this sentence, realizing how strenuously I had labored to qualify.

Within days, Bishop John R. Burt came to our home and extended to me a call to serve as second counselor in the bishopric of the Sixth-Seventh Ward. He mentioned that our bishopric meeting would convene each Monday night at seven o'clock. Immediately I recognized that this was the exact time that my Naval Reserve drill meeting was held, but I determined to say nothing.

After praying and worrying about the conflict between my reserve obligations and my new position as a member of the bishopric, I determined to visit with my former stake president and revered Church leader, Elder Harold B. Lee. As I sat in Brother Lee's office, I explained to him that I was a member of the Naval Reserve and held the rating of yeoman third class and that I had just received a commission in the Naval Reserve as an ensign. He, of course, knew of my call to the bishopric inasmuch as he had set me apart to this position.

I explained to Brother Lee that war clouds were on the horizon in the Far East, and that if our headquarters unit of the Naval Reserve were to be activated, I no doubt would be called to active duty. Elder Lee pondered for a few minutes and then leaned toward me and said, "Brother Monson, place that commission in an envelope and mail it back to Washington, D.C., with a letter indicating that you are not in a position to accept it. Then write a letter to the commanding officer of the Twelfth Naval District in San Francisco, to which your reserve unit is attached, and indicate that you would like to be discharged from the reserve."

I responded, "Elder Lee, you don't understand. There will be no problem at Washington, D.C., in withdrawing the commission that has been extended to me, but I have no reason to think that the Twelfth Naval District will in any way honor my request for discharge from the Reserve."

Elder Lee countered, "Brother Monson, have more faith. The military is not for you."

I returned to my office and the activities of that day feeling that Brother Lee surely did not understand the complexities involved in my situation. However, I so respected his judgment that I complied with his counsel. With tears in my eyes, I posted to Washington, D.C., the beautiful commission and a letter indicating that I could not accept the commission of an ensign in the United States Naval Reserve. I then sent a letter to the commander of the Twelfth Naval District requesting discharge from my reserve unit.

Within a few weeks, my discharge through San Francisco arrived in the mail. My discharge was among the last processed before the Korean War broke out in all its fury and my Naval Reserve unit at Fort Douglas was activated and sent to the Far East.

Within seven weeks of my call as second counselor in the bishopric, our bishop was called to serve in the stake presidency and I was called to serve as the bishop of the ward. Again I went in to see Elder Lee and told him the outcome of the counsel he had provided. Brother Lee smiled and said, "There is safety, Tom, in following the servants of the Lord. Had you not followed the counsel I provided, difficult as it may have appeared to you at the time, you would not have been called by the Lord to be the bishop of your ward."

I have often contemplated what the course of my life might have been had I not received and followed the advice of Elder Lee. I pondered the thought that the wisdom of God ofttimes appears as foolishness to men. But the greatest single lesson we can learn in mortality is that when God speaks and a man obeys, that man will always be right.
