Thomas S. Monson, Inspiring Experiences That Build Faith: From the Life and Ministry of Thomas S. Monson ( 1994)

The Calling of a Stake President

In the autumn of 1967, a program was established whereby regional representatives of the Council of the Twelve were appointed. Many were stake presidents; hence, it was necessary to reorganize a number of the presidencies of the stakes, particularly in the greater Salt Lake Valley.

One of the presidents to be thus released was Stanford Smith of the Bountiful Stake. I received the appointment to reorganize the stake presidency.

At the quarterly conference, Elder Milton R. Hunter of the First Council of the Seventy and I conducted a series of interviews late into the evening. As we would interview brethren, three names generally came forward by way of nomination.

We were conducting our last interview for the evening with a bishop, who gave me the names of three men. Then he said, "Brother Monson, I've given you the names of the brethren who more than likely would become members of the stake presidency, but there is another man who I feel might be a fine stake president." I asked him who that would be. He said, "My second counselor, Edgar M. Denny."

I did not see a light nor did I hear a supernatural voice, yet I knew that the name that had been spoken was indeed the new stake president.

I conferred with President Stanford Smith, and he felt, likewise, that Brother Denny should have an interview. President Smith telephoned the Denny home, whereupon Sister Denny said, "I'm sorry, President Smith, but my husband is in Florida and won't be back until tomorrow." She then said, "Excuse me just a moment; there's a knock at the door." She returned to the phone. "You'll never believe what I'm about to tell you. My husband has come home a day early. Would you like to speak to him?"

We invited Brother and Sister Denny to come to the office, and he was called to be the president of the Bountiful Stake. The people of the Bountiful Stake knew, as did I and as did the Denny family, that the call of their stake president had been inspired by God.
