Thomas S. Monson, Inspiring Experiences That Build Faith: From the Life and Ministry of Thomas S. Monson ( 1994)

A Long-Postponed Blessing

A few years ago I read an obituary in the daily newspaper noting the passing of a man I had known from my youth. The obituary mentioned his wife and children and gave a brief account of his life. The words that registered on my mind were these: "Marriage later solemnized in the Salt Lake Temple."

Backward, ever backward, my thoughts turned to a special day when, in the temple of God, I performed that sacred sealing. Jack was a good man, a generous man. However, it remained the privilege and opportunity of a loving, patient, and understanding wife to quicken within him the desire to live a better life and walk the higher road.

The sealing room of the temple was a scene of tranquility. The cares of the outside world had been temporarily discarded. The quiet and peace of the house of the Lord filled the heart of each one assembled in the room.

I knew that this particular couple had been married for eighteen years before coming to the temple. I turned to the husband and asked, "Jack, who is responsible for bringing this glorious event to fulfillment?" He smiled and silently pointed to his precious wife, who sat by his side. I seemed to sense that this lovely woman was never more proud of her husband than at that particular moment. Jack then directed my attention to one of the brethren serving as a witness to this ceremony and acknowledged the great influence for good that he had had upon his life.

As the three beautiful children were sealed to their parents, I could not help noticing the tears that welled up in the eyes of the teenage daughter and then coursed in little rivulets down her cheeks, finally tumbling upon clasped hands. These were sacred tears, tears of supreme joy, tears that expressed silent but eloquent gratitude of a tender heart too full to speak.

I found myself thinking, "Oh, that such men and women would not wait eighteen long years to receive this priceless blessing."
