Thomas S. Monson, Inspiring Experiences That Build Faith: From the Life and Ministry of Thomas S. Monson ( 1994)

Sacrament Prayers

The privilege to magnify our callings may come without announcement or fanfare. When I was a deacon, I recall sitting on the front row of benches in the chapel, along with the other deacons, as the priests prepared to bless the sacrament. One of the priests, whose name was Leland, had a "golden" voice. When he offered the prayer at the sacrament table, the words were clearly pronounced and beautifully spoken. Many would compliment him when the meeting concluded. I think he became a bit proud.

Another priest, named John, sat with Leland of the golden voice one day. John had a hearing impairment and an accompanying speech problem. His words were somewhat difficult to understand. Often we deacons would snicker a bit when John prayed. How we dared to do so is difficult to understand, for John had fists like bear paws and could have silenced us simply by doubling up those fists.

On one particular Sunday, the bread was broken, the hymn was sung. All bowed their heads as Leland prepared to pray. We heard no words spoken. The silence seemed eternal. I opened my eyes and saw Leland looking frantically for the small card on which the words of the prayer were printed. It was nowhere to be found. Others began to open their eyes and raise their heads in wondering. Just then, John, with the hearing and speaking problems, reached forth with one of his mighty hands and gently guided Leland back to the bench. Then John knelt down and, from memory, spoke the words of that familiar prayer: "O God, the Eternal Father, we ask thee in the name of thy Son, Jesus Christ, to bless and sanctify this bread to the souls of all those who partake of it." (Moroni 4:3.) He also blessed the water that morning. He never missed a word.

As we left the chapel that day, Leland said to John, "I thank you from the bottom of my heart for rescuing me today."

John responded, "We are both priests in the same quorum doing our duty." This priest who magnified his calling had changed lives, altered perspectives, and taught an everlasting lesson: Whom God calls, God qualifies.
