Thomas S. Monson, Inspiring Experiences That Build Faith: From the Life and Ministry of Thomas S. Monson ( 1994)

Christmas Gifts with Meaning

At Christmastime, during my first year as a bishop, I received a telephone call from the teacher of a Mutual Improvement Association class in one of the more affluent wards on the east bench of Salt Lake City. Representing her entire MIA, she asked if there were any poor among our ward, people who needed a "Sub for Santa." I responded that there were some in our ward of scanty means and indicated I had one particular family in mind and that perhaps an experience could be planned that would benefit the young people in her ward as well as this particular family. She agreed.

Within days I provided her with the names, sizes, ages, and needs of the many children in the family, as well as the parents. I suggested that if each boy or girl could bring to the family on the appointed night a gift that meant a great deal to him or to her personally, then each would have a Christmas that would long be remembered.

The appointed evening arrived, and into the parking lot of the Sixth-Seventh Ward came one Buick, one Cadillac, and two Oldsmobiles. Such an array of wealth had never before graced that parking area. The cars were left at the chapel. We walked to the home, singing carols along the way.

We knocked at the door of the humble home. Two grateful parents welcomed us in. A little fire glowed in the fireplace, casting its light against the small Christmas tree. At this tiny home between Fourth and Fifth South on Second West Street, the Christmas spirit truly entered each heart.

One girl handed to one of the daughters a lovely doll that she had kept from her childhood. She showed the tiny girl how to caress the doll and to hold it ever so tenderly in her arms. One of the boys handed to one of the sons his baseball glove, carrying Lou Gehrig's signature. The pocket of the mitt had been well worked with oil. He then explained to the young boy how to catch a baseball. Each gift was lovingly given and gratefully received.

This choice German family, so recently come from war's deprivation, simply could not believe that all these gifts were for them. "Danke, danke, danke," each of them repeated; then in English, "Thank you, thank you, thank you." Tears flowed; embraces followed.

We returned to the ward, where we had a prayer together before our guests departed. I don't recall the words of that prayer, but I will never forget the spirit of it. Nor will those young people. They thanked God for this most joyous Christmas.
