Thomas S. Monson, Inspiring Experiences That Build Faith: From the Life and Ministry of Thomas S. Monson ( 1994)

A Love of the Scriptures

Many years ago I received an invitation to meet with President J. Reuben Clark, Jr., a counselor in the First Presidency, a statesman of towering stature, and a scholar of international renown. My profession then was in the field of printing and publishing. President Clark made me welcome in his office and then produced from his old roll-top desk a large sheaf of meticulous, handwritten notes on eight-and-a-half-by-fourteen-inch canary-colored sheets. Many of the notes had been made when he was a law student long years before. He proceeded to outline for me his goal of producing a harmony of the Gospels. This goal was achieved with his monumental work, Our Lord of the Gospels. Many years later I still treasure my personally inscribed, leather-bound copy of this classic treatment of the life and teachings of Jesus of Nazareth.

I asked President Clark during one of our many conversations, "Which of the Gospels do you like best?" His answer: "Brother Monson, I love each of the Gospels."

Years later as I perused the pages of Our Lord of the Gospels and paused at the section entitled "The Miracles of Jesus," I remembered as though it were yesterday President Clark asking me to read to him several of these accounts while he sat back in his large leather chair and listened. He asked me to read aloud the account found in Luke concerning the man filled with leprosy. Then he asked that I continue reading from Luke concerning the man afflicted with palsy and the enterprising manner in which he was presented to the attention of the Lord, who healed him. President Clark removed from his pocket a handkerchief and wiped the tears from his eyes. He commented, "As we grow older, tears come more frequently." After a few words of good-bye, I departed from his office, leaving him alone with his thoughts and his tears.

Late one evening I delivered some press proofs to his office in his home in Salt Lake City. President Clark was reading from Ecclesiastes, and he was in a quiet and reflective mood. He sat back from his large desk, which was stacked with books and papers. He held the scriptures in his hand, lifted his eyes from the printed page, and read aloud to me: "Let us hear the conclusion of the whole matter: Fear God, and keep his commandments: for this is the whole duty of man." (Ecclesiastes 12:13.) He exclaimed, "A treasured truth! A profound philosophy!"

What a blessing was mine to learn daily at the feet of such a master teacher and a principal architect of the welfare program. Knowing that I was a newly appointed bishop presiding over a challenging ward, he emphasized the need for me to know my people, to understand their circumstances, and to minister to their needs.

One day he recounted the Savior's raising from the dead the son of the widow of Nain, as recorded in the Gospel of Luke. When President Clark closed the Bible, I noticed that he was weeping. In a quiet voice, he said, "Tom, be kind to the widow and look after the poor."

On another occasion he said: "You do not find truth groveling through error. You find truth by seeking truth."

Through the years these conversations have remained bright in my memory.
