Thomas S. Monson, Inspiring Experiences That Build Faith: From the Life and Ministry of Thomas S. Monson ( 1994)

Sunbeam Road

Many years ago I visited the Jacksonville Florida Stake, where I learned that the patriarch of the stake, James R. Boone, father of fourteen upstanding and stalwart children, was ill. All through the two sessions of the conference on Sunday, I felt the impression that I should visit James Boone. I had heard his name mentioned as one of the real Church pioneers in the Florida area.

Following that impression, at the conclusion of conference I was driven to the home of Brother Boone. As I arrived at his residence, I did not see a large two-story or three-story structure. I saw a small, humble farm home situated about forty feet from the front gate. There was not a blade of grass growing, but I saw a couple of pigs and some chickens and dogs and a cat or two adorning the front yard. They were waiting for me, it seemed.

Sister Boone, who was serving as the stake Relief Society president, opened the door, and I was escorted into their small home. There was a warm, friendly spirit there. One could tell he was in the presence of those who had strong testimonies.

Brother Boone was lying in the bedroom resting and recuperating from an illness. As I went into this marvelous patriarch's room, I could not help but notice that his library was by his bedside in bookcases made from wooden orange crates. The books, representing the major publications of the Church, were stacked vertically in the crates, and nearest him were the Standard Works of the Church. As I looked upon this wonderful man, a leader in the Church in that area, I thought to myself, our Heavenly Father has been good to him. He has not blessed him with material things, but He blessed him with a posterity that has done honor to him all through the years.

As I left the Boone home, I noted the address on the mailbox: 3983 Sunbeam. I thought it rather appropriate.

Brother Boone passed away December 4, 1987. His great desire was to have one hundred grandchildren born while he lived in mortality. His wish was granted to him. His one-hundredth grandchild was born on the day that Brother Boone died.
