Thomas S. Monson, Inspiring Experiences That Build Faith: From the Life and Ministry of Thomas S. Monson ( 1994)

Inspiration to Announce a Speaker

On Saturday, August 29, 1987, I was attending the dedication of the Frankfurt Temple. Just prior to the Dutch session, I handed a note to Elder Carlos E. Asay asking him whether or not Peter Mourik, an outstanding Dutch member of the Church, would be in attendance at the meeting. Elder Asay passed a note back indicating that Brother Mourik was not in the session but that, inasmuch as he was serving in the Servicemen's Stake, he would attend the following day with the members of that stake.

Despite the word that he wouldn't be in this particular session, I had a distinct impression to call upon Brother Mourik to speak to the assembled throng, so I stood and announced him as the first speaker. Elder Asay later told me that he was astounded with the announcement and wondered if I had been able to read his response to me.

Just as I finished announcing his name, Brother Mourik entered the Celestial Room and gave a most inspiring message to the assembled Saints, who were from Holland and Belgium.

I later learned how Brother Mourik came to be in the meeting. He had been attending stake priesthood meeting for the Servicemen's Stake and, following the meeting, was visiting with Elder Thomas Hawkes, regional representative. Brother Mourik said that all of a sudden he had a strong, undeniable impression that he must go to the Frankfurt Temple. He felt a great urgency to go immediately. Since his wife had his car, he asked Elder Hawkes to drive him—quickly. Elder Hawkes asked, "Why do you need to go to the temple?"

Brother Mourik replied, "I don't know. I just know I have to get there."

Off they flew in Brother Hawkes's car. Brother Mourik hurried into the temple just in time to see me on the hall monitor and hear me say, "Our next speaker will be Peter Mourik."

This event will serve as a spiritual bond between Brother Mourik and me always.
