Thomas S. Monson, Inspiring Experiences That Build Faith: From the Life and Ministry of Thomas S. Monson ( 1994)

A Visit to a Grease Pit

One Sunday morning during the time I served as a bishop, I noted that one of our priests, Richard, was missing from the priesthood meeting. I left the quorum in the care of the adviser and visited Richard's home. His mother said he was working at the West Temple Garage. I drove to the garage in search of Richard and looked everywhere, but could not find him. Just as I was about to leave, I had the inspiration to gaze down into the old-fashioned grease pit situated at the side of the station. From the darkness I could see two shining eyes. Then I heard Richard say, "You found me, Bishop! Come on in."

I got down into the pit and said, "Richard, we missed you at church today. We love you, and we need you there." Richard agreed to come the following Sunday, no doubt hoping that this would end our conversation.

A couple of days later, Richard was back at work when he had an accident. He slipped while emerging from the pit and cut his chin badly. He later told me that at that moment all he could think about was our conversation. He remembered the words, "We love you, and we need you there." When he recovered from his injury, he returned to church and became completely active.

The family moved to a nearby stake, and Richard moved with them. Time passed, and I received a phone call informing me that Richard was responding to a mission call to Mexico. I was invited by the family to speak at his farewell testimonial. At the meeting, when Richard responded, he mentioned that the turning point in his determination to fill a mission came from a Sunday morning visit when he gazed up from the depths of a dark grease pit and found his quorum president's outstretched hand.

Through the years I have received occasional progress reports from "the boy in the grease pit," telling of his testimony, his family, and his faithful service in the Church, including his service as a bishop himself. In January 1994 I received the following note from him:

Dear President Monson:

I wanted to let you know that the boy in the grease pit is fine and still true to the faith. My testimony of the gospel grows each day more and more. My love for the Lord and Savior also grows more and more each day.

As I ponder the events in my life, I am so grateful for a bishop who looked for me, found me and showed a great interest in me—one who was lost. I thank you from the bottom of my heart for all that you did and have done for me

personally—and for your counsel, your love, and your concern.

Richard
