Thomas S. Monson, Inspiring Experiences That Build Faith: From the Life and Ministry of Thomas S. Monson ( 1994)

The Finest Coal Shed

One cold winter day I visited an elderly couple who lived in a two-room duplex in my ward. The modest home was heated by a small coal-burning Heatrola. As I approached the home, I met the husband, his aged body bent in the driving snow as he gathered a few pieces of wet coal from his exposed supply of fuel. I helped him fill the bucket, and then we took it inside and attempted to start a fire in the stove of that cold house. I said to him, "How long have you had wet coal?" He replied, "Bishop, I've never had dry coal in the winter."

Later in the evening, as I pondered and prayed and sought for a way to help this fine couple, the inspiration came. In our ward was a carpenter who was temporarily out of work. He had no fuel for his furnace but was too proud to receive the coal slack he needed to keep his house warm. I telephoned him and said, "We need you to build a coal shed, but I won't let you do it unless you permit me to arrange for four tons of slack to be delivered to your house from Deseret Coal."

He said, "Well, when you put it that way, I suppose I can't refuse."

Now where were we to obtain the materials for the shed? I approached the proprietors of a local lumberyard from whom we frequently purchased products. I remember saying to the men, "How would the two of you like to paint a bright spot on your souls this winter day?" Not knowing exactly what I meant, they agreed readily. They were invited to donate the lumber and hardware for the coal shed.

Within days the project was completed. I was invited to inspect the outcome. The coal shed was simply beautiful in its sleek covering of battleship-gray paint. The carpenter, who was a high priest, testified that he had actually felt inspired as he labored on this modest shed.

My older friend, the recipient of the carpenter's labors, stroked the wall of the sturdy structure with obvious appreciation. He pointed out to me the wide door, the shiny hinges, and then opened to my view the supply of dry coal that filled the shed. In a voice filled with emotion, he said, in words I shall ever treasure, "Bishop, take a look at the finest coal shed a man ever had." Its beauty was only surpassed by the pride in the builder's heart. And the elderly recipient labored each day at the ward chapel, dusting the benches, vacuuming the carpet runners, arranging the hymnbooks. He too worked for that which he had received.

Once again, the welfare plan of the Lord had blessed the lives of His children.
