Thomas S. Monson, Inspiring Experiences That Build Faith: From the Life and Ministry of Thomas S. Monson ( 1994)

A Paper Boat and Guidance

When I think of the influence of a single good man upon a boy, I think of an experience of Louis C. Jacobsen. He served the Church as a bishop and a high councilor. He served his community as a Scouter, a member of service clubs for boys. He was a successful industrialist, a master in the art of working with others, a father of boys. He ministered to those in need, he assisted the immigrant to find employment, and he delivered more sermons at more funeral services than any other person I have known.

One day while in a reflective mood, Louis Jacobsen told me of his boyhood. He was the son of a poor Danish widow. He was small in stature, not comely in appearance—easily the object of his classmates' thoughtless jokes. In Sunday School one Sabbath morning, the children made light of his patched trousers and his worn shirt. Too proud to cry, tiny Louis fled from the chapel, stopping at last, out of breath, to sit and rest on the curb that ran along Second West Street in Salt Lake City. Clear water flowed along the gutter next to the curb where Louis sat. From his pocket he took a piece of paper that contained the outlined Sunday School lesson and skillfully shaped a paper boat, which he launched on the flowing water. From his hurt boyish heart came the determined words, "I'll never go back."

Suddenly, through his tears, Louis saw reflected in the water the image of a large and well-dressed man. Louis turned his face upward and recognized George Burbidge, the Sunday School superintendent.

"May I sit down with you?" asked the kind leader.

Louis nodded affirmatively. There on the gutter's curb sat a good Samaritan ministering to one who surely was in need. Several boats were formed and launched while the conversation continued. At last the leader stood, and, with a boy's hand tightly clutching his, they returned to Sunday School.

Later Louis himself presided over that same Sunday School. Throughout his long life of service, he never failed to acknowledge the friend who rescued him. A boy had come to the crossroads of decision; a leader was there to guide him.
