Thomas S. Monson, Inspiring Experiences That Build Faith: From the Life and Ministry of Thomas S. Monson ( 1994)

An Evening with Jane

As the Christmas season approached one year, a teacher of sixteen-year-old Laurel girls arranged a visit to bring joy to the heart of a lonely widow, Jane. I had served as Jane's bishop many years before. The girls busied themselves preparing delicious cookies, special refreshments, even a Christmas tree with ornaments to be placed thereon. They did not forget a beautiful corsage, which they knew would brighten the spirit of the special widow they planned to visit.

With their parcels tucked tightly under each arm, the girls and their teacher made their way up the never-ending flights of stairs that led to Jane's apartment. I was privileged to accompany them. There was an interminable delay as aged feet made their way to the door. Then came the tedious task of unbolting the door. Lonely people fear the dark, the unknown, and lock and counterlock the door to home. Some similarly lock and counterlock the door to the soul, fearful of being disappointed or deeply hurt.

The door opened, and beautiful young women were made welcome in the humble apartment. Their smiles reflected the goodness of their hearts as they erected the Christmas tree and placed upon it the decorations they had so carefully carried. Then the packaged gifts were placed beneath its outstretched branches. I had never seen a more beautiful tree, for no tree had ever before been decorated with such love, such Christlike care and concern. The teacher slipped into the kitchen, and with the aid of three of the girls, the refreshments were prepared and a feast enjoyed.

Then this dear widow gathered the girls around her to share with them her life's memories. She told how, as a young girl in far-off Scotland, she had heard the missionaries, embraced the truth that they taught—even suffered the jibes and comments that adherence to a then unpopular faith inevitably provoked. She told them how the entire Sabbath day was taken just to travel and to attend the meetings of her newfound faith. Instinctively the girls compared her account with the ease with which they made their way each Sunday to their chapel.

When Jane told them of the voyage to America, described the storm-tossed Atlantic and the warm feeling that came to her heart when the Statue of Liberty was first glimpsed, I noted that the girls were visibly touched. Tears brimmed in their eyes, and pledges were made within their hearts, pledges to do that which is correct, to be honorable, to live true to the faith.

As the evening came to an end, there were kisses and embraces, and then each girl filed silently from the doorway and made her way down the stairs to the street outside. They left behind a mother filled with the goodness of the world, with love rekindled, with faith again inspired. I'm certain this was one of the happiest days of her life. That night the corsage was carefully and tenderly placed in safekeeping. It had become a symbol of all that is good and clean and wholesome.
