Thomas S. Monson, Inspiring Experiences That Build Faith: From the Life and Ministry of Thomas S. Monson ( 1994)

Honoring a Former Leader

Many years ago I was assigned to divide the Modesto California Stake. The Saturday meetings had been held, the new stake presidencies selected, and preparations concluded for the announcements to be made the following morning in the Sunday session of conference.

That Sunday morning, as the session was about to begin, there went through my mind the thought that I had been in Modesto before. But when? As I searched my memory, the thought came to me that Modesto, years before, had been a part of the San Joaquin Stake. The stake president was Clifton Rooker, and I had stayed in his home during that conference. But that was many years earlier, and I wasn't certain I was remembering correctly. I said to members of the stake presidency as they sat on the stand, "Was this stake formerly the San Joaquin Stake, where Clifton Rooker once presided?"

The brethren answered, "Yes, it is. He was stake president some years ago."

"It's been many years since I was last here," I said. "Is Brother Rooker with us today?"

They responded, "Oh, yes. We saw him early this morning as he came to conference."

I asked where he was seated. "We don't know exactly," they replied. The building was filled to capacity.

I stepped to the pulpit and asked, "Is Clifton Rooker in the audience?" There he was—way back in the cultural hall, hardly in view of the pulpit. I felt the inspiration to say to him publicly, "Brother Rooker, we have a place for you on the stand. Would you please come forward?"

With every eye watching him, Clifton Rooker made that long walk from the rear of the building right up to the front and sat by my side. It became my opportunity to call upon him, one of the pioneers of that stake, to bear his testimony and to tell the people whom he loved that he was the actual beneficiary of the service he had rendered his Heavenly Father and that he had provided the stake members.

After the session was concluded, I said, "Brother Rooker, how would you like to step with me into the high council room and help me set apart the two new presidencies of these stakes?"

He replied, "That would be a highlight for me."

We proceeded to the high council room. There, with his hands joining my hands and the hands of the outgoing stake presidency, we set apart to their callings the two new stake presidencies. Brother Rooker and I embraced as he said good-bye and went to his home.

Just a few days later, after I had returned to Salt Lake City, I had a telephone call from the son of Clifton Rooker. "Brother Monson," he said, "I'd like to tell you about my dad. He passed away this morning, but before he did so, he said that conference last Sunday was one of the happiest days of his entire life."

As I heard that message from Brother Rooker's son, I paused to thank God for the inspiration that came to me to invite this good man, while he was yet alive and able to enjoy them, to come forward and receive the plaudits of the stake members whom he had served.
