Thomas S. Monson, Inspiring Experiences That Build Faith: From the Life and Ministry of Thomas S. Monson ( 1994)

Missionary Joseph A. Ott Remembered

In distant Dresden, Germany, a city then situated behind an iron curtain and far from freedom's friendly face, I visited a small cemetery on October 22, 1978, with a handful of Church members. The night was dark, and a cold rain had been falling throughout the day.

We had come to visit the grave of a missionary who many years before had died while in the service of the Lord. A hushed silence shrouded the scene as we gathered about the grave. With a flashlight illuminating the headstone, I read the inscription:

Joseph A. Ott

Born: 12 December 1870—Virgin, Utah

Died: 10 January 1896—Dresden, Germany

Then the light revealed that this grave was unlike any other in the cemetery. The headstone had been polished, weeds such as those that covered other graves had been carefully removed, and in their place was an immaculately edged bit of lawn and some beautiful flowers that told of tender and loving care. I asked, "Who has made this grave so attractive?" My query was met by silence.

At length an eleven-year-old boy, Tobias Burkhardt, acknowledged that he had wanted to render this unheralded kindness and, without prompting from parents or leaders, had done so. He said that he just wanted to do something for a missionary who gave his life while in the service of the Lord. He said, "I'll never be able to serve a mission as did my father. I feel close to missionary work when I tend this grave where the body of a missionary rests." I wept out of respect for his faith. I sorrowed at his inability to fulfill his greatest desire—to serve as a missionary. But God did hear his prayer. He noted his faith.

Nearly eleven years after that special night in Dresden, many significant changes had taken place in that part of Germany. A temple of God graced the land. Chapels accommodated wards and stakes, and the full program of the Church blessed the lives of our members. On Thursday, March 30, 1989, the first missionaries in fifty years crossed the border into what was then the German Democratic Republic. Their message was proclaimed and was received by a prepared people. Membership in the Church began to grow.

But what of Tobias Burkhardt, who had so tenderly tended the grave of Joseph Ott? He became an elder. On May 28, 1989, he and nine other companions traveled to the Missionary Training Center in Provo, Utah—the first from their country to serve abroad as missionaries. Asked concerning his feelings at that time, he responded, "I'm anxious to serve my mission. I'll strive to work ever so diligently so that Joseph Ott can, through me, yet perform an earthly mission."

The spirit of Joseph Ott had long since gone home to that God who gave him life. His body rested in the peaceful, well-kept grave in faraway Dresden. But his missionary spirit lived on in the service rendered by a faithful elder—even a boy who so long ago had trimmed the lawn, tidied the flowers, and polished the headstone of Joseph Ott, and dreamed of missionary service once denied but now bestowed.
