Thomas S. Monson, Inspiring Experiences That Build Faith: From the Life and Ministry of Thomas S. Monson ( 1994)

Invited by Inspiration

In October of 1984, I returned from an assignment out of the state, arriving home at perhaps eight P.M. I discovered that an urgent telephone call had come from the mother and father of a young woman whose husband had been diagnosed as having a tumor on his brain. At the time he was a patient in the University Hospital. A blessing had been requested at my convenience.

My first inclination was to visit the hospital the next day, but then a prompting came ever so subtly that I should go to the hospital that very evening. Frances and I then drove through the winter snow to the University Hospital, where I was welcomed warmly by the young couple, and a blessing was provided.

As we left the hospital at about nine P.M., I paused at the exit when the thought entered my mind, "I wonder if my friend Hyrum Adams is still a patient here? It has been some months since I was here at the hospital giving him a blessing. Surely he would be discharged by now." The thought persisted, however, and after some difficulty, a custodian showed me to the switchboard area, where I inquired if Hyrum were still a patient. I was advised that indeed he was. After a difficult period of searching, I located the wing in which his room was situated.

As we approached the door to his room, and knowing that Hyrum was terminally ill with cancer, I felt that perhaps I would enter into a room of pain and quiet. Upon opening the door, however, I found just the opposite. Assembled around Hyrum's bedside were three of his sons and a son-in-law. Hyrum was in his bed in a half-lying, half-sitting position. A string extended from one corner of the room to another, from which were suspended perhaps a dozen birthday cards. On a table was a lovely birthday cake with the inscription "Happy Birthday, Dad."

Hyrum recognized me, and a great smile came over his face as he exclaimed, "Brother Monson, my friend! How in the world did you know it was my birthday?" Of course I did not know prior to entering the room that it was his birthday. I mentioned to him that the Spirit of the Lord had directed me to his bedside, and surely we should acknowledge the kindness of our Heavenly Father and provide a blessing. Hyrum's fine sons and son-in-law joined me as we surrounded Hyrum Adams and gave him a priesthood blessing.

Before leaving the room, I sang in quiet tones the traditional "Happy birthday to you," embraced Hyrum warmly, and waved good-bye. This was the last time in mortality I was to see my longtime friend. He died a month later.

At his funeral service, I recounted this special experience and mentioned to the family that surely He who notes the fall of the sparrow had noted, with great impact, that twilight of Hyrum Adams' mortal life and had provided a moment of true inspiration for all of us who were in his room that special birthday evening.
