Thomas S. Monson, Inspiring Experiences That Build Faith: From the Life and Ministry of Thomas S. Monson ( 1994)

Faith and an Old Car

As president of the Canadian Mission, I always enjoyed attending the North Bay District quarterly conferences, particularly when such were held at Sudbury, Ontario. The people were of rather modest means and yet were filled with faith.

Whenever the conference would convene in Sudbury, there would appear on the front row the Royden T. Fraser family. The family was composed of mother and father and three or four beautiful, blond-haired children, one of whom was lame. The children always appeared in their Sunday best and looked rubbed and scrubbed for the occasion.

Sister Fraser was quite an ardent genealogist and frequently would say, "One day, Brother Monson, we will go to the temple in Salt Lake City, so that our family may be united for all eternity." The hope seemed only a hope, or at best a dream, because the Fraser family had no car and no means to make the trip westward.

One bright spring morning in 1960, in the city of Toronto, there came a knock at the mission-home door. As I opened the door, the Fraser family stood before me. I invited them into the office and asked why they had driven the 250 miles to Toronto.

Brother Fraser replied, "We have come for our temple recommends. We are going to Salt Lake City to the temple of the Lord."

I said, "Brother Fraser, you don't even have a car. How will you make the trip?"

He then invited me to step outside to see the automobile he had purchased. My eyes fell upon a very old car. In Canada the winters are unusually hard on cars, causing extensive rusting. It appeared as though the winters had been more than harsh on the car that Brother Fraser had purchased.

I looked at the decrepit automobile and said to him, "This car will never get you to Salt Lake City."

Brother Fraser stood erect, his eyes blazing. Filled with faith, he then said to me, "President Monson, this car will get me and my family to the temple in Salt Lake City, and there is a difference."

I issued the temple recommends and bade them Godspeed on their journey westward.

Three weeks later they returned in the same car. I asked Brother Fraser to give me an account of his journey. He reported that the Lord had been with them throughout their visit to the Salt Lake Temple.

He said, "As we drove along the highway and the close of day would approach, we would inevitably pull into a filling station, there to refuel and to locate a place to stay for the night. The attendant would say, as he looked at our car, 'Where in the world are you going in this car?' After he heard our answer, he would say, 'I know some Mormons in our town. Perhaps they would like to visit with you.' In this way we found a place to stay and food to eat all the way to Salt Lake City and all the way back."

He continued, "No scene is of greater beauty than that which I experienced in the temple of God when my wife and I, kneeling at the altar, heard the door open and saw our children, dressed in white, come to our side. And how glorious it was to hear those words spoken that united us as an eternal family unit for time and all eternity."

His eyes glistened as he recounted the faith-promoting experience. I glanced out the front window at the old car. I knew within my heart that faith had carried the Fraser family to the temple of God and back to their home.
