Thomas S. Monson, Inspiring Experiences That Build Faith: From the Life and Ministry of Thomas S. Monson ( 1994)

Tithing Pays

Very early one morning while I was serving as president of the Canadian Mission, I received a telephone call. As I answered the telephone, the person calling said to me, "Are you the president of the Mormon Church?"

"No," I replied.

She then said, "Are you president of the Mormon Church in Canada?"

"No."

Somewhat frustrated, she said, "Well, are you the man responsible for the two young men who come door-to-door with the message of Mormonism?"

I replied that I was, and she curtly stated, "Then get them off my back! We have had no peace in our home since these two young men called at our door. My foolish husband believes their message." She mentioned to me that her name was Rogers and gave me her address. I told her that I would respect her wish that the missionaries not call at their home, but that if Mr. Rogers wanted to continue his study of the truth, he could do so at our own residence on Lyndhurst Avenue.

I then felt impressed to say to her, "Mrs. Rogers, you're not able to accept the law of tithing, are you?"

She responded, "How did you know? How did you know?" She went on, "Why, of all the foolish doctrines, to think that those of us who can't get by on one hundred percent of our income could get by on nine-tenths. I can't buy that nonsense!" She then slammed the receiver in my ear.

As I returned to bed, Frances asked, "Who was that?"

"Some woman who doesn't want the missionaries," I replied.

I forgot about the incident. About two months later I was attending the fast and testimony meeting of the Toronto Branch, there to bless our newly arrived child, Clark Spencer Monson. The branch president said, "We have a number of ordinances today—some blessings, some confirmations. We would like now to invite the members of the Rogers family, seated on the front row, to each one be confirmed a member of the Church." Instantly the name Rogers flashed through my mind. I looked at the redheaded woman sitting on the front row. As I did so, I wondered, "Could this be the Mrs. Rogers who telephoned at two A.M.?" As though we were communicating one with another, Mrs. Rogers' eyes met mine, and she nodded her head affirmatively.

Following the ordinance work and the conclusion of the meeting, I went forward to congratulate the Rogers family. I said to her, "Could you possibly be the Mrs. Rogers who telephoned me early one morning?"

She said, "Yes, President Monson, and tithing pays."

I replied, "Tithing does pay, just as the missionaries have declared." I was happy to help confirm her a member of the Church.
