Thomas S. Monson, Inspiring Experiences That Build Faith: From the Life and Ministry of Thomas S. Monson ( 1994)

Help in Naming Patriarchs

In 1964 I attended the quarterly conference of the Billings Stake in Montana with the specific assignment to name a patriarch. My visit with members of the stake presidency and my discussion with them concerning the names of possible candidates yielded no fruit. At the conclusion of the seven P.M. meeting, a patriarch was still not apparent. As I walked toward the rear of the chapel, I noticed the back of a man leaving the front door. Instantly I knew he was the patriarch. I said to the stake president, "Who is that brother?"

"That is Brother Davies, a member of our high council," he responded.

"President Anderson," I said, "he will be your patriarch." And thus Brother Davies became the patriarch of the Billings Stake. The Lord had called him. We needed simply to know the will of the Lord.

I once had an assignment to the Idaho Falls North Stake, there to name a patriarch. I reviewed the names of three illustrious men who were former leaders, yet I could not make a choice. Throughout Saturday I prayed earnestly for help, but no help came. At two o'clock Sunday morning I awakened, knowing that a patriarch's name had not been made known to me. I knelt down by the side of my bed and poured out my soul to the Lord and asked him for His divine help. As I returned to bed, I fell into a deep sleep. During my sleep, I dreamed a dream that eliminated two of the three brethren whom we had considered as a patriarch. As I awakened in the morning, I knew that the third individual was the patriarch whom the Lord wanted, and thus the call came to him to serve.

In 1971 I had the assignment to divide the Puget Sound and the Tacoma stakes in Washington, thereby creating a third stake—the Mt. Rainier Stake. Naming the stake presidencies, the high councils, and so forth all fell into place. Remaining to be named was a patriarch for the Tacoma Stake. During the midst of my interview with a bishop concerning who would be appropriate members of the stake presidency, I felt compelled to ask him, "Who is the most spiritually minded man in the Tacoma Stake?"

"Walter Gehring," he responded without hesitation. This confirmed in my mind the thought I had had that Walter Gehring should be the patriarch. Suddenly the brother apologized for his statement and suggested that perhaps another brother or others were equally as spiritual. I told him that his first statement was the answer of confirmation I had needed. Thus Walter Gehring became a patriarch of the Tacoma Stake.

A few months later, I attended the quarterly conference of the Medford Stake in Oregon. Elder Gordon B. Hinckley was originally assigned to attend this conference, but an assignment to the East occasioned my substituting for him. It was necessary that a patriarch be named for this stake. The stake presidency had suggested several names. As I got off the plane at the Medford airport, I looked into the eyes of the stake clerk, who had come with the party to meet me. I knew immediately that he was to be the patriarch, though I said nothing to him nor to the others.

That afternoon, as we visited privately about the decision to be made and I asked each member of the stake presidency to submit to me the names of individuals who could meet the requirements I set forth that a patriarch should possess, the name of Douglas Shepherd, the stake clerk, was more prominently mentioned than any other. Brother Shepherd was ordained a patriarch on Sunday, April 18, 1971.
