Thomas S. Monson, Inspiring Experiences That Build Faith: From the Life and Ministry of Thomas S. Monson ( 1994)

A Family Inspired by a Patriarch's Call

One evening in the winter month of January, I received a telephone call from my wife Frances's brother, Arnold Johnson. He was calling from New York City. He asked a question. I looked up the answer and gave him the details. He mentioned to me that he and his wife were in New York visiting their son, Reid, and attending an electrical engineers convention. I then pointed out that I would be in New York that weekend for a quarterly conference of the New York Stake. I invited Arnold and his wife, Janice, and the family to attend.

When I arrived in New York, I found that there was a need for a stake patriarch. The inspiration directed that Brother Paul Jespersen, a man whom I had released as president of the Chicago Stake when his business assignment took him to New York, was the man whom the Lord wanted to be a patriarch. It was then that I realized that Paul Jespersen had been the Scoutmaster of my brother-in-law, Arnold Johnson, in the old LeGrand Ward in Salt Lake City, and, according to Arnold, the man who had exerted a greater influence for good upon him than any other.

Then Arnold realized that Reid, his son, who was sitting by his side as a pillar of faith, a returned missionary from Sweden, had received his own name and blessing from Paul Jespersen when Paul lived in San Francisco. It was only natural that I should invite my family into the room as Paul Jespersen was ordained. Arnold bore testimony to him, even a testimony of gratitude, for the influence he'd had upon his life and upon his family. I noticed that, following these comments, Brother Jespersen's sons took a keener interest in the calling that had come to their father and embraced him in a spirit of gratitude.

I feel that our Heavenly Father brought to this glorious event, in sort of a family reunion, those who assembled. Arnold told me that this experience was one of the most faith-promoting he had ever had. I declared to him that it was no coincidence that he would be in the same setting where his former Scoutmaster was called to be a patriarch.
