Thomas S. Monson, Inspiring Experiences That Build Faith: From the Life and Ministry of Thomas S. Monson ( 1994)

A Patriarch's Promise

The late Percy K. Fetzer was one of the dearest friends I have ever had. He was a modern-day Paul, a fearless Peter, a guileless Nathanael. At the call of the Church, Brother Fetzer left his home, his business, and his family to nurture and care for our faithful Church members in the countries of Eastern Europe. He loved the people. He spoke the language of the heart. He had been ordained a patriarch to give blessings to worthy members in a host of nations.

During the long period of his service, Brother Fetzer made dozens of flights to Europe, blessing the members, instructing the priesthood, and providing an example of faith, of works, and of love.

While on an assignment in the land of Poland, he gave blessings to a number of German-speaking members who, due to the new geographical boundaries dictated by World War II, found themselves in a nation whose language they did not speak, isolated from the conferences of the Church. Upon his return to Salt Lake City, Brother Fetzer called me on the telephone and, with some anxiety, asked to come to my office. When he arrived, we embraced as old and dear friends do. I then asked him to explain his anxiety and concern.

Brother Fetzer related this account: "Brother Monson, I have just returned from Poland, where I gave patriarchal blessings to the Erich Konietz family." His voice wavered and tears began to course down his cheeks. He continued: "I try to live close to the Lord so that He will inspire the blessings I give. I have given blessings to the Konietz family that are impossible to fulfill. I have promised Brother and Sister Konietz that, because of their faith, they will enter the temple of the Lord and have their entire family sealed to them for eternity as well as time. Brother Monson, they cannot leave their country. It is forbidden for them to do so. What have I done?"

I knew the heart and soul of Percy Fetzer. I responded, "If you made these promises as you did, let us now kneel down before God and ask for them to be fulfilled in His own time and in His own way."

As we prayed, a perfect peace filled our hearts. The matter was left with God. Several years later, and without fanfare or notice, there was announced a pact between the Federal Republic of Germany and Poland that allowed native Germans who had been trapped behind the Polish border following the war to emigrate to Germany. The Konietz family and most other member families in that land came home to their native Germany.

I had the privilege to ordain the father a bishop in the Dortmund Stake of the Church. The family then made that long-awaited trek to the temple in Switzerland. They dressed in clothing of spotless white. They knelt at a sacred altar to await that ordinance which binds father, mother, brothers, and sisters not only for time, but for all eternity. He who pronounced that sacred sealing ceremony was the temple president. More than this, however, he was the same servant of the Lord, Percy K. Fetzer, who, as a patriarch years before, had provided those precious promises in the patriarchal blessings he had bestowed.

Percy Fetzer and I both understood the expression: "The wisdom of God ofttimes appears as foolishness to men. But the greatest single lesson we can learn in mortality is that when God speaks and a man obeys, that man will always be right."
