Thomas S. Monson, Inspiring Experiences That Build Faith: From the Life and Ministry of Thomas S. Monson ( 1994)

A Mission to Complete

A rather unique and frightening assignment came to me in the fall of 1965. Folkman D. Brown, then our director of Mormon relationships for the Boy Scouts of America, came to my office, having learned that I was about to depart for a lengthy assignment to visit the missions of New Zealand. He told me that his sister, Belva Jones, who had been stricken with terminal cancer, did not know how to break the sad news to her only son, a missionary in faroff New Zealand. Her wish, even her plea, was that he remain in the mission field and serve faithfully. She worried about his reaction, for the missionary, Elder Ryan Jones, had lost his father just a year earlier to the same dread disease.

I accepted the responsibility to inform Elder Jones of his mother's illness and to convey to him her wish that he remain in New Zealand until his service there was completed. After a missionary meeting held adjacent to the majestically beautiful New Zealand Temple, I met privately with Elder Jones and, as gently as I could, explained the situation of his mother. Naturally, there were tears—not all his—but then the handclasp of assurance and the pledge: "Tell my mother I shall serve, I shall pray, and I shall see her again."

I returned to Salt Lake City just in time to attend a conference of the Lost River Stake in Idaho. As I sat on the stand with the stake president, Burns Beal, my attention was drawn to the east side of the chapel, where the morning sunlight seemed to bathe an occupant of a front bench. President Beal told me the woman was Belva Jones. He said, "She has a missionary son in New Zealand. She is very ill and has requested a blessing."

Prior to that moment, I had not known where Belva Jones lived. My assignment that weekend could have been to any of many stakes. Yet the Lord, in His own way, had answered the prayer of faith of a devoted woman. Following the meeting, we had a most delightful visit together. I reported, word for word, the reaction and resolve of her son Ryan. A blessing was provided. A prayer was offered. A witness was received that Belva Jones would live to see Ryan again. This privilege she enjoyed. Just one month prior to her passing, Ryan returned, having successfully completed his mission.

I recognize that a Providence greater than chance sent me that day to this mother, with a personal message for her.
