Thomas S. Monson, Inspiring Experiences That Build Faith: From the Life and Ministry of Thomas S. Monson ( 1994)

John's Race

While on an assignment in Sweden, I was with a group of young people who shared with me an account of great courage that took place at a Scandinavian youth conference. It pertained to John Helander.

John was twenty-six years of age and was handicapped in that it was difficult for him to coordinate his motions. At a youth conference in Kungsbacka, Sweden, John took part in a 1500-meter race. He had no chance to win. More likely, he would be humiliated, mocked, derided, scorned. Perhaps John remembered another who had lived long ago and far away—even the Savior, Jesus Christ. Wasn't He mocked? Wasn't He derided? Wasn't He scorned? But He prevailed. He won His race. Maybe John could win his.

What a race it was! Struggling, surging, pressing, the runners bolted far beyond John. There was wonderment among the spectators. Who is this runner who lags so far behind? The participants on their second lap of this twolap race passed John while he was but halfway through the first lap. Tension mounted as the runners pressed toward the tape. Who would win? Who would place second? Then came the final burst of speed; the tape was broken. The crowd cheered; the winner was proclaimed.

The race is over—or is it? Who is this contestant who continues to run when the race is ended? He now crosses the finish line on but his first lap. Doesn't the foolish lad know he has lost? Ever onward he struggles, the only participant now on the track. This is his race. This must be his victory. No one among the vast throng of spectators leaves. Every eye is on this valiant runner. He makes the final turn and moves toward the finish line. There is awe; there is admiration. Each spectator sees himself running his own race of life.

As John approaches the finish line, the audience, as one, rises to its feet. There is a loud applause of acclaim. Stumbling, falling, exhausted but victorious, John Helander breaks the newly tightened tape. (Officials are human beings too.) The cheering echoes for miles. And just maybe, if the ear is carefully attuned, that Great Scorekeeper—even the Lord—can be heard to say, "Well done, thou good and faithful servant." (Matthew 25:21.)
