Thomas S. Monson, Inspiring Experiences That Build Faith: From the Life and Ministry of Thomas S. Monson ( 1994)

Sunshine by the Elbe River

On a gentle rise in the historic city of Freiberg, Germany, once a part of the German Democratic Republic, there stands a beautiful temple of God. The temple provides the eternal blessings of a loving Heavenly Father to His faithful Saints.

On Sunday morning, April 27, 1975, I stood on an outcropping of rock situated between the cities of Dresden and Meissen, high above the Elbe River, in the German Democratic Republic. I responded to the promptings of the Holy Spirit and offered a prayer of dedication on that land and its people. That prayer noted the faith of the members. It emphasized the tender feelings of many hearts filled with an overwhelming desire to obtain temple blessings. A plea for peace was expressed. Divine help was requested. I voiced the words: "Dear Father, let this be the beginning of a new day for the members of Thy church in this land."

Suddenly, from far below in the valley, a bell in a church steeple began to chime and the shrill crow of a rooster broke the morning silence, each heralding the commencement of a new day. Though my eyes were closed, I felt a warmth from the sun's rays reaching my face, my hands, my arms. How could this be? An incessant rain had been falling all morning. At the conclusion of the prayer, I gazed heavenward. I noted a ray of sunshine that penetrated an opening in the heavy clouds, a ray that engulfed the spot where our small group stood. From that moment I knew divine help was at hand.

In due time, with the enthusiastic approval of President Spencer W. Kimball and his counselors, a temple was proposed in this land situated behind the Berlin Wall. Full cooperation of government officials was forthcoming. A site was selected, plans were drawn, groundbreaking services were held, and construction commenced.

At the time of dedication, the attention of the international press was focused on this temple in its unusual setting. Words like "How?" and "Why?" were voiced frequently. This was particularly in evidence during the public open house when 89,872 persons visited the temple. At times the waiting period stretched to three hours, occasionally in the rain. None wavered. All were shown God's house.

During the dedicatory services, hymns of praise, testimonies of truth, tears of gratitude, and prayers of thanksgiving marked the historic event. To understand how, to comprehend why, it is necessary to know the faith, the devotion, the love of the members of the Church in that nation. Though there are fewer than five thousand in number, their activity levels exceeded those found anywhere else in the world.

During the many years I served on assignment in Eastern Europe, I noted the absence of spacious chapels with multiple teaching stations and grounds featuring the greenery of lawns and the blossoms of flowers. The meetinghouse libraries, as well as the personal libraries of our members, consisted only of the standard works, a hymnbook, and one or two other volumes. These books did not remain on bookcase shelves. Their teachings were engraved on the hearts of members. They were displayed in their daily lives. Service was a privilege. A branch president, forty-two years of age, had served in his calling for twenty-one years—half his life. Never was there a complaint—just gratitude.

In Leipzig, when the meetinghouse furnace failed one cold winter day, the meetings were not dismissed. Rather, the members met in the chill of the unheated building, sitting shoulder to shoulder, wearing their coats, singing the hymns of Zion and worshiping Him who counseled, "Be not weary in well doing" (2 Thessalonians 3:13); "Follow me" (Matthew 4:19); "Be thou humble; and the Lord thy God shall lead thee by the hand, and give thee answer to thy prayers" (D&C 112:10).
