Thomas S. Monson, Inspiring Experiences That Build Faith: From the Life and Ministry of Thomas S. Monson ( 1994)

Temple Pictures

When I first visited Czechoslovakia, accompanied by Hans B. Ringger, regional representative, long before the freedom bell sounded, I was met by Jiri Snederfler, our leader through this dark period, and Olga Snederfler, his wife. I went to their home in Prague, where the branch met. Displayed on the walls of the room in which we assembled were picture after picture of the Salt Lake Temple. I said to Sister Snederfler, "Your husband must truly love the temple."

She responded, "I too. I too."

We sat down for some soup Sister Snederfler had prepared, after which she brought out a treasure trove: an album containing individual pictures of the missionaries who were serving there in 1950 when the government edict came for the mission to be closed. As she slowly leafed through the pictures of different missionaries, she would say, "Wonderful boy. Wonderful boy."

Brother Snederfler had been a courageous Church leader in Czechoslovakia and had been willing to put everything on the line for the gospel. When the opportunity came that we would seek recognition for the Church in that country, the government leaders, then Communist, said, "Don't send an American. Don't send a German. Don't send a Swiss. Send a citizen of Czechoslovakia."

There were ominous implications in that particular statement, because to have admitted that you were a church leader during this period of the prohibition of religion could mean imprisonment. And yet this call came to Brother Snederfler to be the designated person to go before the government and to state forthrightly that he was the leader of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints for all of Czechoslovakia and that he was seeking recognition for his church. He later told me that he had been somewhat frightened and had asked for the prayers of his brothers and sisters in the Prague Branch. He went to his sweet wife, Olga, and said to her, "I love you. I don't know when, or if, I'll be back; but I love the gospel, and I must follow my Savior. Pray for me."

With that spirit of faith and devotion, Brother Snederfler went before the government officials and acknowledged that he was the leader of the Church and that he was there to seek a restoration of the recognition the Church had enjoyed long years before.

In the meantime, Elder Russell M. Nelson had been working tirelessly to bring about the desired decision. Later Brother Snederfler heard the good news: "Your church is again recognized in Czechoslovakia." How eager Brother Snederfler was to tell his dear wife and the other stalwart members of the Church the wonderful news that once again missionaries could come to Czechoslovakia and the Church could provide a haven for freedom of worship in that nation. It was a happy day for Czechoslovakia.

In 1991 Jiri and Olga Snederfler responded to their calls to serve as temple president and matron of the Freiberg Germany Temple, which faithful members of the Church in Germany, Czechoslovakia, and surrounding nations attend. These two saintly souls found themselves each day in the Lord's house they so dearly loved.
