Thomas S. Monson, Inspiring Experiences That Build Faith: From the Life and Ministry of Thomas S. Monson ( 1994)

A Mother's Prayer Answered

In 1951, as bishop of the Sixth-Seventh Ward, I received an assignment from our stake president to supply the stake with the names of two possible stake missionaries. My counselors and I prayed about the selection and then reviewed the listing of priesthood bearers within the ward.

We had a card file in which each individual card contained the name of the head of the family. One at a time, we eliminated the name of each of the high priests and each of the elders. My comment would be, "We can't recommend him; he's our Scoutmaster," or "We would be foolish to recommend him; he's busy teaching the priests quorum."

Finally, we commenced the file of the seventy. I came to a card that contained the name of Richard W. Moon and said to my counselors, "We sure won't recommend him. He's the finest assistant Sunday School superintendent we've ever had." I then attempted to put the card face down on the stack, but the card would not leave my thumb and index finger. It was as though it were glued to them. I tugged at the card, but still it would not come loose. I then said to my counselors, "The Lord needs Richard W. Moon as a stake missionary more than we need him as an assistant Sunday School superintendent."

I called the stake president, President Stewart, and related the experience. He said, "Brother Monson, under the circumstances, go immediately to Brother Moon's home and extend to him a call to serve."

We adjourned our meeting and went to Richard Moon's home, only to find no one there. A neighbor said that he was visiting his mother's home, which also was situated within our ward. So we went to the home of Art and Isabel Moon. Isabel, Richard's mother, opened the door to us and invited us in. I said that we had come to visit with Richard about a mission. I then told her the circumstances. Tears welled up in her eyes, and she said, "Bishop, ever since we received your announcement that the Church was looking for seventies who could fill missions, I have prayed that my son might be appointed. I wondered how, with his wife and tiny children, he could be a full-time missionary. Not once did I think of a stake mission. Your visit is in answer to my prayer."

Richard W. Moon became a most successful stake missionary. He served as a district president and brought a number of people into the Church. He then returned to the ward a better assistant Sunday School superintendent than he ever would have been, had he not had his mission experience.
