Thomas S. Monson, Inspiring Experiences That Build Faith: From the Life and Ministry of Thomas S. Monson ( 1994)

Extra Copies

While attending the annual meetings of the Boy Scouts of America in 1971, I took with me several copies of the New Era, that I might share with officials of Scouting this excellent publication. As I opened the package, I found that my secretary, for no accountable reason, had given me two extra copies of the June issue, an issue that featured temple marriage. I left the two copies in the hotel room and, as planned, distributed the other copies.

On the final day of the conference, I had no desire to attend the scheduled luncheon but felt compelled to return to my room. The telephone was ringing as I entered. The caller introduced herself as Sister Knotts. She asked if I could provide a blessing for her ten-year-old daughter. I agreed readily, and she indicated that she and her husband, their daughter, and their son would come immediately to my hotel room. As I waited, I prayed for help. The applause of the convention was replaced by the peace of prayer.

Then came the knock at the door and the privilege of meeting a choice Latter-day Saint family. Ten-year-old Deanna walked with the aid of crutches. Cancer had required the amputation of her left leg. Her clothing was clean, her countenance radiant, her trust in God unwavering. A blessing was provided. Mother and son knelt by the side of the bed, while the father and I placed our hands on tiny Deanna. We were directed by the Spirit of God. We were humbled by its power.

I felt the tears course down my cheeks and tumble upon my hands as they rested on the head of that beautiful child of God. I spoke of eternal ordinances and family exaltation. The Lord prompted me to urge this family to enter the holy temple of God. At the conclusion of the blessing, I learned that such a temple visit was planned for that very summer. Questions pertaining to the temple were asked. I heard no heavenly voice, nor did I see a vision. Yet there came to me a certain statement: "Refer to the New Era." I looked to the dresser, and there were the two copies of the temple issue of the New Era. One was given to Deanna. One was provided her parents. Each was reviewed and read.

The Knotts family said farewell, and once again the room was still. A prayer of gratitude came easily and, once more, the resolve to provide a place for prayer.
