Thomas S. Monson, Inspiring Experiences That Build Faith: From the Life and Ministry of Thomas S. Monson ( 1994)

Prayers in Poland

Poland has had more wars fought on its soil than any other nation in the world. There is now a glorious mission there. Elder Russell M. Nelson, Elder Hans Ringger, and I were there a few years ago when Poland was behind the Iron Curtain, to seek permission for more missionaries to be in Poland. We had just one couple there at the time—one couple for an entire nation. The first couple who served in Warsaw, Poland, were tremendous people from Chicago, Brother and Sister Mazur.

On the day when Elder Nelson, Elder Ringger, and I were in Poland, we were in the company of another wonderful couple by the name of Juliusz and Dorothy Fussek. I had known Brother Fussek when he operated a stitcher-trimmer machine at the Church Printing Services. He and his wife went on their mission to Poland assuming it would be for eighteen months. They actually served close to five years. While in Poland, they lived in a little hovel with just a tiny shower, and they endured the privation there for the entire period. However, the Lord utilized them in a mighty manner to bring about a miracle. When Brother Nelson and Brother Ringger and I, accompanied by Elder Fussek, met with Minister Adam Wopatka of the Polish Ministry of Religion, he said, "Your church is welcome here. You may build your buildings, you may send your missionaries. You are welcome in Poland. This man," pointing to Juliusz Fussek, "and his wife have served your church well. You can be grateful for their example and their work, as well as that of their predecessors."

As we left the ministry and went to our hotel rooms, we got down upon our knees and thanked our Heavenly Father for the manner in which He had responded to the prayers of faith that the doors of nations might be opened so that the gospel of Jesus Christ might be proclaimed. We thanked Him also for the faithful and dedicated service of Elder and Sister Fussek and Elder and Sister Mazur.
