Thomas S. Monson, Inspiring Experiences That Build Faith: From the Life and Ministry of Thomas S. Monson ( 1994)

An Elder's Faith

Shortly after my call to the Council of the Twelve, one of my assignments was to direct missionary labors in the missions of the West Coast of North America.

I held a meeting one day in San Mateo, California, and as I listened to the testimonies of the missionaries, I noted that one elder had a terribly scarred face. The mission president, Howard Allen, advised me that Elder Nichols had been thrown through the windshield of his automobile in a terrible accident just a few months earlier. He then pointed out that Elder Nichols' parents were nonmembers and were threatening to sue the Church due to the injury. Doctors had despaired of the boy ever again regaining a pleasing appearance and felt that plastic surgery could do but little in his particular case.

I felt the strong impression to give to Elder Nichols a blessing. President Allen and I took him aside and gave him such a blessing. The spirit was surely present.

In the fall of 1969 my wife, Frances, and I were looking at carpeting in a store in Salt Lake City. The young man handling the carpet came forward and asked if I remembered him. I told him that he looked vaguely familiar, but that I couldn't quite place his name. He then stepped over and sat behind a lamp so that the light of the lamp cast its brilliance upon his face. He said, "Look closely at my face and then see if you can remember."

As I examined his face, I noted thin, scarcely discernable scars running across his nose, forehead, and cheeks. It was then that I realized this was Elder Nichols, the horribly scarred boy who had received a blessing in San Mateo while serving as a missionary in the Northern California Mission.

When I identified him, he smilingly said, "Brother Monson, even the plastic surgeons have called my case a miracle. I told them it was the intervention of Divine Providence through a priesthood blessing coupled with faith."

Elder Nichols was among the most handsome of young men.
