Thomas S. Monson, Inspiring Experiences That Build Faith: From the Life and Ministry of Thomas S. Monson ( 1994)

A Prayer in Sudbury

In the Canadian Mission during the year 1960, I assigned Elder Clinton Buttars to the nickel-mining city of Sudbury, Ontario. The landscape was bleak, the missionary opportunities somewhat limited, and yet Clinton Buttars and his companion commenced to proselyte in one of the more affluent areas of the community.

They called at the home of Morley Dimma but found that he was at work and had his evenings fully occupied, as reported by his wife. Mrs. Dimma then suggested that the missionaries might wish to call upon him at his office. They grasped the opportunity and went to the office suite occupied by Mr. Dimma, who was the local agent of a large insurance firm.

As they were escorted into his inner office and Mr. Dimma asked them the nature of their visit, fear engulfed them. Suddenly Elder Buttars asked the question, "Mr. Dimma, how long has it been since you prayed?"

Mr. Dimma replied jokingly, "I haven't prayed since I was at my mother's knee."

Elder Buttars then said, "Would you join us in prayer?" He dropped to his knees, for there was no place else to go. His companion followed his lead, and reluctantly Mr. Dimma likewise joined in an attitude of prayer—the first time, as he stated, since he was at his mother's knee.

Concluding the prayer, the two missionaries and Mr. Dimma rose to their feet. Mr. Dimma then reported to them that he felt a strangeness come over him during that prayer and a desire to listen to the message that the missionaries had brought.

Mr. Dimma, his wife, and their children were converted to the Church. He was so thrilled with the truth he had discovered in the gospel of Jesus Christ that he asked if he might extend a personal invitation to the several hundred members of his former religious congregation to each hear the message in his home. Four other missionaries were dispatched to the Sudbury area to accommodate this request.

A thriving branch and a lovely building later characterized the position of the Church in Sudbury, Ontario.
