Thomas S. Monson, Inspiring Experiences That Build Faith: From the Life and Ministry of Thomas S. Monson ( 1994)

Testimony on a Bus

Some years ago I worked with Sharman Hummel in the printing business in Salt Lake City. I once gave him a ride home from work and asked him how he came to receive his testimony of the gospel. He responded, "It's interesting, Tom, that you asked me that question, for this very week my wife, my children, and I are going to the Manti Temple to be sealed for all eternity."

He continued his account: "We lived in the East. I was journeying by bus to San Francisco to establish myself in a new printing company, and then I was going to send for my wife and children. All the way from New York City to Salt Lake City, the bus trip was uneventful. But in Salt Lake City there entered the bus a little girl who sat next to me. As we journeyed westward, I noticed a road sign that read 'Visit the Mormon Sunday School this week.' I said to the little girl, 'I guess there are a lot of Mormons in Utah, aren't there?'

"She replied, 'Yes, sir.'

"Then I said to her, 'Are you a Mormon?'

"Again, 'Yes, sir.'

"'What do Mormons believe?'"

The girl recited the first Article of Faith, and then she talked about it. Continuing, she gave him the second Article of Faith and talked about it. Then she gave him the third, and the fourth, and the fifth, and the sixth, and all of the Articles of Faith and talked about all of them. She knew them consecutively.

Sharman Hummel said, "By the time she arrived at her destination, I was profoundly impressed. All the way to San Francisco I thought, 'What is it that prompts that young girl to know her doctrine so well?'

"When I arrived in San Francisco, the very first thing I did was to look through the yellow pages for The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. I called the mission president, J. Leonard Love, and he sent two missionaries to where I was staying. I became a member of the Church, my wife became a member, all of our children became members, in part because a young girl knew her Articles of Faith."

As my friend told me this story, I thought of the words of the Apostle Paul: "For I am not ashamed of the gospel of Christ: for it is the power of God unto salvation." (Romans 1:16.)

Then Sharman said, "I have but one regret. I never asked for her name. I've never been able to properly thank her."

Several years later I was in Milwaukee, Wisconsin, dedicating the Milwaukee Stake Center. On the front row I noticed the Hummel family. As I greeted them, I found that they had moved to Milwaukee, Sharman having found a better position there. I asked concerning his current status in the Church. He replied, "I am a president in the seventies quorum and a stake missionary."

I then said, "How many people have you brought to a knowledge of the truth?"

"Twenty-four," he replied.

I thought to myself, "All because a young girl knew her Articles of Faith and had the ability and the courage to proclaim the truth to one who was seeking the light of the gospel."
