Thomas S. Monson, Inspiring Experiences That Build Faith: From the Life and Ministry of Thomas S. Monson ( 1994)

A Change of Attitude

Kingston, Ontario, a cold and very old city in Eastern Canada, was called "Stony Kingston" by the missionaries. There had been but one convert to the Church in six years there, even though missionaries had been continuously assigned in that city during the entire time. No one baptized in Kingston. Time in Kingston was marked on the calendar like days in prison. A missionary transfer to another place—any place—would be uppermost in thoughts, even in dreams.

While praying about and pondering this sad dilemma, for my responsibility then as a mission president required that I pray and ponder about such things, my wife called to my attention an excerpt from the book A Child's Story of the Prophet Brigham Young by Deta Petersen Neeley (Salt Lake City: Deseret News Press, 1959). She read aloud that Brigham Young entered Kingston, Ontario, on a cold and snow-filled day. He labored there thirty days and baptized forty-five souls. Here was the answer. If the missionary Brigham Young could accomplish this harvest, so could the missionaries of today.

Without providing an explanation, I withdrew the missionaries from Kingston, so that the cycle of defeat might be broken. Then came the carefully circulated word to the missionaries: "Soon a new city will be opened for missionary work, even the city where Brigham Young proselyted and baptized forty-five persons in thirty days." The missionaries speculated as to the location. Their weekly letters pleaded for the assignment to this Shangri-la. More time passed. Then four carefully selected missionaries—two of them new, two of them experienced—were chosen for this high adventure. The members of the small branch pledged their support. The missionaries pledged their efforts. The Lord honored both.

In the space of three months, Kingston became the most productive city of the Canadian Mission. The gray limestone buildings stood unchanged; the city had not altered its appearance; the population remained constant. The change was one of attitude. Doubt had yielded to faith.
