Thomas S. Monson, Inspiring Experiences That Build Faith: From the Life and Ministry of Thomas S. Monson ( 1994)

A New Elder's Testimony

One of the first accounts I heard when I became president of the Canadian Mission was of the conversion of Elmer Pollard. In the city of Oshawa, Ontario, Canada, two missionaries were proselyting door to door on a cold, snowy afternoon. They had not experienced any measure of success. One had been in the mission field for some time; one was a newly arrived missionary.

The two missionaries called at the home of Elmer Pollard. Feeling sorry for the young men who, during a blinding blizzard, were going house to house, Mr. Pollard invited the missionaries into his home. They presented to him their message. He did not catch the Spirit. In due time he asked that they leave and not return. His last words to the elders as they departed his front porch were spoken in derision: "You can't tell me you actually believe Joseph Smith was a prophet of God!"

He shut the door, and the elders walked down the path. The newly arrived missionary spoke to his companion, "Elder, we didn't respond to Mr. Pollard. He said we didn't believe Joseph Smith was a true prophet. Let's return and bear our testimonies to him."

At first the more experienced missionary was adamant about not returning, but finally he agreed to accompany his "green" companion. Fear struck their hearts as they approached the door from which they had been turned away. Came the knock, the confrontation with Mr. Pollard, an agonizing moment—and then, with power, a testimony born by the Spirit. "Mr. Pollard," began the new missionary, "you said we didn't really believe Joseph Smith was a prophet of God. Mr. Pollard, I testify that Joseph Smith was a prophet; he did translate the Book of Mormon; he saw God the Father and Jesus the Son. I know it."

Mr. Pollard, now Brother Pollard, stood in a priesthood meeting some time later and declared, "That night I could not sleep. Resounding in my ears were the words, 'Joseph Smith was a prophet of God. I know it. I know it.' The next day I telephoned the missionaries. Their message, coupled with their testimonies, changed my life and the lives of my family."
