Thomas S. Monson, Inspiring Experiences That Build Faith: From the Life and Ministry of Thomas S. Monson ( 1994)

A Message on the Radio

In 1959, when I served as mission president in Canada, the Agnew family was investigating the Church. The missionaries had called and presented their message and the teachings of the gospel. The family studied. They loved what they learned. They were approaching the decision to be baptized.

One Sunday morning, by appointment, the family were preparing to attend Sunday School at the Mormon church. Mother and children readied themselves, but they were disappointed when Dad concluded not to attend. The parents even argued somewhat about the decision. Such was rare, for their home was very harmonious. Then Mother and the children went to Sunday School, and Dad stayed at home.

At first Dad attempted to forget the misunderstanding by reading the newspaper, but to no avail. Then he went to his daughter Isabel's room and turned on the radio on her nightstand, hoping to hear the news. He didn't hear the news. Rather, he heard the Tabernacle Choir broadcast. Elder Richard L. Evans's message, "Let Not the Sun Go Down on Thy Wrath," was, it seemed, directed personally to him.

Brother Agnew realized the futility of his anger. He was now overpowered by a feeling of gratitude for the message he had just received. When his wife and family returned home, they found him pleasant and happy. His children asked how this change had come about. He told them how he had turned on the radio, hoping to get the news, only to be humbled by the message of the Tabernacle Choir in word and song.

His daughter asked, "Which radio did you use, Dad?"

He answered, "The one on your nightstand."

She replied, "That radio is broken. It hasn't played for weeks."

He then led them to the room to prove that this radio did indeed function. He turned the proper knob, but the radio failed to work. Yet when an honest seeker after truth needed the help of God, that radio had worked. The message that led to conversion had been received.
