Thomas S. Monson, Inspiring Experiences That Build Faith: From the Life and Ministry of Thomas S. Monson ( 1994)

Promise to a New Missionary

There sat in my office one day in Toronto, Ontario, a newly arrived missionary. He was bright, strong, filled with enthusiasm and a desire to serve, happy and grateful to be a missionary. I spoke with him, as his mission president: "Elder, I imagine that your father and mother wholeheartedly support you in your mission call." He lowered his head and replied, "Well, not quite. You see, President, my father is not a member of the Church. He doesn't believe as we believe, so he cannot fully appreciate the importance of my assignment."

Without hesitating, and prompted by a source not my own, I said to him, "Elder, if you will honestly and diligently serve God in proclaiming His message, your father will join the Church before your mission is concluded." He clasped my hand in a vise-like grip. The tears welled up in his eyes and began to roll forth down his cheeks as he declared, "To see my father accept the truth would be the greatest blessing that could come into my life."

This young man did not sit idly by, hoping and wishing that the promise would be fulfilled, but rather he followed the example of Abraham Lincoln, of whom it has been said, "When he prayed, he prayed as though everything depended upon God, and then he worked as though everything depended upon him." Such was the missionary service of this young man.

At every missionary conference I would seek him out before the meetings commenced and ask, "Elder, how's your father progressing?"

His reply would invariably be "No progress, President, but I know the Lord will fulfill the promise given to me through you as my mission president."

The days turned to weeks and the weeks to months, and finally, just two weeks before my wife and I left the mission field to return home, I received the following letter from the missionary's father:

Dear Brother Monson:

I wish to thank you so much for taking such good care of my son who recently completed a mission in Canada. He has been an inspiration to us.

My son was promised when he arrived in the mission field that I would become a member of the Church before his return. This promise was, I believe, made to him by you, unknown to me.

I am happy to report that I was baptized into the Church one week before he completed his mission and am at present time Athletic Director of the MIA and have a teaching assignment.

My son is now attending BYU, and his younger brother was also recently baptized and confirmed a member of the Church.

May I again thank you for all the kindness and love bestowed upon my son by his brothers in the mission field during the past two years.

Yours very truly,

A grateful father

The humble prayer of faith had once again been answered.
