Thomas S. Monson, Inspiring Experiences That Build Faith: From the Life and Ministry of Thomas S. Monson ( 1994)

A Descendant of Archibald Gardner

One of the great families to join the Church in Canada was that of Archibald Gardner. From his journal, we learn of the family's experience in London, Ontario, Canada, during the year 1843.

Robert Gardner describes the day of their baptism: "We went about a mile and a half into the woods to find a suitable stream. We cut a hole through ice eighteen inches thick. My brother William baptized me. . . . I was confirmed while sitting on a log beside the stream. . . .

"I cannot describe my feelings at the time and for a long time afterwards. I felt like a little child and was very careful of what I thought or said or did lest I might offend my Father in Heaven. Reading the Scriptures and secret prayer occupied my leisure time. I kept a pocket Testament constantly with me. When something on a page impressed me supporting Mormonism, I turned down a corner. Soon I could hardly find a desired passage. I had nearly all the pages turned down. I had no trouble believing the Book of Mormon. Every time I took the book to read I had a burning testimony in my bosom of its truthfulness."

Archibald Gardner added, "[My] mother . . . [accepted] the Gospel at once and whole heartedly, after hearing it. . . . Not long after contacting the new faith she became dessisted on being baptized. The neighbors said that if we put her in the water they would have us tried for murder as she would surely die. Nevertheless, well bundled up, and tucked into a sleigh, we drove her two miles to the place appointed. Here a hole was cut in the ice and she was baptized in the presence of a crowd of doubters who had come to witness her demise. She was taken home. Her bed was prepared but she said, 'No, I do not need to go to bed. I am quite well.' And she was." (Delilah G. Hughes, The Life of Archibald Gardner, Draper, Utah: Review and Preview Publishers, 1970, pp. 25-27.)

On one occasion when I was presiding in the Canadian Mission, we had a missionary, Hal Gardner, who had four years of German. I wondered why his mission assignment had not been to Germany. While making a routine transfer within our mission, without knowing the Archibald Gardner story, I assigned Elder Gardner to the London, Ontario, area as the district president. When the members in the town where Archibald Gardner had lived found that Elder Hal Gardner was a descendant of that early pioneer, they had a Gardner family day, with a full-page news story in the paper describing the event. Elder Gardner said, "The Lord knows how to take care of us if we will but put our faith in him."
