Thomas S. Monson, Inspiring Experiences That Build Faith: From the Life and Ministry of Thomas S. Monson ( 1994)

Hearing Restored

In my early years as a member of the Council of the Twelve, I attended a series of missionary conferences in Australia, one of which was held in Sydney. Following the conference, I spoke to a fireside gathering.

It was necessary that I leave the fireside at an appointed time in order to catch a flight to Auckland, New Zealand, where I was to speak to all the missionaries in that area. When the stake president, William Delves, announced that it would be necessary for me to leave during the closing song, I noticed a look of consternation on the faces of two missionaries seated by the east aisle of the building at Parramatta. As I walked down the aisle, one missionary grasped my hand and said, "Brother Monson, you can't go."

"I must go," I said.

He said, "But who is to give our investigator a blessing?" He pointed to an investigator who sat between the two elders. The man had a hearing aid in each ear.

"You hold all the necessary authority, Elder, that I hold," I said. "You give him the blessing."

The elder replied, "But this man is deaf. We were hopeful that you would restore to him his hearing. In fact, we have told him this could be a definite possibility."

I told the elder, "Since you hold the same power that I hold, if you feel impressed to give him his hearing, you do so, and the Lord will honor your blessing." I then departed the building, was whisked away to the airport, and flew to Auckland, New Zealand.

The next time I attended a quarterly conference of the Sydney Stake, a young man came up to me following the session and said, "Brother Monson, do you remember me?"

"Your face looks familiar," I responded. "Perhaps I visited with you when I toured this mission six months ago."

"Yes," he said, "you did; but more specifically, I was the missionary who sat on the east aisle, and here is the man who sat next to me. You will recall that at that time he had a hearing aid in each ear, and I mentioned to you his need for a blessing and his desire for a restoration of his hearing. You remember, Brother Monson, you said I held all the priesthood authority that you held, and that if I felt properly inspired, I could bless him and give him his hearing. Bless him I did, and the inspiration came to restore his hearing."

By this time the gentleman said to me, "Elder Monson, I am now a member of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. When you saw me last, I was deaf, but thanks to the power of the priesthood, the goodness of our Heavenly Father, and the faith of this young man, now I hear."
