Thomas S. Monson, Inspiring Experiences That Build Faith: From the Life and Ministry of Thomas S. Monson ( 1994)

A Testimony to Prisoners of War

During World War II, German prisoners of war were incarcerated at Fort Douglas in Salt Lake City. It was against military regulations for visitors to be permitted to speak to the prisoners, nor were they allowed to fraternize with the community.

Kaspar J. Fetzer, native-born German, knew there were German prisoners of war at Fort Douglas; hence, he paid a visit to them. He persuaded the guard to let him talk to the men.

As he visited with the men, he asked if any of them happened to be members of the Church. No one replied affirmatively. Kaspar then took from his pockets copies of the pamphlet "Joseph Smith Tells His Own Story," as published in the German language, and began to give them the first discussion. This occurred in 1944.

In 1969, Percy K. Fetzer and I were reorganizing the presidency of the Hamburg Stake. We interviewed one of the bishops and in the course of that interview learned from him that he had installed a furnace recently in the home of a man who, in the tradition of the German people, offered him a glass of wine after he had completed his mechanical work. The bishop replied that he didn't drink wine. He was then offered beer. He declined the beer and then mentioned that he was a member of the Mormon Church.

The owner of the home said, "I know something about the Mormon Church," and he related that he had been a prisoner of war in the group in Salt Lake City when a wonderful man by the name of Kaspar Fetzer taught to them the Joseph Smith story.

The bishop explained that this discussion opened the way for a visit by the missionaries, and the family entered the waters of baptism.

I said to this fine bishop, "Would you like to meet the son of the man who visited the prisoner of war camp in Salt Lake City?"

"Of course!" he replied.

I then had the opportunity to introduce Percy Fetzer, Kaspar Fetzer's son, to this bishop. What a joy for them to meet and to realize that a choice family had joined the Church as a result of Percy's father's testimony.

We cannot estimate accurately our influence upon others.
