Thomas S. Monson, Inspiring Experiences That Build Faith: From the Life and Ministry of Thomas S. Monson ( 1994)

Handicapped, Yet Blessed

As a member of the Church's Missionary Executive Committee many years ago, I had the responsibility occasionally to interview marginal candidates for missions. One such person sat in my office one day. His face was horribly scarred, his eyebrows and eyelashes gone. He had been involved in a terrible accident while driving a Volkswagen that overturned. The car caught fire, and this young man was burned nigh unto death.

As I interviewed him, I candidly advised that if he were to respond to a mission call, it would be a most difficult thing for him; for as he was rejected from door to door, due primarily to disinterest in the message, he might think that the rejection came about as the result of his disfigurement. The young man calmly said that he had considered this factor and had adjusted his thinking so that the situation would not be a liability.

I felt within him such a great desire to serve that I made the decision to permit the recommendation to be handled in the usual manner. He was assigned to the Northern California Mission.

After two years I received from his mission president the following letter:

"The bearer of this letter has served in our mission for two years. He has been one of the finest missionaries in our mission over the whole time that he has been here. He has been effective as a leader, as a proselyting missionary, as the liaison between the mission office and the several stakes in which he has served and in all respects his performance has been without flaw.

"He has handled his personal problem, his severe scarring, in a way that has discouraged or affronted no one. It has been on a basis that 'this is my problem; don't you worry about it.'

"We love him dearly. We are grateful for his service; and if you have any more just like him, send them along."

Early in 1971 this same young man came to my office and requested that I perform his marriage ceremony in the temple of the Lord. He had found the girl of his dreams, and together they planned eternal marriage. I performed their marriage that June in the Salt Lake Temple. He is now a successful businessman, and he and his lovely wife are the parents of several children.
