Thomas S. Monson, Inspiring Experiences That Build Faith: From the Life and Ministry of Thomas S. Monson ( 1994)

A Key to Precious Archives

Sister Monson and I had the opportunity of visiting the land of Sweden while her cousin, Reid Johnson, was the mission president, and we heard an account that brought joy to our hearts. As President Johnson and our group were journeying throughout the mission, we went to a large Lutheran church in the town of Granjarde, Sweden. As we walked into the building, President Johnson said, "I think you would be interested in an experience my companion, Richard Timpson, and I had in this city at the termination of our missions back in 1948."

He said, "We came to this town because we knew that our family history was steeped here and had been lived here. As we entered this large church, we were met by a most protective keeper of the archives. Upon hearing that we had completed our missions and had a few precious days in which we would like to seek out the records that he maintained in his church building, he said that no one had ever been given the opportunity to peruse those valuable records, far less a Mormon. He declared they were under lock and key, and he held up to view the large key to the vault in which the records were stored. He said, 'My job and my future, and the sustenance of my family, depend upon how well I safeguard this key. No, I am afraid it would be impossible for you to peruse these records. But if you would like to see the church, I'll be happy to show you through. I'll be glad to show you the architecture and the cemetery that surrounds the church, but not the records, for they are sacred.'"

President Johnson indicated they were stunned, and their hopes had vanished into thin air, but he said to the keeper of the archives, "We will accept your kind offer." All this time President Johnson and his companion were praying fervently and earnestly that somehow something would change the man's mind, that he would let them view the records.

After a lengthy journey through the cemetery and looking at the church building, the keeper of the archives said to them, "I'm going to do something I have never done before. It may cost me my job, but I'm going to let you borrow this key for fifteen minutes."

President Johnson thought, "Fifteen minutes! All we can do in fifteen minutes is open the lock!" But they took the key, opened the lock, and had made available to their view records that were priceless for their genealogical value. In fifteen minutes the keeper arrived. He looked at them and found they were still in a state of Christmas wonder over the find they had discovered.

They asked, "Can't we stay longer?"

He said, "How much longer?" And he looked at his watch.

They replied, "About four days."

He said, "I don't know why, but I feel I can trust you. Here is the key. You keep it, and when you are through, you return it to me. I'll be here every morning at eight o'clock and every evening at five o'clock."

For four consecutive days those two missionaries literally studied and recorded for our current use information that could have been obtained in no other way. President Johnson was filled with emotion as he explained this experience to us. He said, "The Lord does move in a mysterious way, his wonders to perform." As he made this statement of testimony to me, I realized that this was also a blessing that had come to me and my wife, for the information gathered applied to some of our family lines.
