Thomas S. Monson, Inspiring Experiences That Build Faith: From the Life and Ministry of Thomas S. Monson ( 1994)

"You Must Be a Mormon"

One summer day in 1972, I took a flight from San Francisco to Los Angeles. I was sitting on the first row, and a beautiful young lady was sitting next to me, reading. As one does, I looked over to see what she was reading. How pleased I was when I noted that she was reading A Marvelous Work and a Wonder by LeGrand Richards. I said to her, "You must be a Mormon."

She said, "No, sir. Why do you ask?"

I said, "It's the book you're reading, A Marvelous Work and a Wonder. It was written by an apostle in the Mormon Church. In fact, I printed the book."

She said, "Well, then, maybe you can answer some questions I have," and she gave me three or four rather interesting questions. I responded as best I could. I learned that she was an off-duty flight attendant with United Airlines, and her name was Yvonne Ramirez. A friend had given her the book.

She continued to read, and I pretended to be reading what I had. The thought came to me that maybe the Lord had put me in the seat next to this young lady, and that perhaps He wanted me to bear my testimony to her. I turned toward her, as the plane was making its approach to the Los Angeles Airport, and bore my testimony. I told her I would send her a book that I had written, along with a pamphlet about the Church. I asked if she would be willing to receive visitors from our church. She said she would be delighted to do so.

The plane landed, and she went her way. When I returned to Salt Lake City, I sent her a copy of one of my books, along with a copy of the pamphlet "Joseph Smith's Testimony." I also called the mission president and the stake president in San Francisco and arranged to have two missionaries call on her.

In September a telephone call came to my home from the stake president in San Francisco. He said, "Remember last summer when you flew on United Airlines from San Francisco to Los Angeles and sat next to an off-duty flight attendant?" I indicated that I did indeed remember and that I remembered her name, Yvonne Ramirez. He said, "That's the one." He said that she had just been baptized and confirmed a member of the Church. "In fact," he told me, "she would like to talk with you. She is the most recently baptized member of the Church. Her hair is still wet."

Then a shy voice came on the line and said, "Brother Monson?"

I said, "Yes."

"This is Yvonne Ramirez. Thank you for sharing with me your testimony. Tonight I am the happiest person in the world!"
