Thomas S. Monson, Inspiring Experiences That Build Faith: From the Life and Ministry of Thomas S. Monson ( 1994)

Courage in a Guatemalan Earthquake

In early 1976, while serving in Guatemala as a missionary for The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, Randall Ellsworth survived a devastating earthquake that hurled a beam down on his back, paralyzed his legs, and severely damaged his kidneys. He was the only American injured in the quake, which claimed the lives of 18,000 persons.

After receiving emergency medical treatment, he was flown to a hospital near his home in Rockville, Maryland. While he was confined there, a television newscaster conducted an interview with him that I witnessed through the miracle of television. The reporter asked, "Can you walk?"

The answer: "Not yet, but I will."

"Do you think you will be able to complete your mission?"

Came the reply, "Others think not, but I will."

With microphone in hand, the reporter continued, "I understand you have received a special letter containing a get-well message from the President of the United States."

"Yes," replied Randall, "I am very grateful to President Ford for his thoughtfulness. But I received another letter, not from the president of my country, but from the president of my church—The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints—President Spencer W. Kimball. This I cherish. With him praying for me, and the prayers of my family, my friends, and my missionary companions, I will return to Guatemala. The Lord wanted me to preach the gospel there for two years, and that's what I intend to do."

I turned to my wife and commented, "He surely must not know the extent of his injuries. Our official medical reports would not permit us to expect such a return to Guatemala."

How grateful I am that the day of faith and the age of miracles are not past history but continue with us even now.

The newspapers and the television cameras turned their attention to more immediate news as the days turned to weeks and the weeks to months. But God did not forget him who possessed a humble and a contrite heart, even Elder Randall Ellsworth. Little by little the feeling began to return to his legs. In his own words, Randall described the recovery: "The thing I did was always to keep busy, always pushing myself. In the hospital I asked to do therapy twice a day instead of just once. I wanted to walk again on my own."

When the Missionary Department evaluated the amazing medical progress Randall Ellsworth had made, word was sent to him that his return to Guatemala was authorized. "At first I was so happy I didn't know what to do," he said. "Then I went into my bedroom, and I started to cry. Then I dropped to my knees and thanked my Heavenly Father."

In the summer of 1976 Randall Ellsworth walked, with the aid of two canes, aboard the plane that carried him back to the mission to which he was called and back to the people he loved. His walk was slow and deliberate. Then one day, as he stood before his mission president, John Forres O'Donnal, Randall Ellsworth heard President O'Donnal speak the almost unbelievable words: "You have been the recipient of a miracle. Your faith has been rewarded. If you have the necessary confidence, if you have abiding faith, if you have supreme courage, place those two canes on my desk—and walk."

Slowly, Randall placed one cane and then the other on the mission president's desk, turned toward the door, and toward his future—and walked.

Following his mission, Randall Ellsworth pursued schooling and eventually became a practicing physician as well as a stalwart husband and a loving father.

His mission president, John Forres O'Donnal—the man who helped bring to Guatemala the word of the Lord—visited my office one day and, in his modest manner, recounted his experience with Randall Ellsworth. He then said to me, "Together we have witnessed a miracle. I have kept one of the two canes placed upon my desk that day when I challenged Elder Ellsworth to walk without them. I would like you to have the other." With a friendly smile, he departed the office and returned home to Guatemala.

The cane given to me served as a silent witness of our Heavenly Father's ability to hear our prayers and to bless our lives. It was a symbol of faith, a reminder of courage.

One day some time later, Randall walked into my office for a visit, along with his lovely wife and their children. When he left, I returned the cane to him, with a silent prayer of gratitude in my heart for the blessings of a loving Heavenly Father to a modern-day Paul who had also overcome his "thorn in the flesh." (2 Corinthians 12:7.)
