It was the advice of both Brother Hyrum and his wife, Jerusha, that the marriage should take place at once, and, as Lydia's objections were all overruled, preparations were made immediately.

On the 23rd of November, 1835, was the day chosen. Brother and Sister Smith decided to have a wedding-supper and invite some guests. Accordingly, in the afternoon of the 22nd he set out to invite the friends of the family.

Going to father Smith's, he asked them all to be present. Hastening on to Joseph's house he acquainted him with what was to take place the following day, and then requested him to be present. As Hyrum was hurrying away, Joseph called out:

"Stop, Brother Hyrum, don't be in such a hurry. Where are you going now?"

"Oh, I can't stay, I must make haste, as I have to go down and ask Seymour Brunson to come up and marry them."

"Stop, Hyrum! I tell you to wait a moment. You need not go down and ask Brother Brunson, for I mean to marry that couple myself."

Hyrum looked at his brother in astonishment at this announcement, for heretofore those who wished to be married were obliged to employ either a justice of the peace or a licensed minister. The law of Ohio did not recognize the "Mormon" Elders as ministers, and it was a punishable offense for a lay man to officiate in that capacity. In fact, several Elders had been arrested and fined for the performance of this act. Seymour Brunson had been down in the southern part of the State where prejudice did not run so high and had obtained a license to perform the ceremony. Consequently the Saints employed him whenever there was a couple to be married.

"Very well," replied Hyrum, "you know best. We will be very glad to have you do so."

The evening of the 23rd, about a dozen people gathered in Brother Hyrum's parlor, all of them intimate friends of the Patriarch and his family.

The young couple stood up, and the Prophet arose and commenced the ceremony. At its close he pronounced them husband and wife by the authority of the Priesthood which he held.

Thus was the first marriage ceremony ever performed by the Prophet Joseph Smith. Here was laid the foundation stone of the grand structure of our marriage ceremony. The revelation of sealing was not given, but after he had united the two he blessed them with fervor. Then turning to the company he exclaimed:

"Our Elders have been wronged and prosecuted for marrying without a license. The Lord God of Israel has given me authority to unite the people in the holy bonds of matrimony. And from this time forth I shall use that privilege and marry whomsoever I see fit. And the enemies of the Church shall never have power to use the law against me."

And so it was. The following Sunday he married four couple in public meeting, and continued to do so until his martyrdom without being molested.

After Joseph had thus spoken, some of the company asked some questions and he continued to speak and instruct them on the principle of marriage. Much that was entirely new to the Saints was revealed in his conversation, and again Lydia saw that strange, brilliant light shine through his features, like the mellow radience of an astral lamp, only purer and brighter.

The guests parted that evening with many good wishes for the two, who had suffered so much and were now about to commence the ascent of life's steep hill together. But few misgivings were felt, however, as all knew how genuinely good both were.

The Patriarch gave Brother and Sister Knight a hearty invitation to remain with his family during the Winter, and not attempt to set up housekeeping until they removed to their western home. They gladly accepted his offer, and spent several busy, happy months in this pleasant home.

Newel continued his labors on the temple, and in the evenings attended the schools for the Elders, organized that they might receive instructions preparatory to their endowments. Occasionally a lecture would be given, and at it always would be found Brother and Sister Knight.

How glorious it was to live during those brief Winter months receiving light upon light, revelation upon revelation as it flowed from the prophetic lips of Joseph!

When the lower room of the temple was completed an invitation was issued to all the Saints to assemble on the 27th of March, 1836, to witness the dedication of the first temple that had been built to the name of the Lord in these days. On the appointed day a large congregation was gathered inside and outside the building.

At nine o'clock, services were commenced by Sidney Rigdon reading the ninty-sixth and twenty-fourth Psalms. Singing and prayer were then offered, after which a discourse was delivered by Elder Rigdon.

An intermission of twenty minutes was made between the morning and afternoon services; the people, however did not leave their seats. In the afternoon, after the usual preliminary exercises, Joseph made a short address, and called upon the various quorums to sustain the presidency of the Church and all those who were called to preside. After singing, Joseph offered the dedicatory prayer, which will be found in the Doctrine and Covenants, Sec. 109 of the new edition.

At the close of this sublime prayer the congregation shouted as with one voice, "Hosanna! hosanna! hosanna to God and the Lamb! amen! amen and amen!" The sacrament was then administered. F. G. Williams arose and testified that while the prayer was being offered, a personage came in and sat down between Father Smith and himself, and remained there during the prayer. He described his clothing and appearance.

Joseph said that the personage was Jesus, as the dress described was that of our Savior, it being in some respects different to the clothing of the angels.

David Whitmer testified to seeing angels present.

The services were closed by singing and prayer. The Saints enjoyed a glorious day, and the temple was filled, as Lydia says, with the glory of God.

Cannot we, who are of the later generation, picture to ourselves this grand meeting, when Jesus and His angels were present and the glory of God was felt like a burning fire? What privileges our fathers and mothers enjoyed! How blest were they! And as we look back, it seems to us that we could gladly partake of their many and severe trials if we might enjoy their glorious blessings.

After the dedication, partial endowments were given to the Elders, Newel receiving his with the rest of his quorum.

Shortly after this Brother Knight was released from his labors on the temple, and decided to return to his home in Clay Co., Mo.

But how were they to get home? Newel had received no remuneration for his year's labor on the temple, but he freely donated it to the cause of God.

One day as they were talking over this difficulty Lydia remarked, "If we only had the sum I gave to the Prophet when I first came in, we could fit ourselves out very comfortably."

"Why, did you give the Prophet some money? Well I'm sure I thank God that you were able to help him in his distress, and I have no fear but what God will remember us as you remembered His servant."

This faith was not in vain. The following day Joseph stepped in, and, after shaking hands, said,

"So, Newel, you are about to depart for your western home. Are you amply provided for? Are you not in rather straightened circumstances? I know how you have worked for nothing for the past year, and I know also that you will get your reward."

"Yes, Brother Joseph, we are rather cramped just now for means," replied Newel.

"Just so. Sister Lydia, I have not forgotten how generously you helped me when I was in trouble."

"Oh, Brother Joseph, I have never felt for one moment that you were under the slightest obligation to me; I was only too glad to be the humble instrument of your release from our enemies."

"All right, Sister Lydia. However, I shall remember you."

He then left the house, but returned again in a little while and placed in the hands of this worthy couple about double the sum Lydia had given him, telling them to fit themselves out, and go comfortably provided for to their new home.

This little act well illustrates the just, and, at the same time, generous character of our noble martyr.

Brother Hyrum Smith kindly provided them with a team and teamster to take them to the Ohio river, from which place they could take a steamer to their home.

Thus prepared, the couple started out, and in due time arrived at their home, finding little Samuel (Brother Knight's boy) and the rest of his relatives well, and very much pleased to see him and his young bride. Their life here will be given in another chapter.

A description of the Patriarch Hyrum Smith will be interesting to my readers, I am sure. When Lydia went to his house he was between thirty-five and forty years of age, tall, well-framed, with a fine, handsome countenance, and blue eyes, and his face was full of intelligence and spirit. His manner was dignified, but he was amiable and vivacious, and withal exceedingly courteous and fascinating to all with whom he ever had intercourse. He was really a worthy brother of the Prophet, and together they were a worthy pair.

Father Smith was the general Patriarch of the Church. Not many of his blessings are now preserved, so thinking it will prove of interest to the young, who never had the privilege of seeing this venerable man, the blessing given to Lydia just before she left Kirtland for Clay Co., is here given:

A PATRIARCHAL BLESSING,

BY JOSEPH SMITH, SEN.

For Lydia Knight, who was born in Sutton, Worcester Co., Mass., June 9th, 1812.

"Sister Knight, in the name of Jesus Christ, I lay my hands upon thy head and ask my Heavenly Father to give me wisdom and power to pronounce such things as shall be according to the mind of the Holy Spirit. I also ask God to prepare thee to receive blessings, and pour them into thy soul even a fullness; and to give thee wisdom to abide all things that shall come upon thee; and bless thee in thy out-goings and in thy in-comings. I seal a father's blessing upon thee and thy posterity. For thou shalt be a mother of many children. And thou shalt teach them righteousness, and have power to keep them from the power of the destroyer; and thy heart shall not be pained because of the loss of thy children, for the Lord shall watch over them and keep them. And your children shall be raised up for glory and be ornaments in the Church.

"Thou hast been afflicted much in thy past days, and thy heart has been pained. Many tears have fallen from thine eyes and thou hast wept much. But thou shalt be comforted. The Lord loves thee and has given thee a kind and loving companion for thy comfort. And your souls shall be knit together, and nothing shall be able to dissolve them. Neither distress nor death shall separate you. You shall be preserved in life, and go safely and speedily to the land of Zion. Thou shalt have a good passage, and receive an inheritance in Jackson county. Thou shalt also see thy friends in Zion, thy brothers and sisters, and rejoice with them in the glory of God. Angels shall minister unto thee; thy heart shall be comforted. Thou shalt receive all thy heart's desire. Thy soul shall be enlarged, and thou shalt stand to see Israel gather from their dispersion, the ten tribes come from the land of the north country; the heavens rend, and the Son of Man come in all the glory of His Father. And thou shalt rise to meet Him and reign with Him a thousand years, and thy offspring with thee. Great are thy blessings. I confirm blessings on thee in common with thy husband. Blessings of the earth, and all things which thou needest for thy comfort. And thou shalt be a mother in Israel. Thou shalt relieve the wants of the oppressed and minister to the needy. All needed blessings are thine. I seal them upon thee, and I seal thee up unto eternal life, in the name of Jesus. Amen.

"(Sylvester Smith, Scribe)."

I will not endeavor to point out the many wonderful prophecies in this blessing which have already been fulfilled, but will let events as they are related speak for themselves.
