Richard O. Cowan, Doctrine and Covenants, Our Modern Scripture ( 1984)

The Doctrine and Covenants

"Doctrines" are the basic saving truths of the gospel of Jesus Christ. "Covenants" are solemn agreements in which the Lord promises mighty blessings to those who keep their commitments to him. An earlier title identified the compiled revelation as "The Book of Commandments." The Lord himself described this volume as a "voice of warning." A profitable approach to studying this book might involve identifying these great doctrines, 4 covenants, commandments, and warnings, and pondering their relevance to our lives today.

The "Lectures on Faith"

10A series of seven lectures was written for use in the School of the Prophets during the winter of 1834-35. They were printed with the Doctrine and Covenants but were never regarded as being equal in value to the revelations contained in that volume. Note the distinction made by the Kirtland high council in its testimony about the Doctrine and Covenants. Representing the council, John Smith wrote that "the revelations in said book were true, and that the lectures were judiciously written and compiled and were profitable for doctrine." (HC, 2:176.) Even though they were edited by the Prophet Joseph Smith, "they were never presented to nor accepted by the Church as being otherwise than theological lectures or lessons." Therefore, they were omitted from the 1921 edition of the Doctrine and Covenants. Since then they have been published in pamphlet form with comments by Elder John A. Widtsoe of the Council of the Twelve.

10The lectures point out that faith is the first principle of religion and the foundation of righteousness. Faith is a principle of power-the power by which God created and now governs the universe. In order for faith in God to be a real source of power, the individual must-

10The "Lectures on Faith" point out that the fruits which grow from such faith include all of the blessings of eternity which God has in store for his children.11
