Richard O. Cowan, Doctrine and Covenants, Our Modern Scripture ( 1984)

D&C 1 - 138

Section 1: The Lord's Preface

Even though this revelation was recorded between D&C 66 and 67, it has been placed first because it is intended to be the Lord's preface to the book of his commandments which was about to be published. (See the discussion of D&C 67 for a more detailed account of the setting for D&C 1.)

11A "Voice of Warning" (Verses 1-16). It is customary for the author of a book to give in the preface his reasons for writing the work and a brief prospectus of its message. In this preface, the Lord, who is the true Author of the Doctrine and Covenants, described his message as a "voice of warning" which should go "unto all people." (verse 4.)

11The Lord likened today's world to the ancient materialistic and wicked kingdoms of Babylon and Idumea. (Verses 16 and 36.) In another revelation he characterized "wickedness" as "spiritual Babylon." (See D&C 133:14.) Idumea was the kingdom of the Edomites, who were descendants of Esau. This people frequently was the object of warnings sounded by the Lord's prophets. (See, for example, Isa. 34:5, Ezek. 36:5, and the book of Obadiah.) Similarly, the Lord knows that unless the wicked in our day repent, calamities must certainly come upon them. Because of his love for his children on earth, he therefore gave these commandments as a warning: "Prepare ye, prepare ye for that which is to come, for the Lord is nigh." (verse 12.)

11Fruits of the Lord's Revelations (Verses 17-30). Because the Lord has spoken from heaven, the weak (at least in the eyes of the world) will be able to confound the proud. (Compare verses 17-19 with 12 1 Cor. 1:27.) Furthermore, his servants need not counsel with human wisdom alone, but rather may "speak in the name of God the Lord." (Compare verses 19-20 with 2 Ne. 28:31.) In verses 21-28 the Lord outlined other results of his having restored the gospel by means of the revelations contained in the Doctrine and Covenants. Ponder how the same consequences might similarly affect the lives of all who study this book today.

12The Lord Speaks in Our Language (Verse 24). In order to communicate more perfectly, the Lord is willing to address his children "in their weakness, after the manner of their language." (Verse 24.) While language is an important medium of communication, it can also become a limitation. If the precisely right word cannot be found, it is more difficult to communicate the desired meaning accurately. For example, the ancient prophet Mormon lamented that "there are many things which, according to our language, we are not able to write." (3 Ne. 5:18.) His son Moroni explained that to conserve space the Nephites wrote in "reformed Egyptian," and that "if we could have written in Hebrew" there would have been "no imperfection in our record." Nevertheless, he explained, the Lord "prepared means" for us to overcome these difficulties and to obtain a proper interpretation. (Morm. 9:32-34.) Similarly, if we read the revelations in the Doctrine and Covenants with the Lord's Spirit, he can reveal his message anew directly to us, thus bypassing any barriers to complete understanding which may be posed by Joseph Smith's nineteenth-century language.

12One True Church (Verses 30-33). Because the Restored Church asserts a unique claim to divine authority by direct revelation, it has never considered participating in mergers with other churches as part of the ecumenical movement. This does not mean that some good may not be found in any other organization. Furthermore, verse 30 points out that mere membership in the "true Church" does not necessarily guarantee an individual's righteousness. Humility rather than boastfulness, therefore, is the proper attitude for a Latter-day Saint.

12In verses 30-33 the Lord explained that he could not tolerate sin even among his "only true and living church." (For a more 13 complete discussion of the relationship between repentance and forgiveness, see the discussion under D&C 19.)

13The Place of the Living Prophet (Verse 38). On the very day the Church was organized, the Lord commanded the Latter-day Saints to receive the Prophet's words "as if from mine own mouth." (D&C 21:4-5.) In his preface to the Doctrine and Covenants, the Lord bore witness of his earthly representatives' authority: "What I the Lord have spoken, I have spoken, and I excuse not myself; and though the heavens and earth pass away, my word shall not pass away, but shall all be fulfilled, whether by mine own voice, or by the voice of my servants, it is the same." (D&C 1:38.)

13Thus in addition to the written scripture from the past, Latter-day Saints are blessed with "living scripture" in the present. Elder Henry D. Moyle, a counselor in the First Presidency, observed:

13"The older I get and the closer the contact I have with the President of the Church, the more I realize that the greatest of all scriptures which we have in the world today is current scripture.... And I love it more than all other. It applies to me today specifically, and to you all." (BYU Fireside Address, January 1963.)

13Elder Marion G. Romney has testified, "What the Presidency say as a Presidency is what the Lord would say if he were here, and it is scripture. It should be studied, understood, and followed, even as the revelations in the Doctrine and Covenants." (CR, April 1945, pp. 88-90.)

13At the conclusion of a general conference, Elder Harold B. Lee admonished Church members to "consider seriously the importance of taking with them the report of this conference and let it be the guide to their walk and talk during the next six months. These are the important matters the Lord sees fit to reveal to this people in this day." (CR, April 1946, p. 68.) In the same spirit Elder Spencer W. Kimball counseled us to obtain our own copy of the most recent conference talks (such as published in the Ensign): "Underline the pertinent thoughts and keep it with you for continual reference. No text or volume outside of the standard works of the Church should have a more prominent place 14 on your personal library shelves." (BYU Devotional Address, May 14, 1968.)

14Let us be eager to receive and live according to this most modern of all scripture. (For a discussion of revelations since the compilation of the Doctrine and Covenants, see p. 211.)
