Richard O. Cowan, Doctrine and Covenants, Our Modern Scripture ( 1984)

D&C 2

About three and a half years following the appearance of the Father and the Son, Joseph Smith received his next heavenly communication. During the night of Sunday, September 21, and morning of Monday, September 22, 1823, the angel Moroni visited him three times and told him about a set of ancient sacred records from which the Book of Mormon was subsequently translated. D&C 2 includes only a small extract from Moroni's message. Read the more complete account in Joseph Smith's history as found in the Pearl of Great Price. (verses 38-47.) In order to stress the urgency of the translation and publication of the Book of Mormon, Moroni cited several Old Testament prophecies concerning the last days and indicated that they were about to be fulfilled. Notice how the selection from Malachi's prophecy (as also found in D&C 2) supported this total message. In his Wentworth Letter account of these events, Joseph Smith quoted Moroni as emphasizing that "the preparatory work for the second coming was speedily to commence; that the time was at hand for the gospel in all its fulness to be preached in power, unto all nations that a people might be prepared for the Millennial reign." (HC, 4:537.)

14Moroni's Revision of Malachi's Prophecy. Compare Moroni's version as given in D&C 2 with the corresponding passage in the King James Bible, Mal. 4:5-6.

14 Doctrine and Covenants King James Bible D&C 2 Mal. 4:5-6

1.Behold, I will reveal unto you the 5. Behold, I will send you Elijah the Priesthood, by the hand of Elijah prophet the prophet, before the coming of the great and before the coming of the great and dreadful day of the Lord. dreadful day of the Lord.15 2. And he shall plant in the hearts of 6. And he shall turn the heart of the the children the promises made to fathers to the children, the fathers, and the hearts of the children shall and the hearts of the children to turn to their fathers. their fathers, 3. If it were not so, the whole earth lest I come and smite the earth would be utterly wasted at his with a curse. coming.

15This same prophecy appears in the Book of Mormon (3 1 Ne. 25:5-6) and in Joseph Smith's inspired revision of the Bible, identically as it is found in the King James Version. This suggests that the Bible version must be correct, and, therefore, that Moroni's changes were more in the nature of revision for clarification and emphasis rather than being corrections of erroneous translations.

15Priesthood to Be Revealed (Verse 1). The priesthood which Elijah restored in 1836 included the "sealing keys" by which not only the work for the dead, but all ordinances, may be performed on earth so that they will be sealed or "bound in heaven." (See Matt. 16:19; for a further consideration of Elijah's mission, see the discussion under D&C 110 herein.) The "great and dreadful day" refers to judgments which will accompany Christ's second coming.

15Promises to the Fathers (Verse 2). "Fathers" may refer to those who died without an opportunity to accept and live the gospel of Jesus Christ. Many of them accepted the gospel when it was preached to them in the spirit world. (See 1 Pet. 3:18-20; 4:6.)

15President Joseph F. Smith explained the meaning of "the promises made to the fathers" by pointing out that "those who died without opportunity to receive ordinances necessary for exaltation were promised that the children in the last days would perform them in their behalf." (CR, October 1897, p. 47.) To explain why certain individuals receive the gospel and others do not, Elder Melvin J. Ballard testified, "It was made known to me that it is because of the righteous dead who had received the Gospel in the spirit world exercising themselves, and in answer to their prayers Elders of the church were sent to the homes of 16 their posterity that the Gospel might be taught to them and through their righteousness they might be privileged to have a descendant in the flesh do the work for their dead kindred.... It is with greater intensity that the hearts of the fathers and mothers in the spirit world are turned to their children than that our hearts are turned to them." (Three Degrees of Glory, p. 27.)

16Elder Harold B. Lee added a new dimension to our understanding of Malachi's prophecy. He explained that one objective of Church programs, such as family home evening, is "to turn here upon the earth, the hearts of parents to children and the hearts of the children to parents. Can you believe that when parents have passed beyond the veil that then is the only time when parents should have their hearts turned to their children and children to their parents? ... Maybe it is time for us to think of turning the hearts of parents to children now while living in order that, after they are gone to the beyond, there might be that bond between parents and children that might last beyond death." ("Preparing to Meet the Lord," an address given by Elder Harold B. Lee at the dedication of the Oakland Temple in November 1964, Improvement Era, February 1965, p. 124.)
