Richard O. Cowan, Doctrine and Covenants, Our Modern Scripture ( 1984)

D&C 3 and the Lost Manuscript

Joseph received the Book of Mormon records from Moroni on September 22, 1827. By April 1828, the Prophet had started the work of translation with the help of Martin Harris as scribe in Harmony, Pennsylvania.

16By the month of June, 116 pages of manuscript had been written. Joseph recorded that-

16Sometime after Mr. Harris had begun to write for me, he began to importune me to give him liberty to carry the writings home [to Palmyra, New York] and show them; and desired of me that I would inquire of the Lord through the Urim and Thummim, if he might not do so. I did inquire, and the answer was that he must not. However, he was not satisfied with this answer, and desired that I should inquire again. I did so, and the answer was as before. Still he could not be contented, but insisted that I should inquire once more. After much solicitation I again inquired of the Lord, and permission was granted him to have the writings on certain conditions. (HC, 1:21.)

1717 Martin Harris failed to adhere strictly to these conditions, and through his carelessness the manuscript was lost. Because Martin did not return when expected, Joseph Smith himself went to Palmyra to learn what had happened. Shortly after his return to Harmony, a heavenly messenger appeared and returned the Urim and Thummim which had been taken from the Prophet because of his "having wearied the Lord in asking for permission of letting Martin Harris take the writings." (HC, 1:22.) This is the setting in which D&C 3 was received. The Urim and Thummim, as well as the Book of Mormon plates, were then again taken away, but both were returned a few days later when the Lord gave Joseph Smith some instructions (D&C 10) about continuing the work of translation. (See HC, 1:21-23.) The Lord rebuked Joseph Smith and Martin Harris in these revelations and even referred to them as being "wicked" because they had placed their own judgment ahead of the Lord's counsel. The presence of such revelations in the Doctrine and Covenants should strengthen one's testimony that Joseph Smith truly was a prophet, because he would not likely have included them unless he knew they were revelations from God.

17The Book of Mormon and the Lamanites (Verses 16-20). Even though the Book of Mormon was written for the "convincing of the Jew and Gentile that JESUS is the CHRIST," D&C 3:20 suggests that this work shall have particular value for the Lamanites. This is in agreement with numerous Book of Mormon passages (such as Moro. 10:1-5) which indicate that the book was being written for the benefit of the latter-day Lamanites.

17Who Are the Lamanites Today? In contrast to the idea that all the descendants of Nephi were killed in the last great battle at Cumorah, verses 17 and 18 in D&C 3 suggests that the so-called Lamanites may include descendants from Nephi and others as well. For about five hundred years the Nephites and Lamanites continued as two separate groups-the righteous prophets who kept the Book of Mormon record being among the Nephites, the Lamanites generally being 18 characterized as a wild, wicked, and warlike people.

18Chart 2 Who Are the Lamanites?

Compiled by Richard and Dawn Cowan

20From 91 to 77 B.C., the four sons of Mosiah were the first who preached the gospel effectively among the Lamanites. As a result, many were converted, left their homeland, and were absorbed into the Nephite nation. In the meantime, groups of apostate Nephites were similarly assimilated among the Lamanites. Another very successful mission in about 30 B.C. brought such widespread conversion among both Nephites and Lamanites that, in effect, both groups became one people for a time. Just before the coming of Christ, a reversal of the traditional role was evident when Samuel, a Lamanite prophet, was sent to call the Nephites to repentance.

20Following the visit of the resurrected Savior, righteousness prevailed for about two hundred years, during which period there were no divisions among the people. In A.D. 231, a new dividing line was drawn-the unbelievers adopted the name Lamanites, while the faithful called themselves Nephites. Each group consisted of several subdivisions. (Read 4 Ne. 35-39.) Thus, the Lamanites included descendants not only of Laman but also of Nephi.

20Over a century later, the majority of the Nephites had become so wicked that the Lord permitted the less wicked Lamanites to destroy them in the battle of Cumorah in about A.D. 385. During this final battle, many Nephites defected to the Lamanites. This may explain the meaning of D&C 3:17-18 (compare 4 Ne. 35-39) and 10:48, which comment on the composition of modern Lamanites including the American Indians, Mestizos of Latin America, Polynesians, and so on. Consequently, today's Lamanites should be proud that they have among their progenitors the great prophets through whom the Lord gave the scriptures now included in the Book of Mormon. Note, however, how the Lord consistently refers to the children of Lehi as Lamanites in these and succeeding revelations in the Doctrine and Covenants. (See Chart 2.)
