Richard O. Cowan, Doctrine and Covenants, Our Modern Scripture ( 1984)

Section 4: Calls to the Work

This was the first of numerous revelations given in response to individuals' having asked Joseph Smith to inquire 21 of the Lord concerning what was to be their part in the restored work. Even though the Lord addressed specific persons in these revelations, in reality he is speaking "to all those who have desires to bring forth and establish this work." (D&C 12:7; see also 11:27 and 93:49.)

21"A Marvelous Work" (Verses 1-4). The "marvelous work" refers to the Latter-day restoration, including the publication of the Book of Mormon, organization of the Church, and proclamation of the gospel in its fullness. The prophet Isaiah had anticipated these events long ago; notice how his language is reflected in D&C 4. (See Isa. 29:11-14.) The "field" being "white already to harvest" represents the world's readiness to receive the restored gospel. Therefore, those who desire to serve should thrust in their sickle, or in other words, be totally committed and serve "with all your heart, might, mind and strength." (Verse 2.) Great blessings are promised; sharing the gospel with others has the effect of strengthening one's own testimony.

21Essential Qualities (Verses 5-7). These verses (together with D&C 12:8) list some of the attributes the Lord considered important for those whom he was calling into his service. Ponder how each of them is likewise essential to success in our present Church callings. The opposites of these qualities (such as fear rather than faith, for example) generally bring failure. (For an excellent discussion see Doxey, The Doctrine and Covenants Speaks, vol. 1, chap. 6.)

21Many of the ideas originally revealed to Joseph Smith, Sr., in D&C 4 were subsequently repeated to others who were similarly being called to the work: Oliver Cowdery, D&C 6:1-6; Hyrum Smith, 11:1-6; Joseph Knight, Sr., 12:1-6; and David Whitmer, 14:1-6. The Lord's counsel in these verses placed in proper perspective the specific assignment given to each of these brethren. Notice how he particularly challenged them to "seek to bring forth and establish the cause of Zion." (D&C 6:6, for example.) "Zion" is the name given to the people and city which must be prepared for the Lord's second coming. (See the discussion of D&C 57 and 22 58 for a further consideration of the importance of establishing Zion.)

22Joseph Smith, Sr. The Prophet's father, one of the earliest to receive a testimony of the restored gospel, heeded the counsel contained in D&C 4 and thrust in his sickle with his might. He was one of the Eight Witnesses to the Book of Mormon in 1829, was baptized and confirmed a member of the Church on April 6, 1830, was ordained Patriarch to the Church in 1833, served on the first high council in 1834, was called as an assistant counselor in the First Presidency in 1837, endured mob violence in Ohio and Missouri, and died in 1840 a stalwart in the faith.
