Richard O. Cowan, Doctrine and Covenants, Our Modern Scripture ( 1984)

D&C 5 and Martin Harris

During the previous summer (1828), Martin Harris had been involved in the loss of 116 pages of Book of Mormon translation. (See "Section 3 and the Lost Manuscript" herein.) Now repentant, Martin was seeking to learn of his place in the work in general and whether he might be permitted to see the Book of Mormon plates in particular.

22How Knowledge Comes (Verses 2-29). Martin Harris apparently was skeptical by nature and therefore frequently sought further evidence. For example, he took a copy of characters from the Book of Mormon plates to scholars in New York City for their appraisal. Then he felt the need to show 116 pages of the completed translation to family members in order to convince them. Now he was seeking a further witness for himself. In D&C 5 the Lord explained to Martin how a testimony is and is not obtained. These principles apply likewise to all who are seeking a knowledge of the truth.

22The Lord pointed out that those who do not already have faith would not be convinced even if they could see the plates. (Verse 7.) Earlier he had promised that "signs" or tangible manifestations would follow those that believe. (See Mark 16:15-16; for a further consideration of the relationship between signs and faith, see the discussion of D&C 63:7-12.) Instead, the world is to gain a knowledge of the 23 truth through the living prophet. (Verse 10.) Furthermore, there will be the testimony of other witnesses. Even these selected individuals will know the work is true, not because they see the plates with their physical eyes, but because "from heaven will I declare it unto them." (Verses 11-12.) Still, one must gain a witness for himself. The Lord outlined how this may be accomplished. Those who believe his words (available in the scriptures and through the living prophet and other witnesses) will receive direct and personal manifestations from the Holy Ghost. (Compare verse 16 with Alma's instructions on how to cultivate faith-Alma 32:26-43.) The Spirit can then give us a sure personal knowledge of all things. (Moro. 10:5.) To receive this desired testimony one must humble himself, confess his sins, and covenant to keep the Lord's commandments. (D&C 5:24-28.)

23Further Instructions (Verses 30-34). After cautioning Joseph to pause in the work of translation and warning him of Martin's weaknesses, the Lord promised other "means" by which the Prophet could accomplish his assignment. This promise may have been fulfilled the following month with the arrival of Oliver Cowdery, who was to be the Prophet's scribe throughout almost the entire translation project.
