Richard O. Cowan, Doctrine and Covenants, Our Modern Scripture ( 1984)

D&C 115

Name of the Church (Verse 4). During the first years of its existence, the Church was generally called by its members the Church of Christ or the Church of Jesus Christ, while nonmembers often called it the "Mormonite" Church. In order to avoid the latter name, a conference held May 3, 1834, adopted the official title "The Church of the Latter-day Saints." It is clear from many contemporary sources, however, that the brethren still regarded the Church as being the Church of Jesus Christ. (See B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of the Church, vol. 1, pp. 392-93.) In 1838, D&C 115 instructed the members to use the full title of the Church as follows: "The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints." The first phrase, "The Church of Jesus Christ," is certainly the key part of the title. (See 1 Cor. 1:10-13; 3 Ne. 27:8.) The term Saints generally refers to those who are sanctified or holy, so the use of this term should be a constant challenge to all Church members. The word Saints is also used in a more general sense to refer to members of the Church, all of whom should be seeking sanctification through living the gospel of Jesus Christ. Paul addressed his epistles to the "saints" or church members in various places; he explained that one purpose of the church was the "perfecting of the saints." (See Eph. 4:11-13.)

181Far West: A Gathering Place (Verses 5-19). During the summer of 1837, the citizens of Clay County asked the Mormons to leave in peace, giving as their reasons differences over slavery and Indian policy. As a result, most of the Saints left the area during the fall of that year. About the same time, economic difficulties in Kirtland brought a real crisis-during the opening weeks of 1838, Joseph Smith and those who were loyal to him fled from Ohio to Missouri.

181In this revelation the Lord directed his Saints to gather at Far West, Caldwell County, in northern Missouri. This county had been formed expressly for the Mormons, that thereby the Saints' influence could be confined to that one place. The Church was to build a temple according to the pattern the Lord would reveal. They were to begin construction July 4, 1838, and resume work after the winter season, on April 26, just one year after this revelation was given.

181In verse 13 the Lord cautioned the First Presidency against going into debt as they had done while building the Kirtland Temple. This counsel may have contributed to the Church's policy of not dedicating buildings until they are fully paid for.
