Richard O. Cowan, Doctrine and Covenants, Our Modern Scripture ( 1984)

D&C 121-23: At Liberty Jail

For several years Latter-day Saint settlement in Missouri had met intense opposition. During the fall of 1838 difficulties flared anew. (See chronology below.) A series of attacks on outlying Mormon settlements led on October 25 to a clash between the Saints and their enemies on the banks of Crooked River; several lost their lives, including Apostle David W. Patten. Two days later Governor Boggs described the Saints as being in "open and avowed defiance of the laws" and as "having made war upon the people of the state," so he ordered that "the Mormons must be treated as enemies and must be exterminated or driven from the state." With this encouragement, a mob attacked Haun's Mill on October 30 and killed seventeen Saints. The following day Far West itself surrendered, and Joseph Smith and other Church leaders were taken as prisoners. That winter some 12,000 to 15,000 Saints were forced to flee from Missouri.

186Meanwhile, the prisoners were "exhibited" in Independence, and were then taken to Richmond to await trial. Elder Parley P. Pratt described how one night the guards boasted obscenely of evils committed against the Latter-day Saints. Although chained, Joseph Smith suddenly arose and thundered:

186SILENCE, ye fiends of the infernal pit. In the name of Jesus Christ I rebuke you, and command you to be still; I will not live another minute and hear such language. Cease such talk or you or I die THIS INSTANT!

186The guards immediately ceased their boastings and begged the Prophet's pardon. Elder Pratt, in recalling his experiences with the leaders of the world, concluded, "Dignity and majesty have I seen but once, as it stood in chains, at midnight, in a dungeon in an obscure vilage in Missouri." (Autobiography of Parley P. Pratt, p. 211.) It may be to this incident that D&C 122:4 refers.

186Following a preliminary hearing in November of 1838, the prisoners were transferred to the jail in Liberty, Missouri, to await a trial which never came. Throughout the winter the brethren suffered from inadequate ventilation, heating, and

187

Liberty Jail (Photo courtesy Harold B. Lee Library)

187sanitation; their food was grossly inferior, and they had nothing but the rough stone floor for a bed. It was in the circumstances that the revelations contained in D&C 121, 122, and 123 were received. Shortly after this time, Missouri state officials became increasingly embarrassed over the Church leaders' being held in jail on ill-founded charges, so allowed them to "escape." The Prophet and his associates made their way to Illinois where they rejoined the Saints.

187Culmination of Missouri Persecutions

188The Prophet's prayer (D&C 121:1-6) reflects the months of suffering which he and his associates had endured in the Liberty Jail. It should be realized that Joseph Smith had actually experienced all the trials mentioned in the subsequent revelation. (See D&C 122:5-7.) The Lord's answers to the Prophet's pleas (D&C 121:7-25 and D&C 122) compared these afflictions to those suffered by Job and by the Lord himself and, thus, set them in their proper perspective. The Prophet was told that these things were to give him experience "and shall be for thy good." (D&C 122:7.)

188As the Prophet reflected on these things (D&C 121:26-46), he could see that the Saints had truly been blessed with unprecedented revelations and manifestations through the Holy Ghost. In verse 33 he expressed the idea that it would be as impossible for men to prevent the Lord from blessing his people as it would be for them to stop the Missouri River or divert it from its course. Verses 34-40 warn that sin and pride undermine priesthood power; verses 41-44 set forth the spirit in which priesthood authority must be exercised. Verses 45-46 promise that the virtuous will not be ashamed of their lives, but that their "confidence [shall] wax strong in the presence of God," and that the Holy Ghost shall be their constant companion. The profound ideas and beauty of expression here (verses 34-46) rank among the greatest passages in the world's literature.

188Amen to the Priesthood (D&C 121:37). If a man becomes unrighteous, his priesthood which he does not magnify will become a source of personal condemnation rather than a blessing for him. His ability to bless others through his priesthood will be impaired, and he should not be called to represent the Lord or the Church in performing sacred ordinances. If one's unworthiness is not known and those in authority call him to perform an ordinance, the ordinance is valid because the person performs it not so much by his own authority but, rather, acts as a duly appointed agent for the Church. The efficacy of ordinances depends more on the worthiness of those receiving than upon the worthiness of those performing them.
