Richard O. Cowan, Doctrine and Covenants, Our Modern Scripture ( 1984)

D&C 6 and the Coming of Oliver Cowdery

While Joseph Smith was still residing in Harmony, Pennsylvania, Oliver Cowdery was teaching school in Palmyra. It was the custom of the day to have the school teacher board with the various families sending children to school. Thus, Oliver came to live with the Smiths, where he first learned about Joseph's work of translating the Book of Mormon plates. After retiring one evening, Oliver prayed for and received a witness from God that these things were true.

23When school closed for the season, Oliver decided to go to Harmony and meet the Prophet himself. Oliver arrived in Harmony on April 5, 1829, and started work as Joseph Smith's scribe two days later. He later declared:

23I wrote, with my own pen, the entire Book of Mormon (save a few pages) as it fell from the lips of the Prophet Joseph Smith, as he 24 translated it by the gift and power of God, by, the means of the Urim and Thummim. ("Journal History," October 21, 1848.)

24A Special Testimony for Oliver Cowdery (Verses 14-24). Oliver kept secret the matter of having received a witness from God until after D&C 6 had been received. The Lord gave Joseph Smith the power to reveal things which were in Oliver's mind in order to confirm the latter's testimony. Notice that together with this special witness he received added responsibility. (Verses 18-19).

24Oliver, at that time, stood at the beginning of many years of service in the Lord's kingdom. Oliver also had the privilege of being one of the three special witnesses to the Book of Mormon. No other individual besides Joseph Smith is mentioned more often in the Doctrine and Covenants than is Oliver Cowdery. He served as the Assistant President of the Church from December 5, 1834, until the time of his apostasy and excommunication in 1838. (For a discussion of this office see D&C 124 herein.) In 1848 he humbly returned to the Church and was rebaptized on November 12. He died as a faithful member on March 3, 1850.

24"Seek Not for Riches" (Verse 7). This verse may give the impression that wordly wealth is to be avoided. Such an idea, however, is unreasonable as one recognizes the importance of temporal resources in building the Lord's kingdom on earth. The scriptures teach that money, as such, is not necessarily evil, but that by placing the acquisition of wordly wealth ahead of developing things of the Spirit, one commits sin. Thus, money should not be an end in itself but should be used mostly as a means to do good. One's attitude toward worldly wealth is, therefore, all-important. Consider the teachings in the following passages on the subject: Matt. 6:33; 1 Tim. 6:10; Jacob 2:17-19; D&C 56:16-18.

24"The Mysteries of God Shall Be Unfolded unto You" (Verse 7). How is this promise to be reconciled with Joseph Smith's instructions to the elders to "declare the first principles, and let mysteries alone"? (Teachings, p. 292.) In the theological sense, a "mystery" might be defined as something which cannot be 25 known through human faculties alone but must be made known through divine revelation. The Lord has chosen not to give revelation about certain matters; these are the "mysteries" we should leave alone. The student of the gospel should never fear to ask questions; but when he learns that the answer has not been revealed, he should follow Alma's example when he said: "Now these mysteries are not yet fully made known unto me; therefore I shall forbear." (Alma 37:11.) On the other hand, the Lord has consented to reveal fundamental and profound truths including "the mysteries of the kingdom, even the key of the knowledge of God." (D&C 84:19.) Similarly, an understanding of the plan of salvation and of the place of Christ's mission can be obtained only by divine revelation. Such "mysteries" we should earnestly seek to comprehend. D&C 63:22-23 suggests that only the obedient will understand the mysteries, or, in other words, the Lord's will for them.

25The Importance of Desire (Verse 8 ff). Notice how many times this and subsequent revelations declare proper desire to be a necessary prerequisite to receiving blessings. (In D&C 6, for example, see verses 8, 20, 22, 25 and 27.)Just as "faith without works is dead" (James 2:26), more than mere desire is necessary. Oliver Cowdery desired to translate like Joseph Smith and was granted this privilege by which he could bring forth other records containing yet unknown gospel truths. (Verses 25-27.) Nevertheless, as will be seen in D&C 9, Oliver failed to pay the price, so these promises were never realized.

25Further Counsel (Verses 32-37). Compare verse 32 with a similar promise recorded in Matt. 18:20. Notice how in this revelation the Lord stresses the importance of being united. Although the "little flock" might be few in numbers, they should not hesitate to do good. (Verses 33-34.) The invitation in verse 37 to behold the Savior's wounds does not necessarily mean that Joseph and Oliver were privileged to see him on this occasion; rather, this was an admonition for them to remember him and contemplate the meaning of his mission.
