Richard O. Cowan, Doctrine and Covenants, Our Modern Scripture ( 1984)

D&C 127-28: Epistles on Baptism for the Dead

During May 1842, Governor Lilburn Boggs of Missouri, who issued the extermination order against the Mormons, was shot and wounded. The Latter-day Saints were immediately suspected, and Joseph Smith was accused of being an accessory to the crime. During August, the Illinois governor finally yielded to Missouri's demands and had the Prophet arrested, but Joseph was soon released. Some Missourians then threatened to cross the river into Illinois and seize Joseph Smith by force. At this point, the Prophet went into hiding for the safety of both the Church and himself. It was in this setting that he wrote the two letters dated September first and sixth, which are now D&C 127 and 128, respectively, in the Doctrine and Covenants.

193The Need for a Recorder. In his first letter (D&C 127:5-9), Joseph Smith emphasized the importance of having a recorder present when baptisms for the dead were performed, not only to make a record but also to be a witness that the ordinance was done properly. The Prophet returned to this same theme in his second epistle and linked the idea of making a record of valid ordinances to the power of binding and sealing on earth and having these acts recognized in heaven. (See D&C 128:3-10.)

194General and Ward Recorders (D&C 128:3-4). The reference in verse 3 is the first mention of the "ward" in the Doctrine and Covenants. This is a common political subdivision. It appears that Nauvoo was divided into wards for both political and ecclesiastical purposes. Even though there had been bishops in the Church since 1831, they were first associated with ward units in Nauvoo. The appointment of a general Church recorder (verse 4) marked the beginning of the Church Historian and Recorder as a formal office. Willard Richards was the first to hold this position, although Oliver Cowdery and John Whitmer had been called earlier to keep histories. (See discussion of D&C 47 herein.)

194Baptism for the Dead (Verses 12-13). Baptism is a symbol of death, burial, and resurrection. Therefore, immersion is the proper mode, and the baptismal font is generally located on a lower level in similitude of the grave. (See D&C 128:12-13).

194Importance of Work for the Dead. (Verses 15-18). In stressing the importance of vicarious work for the dead, Joseph Smith amplified the meaning of several biblical passages. For example, Paul taught that the dead cannot be made perfect without us (Heb. 11:40) Joseph Smith added the thought that we without them cannot be made perfect (see D&C 128:15). Furthermore, commenting on Malachi's prophecy of Elijah's coming, Joseph Smith stressed the need of a "welding link" between generations and dispensations. (Verses 17-18.) He therefore, called on the Saints to be prepared to present in the temple an offering of an acceptable record of their dead. (See D&C 128:24.) (For other thoughts on the work for the dead, see the discussion of Elijah's mission under D&C 2 and 110 herein.)

195Restoration of the Gospel (Verses 19-21). As the Prophet reviewed some of the glorious events which have been part of the Restoration, he called on the people to rejoice. In these verses, he gave information about certain events which is not found anywhere else. The exact area where the Melchizedek Priesthood was restored is specified here. The voice of God heard in the Whitmers' chamber was part of the circumstances leading to the reception of D&C 18. There is no other information about appearances of Michael (Adam). Perhaps the coming of Gabriel refers to the appearance of Elias in the Kirtland Temple. (See the discussion about the identity of Elias under D&C 27 herein.) The exact identity of Raphael is unknown.

195On to the Victory! (Verses 22-23). In our own day Church leaders have often quoted and renewed the challenge given by Joseph Smith in the first part of verse 22.
