Richard O. Cowan, Doctrine and Covenants, Our Modern Scripture ( 1984)

D&C 131

Divisions within the Celestial Kingdom (Verses 1-4). This is the clearest scriptural statement concerning the internal structure of the celestial kingdom. Only those who are in the highest of the three divisions are "exalted." (See the discussion of the celestial kingdom under D&C 76, and the discussion of celestial marriage under D&C 132 herein.)

198Man Cannot Be Saved in Ignorance (Verses 5-6). Some have supposed that these verses teach that secular knowledge is essential to salvation. It is true that in order to become as God one must have all knowledge; but when taken together, these verses suggest that the knowledge necessary for entrance into the celestial kingdom is a spiritual knowledge. At some point during progression, all who will eventually be exalted must reach the point at which they have so demonstrated their worthiness that the Lord is able through the Spirit to assure them that they will receive the highest glory in the celestial kingdom. It is possible through living the gospel to receive this "more sure word of prophecy" and make one's "calling and election sure" while still in mortality. This is the challenge to all Latter-day Saints. (See "The Holy Spirit of Promise," pp. 110, 125 herein. Sidney B. Sperry's treatment of D&C 131 and 132 also gives valuable insights-see Doctrine and Covenants Compendium, pp. 700-738.)

198Spirit Is Matter (Verses 7-8). Most traditional theologies advance a philosophy of dualism by teaching that spirit and matter are opposites. These verses, however, suggest a philosophy of monism-that spirit and matter are of similar substance but are of a different order or degree of refinement. A resurrected body, for example, is quickened by the spirit rather than by blood so is more refined than a mortal body; yet such a body is still tangible, being of coarser nature than a spirit. This difference in perfection may account for the contrast drawn in the scriptures between the willing spirit and the relatively weaker or more evil flesh. (See, for example, Matt. 26:41; 2 Ne. 2:27-29.)
