Richard O. Cowan, Doctrine and Covenants, Our Modern Scripture ( 1984)

D&C 7 and John's Desire

This section is the inspired translation of an account written by John the apostle on a parchment. The parchment was not necessarily present physically but was probably seen by revelation. Compare D&C 7 with John 21:20-23 to see what is added to the knowledge available in the Bible.

26 John Chapter 21 D&C Section 7

26At a conference held June3-6, 1831, the Prophet Joseph Smith learned by revelation that "John the Revelator was then among the ten tribes of Israel ... to prepare them for their return from their long dispersion to again possess the land of their fathers." (HC, 1:176, footnote.)

27Translated Beings. Joseph Smith taught that "translated bodies are designed for future missions." (Teachings, p. 191.) For example, Moses and Elijah were to bestow the keys of the priesthood to Peter, James, and John on the Mount of Transfiguration. (Teachings, p. 158.) Because this is done by the laying on of hands, Moses and Elijah would need tangible bodies. Since these keys were to be conferred before Christ inaugurated the resurrection, Moses and Elijah had to be blessed in such a way that they might retain their mortal bodies much longer than the normal lifespan. Similarly, John the Revelator (John 21:20-23) and the three Nephite disciples (3 Ne. 28) were "translated" so that they could remain on earth and labor to prepare the world for Christ's second coming.

27What is the nature of these translated beings? Joseph Smith observed that many have supposed that translated beings "were taken immediately into the presence of God and into eternal fullness," but that is a mistaken idea. "Their place of habitation is that of the terrestrial order." The Prophet made a distinction between the "actual resurrection and translation: translation obtains deliverance from the tortures and sufferings of the body, but their existence will prolong as to the labors and toils of the ministry, before they can enter into so great a rest and glory." (Teachings, pp. 170-71.) "Translated bodies cannot enter into rest until they have undergone a change equivalent to death." (Teachings, p. 191.) Consider also the information about the three Nephite disciples in 3 Ne. 28, especially verses 7-9 and 36-40. Mormon noted that a change had already come upon them. They had been quickened from their telestial state to a higher terrestrial level. He then indicated that a greater change would accompany Christ's second coming. These translated beings would then be changed in the twinkling of an eve from mortality to immortality. The three Nephite disciples were promised that they would never "taste of death" nor "endure the pains of death." This did not mean they would never die. Compare this promise with a similar statement in the Doctrine and Covenants (42:46) that the righteous who 28 "die in me shall not taste of death, for it shall be sweet unto them." In light of the above, consider the placement of translated beings on Chart 3.

28Chart 3 Types of Bodies

28 Spirit Mortal Immortal

Holy Ghost; Father and Son; Celestial (Our resurrected in preexistence) celestial kingdom

Terrestrial Translated beings; Resurrected in mortals during terrestrial millennium kingdom Our present Resurrected in

Telestial state telestial kingdom

Sons of Those who Those who committed Perdition followed Satan unpardonable sin in preexistence (resurrected)
