Richard O. Cowan, Doctrine and Covenants, Our Modern Scripture ( 1984)

Section 138: Vision of the Redemption of the Dead

This revelation is the only numbered section in the Doctrine and Covenants which was received in the twentieth century or in Utah, where the headquarters of the Church are now located. D&C 137 and 138 were added to the standard works in 1976, at first being assigned to the Pearl of Great Price. Five years later they were transferred to their present position as part of the new 1981 edition of the Doctrine and Covenants. Thus they followed the pattern of D&C 87, which also had been a part of the Pearl of Great Price before it was moved to the Doctrine and Covenants. Both D&C 137 and 138 shed light on salvation of the dead, so their addition to the scriptural canon was timely, coming in an era of unprecedented temple-building activity.

209To Whom Did the Savior Preach? (Verses 18-30). President Smith's vision has shed further light on Peter's declaration that the Lord preached to those "who sometime [the Revised Standard Version says "formerly"] were disobedient." The Savior did not go "in person" to the "ungodly" or "unrepentant" (D&C 138:20, 29). Rather, President Smith learned, the Master "organized his forces," authorizing righteous spirits to carry the gospel message to those to whom he could not personally go. (See Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions 1:27-29.) This work continues, and faithful elders of the present dispensation can look forward to continuing their preaching of the gospel even after they have left mortality. (See verses 30 and 57.)

209"The Acceptable Day of the Lord" (Verse 31). This phrase is undoubtedly related to references in the King James Bible to "the acceptable year of the Lord" (Isa. 61:2 and Luke 4:19). Other modern versions translate this phrase as "the year of God's favor." Hence the Lord's authorized representatives are declaring to the inhabitants of the spirit world that the time has come when they are to enjoy the Lord's favor and his full acceptance on condition of their repentance.

209Elias or Elijah (Verses 45-48). The "Elias" who appeared on the Mount of Transfiguration was known as "Elijah" in the Old Testament, and was the same individual Malachi prophesied would come in the latter days. (Compare Mal. 4:5-6 with Moroni's paraphrase of this prophecy in D&C section 2. See the discussion of meanings of "Elias" under D&C 27 herein.) President Smith emphasized that Elijah's keys, like the Savior's mission in the spirit world, were closely related to "the great work to be done in the temples" (verse 48).

209Bondage in the Spirit World (Verses 50-51). Although we generally identify "spirit prison" with the condition of only the wicked, in at least one sense all spirits-both good and evil-consider their existence in the spirit world as a bondage. (See verse 50.) Hence when the Savior announced to them that they would soon be resurrected, he truly was "declaring liberty to the captives" who had eagerly been looking forward to "the hour of their deliverance from the chains of death" (verse 18).

210Latter-day Leaders (Verses 53-56). At this point President Smith's vision shifted from the spirits who had already been on earth in previous eras. He now saw those who had been chosen to become leaders of the Church in the latter days.
