Richard O. Cowan, Doctrine and Covenants, Our Modern Scripture ( 1984)

Subsequent Revelation

It is the firm testimony and witness of the present author that later presidents of the Church have been prophets as much as was Joseph Smith and that they, too, have received divine revelation to guide the Church. (See Appendix B for a list of selected published revelations.) Some ask why these subsequent revelations have not been added to the Doctrine and Covenants canon. There are several thoughts which might be considered in relation to this question.

215The idea that recorded revelations came at an even pace throughout Joseph Smith's life and then suddenly ceased with his death is erroneous. Over half of the revelations now recorded in the Doctrine and Covenants were received in the three-year period 1830-1832, and there were several years nearer the end of the Prophet's life during which no such revelations were received. (See the "Chronological Order of Contents" in the Doctrine and Covenants and the chart on p. 7 herein.) Unlike the earlier revelations in which new fundamentals were made known, later revelations were more in the nature of application of previously revealed principles.

215Mormon, who abridged the Nephite history, explained that he had included less than a hundredth part of the original record, even of Christ's visit. He challenged his readers by promising that when they were able to understand and live the lesser part, then they might expect to receive the greater part. (See 3 Ne. 26:6-9.) The same principle applies to latter-day revelation. In a sense, the Lord would condemn his people by including in the formal scriptural canon precepts they were not prepared to live. (For further discussion of this subject, see Joseph Fielding Smith, Doctrines of Salvation 3:201-202; Bruce R. McConkie, "A New Commandment," Ensign [August 1976], p. 7)

216Finally, those who are genuinely interested in knowing the teachings of the present prophet can hear them at general conferences and read them in several Church periodicals. Elder Spencer W. Kimball testified most impressively that remarkable revelations have continued. Quoting George Q. Cannon, Elder Kimball declared: "There has never been a single minute since 1830 when the people were left without the revealed guidance of the Lord." (CR October 1966, p. 26.) Serious students of the Doctrine and Covenants should also study the inspired teachings given today through the Lord's living prophet.
