Richard O. Cowan, Doctrine and Covenants, Our Modern Scripture ( 1984)

D&C 8-9 and Oliver's Desire to Translate

"Oliver Cowdery became exceedingly anxious to have the power to translate bestowed upon him" (HC 1:36) as had been promised in D&C 6, verses 25-27. It was in this setting that D&C 8 was given. The Lord stated that Oliver had two gifts. Apparently Oliver failed to magnify his gift of translation, and D&C 9 was given to explain his failure. As a result, Oliver forfeited the opportunity he might have otherwise had to translate other ancient records.

28Oliver's Gifts (D&C 8:2-9). Oliver Cowdery was reminded that the Holy Ghost is "the spirit of revelation." (Verses 2-3.) Similarly, the Prophet Joseph Smith taught that one cannot receive the Holy Ghost without also receiving revelation. (Teachings, p. 238.)

28The exact nature of the "gift of Aaron" is not known. Some have suggested that this gift gave Oliver Cowdery power to be the mouthpiece for Joseph Smith, even as Aaron had been for Moses. Oliver was subsequently called to be the 29 "first preacher of this church." (D&C 21:11-12.) It should be remembered, however, that Sidney Rigdon was later called by revelation to be the spokesman for Joseph Smith. (D&C 100:9-11.) Other students point out that in the original Book of Commandments this gift is referred to as "the rod of Aaron"; the idea that there may have been a tangible sacred instrument present is sustained by the promise in verse 8 of D&C 8 that Oliver would "hold it in [his] hands." (Sperry, Compendium, p. 71.)

29Oliver's Failure (D&C 9). Many have supposed that Oliver Cowdery failed when he attempted to translate. D&C 9, however indicates that he did commence to translate but then quit because of fear (verses 5 and 11) and so resumed his more comfortable role as scribe (verse 1). He therefore lost the privilege to translate because of his lack of faith. (Compare Oliver's experience with that of Peter when he commenced to walk upon the water-Matthew 14:22-31.)

29Getting Answers to Prayers (D&C 9:7-9). This passage describes the process known as "spiritual confirmation." The individual takes the initiative by studying the matter out in his own mind first, and then by asking the Lord if his conclusions are 30 right. The process is complete only when the individual is able to recognize the Lord's answer.

30Epistemology is the branch of philosophy which considers how one can know the truth. Over the centuries, scholars have debated the relative roles of the physical senses and reason in gaining knowledge. The scriptures frequently refer to seeing or hearing the truth. Furthermore, the Lord promised Oliver Cowdery that he would reveal the truth to Oliver Cowdery in his mind as well as in his heart. (D&C 8:2.) The revelation in D&C 9 indicates that divine revelation must be added to the physical senses and reason as the ultimate source of truth.
