Richard O. Cowan, Doctrine and Covenants, Our Modern Scripture ( 1984)

Section 10: Satan's Plan Thwarted

Exactly when D&C 10 was received is not known. All editions of the Doctrine and Covenants prior to 1921 gave the date as May 1829. When Elder B. H. Roberts edited Joseph Smith's History of the Church early in the twentieth century, he regarded this date as an error. Elder Roberts cited the statement in Joseph Smith's history that D&C 10 was received "a few days" after D&C 3 had been given. (HC, 1:23.) Even though the present edition of the Doctrine and Covenants has changed the date of D&C 10 to "summer of 1828," this revelation remains where it would appear chronologically if the date were May 1829. (See also the discussion of D&C 3 herein.)

30Satan's Plan (Verses 10-19). Had Joseph Smith retranslated the lost material, Satan would have prompted the Prophet's enemies to alter the wording in the missing original so as to discredit the translator. Attempting to translate 116 pages word-for-word exactly the same a second time would have been "tempting" the Lord. (Verse 15.) One generally translates ideas rather than words. Furthermore, the Lord has indicated that he gives revelations-including inspired translations-to his servants "after the manner of their language." (D&C 1:24.) Thus it would not have been appropriate to criticize Joseph Smith even if he had failed to translate with identical wording a second time.

31Satan's Tactics (Verses 19-28). Satan not only wants to thwart the work of God, but he also wants to destroy the souls of men and make them miserable like himself. (Compare verse 22 with 2 Ne. 2:27.) His tactics, as described in this revelation and in 2 Ne. 28:20-22, can be recognized on all sides in today's world.

31The Lord's Counterplan (Verses 30-46). In order to comprehend Satan's plan to frustrate the coming forth of the Book of Mormon and to appreciate the Lord's counterplan, an understanding of the nature of the two sets of Book of Mormon plates is essential. Nephi made two sets of plates "for a wise purpose in the Lord." (1 Ne. 9:5.) On the Small Plates of Nephi, the prophets gave a religious history covering the period from 600 B.C. to about 150 B.C., when they were filled up. The first six books of the present Book of Mormon were translated from the Small Plates. The kings kept a political and military history on the Large Plates of Nephi. The book of Lehi covers roughly the same period as the Small Plates. The book of Mosiah, which followed the book of Lehi on the Large Plates, inaugurated a combined religious and secular history which continued to the time of Mormon, who prepared an abridgment of the Large Plates. (See Chart 4.)

31Joseph Smith began his work by translating from Mormon's abridgment, and it was the manuscript translation of the book of Lehi which Martin Harris lost. In D&C 10, verses 38-46, the Lord instructed Joseph Smith not to retranslate the book of Lehi taken originally from the political history on the Large Plates, but rather to translate the Small Plates covering the same period of time and throwing a greater light on the gospel of Jesus Christ. (See verses 39-40.) Then the Prophet was to continue translating from the Large Plates, beginning with the book of Mosiah, which also contained things of the Spirit. (See verses 41 and 46.) In light of these instructions, consider the net results of losing the manuscript. To what extent was the Lord's work frustrated? Note that the Book of Lehi was a purely secular history; none of the religious history was lost.32

32Chart 4

32Book of Mormon Time Span of Books and Pages

Compiled by Richard O. Cowan. Adapted from The Instructor, December 1962

*Not all dates are definitely known. **See Ether 1: 13:20-22; Omni 21. 33

33The Lord's Church vs. the Kingdom of Satan (Verses 53-69). D&C 1:30 declares that there is but "one true and living church." D&C 10 (particularly verse 67) defines the attributes of those who can claim membership in the Lord's church. These qualities are in marked contrast to the behavior advocated by Satan (described above).
