Richard O. Cowan, Doctrine and Covenants, Our Modern Scripture ( 1984)

D&C 17 and the Three Witnesses

In previous revelations the Lord had suggested to three individuals that they might be privileged to stand with Joseph Smith as eyewitnesses of the Book of Mormon plates: Martin Harris (D&C 5:11-13. 24-28; note the discussion of the witnesses' responsibilities), Oliver Cowdery, (D&C 6:25-28), and David Whitmer (D&C 14:8). As the work of translation drew to a close, these three men became very eager to be the special witnesses spoken of in the record.

38

The three witnesses of the Book of Mormon (Photo courtesy Harold B. Lee Library)

37The revelation in D&C 17 assured the three that through their faith and by the power of God they would see not only the plates, but four other sacred objects as well. The Lord also warned the witnesses that it would be their responsibility to sustain Joseph Smith with their testimony.

39Not many days after this revelation was received, Joseph Smith was present at the customary morning devotional service in the Whitmer home. In great solemnity he declared:

39Martin Harris, you have got to humble yourself before your God this day, that you may obtain a forgiveness of your sins. If you do, it is the will of God that you should look upon the plates, in company with Oliver Cowdery and David Whitmer. (Lucy Mack Smith, History of the Prophet Joseph Smith, chap. 31.)

39The Prophet then recorded what happened the same day:

39We four, viz., Martin Harris, David Whitmer, Oliver Cowdery and myself, agreed to retire into the woods, and try to obtain, by fervent and humble prayer, the fulfillment of the promises given in the above revelation-that they should have a view of the plates. We accordingly made choice of a piece of woods convenient to Mr. Whitmer's house, to which we retired, and having knelt down, we began to pray in much faith to Almighty God to bestow upon us a realization of these promises.

39According to previous arrangement, I commenced by vocal prayer to our Heavenly Father, and was followed by each of the others in succession. We did not at the first trial, however, obtain any answer or manifestation of divine favor in our behalf. We again observed the same order of prayer, each calling on and praying fervently to God in rotation, but with the same result as before.

39Upon this, our second failure, Martin Harris proposed that he should withdraw himself from us, believing, as he expressed himself, that his presence was the cause of our not obtaining what we wished for. He accordingly withdrew from us, and we knelt down again, and had not been many minutes engaged in prayer, when presently we beheld a light above us in the air, of exceeding brightness; and behold, an angel stood before us. In his hands he held the plates which we had been praying for these to have a view of. He turned over the leaves one by one, so that we could see them, and discern the engravings thereon distinctly. He then addressed himself to David Whitmer, and said, "David, blessed is the Lord, and he that keeps His commandments"; when, immediately afterwards, we heard a voice from out of the bright light above us, saying, "These plates have been revealed by the power of God, and they have been translated by the power of God. The translation of them which you have seen is correct, and I command you to bear record of what you now see and hear."

40I now left David and Oliver, and went in pursuit of Martin Harris, whom I found at a considerable distance, fervently engaged in prayer. He soon told me, however, that he had not yet prevailed with the Lord, and earnestly requested me to join him in prayer, that he also might realize the same blessings which we had just received.

40We accordingly joined in prayer, and ultimately obtained our desires, for before we had yet finished, the same vision was opened to our view, at least it was again opened to me, and I once more beheld and heard the same things; whilst at the same moment, Martin Harris cried out, apparently in an ecstasy of joy, "'Tis enough; 'tis enough; mine eyes have beheld; mine eyes have beheld;" and jumping up, he shouted, "Hosanna," blessing God, and otherwise rejoiced exceedingly. (HC, 1:54-55.)

40Concerning their experience, David Whitmer wrote many years later:

40In the midst of this light ... there appeared, as it were, a table with many records or plates upon it, besides the plates of the Book of Mormon, also the sword of Laban, the Directors [or Liahona] and the Interpreters [or Urim and Thummim].... I also heard the voice of the Lord, as distinctly as I ever heard anything in my life, declaring that the records of the plates of the Book of Mormon were translated by the gift and power of God. (B. H. Roberts, New Witness for God, vol. 2, pp. 271-314.)

40Thus the promises in D&C 17 were literally fulfilled.

40It was mid-afternoon when the brethren returned to the house. The Prophet's mother recalled that:

40On coming in Joseph threw himself down beside me, and exclaimed: "Father, mother, you do not know how happy I am; the Lord has now caused the plates to be shown to three more besides myself. They have seen an angel, who has testified to them, and they will have to bear witness to the truth of what I have said, for now they know for themselves that I do not go about to deceive the people, and I feel as if I was relieved of a burden which was almost too heavy for me to bear, and it rejoices my soul, that I am not any longer to be entirely alone in the work." Upon this Martin Harris came in. He seemed almost overcome with joy, and testified boldly to what he had both seen and heard. And so did David and Oliver, adding, that no tongue could express the joy of their hearts, and the greatness of the things which they had both seen and heard. (Lucy Mack Smith, History of the Prophet Joseph Smith, chap. 31.)

41Even though all three of these witnesses later left the Church because of personal differences with Joseph Smith, none of them ever denied their testimony despite ridicule and scorn which was often directed at them. Two of the three subsequently repented and reunited with the Saints.

41As one compares the testimony of the Three Witnesses with that of the group of Eight Witnesses, it is instructive to contrast the supernatural experience of the former with the more natural and yet still significant experience of the latter. The Three Witnesses were shown the plates by an angel who turned the pages for their examination, and they heard the voice of God bearing testimony of the work. The Eight Witnesses, on the other hand, "handled" and "hefted" the plates which were shown them by Joseph Smith himself. Both types of witnesses are important to satisfy a variety of people.
