Richard O. Cowan, Doctrine and Covenants, Our Modern Scripture ( 1984)

D&C 18 and the Authority to Preach

Verses 2-8 were directed primarily to Oliver Cowdery. (Compare D&C 6.) Beginning with verse 9, this revelation was addressed to both Oliver Cowdery and David Whitmer.

41Call to Preach the Gospel (Verses 9-25). Verse 9 reminded Oliver Cowdery and David Whitmer that they had the same calling as Paul the apostle. The Lord told these brethren that their basic responsibility was to preach repentance (verse 14), because each individual is a child of God and, therefore, "the worth of souls is great in the sight of God" (verse 10). Not only does the Savior rejoice in the soul that repents, thereby qualifying for the Lord's greatest blessings (verses 11-13), but the missionaries will also receive great joy in the kingdom of heaven with those whom they bring to repentance (see verses 15-16). The Lord had earlier given similar instructions and made similar promises to two other Whitmer brothers in identical revelations. (See D&C 15 and 16, verses 6.) The missionaries were, therefore, counseled not to waste their time in fruitless debate over theological tenets of specific churches, but to stress the first principles of the gospel. (See D&C 18:20; 19:31.)

42Restoration of the Melchizedek Priesthood. Peter, James, and John restored the higher or Melchizedek Priesthood in fulfillment of the promise made by John the Baptist when he restored the Aaronic Priesthood. Even though it is known where the restoration took place, the record of the exact date of this important event has been lost. It is not known whether or not this priesthood had been restored by the time D&C 18 had been received, although many students of the Doctrine and Covenants believe that verse 9 indicates that Oliver Cowdery and David Whitmer did have the Melchizedek Priesthood by that time.

42It is possible to approximate the time of the restoration in the light of the following evidence. The Melchizedek Priesthood was restored on the banks of the Susquehanna River in the "wilderness" between Harmony, Pennsylvania, and Colesville, New York. (See D&C 128:20 and map on pp. 8-9.) Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery left the Susquehanna River country and moved about 100 miles to Fayette about June 1, 1829, "and there resided until the translation [of the Book of Mormon] was finished" (HC, 1:48-49). Joseph Smith recorded that in June 1829, "We now became anxious to have that promise realized to us, which the angel that conferred upon us the Aaronic Priesthood had given us, viz., that provided we continued faithful, we should also have the Melchizedek Priesthood.... We had for some time made this matter a subject of humble prayer, and at length we got together in the chamber of Mr. Whitmer's house, in order more particularly to seek of the Lord what we now so earnestly desired." The Lord directed Joseph and Oliver to ordain each other elders, but to defer this action until a time when others who had been baptized could meet together and vote as to whether or not they would sanction these proceedings; this meeting was held on April 6, 1830, when the Church was officially organized. (See HC, 1:60-62.)

43In addition to restoring the Melchizedek Priesthood itself, Peter, James, and John also restored keys necessary to organize the Lord's kingdom. (See D&C 27:12-13; 128:20.)

43"Search Out the Twelve" (Verses 26-39). In these verses the Lord told his servants how they could recognize those who were to become apostles, and he gave instructions to the future Twelve. This commandment was fulfilled nearly six years later when, on February 14, 1835, the original Twelve Apostles were called and ordained. Even though only Oliver Cowdery and David Whitmer are here appointed to "search out the Twelve," Martin Harris was also included later, so that all three special witnesses of the Book of Mormon participated in the selection of the original Twelve.
