Richard O. Cowan, Doctrine and Covenants, Our Modern Scripture ( 1984)

D&C 19

Mr. Egbert B. Grandin, who was printing the Book of Mormon in Palmyra, stopped work on the nearly completed project when a group of townspeople voted to refrain from purchasing the book if it were published. It was in this setting that the Lord directed Martin Harris in D&C 19 to pay in advance the agreed upon price of $3,000. (See verses 13-16, 20, 25-26, 34-35.) This Martin did at great personal sacrifice.

43 D&C 19, however goes far beyond these circumstances. In order to impress Martin Harris with the importance of keeping this commandment, the Lord elucidated the relationship among the Atonement, repentance, and the forgiveness of sins.

43Eternal Punishment (Verses 4-12). In order to comprehend why punishment is necessary, one must understand the principle of justice. God operates according to law, obedience to which will always bring blessings (D&C 130:20-21), but disobedience to which brings punishment (Alma 42:22; 2 Ne. 9:25-27). Thus, punishment is an inevitable consequence of transgression.

44God's Laws

Our Choice: Obedience or Disobedience A Condition of: Righteousness or Wickedness, Sin Which Results In: Blessings or Punishment, Cursings Bringing Us: Happiness, Joy or Suffering, Sorrow

44It is impossible to reconcile God's justice with the erroneous idea that some of his children are saved in heaven but that the majority are condemned to suffer with the devil forever. According to the teachings of the Doctrine and Covenants, "eternal punishment" may be considered "eternal" in three senses:

44Atonement of Jesus Christ (Verses 16-19). According to the principle of mercy, another person, if he is willing and able, may pay the penalties resulting from our sins. He must make this payment, however, in such a way as not to rob justice (Alma 42:22-25) he therefore, must require something of us in order for us to qualify for the payment he is making in our behalf.

45Because of his great love for us, Jesus Christ was willing to make the atoning sacrifice in our behalf. He was able to do so because of his own sinlessness, which gave him power over spiritual death, and because his being the Son of an Immortal Father and of a mortal mother gave him unique powers over the physical death. The Savior's death and resurrection made it possible for all mankind to be resurrected. (See 1 Cor. 15:21-22.) When he suffered in the Garden of Gethsemane and on the cross, he paid the penalty for our individual sins; thus, each of us owes a personal debt of gratitude to the Lord for opening the way for us to receive salvation and exaltation.

45When penalties for sin are paid, either through one's own suffering or through the atonement of Jesus Christ, the demands of justice are satisfied and pardon is achieved. Forgiveness, on the other hand, refers specifically to Christ's assuming the burden of paying the penalties of sin for those who repent. (See Chart 5.)

45Faith in the Lord Jesus Christ is the first step in the gospel, because it is only through his atonement that salvation is possible. Repentance then follows logically as the individual learns that obedience to divine law is required if sins are to be forgiven through the atonement; this is why one must repent or suffer-that is, pay the punishment of his own sins which would cause the individual to suffer even as Christ suffered. (See D&C 19:16-18.) Furthermore, as the individual becomes better acquainted with Christ, he will be motivated to pattern his own life after the Lord's example. Finally, inasmuch as sin is the main obstacle in the way of achieving spiritual goals, repentance is the means of removing the problem. Through baptism, the individual covenants to obey God's commandments and receives remission of his sins. Receiving the Holy Ghost completely cleanses the individual from the effects of sin and brings him back into direct communion with the Godhead. (See the discussion of justification and sanctification, under D&C 20.)

46Chart 5 Repent Or Suffer The Two Roads to Pardon

47

47The Lamanites-A Remnant of the Jews (Verse 27). Today's Lamanites may be called "Jews" in two senses:
