Richard O. Cowan, Doctrine and Covenants, Our Modern Scripture ( 1984)

D&C 28

Who May Receive Revelation? (Verses 1-7). Hiram Page, one of the Eight Witnesses to the Book of Mormon, claimed to be receiving revelation for the Church by means of a special stone in his possession. For example, he professed to have been told where the future city of Zion was to be built. This, of course, was contrary to the pattern set forth in the revelation given at the organization of the Church (D&C 21:1-9) that the Lord would speak to the Church through his prophet, Joseph Smith. The Prophet had at first thought of bringing this problem before the conference scheduled for September 26; but when he learned that the Whitmer family and even Oliver Cowdery were being influenced by Page's claims, he knew the matter could not wait, so he went to the Lord in prayer and received D&C 28 in response.

60The Lord directed Oliver Cowdery to tell Hiram Page in private that his supposed revelations were not of God. Oliver would probably have had more influence with Page than would Joseph Smith because Oliver had believed in the false revelations. A close personal relationship existed among Hiram Page, Oliver Cowdery, and the Whitmers; in 1825, Page had married Katherine Whitmer, and Cowdery would marry Elizabeth Ann Whitmer in 1832.

61In D&C 28, verses 1-7, the Lord clearly informed Oliver that he should preach and teach as guided by the Spirit, but that it was not his privilege to receive formal revelations or commandments for the Church. Similarly, today all members of the Church are entitled to receive answers to their prayers and to have revelation to guide them in their personal affairs, family responsibilities, or Church assignments; still, only one, the President of the Church, is authorized to speak for the Lord to the Church or to the world as a whole.

61A similar problem also brought forth D&C 43. In verses 1-7 the Lord explained that only the Prophet would receive revelation for the Church, so that all may be done in order and "that you may not be deceived." D&C 43:4 states that no one else would be appointed to this responsibility except through the Prophet, and that if his calling were taken from him, he would only have authority to name his successor. This last provision would effectively silence any false prophet who obviously could not show that Joseph Smith had passed his authority on to him. The Lord knew, furthermore, that Joseph Smith would remain faithful so that his calling would not be taken from him.

61Mission to the Lamanites (Verse 8). Oliver Cowdery was called to "go unto the Lamanites." (D&C 30:5-8.) Peter Whitmer, Jr., Parley P. Pratt, and Ziba Peterson were soon called to the same work. (D&C 30:5-6; 32:1) These missionaries left Fayette late in October 1830. They first visited the Catteraugus Indians near Buffalo, where they left copies of the Book of Mormon. Thus the first formal mission of the Church carried the message of the restored gospel to the Lamanites and gave them the record of their fathers. (See discussion under D&C 3 herein, "Who Are the Lamanites?") In Church history, however, the major significance of this mission was not in its work with the Indians. Parley P. Pratt wanted to take the Book of Mormon to his old friend Sidney Rigdon, who was a leading minister at Mentor (near Kirtland), Ohio, in the Campbellite movement, a forerunner of the Disciples of Christ church. As a result of this visit, many future Church leaders were converted, including Rigdon (D&C 35 was later directed to him), Edward Partridge (D&C 36 and 41), and Frederick G. Williams (D&C 81). By the following spring, there were about 1,000 members of the Church in the area. In the meantime the missionaries continued their journey west during the winter of 1830-31. Because of sectarian jealousy, the Latter-day Saint missionaries were expelled from among the Indians west of the Missouri River, but they were successful in converting many non-Indians in the vicinity of Independence, Missouri. By the spring of 1831, therefore, there were sizable Church congregations in Kirtland, Ohio, and Independence, Missouri-two centers which would play key roles in subsequent Church history.
