Richard O. Cowan, Doctrine and Covenants, Our Modern Scripture ( 1984)

D&C 29

This is one of the great doctrinal revelations in the Doctrine and Covenants. Verses 1-30 deal mostly with events of the future. Verses 30-50 deal with a variety of topics ranging from pre-existence and creation to the status of little children. All this helped the members of the Church gain perspective and understanding during the early months of its existence. (Doxey, The Doctrine and Covenants Speaks, chapters 19 and 20 present a very good discussion of this significant section.)

62Warning of Future Perils (Verses 3-30). The early Saints were warned to repent of their sins and to gather together as a protection against the latter-day tribulations. (Verses 3-8.) The Lord outlined the calamities which would befall the wicked both before and following the Millennium. The Twelve who will assist in judging Israel (verse 12) will include Matthias rather than Judas. (For a further consideration of latter-day events, see the discussion of D&C 45 herein.)

62"Spiritual and Temporal" (Verses 31-34). The word temporal may have a double meaning as it is used here. First, it is used to refer to that which is material in contrast to that which is spiritual. Second, it and the word temporary come from the same root and have a similar meaning. The Lord declared that the "beginning of my work" was "first spiritual, secondly temporal." (Verses 31-32.) For example, the earth was created spiritually and later physically. (Moses 3:5-7.) Similarly, each individual lived as a spirit son or daughter of God before receiving a physical body at the time of mortal birth. The Lord then indicated that "the last of my work" will be "first temporal, and secondly spiritual." (Verse 32.) Eventually this earth will be quickened to become a celestial world; although it will still be physical, it will be spiritual in character. (See Chart 10, p. 122.) In a like manner, the individual's resurrected body will be tangible and spiritual, being quickened by spirit rather than by blood. Hence, that which is spiritual is more enduring and therefore more vital.

63Satan and the Preearthly Existence (Verses 36-39). D&C 29 clarifies the biblical reference to a war in heaven (Rev. 12:4, 7-9) and indicates definitely that the spirit children of God enjoyed free agency in his presence and that Satan was successful in leading away one-third of all the spirits. Satan and his followers were cast out because-

63The Fall of Adam (Verses 39-45). These verses, along with 2 Ne. 2:15-27 and Moses 5:10-11, are the major source of information about the consequences of Adam's transgression, which are summarized in Chart 7. One can appreciate the need for and the accomplishments of the Atonement best by first gaining an understanding of the background of Adam's transgression. On the chart, a plus mark is placed next to each entry representing a condition which would be considered favorable if it were a quality of one's eternal state; a minus indicates those qualities which would be regarded as undesirable. It can be seen that Adam's transgression brought a "fall" in at least three areas:

64Keep in mind that the second column represents our present state. Because of our own sins, we have brought upon ourselves spiritual death-not that our spirit dies, but that our unworthiness impairs our ability to receive the blessings of spiritual life. Further reflection will suggest that the Fall was really just a step down along the path which leads to eternal life; being outside of God's immediate presence, subject to the limitations of mortality and in a telestial state in which Satan's influence is near, gives the individual the opportunities necessary in preparing for eternal life and exaltation through adhering to the gospel. (See D&C 122:5-7.) It is interesting to note that all the favorable aspects of Adam and Eve's condition before their transgression, as well as of our present condition, will be enjoyed by the faithful through the atonement of Jesus Christ.

64Chart 7 Consequences of Adam's Transgression

64 Adam and Eve After Fall (Our Available through before Fall present condition) Atonement

Not mortal -Mortal: subject + Immortal: to physical death resurrection

Presence of +May return to Cast out: God spiritual death presence of God through obedience

No knowledge of + Knowledge + Knowledge good and evil

No posterity + Have children + Eternal increase

Terrestrial Telestial + Celestial

64Little Children (Verses 46-48). There is a distinction between sin and transgression. Sin is usually used to refer to a willful, deliberate, knowing transgression of God's law. Little children lack the knowledge necessary to sin. Satan is not given the power to tempt them. One of the most vigorous denunciations of the doctrine that children are sinful and, therefore, need baptism is found in the writings of the ancient prophet Mormon. He said that such a doctrine is a "solemn mockery before God" and that he who teaches it "is in the gall of bitterness and in the bonds of iniquity" because he is making our Father a partial God by denying his mercy and by setting "at naught the atonement." (Moro. 8:8-9, 14, 20.)

65The Lord returned to the theme of parents' responsibility to their children in D&C 68:25-28 and indicated that eight years was the age for baptism. Children do not become wholly responsible at once, and the Lord will hold a person accountable only in proportion to his responsibility. But in order to avoid confusion, the Lord has indicated that he will hold no one accountable before the age of eight years, at which time the child should be baptized.

65Those who die before the age of accountability will not be deprived of any blessing they might have received had they lived to maturity in the flesh, but they will be given the opportunity to earn their exaltation in the celestial kingdom. (See Joseph F. Smith, Gospel Doctrine, p. 453, and Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, Vol. 1, pp. 57-59.)

65State of the Mentally Retarded. (Verses 49-50). These verses suggest that those who have "no understanding," like little children, are not capable of sin, so need no baptism.
