Richard O. Cowan, Doctrine and Covenants, Our Modern Scripture ( 1984)

D&C 30-36

D&C 30 and 32 added three men to the Lamanite mission, while more brethren were being called to several other fields of labor. To prepare the world for the Lord's second coming, these missionaries were to preach the gospel, which is defined succinctly in D&C 33:10-12 and 39:6.

65A sense of urgency was given to the missionaries' assignment as the Lord used such phrases as: "Reap in the field which is white already to be burned." "It is the eleventh hour, and the last time that I shall call laborers into my vineyard." "Even now already summer is nigh." (D&C 31:4; 33:3; 35:16.) Note that D&C 33-35 end with the warning, "I come quickly."

66

Sidney Rigdon (Photo courtesy Harold B. Lee Library)

66Several future Church leaders were addressed in these revelations. Thomas B. Marsh (D&C 31) became the original President of the Twelve in 1835; he failed to heed the counsel given him in verses 9 and 12, so ultimately lost his high standing. Parley P. Pratt (D&C 32) and his younger brother Orson (D&C 34) were both members of the original Quorum of the Twelve. Even though Orson Pratt was only nineteen years old when he received D&C 34, he was told that he would preach "as with the sound of a trump, both long and loud" (verse 6); this prophecy was fulfilled in Elder Pratt's lifetime of missionary service. Sidney Rigdon (D&C 35) later served as first counselor in the First Presidency. (See discussion below.) Edward Partridge, who became the first Presiding Bishop, was not yet a member when he received D&C 36. The last two of these brethren first heard the gospel in Ohio from the missionaries to the Lamanites. (See the discussion of this mission under D&C 28 herein.) Shortly afterward they journeyed from Kirtland to Fayette in order to meet the Prophet personally. This was the setting for D&C 35 and 36.

67Sidney Rigdon's "Greater Work" (D&C 35:3-6). Some Latter-day Saints take the view that there is no good at all being done by other churches. Apparently the Lord regarded Sidney Rigdon's service as a Campbellite minister as a great work because he described it as preparation for a greater work. Without knowing it, Sidney had prepared his congregation to receive the restored gospel. Verse 4 suggests he had labored in the same spirit as John the Baptist, who was sent to prepare the way for the coming of the Savior. Still it was necessary for Sidney Rigdon and his followers to join the only true Church. The contrast between his past work and his future opportunities was suggested in verses 5-6, the words in brackets being inserted to sharpen the meaning:

67[Without priesthood authority] thou didst baptize by water unto repentance, but they received not the Holy Ghost;

But now I give unto thee a commandment, that thou shalt baptize by water [having the authority], and [therefore] they shall receive the Holy Ghost by the laying on of hands, even as the apostles of old.

67The Lord gave a similar message to James Covill, who had been a Baptist minister for about forty years. In D&C 39, verses 10-12, he was commanded to be baptized and was promised that he, too, could do a "greater work"-preach the fullness of the restored gospel with power.

67In D&C 35, Sidney Rigdon received two specific assignments to work with Joseph Smith:

67The Inspired Revision of the Bible. Statements about the Prophet "translating" the scriptures during this period often referred to his inspired revision of the Bible. This was not a "translation" in the usual sense of the word because no foreign language texts were involved. The Prophet received through revelation revisions which clarified the meaning of the King James Version. Still, the Inspired Version is more than merely commentary on the meaning of biblical passages; it appears in many instances to be a restoration of the original, or, strictly speaking, an inspired English translation of the original Hebrew, Aramaic, and Greek writings. In this latter sense, the Inspired Version might be called a "translation."

68This project may have begun when the Prophet received the book of Moses by revelation during June and December 1830. By September of that year he had started his work of revising the Old Testament. In the following March, the Lord directed the Prophet to work on the New Testament. (See D&C 45:60-61.) He completed this phase of the project by February 2, 1833. Roughly a month later, the Lord spoke to the Prophet about finishing "the translation of the prophets," that is, the Old Testament (D&C 90:13), and also counseled him not to revise the Apocrypha. (See D&C 91.) On July 2, 1833, Joseph Smith recorded: "We this day finished the translating of the Scriptures, for which we returned gratitude to our Heavenly Father." (HC, 1:368.)

68The revisions in the Inspired Version help clarify biblical passages and gospel doctrines. These changes are most numerous in the books of Genesis and Matthew. Because the revisions were given by inspiration, this version is a most valuable work to study.

68Joseph Smith's "new translation" of the Bible has contributed to our knowledge of gospel doctrines in still another way. Questions which arose in relation to biblical passages became the occasions for the Prophet's receiving many revelations now in the Doctrine and Covenants. Some of these include D&C 74, 76, 77, 86, 91, 93, 113, and 132. Nevertheless, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints has not adopted the Inspired Version as one of its standard works because the Prophet never considered the project really completed, even though he had "finished" in the sense that he had gone all the way through the Bible. Joseph Smith's revision has been published by the Reorganized Church under the title The Holy Scriptures.

69(For an excellent discussion, see Robert J. Matthews, "A Plainer Translation": Joseph Smith's Translation of the Bible, A History and Commentary [Provo: BYU Press, 1975].)
