Richard O. Cowan, Doctrine and Covenants, Our Modern Scripture ( 1984)

Section 46: The Gifts of the Spirit

This section is an excellent example of the Lord's revealing information far beyond the circumstances which made the revelation necessary. The practice had arisen among some to exclude unbelievers from sacrament meetings. Other members of the Church regarded this custom as wrong in light of the Lord's instructions in the Book of Mormon (3 1 Ne. 18:22-34) to the effect that those in need of repentance should not be forbidden but should be welcomed in sacrament meetings, since this might be a means of bringing them to repentance. The Lord settled this matter in the first seven verses of D&C 46 by reemphasizing the fact that no one is to be excluded from any public meetings such as the sacrament meeting. Those who conduct meetings are to proceed as "directed and guided by the Holy Spirit. (Verse 2.) In verse 7, the Lord further commanded his Saints "in all things to ask of God" and then do in holiness with prayer and thanksgiving whatsoever "the Spirit testifies unto you." This opened the way for a remarkable discussion of the gifts of the Spirit-a discussion that occupies the remainder of the revelation.

83Latter-day Saints are commanded, "Seek ye earnestly the best gifts" which are given for the benefit of those who love the Lord and keep his commandments. (See verses 8-9; compare 1 Cor. 12:31.) Furthermore, this is another safeguard against being deceived. (See verses 7-8.) It will be remembered that the Lord earlier exhorted the people to follow the Prophet as another key against deception. (See D&C 43:5-6.) If one is to seek these gifts, he has to know what they are. (See verse 10.) Not all receive the same gifts, but "to some is given one, and to some is given another, that all may be profited thereby." (Verse 12.) In 1 Cor. 12, Paul listed the various gifts of the Spirit and compared them, as well as the various officers in the Church, to a perfect human body, all of whose members are essential for the well-being of the whole. Paul's list of the gifts is similar to that found in D&C 46 and also Moro. 10.

83It is instructive to see how the various standard works strengthen one another. For example, Paul testified that "no man can say that Jesus is the Christ but by the Holy Ghost" (1 Cor. 12:3; italics added), while modern revelation suggests that "say" might better be translated "know" (D&C 46:13). The Doctrine and Covenants speaks of the "word of Wisdom" and the "word of knowledge" D&C 46:17-18) Moroni explained that the ability to teach these is a gift of the Spirit (Moro. 10:9-10).

83"Differences of Administration" and "Diversities of Operations" (Verses 15-16). The significance of these terms may be clarified by referring to the meaning of the Greek words which Paul used and which have been translated into English as "administration" and "operations." Administration describes the various courses or duties of the priesthood. The Lord directs his authorized servants by revelation through the Holy Ghost. Knowing the diversities of operations means being able to discern whether or not a given form of spiritual manifestation is of the Lord. (See Sperry, Compendium, pp. 194-201.)

84The Gift of Tongues (Verses 24-25). There are churches in the world which publicly demonstrate the ability to speak in unknown tongues as an attempt to prove they have the Holy Spirit. In contrast to this attitude, Joseph Smith pointed out that the weightier gifts, such as faith and wisdom, are not necessarily accompanied by visible outward manifestations. He also described the gift of tongues as the smallest of the gifts, its "ultimate destiny" being its power to enable one to speak with foreigners. (HC, 5:27-31.) In Chapter 14 of 1 Corinthians, Paul discussed some of the abuses of the gift of tongues. Even though the apostle was proud of the fact that he could speak in tongues as much as anyone in the Church, he would rather speak five words that could be understood than to speak ten thousand words in an unknown tongue. (See 1 Cor. 14:18-19.)
