Richard O. Cowan, Doctrine and Covenants, Our Modern Scripture ( 1984)

Section 50: The Discerning of Spirits

Several waves of religious revivals swept the United States during the early years of the nineteenth century. These were characterized especially on the frontier by extreme emotional manifestations. At camp meetings, which would often last several days, the preachers' fiery sermons sometimes caused their listeners to experience such outward manifestations as "jerks," "moans," or "shouts." Elder Parley P. Pratt recorded that even among some Latter-day Saints similar physical contortions and false visions had been witnessed. The Lord gave D&C 50 to help the brethren know how to discern whether or not such "spiritual" manifestations were of God.

87Parley P. Pratt had left a most valuable account of how this revelation (as well as several others) was received:

87After we had joined in prayer in his translating room, he dictated in our presence the following revelation:-(each sentence was uttered slowly, and very distinctly and with a pause between each, sufficiently long for it to be recorded, by an ordinary writer, in long hand.)

87This was the manner in which all his written revelations were dictated and written. There was never any hesitation, reviewing, or reading back to keep the run of the subject, neither did any communications undergo revisions, interlinings, or corrections. As he dictated them so they stood so far as I have witnessed; and I was present to witness the dictation of several communications of several pages each. (Autobiography of Parley P. Pratt, p. 62.)

87With reference to Elder Pratt's last point, note that the Prophet did make some modifications or additions when subsequent revelation expanded his understanding of doctrinal concepts or of Church organization.

87The Lord gave three keys by which evil spirits might be detected:

88The principles set forth in D&C 50 should not be restricted to the discerning of false spirits only. To the contrary, verses 21-24 give the key by which Church members can know when their leaders are speaking under the direction of the Holy Ghost. Thus, Latter-day Saints should not only ask the Lord to inspire those who will speak, but they should also seek the Spirit themselves so that they might be "edified and rejoice together."
