Richard O. Cowan, Doctrine and Covenants, Our Modern Scripture ( 1984)

D&C 57-58: The Land of Zion

Old Testament prophets spoke of two latter-day gathering places from which the Lord's law and word should go forth: Jerusalem and the New Jerusalem, or Zion. (See Isa. 2:2-3; Micah 4:1-2.) The Book of Mormon made it clear that while the ancient Jerusalem would be rebuilt and become the Holy City of the Lord in the Old World, the New Jerusalem would be built on the American continent. (Ether 13:4-6.) As early as 1830, the year in which the Church was organized, the building of the New Jerusalem was a subject of great interest, and the Latter-day Saints were eager to know just where the Holy City was to stand. In September of that year, Hiram Page had professed revelations making known, among other things, where the New Jerusalem or Zion would be located. (See the discussion of these circumstances under D&C 28 herein.) On that occasion, the Lord declared through his prophet that the location of Zion had not yet been revealed, but that it was "on the borders by the Lamanites" and that the exact location would be made known later. In the same revelation Oliver Cowdery was called to go as a missionary to the Lamanites. (See D&C 28:8-9.) Cowdery and his fellow missionaries traveled as far west as the "borders by the Lamanites" in western Missouri. (See the discussion of this mission under D&C 28 herein.) During the spring of 1831, the Lord directed his people to prepare to purchase land in the "western countries" where the New Jerusalem or Zion would be built. (See D&C 45:64-67.) On June 7, 1831, following a very spiritual conference, the Lord directed many of the elders to go to Missouri, the land the Lord had consecrated for the people of Israel, and it would be made known where their inheritances should be. (See D&C 52:1-5.)

92In compliance with the above instructions, Joseph Smith

Independence Temple Area

and many others left Kirtland in mid-June and arrived in Jackson County, Missouri, just a month later. They had a joyful reunion with the missionaries to the Lamanites and with the many converts they had made in the area earlier in the year. As the Prophet beheld the backward state of this land and its inhabitants, he was moved to exclaim, "When will the wilderness blossom as the rose? When will Zion be built up in her glory, and where will thy temple stand?" D&C 57 and 58 were revealed, in part, to answer these questions. D&C 57, verses 1-3, indicated the exact spot for the temple lot. The accompanying map shows the boundaries of the lands purchased for the Saints in 1831. D&C 58, verse 3, however, suggested that the literal restoration of Zion would come only "after much tribulation." Nevertheless these early Saints had been brought to Missouri to test their obedience and in order that they might "be honored in laying the foundation, and in bearing record of the land upon which the Zion of God shall stand." (D&C 58:6-7.) The "feast of fat things" and the "marriage of the Lamb" were symbolic biblical prophecies of the Lord's second coming. (Compare verse 8 with Isa. 25:6, and verse 11 with Matt. 22:1-10 and Rev. 19:7.)

94These two revelations contain many specific instructions for those who were gathering to Zion at that time, particularly for the Colesville Branch which had been directed in D&C 54 to continue its journey to Missouri. Members of this group played a key role in the early Latter-day Saint settlement of Jackson County. Twelve men, symbolizing the tribes of Israel, carried the first log into place as building commenced.

94Today Latter-day Saints realize that they must be prepared both individually and as a church before Zion can be built. Many of the instructions in these early revelations are applicable to this present endeavor. (See D&C 105 for further consideration of requirements for establishing Zion.)

94The Line Between "Jew and Gentile" (D&C 57:4). Early explorers reported that the territory west of the ninety-fifth meridian (an imaginary north-south line a few miles west of Kansas City, Missouri) was an arid, barren waste, totally unsuited for settlement. In light of these reports, the United States government adopted the concept of a "permanent Indian frontier" and from 1825 to 1840 followed the policy of removing Indians from east of this line and assigning them to reservations on the Great Plains. It was anticipated that non-Indian settlers would forever remain east of the ninety-fifth meridian, thus solving the problem of conflict with the Indians. (See Ray A. Billington, Westward Expansion, pp. 468-71.)

95The "line running directly between a Jew and Gentile" mentioned in the Doctrine and Covenants was the adjacent portion of the "permanent Indian frontier," which was approximately the same as the western boundaries of the state of Missouri. The Lord used the term "Jew" to refer to the Lamanites or American Indians for the reasons explained earlier. (See "The Lamanites-a Remnant of the Jews" under D&C 19 herein.)

95Obedience to Law (D&C 58:19-22). Those seeking to establish Zion must obey the law of God and should not break the law of the land. (See D&C 134 for a further consideration of the need to obey civil law.)

95Initiative (D&C 58:26-33). Those engaged in building Zion cannot wait to be "commanded in all things," but must be "anxiously engaged in a good cause." The "slothful servant" who must always be prodded never can rise above the level of drudgery. On the other hand, those who go the "second mile" (Matt. 5:41) experience the joy which comes from freely giving of oneself. This is an illustration of the principle that blessings are conditioned upon our behavior. (See, for example, D&C 82:10 and 130:20-21.)

95Furthermore, the Lord has worked through his "wise" and "anxiously engaged" servants to effect important developments in his work on earth. Some examples from Church history include Joseph Smith and the First Vision, Richard Ballantyne and the Sunday School, Aurelia Spencer Rogers and the Primary, Harold B. Lee and the Welfare plan, to cite only a few illustrations. Within guidelines given in handbooks and by those who preside over us, we should actively seek divine inspiration to help us to do "many things of their own free will, and bring to pass much righteousness." (Verse 27.)

96The Nature and Fruits of Repentance (D&C 58:42-43). One of the best brief definitions of repentance to be found in the standard works is contained in D&C 58:43 (for a discussion on the confession of sins, see p. 72). Verse 42 states (1) that those who repent will receive forgiveness for their sins (see discussion of forgiveness under D&C 19 herein), and (2) that the Lord will remember the sins no more. Alma's experience shows that the individual may still remember his past sins, but that after they have been forgiven they will trouble him no more. (See Alma 36:19-21.) The Lord has warned, however, that if one sins again, the former sins will return. (See D&C 82:7.)
