Richard O. Cowan, Doctrine and Covenants, Our Modern Scripture ( 1984)

D&C 60-61: The Return Trip from Zion

On Monday, August 8, 1831, as the brethren from Ohio were preparing to return home, D&C 60 was received in which return travel instructions were given. The elders were told to go by river to St. Louis (D&C 60:5), from which point some were to continue speedily to their homes, but most were to preach along the way as they went. Joseph Smith and ten other elders left Independence the next day. On Thursday afternoon, dangerous conditions were encountered on the river, and manifestations of Satan's power and presence were experienced. The following morning, D&C 61 was received to explain these things and also to elaborate on further travel directions.

98Congregations of the Wicked (D&C 60:8 ff.). Instructions for the missionaries to preach among the congregations of the wicked do not mean that they were necessarily to seek out the worst elements of the population. The Lord used the word "wicked" to refer to all the inhabitants of the earth who had not yet accepted the fulness of the gospel, perhaps many never having even heard it. (See D&C 35:12; 84:49) The word gentiles has sometimes been used in much the same sense as the Lord has used the term wicked here, in referring to those who had not become part of the covenant people.

98Travel by Water (D&C 61). The Lord explained that he had allowed the group to come by water that they might better be able to bear witness to the dangers on the water, particularly upon the western rivers in that vicinity. (See verses 4-5.) Because Satan's power was upon the waters (verse 19), those whose faith might fail them should avoid these waters lest they be "caught in snares." (Verse 18.) Those whose faith is strong will not only have power to command the waters but will also be led by the Spirit. (See verses 27-28.) In such cases, it would not matter whether they went by water or by land, as long as they fulfilled their missions. (See verse 22.)
