Richard O. Cowan, Doctrine and Covenants, Our Modern Scripture ( 1984)

D&C 68

This revelation was received within a day or so following the conference which had decided to publish the compiled revelations. Verses 1-12 were received specifically for the guidance of four missionaries who were about to depart. Verse 13, however, suggests that the balance of the revelation consists of Addenda to the "covenants and commandments" (another title for the Book of Commandments which was about to be published). Items in these later verses are particularly related to the content of D&C 20, which with D&C 22, had been accepted as the "articles and covenants" of the Church.

105What Is Scripture? (Verses 2-4). These verses, directed to a group of missionaries, specify two general requirements which must be met if a pronouncement is to be accepted as "scripture": (1) It must be inspired, and (2) it must be within the jurisdiction or authority of the one making the pronouncement. Thus a bishop may receive "scripture" for his ward, or a stake president for his stake. Similarly, worthy fathers bearing the holy priesthood should receive "scripture" for their families. Of course, only the president of the Church may receive "scripture" for the whole Church or for the world. President J. Reuben Clark, Jr., declared:

106Only the President of the Church, the Presiding High Priest, is sustained as Prophet, Seer, and Revelator for the Church, and he alone has the right to receive revelations for the Church, either new or amendatory, or to give authoritative interpretations of scriptures that shall be binding on the Church, or change in any way the existing doctrines of the Church. He is God's sole mouthpiece on earth.... He alone may declare the mind and will of God to his people. ("When Are Church Leaders' Words Entitled to Claim of Scripture?" Church News, July 31, 1954.)

106Elder Ezra Taft Benson suggested three tests by which we can judge the authenticity of any statement: (1) "What do the standard works say about it?" Any new statement must be consistent with the eternal principles revealed in the scriptures. (2) What do the latter-day prophets, particularly the living president, have to say on the subject? (3) Our own personal witness through the Holy Ghost is the final test. D&C 50:29 declares that those who teach and those who listen by the Spirit "understand one another, and both are edified and rejoice together." (CR, October 1963, pp. 16-17.)

106The "Signs of the Times" (Verse 11). Latter-day Saints are not only privileged, but are also commanded, to ponder and heed the signs of the Savior's approaching coming in glory. (See the discussion of D&C 45 herein.)

106Selecting Bishops (Verses 14-24). At the time this revelation was received, only one bishop, Edward Partridge (see D&C 4:1), was serving. The promise of "other bishops" was fulfilled beginning in the following month with the call of Newel K. Whitney. (D&C 72.) The "legal right" of literal descendants of Aaron to this office is related to the organization of the lesser priesthood during Old Testament times. (See the discussion of the office of bishop and the history of the priesthood under D&C 107 herein.) Note that these verses contain the first reference to the "First Presidency" in latter-day revelation. Provisions in verses 22-24 regarding the trial of bishops refer only to the Presiding Bishop.

106Parents' Responsibility (Verses 25-28). The prime responsibility of teaching children the gospel rests with their parents. Church leaders have frequently cited these verses in support of the family home evening. Parents who fail to teach their children must assume responsibility for the children's transgressions. (Compare Jacob 1:18.) Here, for the first time, the Lord specifies the precise age of accountability. (See the discussion on the status of little children under D&C 29 herein.) Verse 25 contains the first Doctrine and Covenants reference to stakes of Zion; the first stake was organized in Kirtland just over two years later. (See the discussion of D&C 102 herein.)
