Richard O. Cowan, Doctrine and Covenants, Our Modern Scripture ( 1984)

Section 78: The United Order

In this revelation the Lord called a number of the leading brethren of the Church to unite by covenant and to form the "united order," an administrative body to coordinate and operate various business enterprises related to the law of consecration. (See discussion of the law of consecration under D&C 42 herein.) This should not be confused with the popular usage of the term "united order" in referring to the operation of the law of consecration as a whole, or to cooperative experiments in Utah during a later period of Church history. D&C 82, beginning with verse 11, also gave further instructions concerning the united order.

123Adam Holds the Keys (Verse 16). As the head of the human family, Michael or Adam was given the privilege of holding the keys of salvation under the direction of the "Holy One" (Jesus Christ). The keys are the power to direct the Lord's work on earth. They were passed down among the prophets, Elijah being the last to hold the keys of the higher priesthood and John the Baptist the last to bear the keys of the lesser priesthood before the coming of Christ. (See Teachings, pp. 172, 272.) The apostles received their priesthood directly from Christ (John 15:16) and received the keys from Moses and Elijah on the Mount of Transfiguration (Teachings, p. 158). These same three apostles restored the keys as well as the Melchizedek Priesthood in this dispensation. Six years following the organization of the Church, Moses, Elias, and Elijah restored additional special keys. (See D&C 110.) Just before Christ's second coming, a great priesthood conference will be held at Adam-ondi-Ahman, where all keys will be given back to Adam who will then turn them over to Jesus Christ in preparation for the Lord's personal reign on earth. (See Joseph Fielding Smith, Way to Perfection, chap. 40, p. 287.)

124Son Ahman (Verse 20). Elder Orson Pratt has explained the meaning of this title. In the pure language, "Ahman" is the name of God, "Son Ahman" is the name of the Son, and "Sons Ahman" is the name of man. (See JD, 2:342.)
