Richard O. Cowan, Doctrine and Covenants, Our Modern Scripture ( 1984)

Section 87: "Prophecy on War"

Joseph Smith's prophecy of wars beginning with the rebellion of South Carolina was given on Christmas Day, 1832, over twenty-eight years before the American Civil War began at Fort Sumter on Charleston Bay in South Carolina. Students of history realize that there was an earlier rebellion just one month before D&C 87 was received. For some time the Southern States, which depended heavily on imports from abroad, had resented the high tariff rates passed primarily to protect Northern manufacturing interests. In November 1832, the South Carolina legislature adopted an exposition which advanced the doctrine of the states' rights to nullify any act of the federal government which was not in their interest. In his journal entry prefacing the record of D&C 87, Joseph Smith referred to South Carolina's actions as a "rebellion." Some critics, therefore, argue that anyone in 1832 could have guessed that difficulties would begin in South Carolina and that the so-called South Carolina prophecy is not evidence at all of divine appointment. Joseph Smith, however, made it clear in a later statement that the South Carolina rebellion mentioned in D&C 87 was not the nullification controversy of 1832 but was still future. (See D&C 130:12-13.)

130Other aspects of this prophecy are quite impressive. Joseph Smith referred to the South being divided against the North; at the time this prophecy was given, there were three contending sections-the Northeast, Southeast, and Northwest (Great Lakes area)-and it was uncertain along which lines alliances would be drawn. The Prophet also listed slavery and not the tariff as the dividing issue. The Southern Confederacy did call on Great Britain for assistance as prophesied in D&C 87.

130Furthermore, one might wish to expand one's horizon from the American Civil War, in particular, to the wars which were to be poured out on the world in general. The history of warfare shows a marked acceleration from the time of the Civil War period. The concept of "total war" involving entire populations has replaced the former restricted involvement of only mercenary (or professionally hired) armies. The system of defensive alliances prophesied in verse 3 has become an essential fact in the present-day global scene.

130"Lord of Sabaoth" (Verse 7). This Hebrew word is usually translated "hosts" (meaning "armies"), so this title denotes the Lord's being the ruler over all.

130Stand in Holy Places (Verse 8). This injunction does not require the Latter-day Saints to spend all their time in such places as the temples and chapels; rather, Church members should, through their way of life, help make wherever they are a holy place.
