Richard O. Cowan, Doctrine and Covenants, Our Modern Scripture ( 1984)

Section 93: The Glory of God

The opening verses of this revelation give the remarkable promise that the faithful will see God's face and behold his glory. The glory of God is the theme which runs throughout the remainder of this great revelation. In verses 7-17, the Lord refers to the testimony of John the Baptist as quoted in the gospel written by the apostle John; the Baptist had the privilege of beholding and bearing witness to Christ's glory.

145The Father and the Son (Verses 3-22). Christ might be identified with the Father because he received a fullness of the Father's glory. This might be related to the concept of "divine investiture of authority" as set forth in the First Presidency's statement on "the Father and the Son." (See the discussion of this statement, under D&C 11 herein. Still, Christ was the "Son" in several senses:

146Chart 13 Man's Eternal Life

147Independence and Agency (Verses 30-31). D&C 93 may help Latter-day Saints understand the origin of evil. The traditional Christian view holds that God "created" everything ex nihilo (out of nothing) and, therefore, that he must be responsible for everything that exists, good or evil. In contrast to this notion, D&C 93 affirms that at least two things, intelligence and material elements, have always existed and, therefore, that God is not necessarily responsible for evil that might come from those sources. On a more positive note, man's eternal intelligence may be the ultimate source of his free agency. (See verse 31.) The exact nature of the intelligence is not known, but the fact that this subject was presented by the Lord in the midst of his discussion of glory, truth, and light may suggest that these are essential qualities of man's eternal intelligence.

147"The Glory of God Is Intelligence" (Verse 36). The term intelligence may be understood in two rather distinct senses: (1) Commonly, it refers to mental ability or the capacity to learn and reason. (2) Latter-day Saints identify "intelligence" with that portion of our being which is eternal or uncreated. One must read the context in order to determine which of these senses is intended in verse 36.

147Notice how the words used in verse 36 to describe God's glory are also found in verse 29 in reference to man's condition in the beginning. God the Father possesses these powers and attributes in full. Although the Son did not have a fullness at first, he progressed to the point that he did receive a fullness of the Father's glory. (Verses 12-16.) Verse 19 may be regarded as setting forth the basic thesis of D&C 93-that through Jesus Christ, men also may attain a fullness of the Father's glory. This may be accomplished through obedience to the Lord's commandments. (Contrast verses 27-28 with verse 39.)

147Thus "intelligence" in verse 36 should be understood in a broader spiritual sense rather than only in its strictly academic meaning. Physical light has often been emphasized in descriptions of the glory possessed by heavenly messengers. (Consider, for example, Joseph Smith's accounts of the Father and the Son and of the angel Moroni.) Light is also intertwined with the powers of God's Spirit. (See the discussion of the Spirit or Light of Christ on p. 131.) "Intelligence" in D&C 130:18-19 should likewise be understood in this enlarged sense. Similarly, the declaration in D&C 131:6 that "it is impossible for a man to be saved in ignorance" takes on an essentially spiritual meaning when read in the context of the preceding verse.

148Even though these passages should be understood in a broader and primarily spiritual sense, "intelligence" being developed primarily through righteous obedience, secular study and learning are not excluded. Truth, which is one of the key ingredients of intelligence and God's glory, is defined in verse 24 as "knowledge of things as they are, and as they were, and as they are to be" (italics added). Perhaps the strongest scriptural basis for the Church's interest in education is to be found in D&C 88. (See the discussion of D&C 88:76-80 herein.)
