Richard O. Cowan, Doctrine and Covenants, Our Modern Scripture ( 1984)

Section 97: Difficulties in Jackson County

This revelation came exactly two years after the land of Zion had been dedicated in 1831. During this period many Latter-day Saints had gathered to the area, but unfortunately they experienced antagonisms with their non-Mormon neighbors.

149For several months tensions between Mormons and non-Mormons grew in Jackson County, Missouri, culminating in the destruction of the Latter-day Saints' press on July 20, 1833. It was in this attack that most of the copies of the newly completed Book of Commandments were lost.

149Some of the causes of this friction included the following:

150These and other factors antagonized the earlier settlers in the area. Because the lawless element tended to flock to the frontier, these antagonisms resulted in mob violence against the Saints.

150As difficulties mounted during the early summer of 1833, word was sent to Joseph Smith in Kirtland, and it was in this setting that D&C 97 and 98 were given.

150A Temple in Zion (Verses 10-17). Location of the Independence, Jackson County, Missouri, temple had been revealed two years earlier. (See D&C 57:3.) Recently discovered preliminary sketches for this temple indicate that it would have been built "like unto the pattern" which the Lord had given for the Kirtland Temple. (See D&C 97:10.)

150The temple would have been a source of temporal as well as spiritual salvation for the Saints in Zion. By means of a parable in a subsequent revelation, the Lord spoke of his servants' failure to build a tower (or the temple) as he had commanded in order to provide defense. (See D&C 101:43-62.)

150In D&C 97, verses 13 and 14 list functions of temples, and verses 15-17 set forth a marvelous promise which may be applied to these sacred structures today as well as to the contemplated temple in Zion.

150Warning to the Saints in Zion (Verses 18-26). According to verse 21, Zion refers to the "pure in heart:" Thus, the Lord was pleased with the humble, righteous Saints in Missouri; but at the same time, he chastened those in need of repentance. The Lord stressed that righteous Zion would be protected during the time when scourges would be swept over the wicked. Nevertheless, if the inhabitants of Zion failed to keep the Lord's commandments, she, too, would partake of the afflictions to come upon the disobedient. In the light of immediate future events, this was a very timely warning.
