Richard O. Cowan, Doctrine and Covenants, Our Modern Scripture ( 1984)

Section 110: The Restoration of Keys

Statements in the introductory superscription and in this section itself suggest that this revelation came by vision. It is also true, however, that at least Moses, Elias, and Elijah had to appear in person because they conferred keys, which is done by the laying on of hands. (See the discussion on p. 3 concerning the various ways in which revelation comes.) This section consists of a series of manifestations in which glorious beings appear to bring a special message or authority.

176Christ (Verses 1-10). The major purpose of the Savior's appearance was to accept the temple which had been dedicated to him just one week earlier. The Lord repeated his earlier promise to manifest himself in his house if no unclean person is permitted to pollute it. (Compare verses 7-8 with D&C 97:15-17.)

176 Moses (Verse 11). Moses, who gathered the ancient children of Israel and led them to the Promised Land, restored the keys for the latter-day gathering. This gathering is to involve at least five major aspects:

177Elias (Verse 12). Available sources do not clarify the exact nature of the keys Elias brought. (For a discussion of Elias's identity, see D&C 27 herein.)

177Elijah (Verses 13-16). This appearance fulfilled Malachi's prophecy. (Compare Mal. 4:5-6 with Moroni's clarified version in D&C 2. See the discussion under D&C 3 herein.) The "sealing" key which Elijah restored pertains most especially to the work done in the temples, but not exclusively to work for the dead. Not only do these keys carry the power to bind on earth and have it recognized or bound in heaven (Matt. 16:19), but they also make it possible to secure the necessary "welding links" which bind families together. (See D&C 128:8-18.) The return of the "spirit of Elijah" may be reflected in the sudden increase in genealogical work around the world beginning about the time these keys were restored.

178

Melchizedek Priesthood pulpits in Kirtland Temple. Here Christ, Moses, Elias, and Elijah appeared. (Photo courtesy Harold B. Lee Library)

178(For a full discussion of this most vital subject, see Joseph Fielding Smith, Doctrines of Salvation, vol. 2, chap. 6 and 7; also LeGrand Richards, A Marvelous Work and a Wonder, chap. 13, "The Mission of Elijah.")
