God called Moses to be the prophet to lead the children of Israel out of captivity in Egypt. He parted the Red Sea so Moses could lead the people through it and escape the pursuing Egyptian army. When the people had no food, the Lord gave them manna, which they gathered fresh every day except on the Sabbath. When they needed water, he provided it. The Lord blessed his people, and they were grateful.

After they had traveled in the wilderness for two months, they came to Mount Sinai. Moses went up the mountain, and the Lord called to him and told him to tell the people, “If ye will obey my voice indeed, and keep my covenant, then ye shall be a peculiar treasure unto me above all people” (Ex. 19:5). The people answered, “All that the Lord hath spoken we will do” (Ex. 19:8).

The Lord asked Moses to gather the people at the foot of the mountain. When they were gathered, the mountain was covered with a cloud of smoke and the whole mountain shook. Then the Lord spoke, saying:

“I am the Lord thy God, which have brought thee out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage.

“Thou shalt have no other gods before me.

“Thou shalt not make unto thee any graven image. …

“Thou shalt not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain. …

“Remember the sabbath day, to keep it holy. …

“Honour thy father and thy mother. …

“Thou shalt not kill.

“Thou shalt not commit adultery.

“Thou shalt not steal.

“Thou shalt not bear false witness against thy neighbour.

“Thou shalt not covet” (Ex. 20:2–4, 7–8, 12–17).

During the 40 years that followed, as the children of Israel wandered in the wilderness on their way to the promised land, Moses taught them and counseled them. He tried to help them obey these commandments, which God wrote on stone tablets. They are known as the Ten Commandments.

Although we were not at Mount Sinai when these commandments were given, it is just as important for us to obey them today as it was for the children of Israel in Moses’ day. As we read this story in the scriptures, we can imagine the voice of the Lord speaking to us and the voice of Moses counseling us to obey the commandments given at Sinai.

Mount the flannel-board figures on heavier paper, color them, cut them out, and use them to tell the story of Moses and the Ten Commandments.
