Robert L. Millet, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Man Adam ( 1990)

Preface

Perhaps no person in all eternity, save Jesus only, has been more directly involved in the plan of salvation-the creation, fall, and ultimate redemption of mankind-than the man Adam. His ministry among the sons and daughters of earth stretches from the distant past of premortality to the distant future of resurrection and judgment and beyond. As Michael, the archangel, he led the forces of God against the armies of Lucifer in the War in Heaven. Under the direction of Elohim and Jehovah, he assisted in the creation of the earth. After taking a physical body, Adam (with Eve) brought mortality into being through partaking of the fruit of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil; with the fall of our first parents came blood and posterity and probation and death, as well as the need for redemption through a Savior, a "second Adam" (see 1 Cor. 15:45). To Adam the gospel was first preached. Upon Adam the priesthood was first bestowed. From Adam and Eve the message of the gospel of salvation went forth to all the world. Even following his death, which occurred almost a millennium after he entered mortality, Adam's watch care over his posterity continued. Revelations have come and angels have ministered under his direction. Priesthoods have been conferred and keys delivered at his behest.

All too often Adam's place and role in the plan of the Father have been misunderstood. To many in the religious world he is an enigma, to others a myth. Some despise him for his actions in Eden. The praise he receives from some others takes the strange form of adoration and worship. Though there is yet much to be revealed in regard to the Creation, the Fall, the Atonement, and the final redemption of earth and its inhabitants, the fundamental doctrines of the gospel-including a proper understanding of Adam and Eve and our relationship to them-have been made known through modern seers and revelators. Latter-day Saints need not be confused and certainly need not be led astray by the views of the hopelessly ignorant, the sophistries of learned men, or the vagaries of the willfully perverse. We have the scriptures, the standard works, to guide our study. And, perhaps more important, we have the prophetic utterances of those called to lead the destiny of the restored Church in this final dispensation of grace.

The chapters of this book have been prepared by individuals committed to the practices and beliefs of the Church. Each of the individual contributors is responsible for his or her own conclusions, and the volume is a private endeavor and not a production of either Brigham Young University or The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, Although the writers have sought to be in harmony with the teachings of the standard works and the leaders of the Church, the reader should not regard this work as a primary source but should turn instead to the scriptures and the words of the living oracles for authoritative doctrinal statements.
