Robert L. Millet, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Man Adam ( 1990)

2

Adam in Eden: The Creation

Robert L. Millet *

In order to understand fully the nature of the Creation, we must first grasp the reality that there were in fact three creations. The first creation is called the spirit creation and pertains to the birth of our spirits in premortality. The second creation, the spiritual creation, pertains to the nature of life on earth before our first parents were dismissed from Eden. The third creation or organization of things came as a result of the Fall; this, the natural creation, opened the door to mortality and corruption and death. We shall now speak briefly of the spirit creation, after which we shall discuss at some length the nature of the spiritual state of life in Eden. Life after the Fall will be treated in a subsequent chapter.

THE SPIRIT CREATION

The first creation of man of which the prophets speak—the spirit creation—entailed the creation of our spirits as organized intelligences (Abr. 3:22). That is to say, in a pristine past, in premortality, men and women were begotten as individual spirit entities and thereby became the children of a Father and Mother in heaven. The doctrine of the Latter-day Saints is clear: man is a child of God in the purest and most literal sense, and we inherit from our exalted Sire the powers and attributes and capacities to become, in process of time, even as he is. "We believe," Elder Lorenzo Snow explained,

that we are the offspring of our Father in heaven, and that we possess in our spiritual organizations the same capabilities, powers and faculties that our Father possesses, although in an infantile state, requiring to pass through a certain course or ordeal by which they will be developed and improved according to the heed we give to the principles we have received.

We are born in the image of God our Father; he begot us like unto himself. There is the nature of deity in the composition of our spiritual organization; in our spiritual birth our Father transmitted to us the capabilities, powers and faculties which he himself possessed, as much so as the child on its mother's bosom possesses, although in an undeveloped state, the faculties, powers and susceptibilities of its parent. [^1]

We need to observe at this point in our discussion that, as President Joseph Fielding Smith explained, "there is no account of the creation of man or other forms of life when they were created as spirits. There is just the simple statement that they were so created before the physical creation. The statements in Moses 3:5 and Gen. 2:5 are interpolations thrown into the account of the physical creation, explaining that all things were first created in the spirit existence in heaven before they were placed upon this earth. We were created untold ages before we were placed on this earth." [^2]

PERSONALITIES IN THE CREATION

The Prophet Joseph Smith learned, as a result of his studies of the Egyptian papyri, that "everlasting covenant was made between three personages before the organization of this earth, and relates to their dispensation of things to men on the earth; these personages, according to Abraham's record, are called God the first, the Creator; God the second, the Redeemer; and God the third, the witness or Testator." [^3] God the Father, the Almighty Elohim, is designated as the Creator. Indeed, in the ultimate sense, all creation is accomplished in and through his power and under his divine direction. We therefore know "that there is a God in heaven, who is infinite and eternal, from everlasting to everlasting the same unchangeable God, the framer of heaven and earth, and all things which are in them" (D&C 20:17).

The scriptures also attest that Jehovah was and is the creator of worlds without number (Moses 1:32-33) that the Lord Omnipotent, acting under the direction of his Eternal Father, brought worlds into existence out of chaotic matter and thereafter formed and prepared those orbs for habitation by intelligent and sentient life. That is to say, God the Father "created all things by Jesus Christ" (Eph. 3:9). "In the beginning," the Apostle John wrote, "was the gospel preached through the Son. And the gospel was the word, and the word was with the Son, and the Son was with God, and the Son was of God. The same was in the beginning with God. All things were made by him; and without him was not anything made which was made." (JST John 1:1-3; italics added.) Paul likewise testified to the Hebrew Saints that the Father had "spoken unto us by his Son, whom he hath appointed heir of all things, by whom also he made the worlds" (Heb. 1:2; compare D&C 76:24). "Behold, I am Jesus Christ the Son of God," the Master declared to the Nephites. "I created the heavens and the earth, and all things that in them are." (3 Ne. 9:15.)

In addition, "Adam helped to form this earth," President Joseph Fielding Smith taught. "He labored with our Savior Jesus Christ. I have a strong view or conviction that there were others also who assisted them. Perhaps Noah and Enoch; and why not Joseph Smith, and those who were appointed to be rulers before the earth was formed?" [^4] In expanding our view even more regarding those who may have been involved in the work of creation—including perhaps some of that group of men and women designated as the "noble and great ones" —Elder Bruce R. McConkie observed:

Christ and Adam were companions and partners in preexistence. Christ, beloved and chosen of the Father, was foreordained to be the Savior of the world; Adam, as the great Michael, led the armies of heaven when Lucifer and one-third of the spirit hosts rebelled. The Lord Jesus, then reigning as the Lord Jehovah, was the number one Spirit Son; described as being "like unto God" (Abr. 3:24), he then ascended the throne of eternal power; and with him, by his side and serving under his direction, was Michael, who is Adam, and who was then foreordained to be the first man and the head of the human race.

And we cannot doubt that the greatest of all female spirits was the one then chosen and foreordained to be "the mother of the Son of God, after the manner of the flesh." (1 Ne. 11:18.) Nor can we do other than suppose that Eve was by her side, rejoicing in her own foreordination to be the first woman, the mother of men, the consort, companion, and friend of mighty Michael.

Christ and Mary, Adam and Eve, Abraham and Sarah, and a host of mighty men and equally glorious women comprised that group of "the noble and great ones," to whom the Lord Jesus said: "We will go down, for there is space there, and we will take of these materials, and we will make an earth whereon these may dwell." (Abr. 3:22-24. Italics added.) This we know: Christ, under the Father, is the Creator; Michael, his companion and associate, presided over much of the creative work; and with them, as Abraham saw, were many of the noble and great ones. Can we do other than conclude that Mary and Eve and Sarah and myriads of our faithful sisters were numbered among them? Certainly these sisters labored as diligently then, and fought as valiantly in the war in heaven, as did the brethren, even as they in like manner stand firm today, in mortality, in the cause of truth and righteousness. [^5]

After describing Abraham's vision of the noble and great ones; after a significant discussion of their foreordination and the purpose of mortality (to "prove them herewith, to see if they will do all things whatsoever the Lord their God shall command them"); and after a brief recitation of Lucifer's rebellion (Abr. 3:22-28), the scriptural record continues: "And then the Lord said: Let us go down. And they went down at the beginning, and they, that is the Gods, organized and formed the heavens and the earth." (Abr. 4:1; italics added.) It is possible that those here called "the Gods"—those involved in the preparation of the earth to receive plants, animals, and, most important, man himself—are those previously referred to as "noble and great ones." If so, they are gods not in the sense that they are resurrected beings and have received the fulness of the glory and power of the Father (see D&C 132:19-20) but in the sense that they are involved in the accomplishment of the creative work of the Father; they are members of the family of God, sons and daughters of God; and they are those to whom the word of God came and by whom it was carried out (John 10:34-35).

NEAR THE THRONE OF GOD

This earth was created in a different environment, a very different atmosphere from the one we know now. It was created near Kolob, near to where God himself dwells. In speaking of the ultimate renewal and regeneration of the planet on which we reside, Joseph Smith simply stated, "This earth will be rolled back into the presence of God, and crowned with celestial glory." [^6] President Brigham Young explained: "When the earth was framed and brought into existence and man was placed upon it, it was near the throne of our Father in heaven. And when man fell—though that was designed in the economy, there was nothing about it mysterious or unknown to the Gods, they understood it all, it was all planned—but when man fell, the earth fell into space, and took up its abode in this planetary system, and the sun became our light. . . This is the glory the earth came from, and when it is glorified it will return again unto the presence of the Father, and it will dwell there." [^7] On an earlier occasion President Young had taught that "this earthly ball, this little opake [sic] substance thrown off into space, is only a speck in the great universe; and when it is celestialized it will go back into the presence of God, where it was first framed." [^8]

In instructing one of the sisters of the Church, John Taylor spoke of her divine origins:

Knowest thou not that eternities ago thy spirit, pure and holy, dwelt in thy Heavenly Father's bosom, and in His presence, and with thy mother, one of the queens of heaven, surrounded by thy brother and sister spirits in the spirit world, among the Gods? That as thy spirit beheld the scenes transpiring there, and thou grewest in intelligence, thou sawest worlds upon worlds organized and peopled with thy kindred spirits who took upon themselves tabernacles, died, were resurrected, and received their exaltation on the redeemed worlds they once dwelt upon. Thou being willing and anxious to imitate them, waiting and desirous to obtain a body, a resurrection and exaltation also, thou longed, thou sighed and thou prayed to thy Father in heaven for the time to arrive when thou couldest come to this earth, which had fled and fallen from where it was first organized, near the planet Kolob. Leaving thy father and mother's bosom and all thy kindred spirits thou camest to earth, took a tabernacle, and imitated the deeds of those who had been exalted before you. [^9]

Furthermore, because the Fall was yet to occur, because the earth was created in the proximity of God's dwelling, the earth was on a different system of time in the morn of creation. In the Abrahamic account of the creation, the Gods instructed Adam and Eve: "Of every tree of the garden thou mayest freely eat, but of the tree of knowledge of good and evil, thou shalt not eat of it; for in the time that thou eatest thereof, thou shalt surely die. Now I, Abraham, saw that it was after the Lord's time, which was after the time of Kolob; for as yet the Gods had not appointed unto Adam his reckoning." (Abraham 5:12-13; italics added.)

THE PARADISIACAL CREATION

We state as an article of our faith that in the Millennium "the earth will be renewed and receive its paradisiacal glory" (A of F 1:10). Reasoning in reverse, and knowing that during the thousand years of peace the earth will exist in a terrestrial glory, we can conclude that life on the Edenic earth was of a terrestrial order. This state was indeed paradisiacal. Man knew his God and walked and talked with him. Adam was, as Joseph Smith taught, "lord or governor of all things on earth .... at the same time enjoying communication and intercourse with his Maker, without a vail to separate between." [^10] The Prophet also observed: "The designs of God .... have been to promote the universal good of the universal world; to establish peace and good will among men; to promote the principles of eternal truth .... and to bring about the millennial glory, when ‘the earth shall yield its increase, resume its paradisean glory, and become as the garden of the Lord.’ " [^11]

As we have already observed, the accounts of the Creation from the records of Moses and Abraham depict the placement of Adam, Eve, and all forms of life in a physical state. They had substance. They were tangible. And yet they were what the scriptures describe as being spiritual. That is, they were immortal, not subject to death. In speaking of the body in the resurrection, Paul wrote that "it is sown in corruption; it is raised in incorruption: . . . it is sown a natural body; it is raised a spiritual body" (1 Cor. 15:42, 44). Amulek likewise testified that "this mortal body is raised to an immortal body, that is from death, even from the first death unto life, that they can die no more; their spirits uniting with their bodies, never to be divided; thus the whole becoming spiritual and immortal, that they can no more see corruption" (Alma 11:45). Finally, a modern revelation attests that notwithstanding the righteous die, "they also shall rise again, a spiritual body" (D&C 88:27). The nature of things in Eden before the Fall can therefore be described as physical-spiritual: physical and tangible in its makeup but not subject to the decaying and deteriorating effects of death. Joseph Fielding Smith summarized as follows:

The account of creation in Genesis was not a spirit creation, but it was in a particular sense, a spiritual creation. This, of course, needs some explanation. The account in Genesis, chapters one and two, is the account of the creation of the physical earth. The account of the placing of all life upon the earth, up and until the fall of Adam, is an account, in a sense, of the spiritual creation of all of these, but it was also a physical creation. When the Lord said he would create Adam, he had no reference to the creation of his spirit for that had taken place ages and ages before when he was in the world of spirits and known as Michael.

Adam's body was created from the dust of the earth, but at that time it was a spiritual earth. Adam had a spiritual body until mortality came upon him through the violation of the law under which he was living, but he also had a physical body of flesh and bones. [^12]

"Man, when he was first placed upon this earth," Elder Orson Pratt explained, "was an immortal being, capable of eternal endurance; his flesh and bones, as well as his spirit, were immortal and eternal in their nature; and it was just so with all the inferior creation ...; all were immortal and eternal in their nature; and the earth itself, as a living being, was immortal and eternal in its nature." [^13] More specifically, Joseph Fielding Smith wrote: "Adam [and, by extension, all of the animal creation] had no blood in his veins before the fall. Blood is the life of the mortal body." After Adam partook of the forbidden fruit, blood became "the life-giving fluid in Adam's body, and was inherited by his posterity. Blood was not only the life of the mortal body, but also contained in it the seeds of death which bring the mortal body to its end. Previously the life force in Adam's body, which is likewise the sustaining power in every immortal body, was the spirit." [^14]

Inasmuch as blood did not become a part of the physical organization of animal life until after the Fall, death was held in abeyance. The revelations attest that by reason of transgression came the Fall, and through the Fall came death (Moses 6:59; compare 2 Ne. 9:6). In addition, because blood is the medium of mortality and thus the means by which mortal life is propagated, before the Fall there was no procreation. That is to say, the command to our first parents and to all forms of life to multiply and replenish the earth (see Moses 2:22, 28) could not be obeyed until man had fallen and until blood had entered the human and animal systems.

Thus Lehi explained to Jacob that "if Adam had not transgressed he would not have fallen, but he would have remained in the garden of Eden." He and Eve and all plant and animal life would have persisted in their spiritual state, and they would still be in the garden today, after some six thousand years! "And all things which were created"—man and woman, plant and animal—"must have remained in the same [immortal, spiritual, paradisiacal] state in which they were after they were created; and they must have remained forever, and had no end. And they would have had no children; wherefore they would have remained in a state of innocence, having no joy, for they knew no misery; doing no good, for they knew no sin." (2 Ne. 2:22-23; compare Moses 3:9.) After the Fall, and with a more elevated perspective of the events in Eden, Eve, in what is certainly one of the most profound declarations in scripture, exulted: "Were it not for our transgression we never should have had seed, and never should have known good and evil, and the joy of our redemption, and the eternal life which God giveth unto all the obedient" (Moses 5:11).

Having come thus far, we are in a better position to understand the otherwise enigmatic words of God to Moses regarding man's creation. Having written of the six days (periods or times) of creation and the particular events of those days—including the placement of man on earth—Moses recorded the Lord's words as follows: "These are the generations of the heaven and of the earth, when they were created, in the day that I, the Lord God, made the heaven and the earth, and every plant of the field before it was in the earth, and every herb of the field before it grew. For I, the Lord God, created all things, of which I have spoken, spiritually, before they were naturally upon the face of the earth." (Moses 3:4-5; italics added.) We must keep in mind that the Creation is a past event. These statements are thus, as Elder McConkie wrote, "interpolative; they are inserted in the historical account to give us its true depth and meaning and import. They are not chronological recitations, but are commentary about what [the Lord] had already set forth in its sequential order." [^15] Parts of these verses, specifically that which appears in italics above, can apply to the physical-spiritual creation. As we have said, the spiritual creation—the placement of all things in a physical but spiritual state (tangible but immortal, not subject to death—preceded the natural or mortal creation, that organization and state of things which came as a result of the Fall.

The account continues: "For I, the Lord God, had not caused it to rain upon the face of the earth." Jehovah then makes specific reference to the spirit creation, the premortal creation of man and all forms of life: "And I, the Lord God, had created all the children of men; and not yet a man to till the ground; for in heaven created I them" (Moses 3:5). "Thus, all things have been created," Elder McConkie wrote; "the work is finished; the account is revealed; but it can only be understood if some added truths are set forth. These deal with the premortal existence of all things and with the paradisiacal nature of the earth and of all created things when they first came from their Creator's hand. Both of these concepts are interwoven in the same sentences, and in some instances the words used have a dual meaning and apply to both the premortal life and the paradisiacal creation." [^16] And thus the word of the Lord in modern revelation is made clearer. The Lord instructed the early Latter-day Saints that he had created all things "by the word of my power, which is the power of my Spirit. For by the power of my Spirit created I them; yea, all things both spiritual and temporal—first spiritual [the paradisiacal creation], secondly temporal [after the Fall], which is the beginning of my work; and again, first temporal [reference again to this mortal creation], and secondly spiritual [man and all forms of life in and after the resurrection], which is the last of my work." (D&C 29:30-32.)

THE LOCATION OF EDEN

The Prophet Joseph Smith learned early from his translation of the Book of Mormon that the land of America is "a land of promise," a sacred and select site "which is choice above all other lands" (1 Ne. 2:20; see also 2 Ne. 10:19; Ether 2:9-10). Later in his ministry the Prophet came to appreciate, at least in part, why this continent is so highly treasured by the Lord: the drama which we know as Eden was acted out in the land of America. Wilford Woodruff reported that Brigham Young once said: "Joseph, the Prophet, told me that the Garden of Eden was in Jackson County, Missouri. When Adam was driven out he went to the place we now call Adam-ondi-Ahman, Daviess County, Missouri. There he built an altar and offered sacrifices." [^17]

Finally, in regard to Eden, we need only add that the scriptural or prophetic word makes no distinction between the state of things in Eden and that of the rest of the earth; that is to say, we have every reason to believe that the entire earth—not a few acres in the Garden of Eden—existed in a physical-spiritual, paradisiacal, terrestrial condition: no death, no decay, no procreation, no development and growth took place anywhere until the universal fall.

THE CREATION OF MAN

Moses called the creative time periods days, Abraham called them times. "What is a day?" Elder Bruce R. McConkie asked. "It is a specified time period; it is an age, an eon, a division of eternity; it is the time between two identifiable events. And each day, of whatever length, has the duration needed for its purposes." And then, in what is a penetrating insight, he added: "There is no revealed recitation specifying that each of the ‘six days’ involved in the Creation was of the same duration." [^18] As the work of creation progressed, the Gods prepared the heavens and the earth for plant and animal life: they formed the earth from self-existing chaotic matter; divided the light from the darkness; created an expanse or a firmament through dividing the waters on the earth from those in the atmospheric heavens; set the great lights—the sun, moon, and stars—in their proper planetary position, so as to be in place when the earth fell; and prepared animal life in the waters and on earth (see Moses 2; Abr. 4).

The work of the Gods—possibly some of the noble and great ones—had been monumental and their labors extensive; all things were now in readiness for the creation and placement of man on earth. Drawing insights from scriptural and other sacred sources, Elder McConkie has written, "We know that Jehovah-Christ, assisted by ‘many of the noble and great ones’ (Abr. 3:22), of whom Michael is but the illustration, did in fact create the earth and all forms of plant and animal life on the face thereof. But," he added, "when it came to placing man on earth, there was a change in Creators. That is, the Father himself became personally involved. All things were created by the Son, using the power delegated by the Father, except man. In the spirit and again in the flesh, man was created by the Father. There was no delegation of authority where the crowning creature of creation was concerned." [^19] Similarly, Elder McConkie has written elsewhere:

In the ultimate and final sense of the word, the Father is the Creator of all things. That he used the Son and others to perform many of the creative acts, delegating to them his creative powers, does not make these others creators in their own right, independent of him. He is the source of all creative power, and he simply chooses others to act for him in many of his creative enterprises. But there are two creative events that are his and his alone. First, he is the Father of all spirits, Christ's included; none were fathered or created by anyone else. Second, he is the Creator of the physical body of man. Though Jehovah and Michael and many of the noble and great ones played their assigned roles in the various creative events, yet when it came time to place man on earth, the Lord God himself performed the creative acts. "I, God, created man in mine own image, in the image of mine Only Begotten created I him; male and female created I them" (Moses 2:27). [^20]

Thus we can conclude that scriptural references to Jesus Christ as the creator of man (e.g., Isa. 45:12; Mosiah 26:23; Ether 3:15-16) are illustrations of the Son speaking for the Father by divine investiture of authority.

Luke, in providing the genealogy of Jesus, spoke of Cainan, who "was the son of Enos, which was the son of Seth, which was the son of Adam, which was the son of God" (Luke 3:38). The Joseph Smith Translation of this passage speaks of "Adam, who was formed of God, and the first man upon the earth" (JST Luke 3:45). In another account from that same inspired translation, we read of the line of great patriarchs from Adam to Enoch. "And this is the genealogy," the sacred record affirms, "of the sons of Adam, who was the son of God, with whom God, himself, conversed" (JST Gen. 6:23; Moses 6:22).

A brief treatment of the placement of man and woman on earth is contained in this book in the chapter entitled, " ‘Our Glorious Mother Eve.’ "

CONCLUSION

The accounts of the creation of man, animals, and all forms of life bear witness of the almighty power of the Father and the Son to organize and orchestrate what is and what is to be. If we could measure their value, these scriptural gems would be worth far more than their weight in gold. But they are fragmentary; they are brief; they weave together the literal and the figurative; and they present the truth in such a manner as to require our greatest exertions to arrive at those transcendent but obtainable realities toward which they but point the honest truth seeker. "The things of God are of deep import," Joseph the Seer declared; "and time, and experience, and careful and ponderous and solemn thoughts can only find them out." [^21]

In this chapter we have considered some of the mysteries of creation. We have seen that men and women were begotten as spirits before the physical creation was begun. Further, Jehovah, Michael, and possibly other noble and great ones—all acting by virtue of the power and pursuant to the directions of God the first, the Creator—prepared and organized the earth itself and placed upon it plant and animal life. We hereby come face to face with a creation—a spiritual organization of life on earth—which is almost beyond comprehension. Prior to the Fall and the introduction of the natural or mortal creation, there was no blood, no death, no procreation. All things would have so remained had Adam and Eve not partaken of the forbidden fruit.

Men and women were born and reared in the heavenly mansions as spirit children of God and have the capacity to rise—through the lifting and regenerating powers of the atonement of Christ and by sustained righteousness—to celestial heights and resume their place in the family of the Gods. The Creation thus opened the door to endless and eternal possibilities. And with the Creation as an accomplished task, one of the pillars of eternity was in place.

Notes

* Robert L. Millet is Associate Professor and Chairman of the Department of Ancient Scripture at Brigham Young University.

---
Notas:
[^1] 1. In Journal of Discourses, 14:300, 302.
[^2] 2. Joseph Fielding Smith, Doctrines of Salvation, comp. Bruce R. McConkie, 3 vols. (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1954-56), 1:75-76.
[^3] 3. Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, comp. Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1976), p. 190.
[^4] 4. Joseph Fielding Smith, Doctrines of Salvation, comp. Bruce R. McConkie, 3 vols. (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1954-56), 1:74-75.
[^5] 5. Bruce R. McConkie, "Eve and the Fall," in Woman (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1979), p. 59.
[^6] 6. Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, comp. Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1976), p. 181.
[^7] 7. In Journal of Discourses, 17:143.
[^8] 8. In Journal of Discourses, 9:317.
[^9] 9. John Taylor, cited in The Vision, comp. N. B. Lundwall (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, n.d.), p. 146; italics added.
[^10] 10. Lectures on Faith 2:12.
[^11] 11. Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, comp. Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1976), pp. 248-49.
[^12] 12. Joseph Fielding Smith, Doctrines of Salvation, comp. Bruce R. McConkie, 3 vols. (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1954-56), 1:76.
[^13] 13. In Journal of Discourses, 1:281.
[^14] 14. Joseph Fielding Smith, Man: His Origin and Destiny (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1954), pp. 362, 376-77.
[^15] 15. Bruce R. McConkie, "Christ and the Creation," Ensign 12 (June 1982): 13.
[^16] 16. Bruce R. McConkie, "Christ and the Creation," Ensign 12 (June 1982): p. 13.
[^17] 17. As cited in Matthias F. Cowley, Wilford Woodruff: History of His Life and Labors (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1964), p. 481; see also pp. 545-46. Compare John Taylor, The Mediation and Atonement (Salt Lake City: Deseret News Co., 1882), pp. 69-70; George Q. Cannon, in Journal of Discourses, 11:336-37.
[^18] 18. Bruce R. McConkie, "Christ and the Creation," Ensign 12 (June 1982): p. 11.
[^19] 19. Bruce R. McConkie, The Promised Messiah (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1978), p. 62.
[^20] 20. Bruce R. McConkie, A New Witness for the Articles of Faith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1985), p. 63.
[^21] 21. Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, comp. Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1976), p. 137.
