Robert L. Millet, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Man Adam ( 1990)

3

The Mystery of Eden

Joseph Fielding McConkie [^1]

What of Eden? Was Eden real or just a universal myth-an allegory to explain the origin of man, an answer for the primitive mind? Was Adam molded from clay and Eve formed from Adam's bone? Was there once a garden in which our first parents lived, blissfully unaware of their nakedness? And if so, what became of that garden when Adam and Eve were no longer there to dress and keep it? Did snakes once stand erect, possessing the power to converse with men and women? Was there once a tree, the fruit of which brought a knowledge of good and evil? Was there yet another tree, the fruit of which brought everlasting life?

What of Eden? Is the story figurative or literal? Is it reality or the shadow of reality, or is it a masterful blend of both? Is it like so much else within the Bible-a parable, a sealed book, a type, a story veiled to the eyes of the spiritually untutored? Is the story of Eden, in fact, a light that reveals the path all must travel to return to the divine presence? Just what is the mystery of Eden?

The confusion of tongues in the city of Babel is no match for the confusion of ideas and doctrines among Bible believers as to the meaning of Eden and the expulsion of Adam and Eve from its paradisiacal splendors. In unfolding that story we make no pretense to being smarter than others. Indeed, answers to spiritual queries have little to do with the powers of intellect alone, while they have much to do with eyes and ears endowed with a capacity to see and hear. Such is the privilege of those of the household of faith, those of believing blood, those who have schooled themselves in the revelations of the Restoration-the Book of Mormon, the Doctrine and Covenants, the book of Moses, and the temple ceremony. Such are the sources to which we turn to obtain an understanding of Eden and the experiences of those who once resided there. This article will confine itself to commentary on scriptural texts.

EDEN: FIGURATIVE OR LITERAL?

The scriptural account of the birth of Adam is a sacred metaphor, as is the account of the birth of his eternal companion, Eve. Indeed, it is Adam and the Lord who are quoted in the discourse by Enoch in which we are told that all mankind are born of the dust of the earth (see Moses 6:49-59). Thus the promise to Adam that in death his body would return to the dust from whence it was taken (Moses 4:25) is extended to all his posterity. "All are of the dust, and all turn to dust again" (Eccl. 3:20; see also Mosiah 2:25).

The imagery used to veil the account of Eve's birth is most beautiful, particularly so in a day when there is so much confusion about the role of women. Symbolically, she was not taken from the bones of Adam's head nor from the bones of his heel, for it is not the place of woman to be either above the man or beneath him. Her place is at his side, and so she is taken, in the figurative sense, from his rib-the bone that girds the side and rests closest to the heart. Thus we find Adam declaring: "This I know now is bone of my bones, and flesh of my flesh; she shall be called Woman, because she was taken out of man" (Moses 3:23). Eve, unlike the rest of God's creations, was of Adam's bone and of his flesh, meaning that she was equal to him in powers, faculties, and rights.

"Therefore," the divine word attests, "shall a man leave his father and his mother, and shall cleave unto his wife; and they shall be one flesh" (Moses 3:24). Thus, because Eve was of his flesh and of his bone-because she was his equal in creation and in divine endowment-Adam was to leave his father and his mother, as all men were to do after him, and cleave unto his wife and none else (see Matt. 19:5-6). All men and women are commanded to do likewise; that is, they (the newly formed couple), like their first earthly parents, are to be "one flesh"; they are to be as if they had one body, thus suggesting that they cannot properly have separate cares or concerns, different rights or varied privileges. The phrase also suggests that as Adam and Eve were in the image and likeness of their parents, so their posterity would be in their image and likeness.

How literally do we take the story of the Garden of Eden? This we know: Adam was real. He was as real as Christ. For if Adam was not real the Fall was not real; and if the Fall was not real the Atonement was not real; and if the Atonement was not real Jesus the Christ is not and was not necessary. Of some parts of the Eden story it matters little if we choose to view them as figurative or literal, but of others it is not so. The testimony of Christ, of necessity, embraces the testimony of Adam. Had there been no Eden there could be no Gethsemane; had there been no Eve there could be no Mary; if we have not inherited death from Adam, we have no claim on everlasting life through Christ.

What then became of Eden? This we know: it constituted sacred space when mother earth resided in her paradisiacal state, for it was here that Adam and Eve walked and talked with God, and it was from the confines of Eden that they were cast following their transgression. Further, we know that it existed after the Fall for a period of time and that God continued to instruct Adam and Eve from its sacred groves. (Moses 5:4; 6:4.) In likening Tyrus to Eden, Ezekiel made use of the term "mountain of God" (Ezek. 28:13-14), a phrase used throughout the scriptures to depict a place where one went to commune with God, to worship, to make sacrifices, and to enter into sacred covenants. Mountains were most suited for such purposes and thus became symbols for the temple, the place where heaven and earth meet. Perhaps Ezekiel was implying that Eden was a mountain or at least had a high place suited for worship.

As to what became of Eden, the scriptures are silent. Perhaps, after Adam and his righteous posterity had built the city of Adam-ondi-Ahman-which undoubtedly would have had a temple-Eden was no longer needed as a place of God's presence. A place of sacrifice and of covenant, Eden thus could either be taken into heaven or be allowed to be assimilated into the earth.

What of the trees of Eden? Was there actually a tree whose fruit would make one wise, and another whose fruit would assure everlasting life? The scriptural account, for instance, tells us that the Lord planted "the tree of knowledge of good and evil" in the midst of the garden (Moses 3:9). He then gave Adam and Eve the command: "Of every tree of the garden thou mayest freely eat, but of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil, thou shalt not eat of it, nevertheless, thou mayest choose for thyself, for it is given unto thee; but, remember that I forbid it, for in the day thou eatest thereof thou shalt surely die" (Moses 3:16-17). "Again," wrote Elder Bruce R. McConkie, "the account is speaking figuratively. What is meant by partaking of the fruit of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil is that our first parents complied with whatever laws were involved so that their bodies would change from their state of paradisiacal immortality to a state of natural mortality." [^2] Elder McConkie also wrote elsewhere: "We do not know how the fall was accomplished any more than we know how the Lord caused the earth to come into being and to spin through the heavens in its paradisiacal state." [^3]

If we were to reason that it was the fruit itself that brought about this change in the bodies of Adam and Eve, we would then have to suppose that our first parents fed some of the fruit to all the other living things upon the whole earth. Had they not done so, "all things which were created must have remained in the same state in which they were after they were created; and they must have remained forever, and had no end" (2 Ne. 2:22; see also Moses 3:9). Every plant and animal, including all sea life and the fowls of the air, would have been required to eat some of this fruit (and must also have been precluded from partaking of it either by design or accident before this point of time).

What of the serpent that beguiled Eve into partaking of the forbidden fruit? Did animals in Eden have the capacity to converse in the language of men, as some ancient traditions suggest? Was it then a natural thing for Eve to have a conversation with a serpent? And what of the curse which consigned the serpent to crawl upon its belly and eat of the dust of the earth? Does this suggest that snakes once stood upright, having legs and arms, as they are so commonly depicted in ancient Egyptian drawings? The key question is, Did Satan actually possess the body of a serpent and speak to Eve through that medium, or did Moses choose to describe Eve's confrontation with the father of lies as a discussion with a snake because a snake is such a vivid metaphor to dramatize the subtle, crafty, and dangerous nature of the devil?

Whether a serpent was actually the agent of deception in the Eden story or merely a metaphorical representation of the devil, it matters little. Neither point of view changes or tampers with the integrity of the story. If, however, we assume the partaking of the fruit to have been a figurative representation of what actually brought about the transformation of the earth from a paradisiacal to a natural or mortal sphere, then it might follow that the speaking serpent would also have been figurative.

What, then, do we conclude of the Eden story? Was it figurative or literal? We answer by way of comparison. It, like the temple ceremony, combines a rich blend of both. Our temples are real, the priesthood is real, the covenants we enter into are real, and the blessings we are promised by obedience are real; yet the teaching device may be metaphorical. We are as actors on a stage. We role-play and imagine. We do not actually advance from one world to another in the temple, but rather are taught with figurative representations of what can and will be.

EDEN AS AN ALLEGORY

Should it ever be our privilege to call upon father Adam and ask him to share with us his treasured memories of Eden, can we not confidently suppose that he would speak in reverent terms of walking with God and being instructed by him? Would he not speak of hands that were laid upon his head to convey the priesthood and its keys? Would he not tell of his marriage with his beloved companion, Eve, and the charge given to them to multiply and fill the earth with their posterity? Would he not recount that instruction given him and his eternal companion by which they could obtain the fulness of heavenly knowledge and power? Would he not rehearse how he had been taught the law of sacrifice (Moses 5:1-8) and how he and Eve had been clothed in the garments of salvation preparatory to their entering the lone and dreary world, where they were to be tried and tested in all things?

A rehearsal of the key events of Eden brings the realization that we too are privileged to leave the lone and dreary world and enter the sacred sanctuaries of the Lord, where we participate in essentially the same experiences known to our first parents before the Fall. The temple is to us as Eden was to Adam and Eve. It is in the temple that we, like Adam and Eve, are invited to walk with God; it is in the temple that we are instructed in those things that we must do to return to his holy presence; it is in the temple that we are married for eternity and commanded to multiply and replenish the earth; it is within these sacred walls that we are taught the law of sacrifice, placed under covenant to be true and faithful, and clothed in a garment of protection.

After Adam and Eve had partaken of the forbidden fruit, but before they were expelled from the garden, the Father taught them the law of sacrifice. Animals were slain that Adam and Eve might be clothed in "coats of skins" (Moses 4:27) that were to be a protection to them in our fallen world. Adam and Eve subsequently learned that the shedding of the animals' blood was in similitude of the atoning blood of Christ (Moses 5:7). Thus the garments given them in Eden were to serve as a constant reminder that through the atoning blood of Christ they could be protected from all the effects of a fallen world. Through his blood they could obtain a remission of sins, be born again, and return to the divine presence.

Adam and Eve were further instructed by an angel of the Lord that they were to take upon them the name of Christ and that all they did was to be done in his name (Moses 5:8). Thus as God had clothed them in coats or garments of skin as a token of the protection provided them through Christ, a protection from the effects of a fallen world, so they were to clothe themselves in his name by faith, and in that name they were to do all that they did that pertained to salvation or to things of the Spirit. Thus they were assured that they could overcome.

"He that hath an ear, let him hear," John wrote unto the seven churches in Asia, "what the Spirit saith unto the churches; To him that overcometh will I give to eat of the tree of life" (Revelation 2:7). The fruit is the gospel of Jesus Christ and is described by Lehi as being "desirable to make one happy" and as filling the soul with "exceedingly great joy" (1 Ne. 8:10-12). To Nephi it was revealed that the tree of life-that tree which stood in the midst of Eden-represented the love of God, and by extension, the eternal life made possible by the atonement of the Son of God (see 1 Ne. 11:4-21).

EFFECTS OF THE FALL

After Adam and Eve had partaken of the forbidden fruit-thus becoming mortal and imposing mortality upon the earth and all forms of life-they were driven out of the Garden of Eden to till the earth, which is to say that the whole earth was destined to lose its paradisiacal splendor. The change of the earth from its incorruptible state to that of a fallen world is symbolized by Adam and Eve's expulsion from the garden. The garden-earth that once was-became the lone, dreary, and often hostile earth that now is. The "cherubim and a flaming sword, which turned every way to protect the tree of life" (Moses 4:31), constituted a symbolic announcement that the earth could not return to its paradisiacal state while death reigned. Until the great millennial day, the earth would be subject to corruption.

As to the procreation that attends mortality, Lehi said: "They [Adam and Eve] have brought forth children; yea, even the family of all the earth" (2 Ne. 2:20). Eve is truly the mother of all living; every living soul on earth is a descendant of Adam and Eve. "God Â� hath made of one blood all nations of men for to dwell on all the face of the earth" (Acts 17:24-26). All of earth's inhabitants share a common father.

The days of the children of men were prolonged, according to the will of God, that they might repent while in the flesh. The day within which their destined mortal death came was a thousand of our years (Abr. 3:4; 5:13). "Wherefore, their state became a state of probation, and their time was lengthened, according to the commandments which the Lord God gave unto the children of men. For he gave commandment that all men must repent; for he showed unto all men that they were lost, because of the transgression of their parents." (2 Ne. 2:21.) The effects of the Fall pass upon all men; all must repent; all must be reconciled to God; all must be redeemed from death, hell, and endless torment.

"And now, behold, if Adam had not transgressed he would not have fallen, but he would have remained in the garden of Eden." He would be there today, nearly six thousand years later, because there was no death before the Fall. "And all things which were created"-all things: the earth, all forms of life, vegetation, trees, grass, herbs, everything that comes from the ground; the fowl and fish and creeping things in all their varieties; animals of every sort; the field mouse and the dinosaur-"all things which were created must have remained in the same state in which they were after they were created"-that is, in a paradisiacal state-"and they must have remained forever, and had no end." (2 Ne. 2:22.) There was no death -not for man, not for fowl, not for fish, not for animals, not for any form of life-until Adam fell.

"And they would have had no children; wherefore they would have remained in a state of innocence, having no joy, for they knew no misery; doing no good, for they knew no sin" (2 Ne. 2:23). Until Adam and Eve transgressed they were innocent. There was no righteousness because there was no wickedness; there was no good because there was no evil. Hence, as we have seen, Adam needed to transgress in order to be put on probation and be subject to sin, that he might reject sin, overcome, and embrace righteousness.

"But behold, all things have been done in the wisdom of him who knoweth all things." Contrary to the beliefs of traditional Christianity, Adam conformed to the will of the Lord when he partook of the forbidden fruit. "Adam fell that men might be; and men are, that they might have joy." (2 Ne. 2:24-25.) And joy is available only because of misery, its opposite. If there were no misery, which could not exist in the state of innocence before the Fall, there could be no joy. This is why Eve said that if she and Adam had not transgressed, they "never should have had seed, and never should have known good and evil, and the joy of [their] redemption, and the eternal life which God giveth unto all the obedient" (Moses 5:11).

As to the doctrine of the Fall, and the philosophical basis upon which it rests, Alma tells us that "our first parents" were cast out of Eden; that man became like God in the sense that he knew good from evil; that cherubim and a flaming sword kept the way of the tree of life; and that had fallen man partaken of the tree of life, he would have lived forever in his sins. "And thus we see, that there was a time granted unto man to repent, yea, a probationary time, a time to repent and serve God." (Alma 42:2-4.) The creation of a mortal state of probation was the very reason for the Fall, and it was a state that could not come into being without the transgression of the first man and the first woman.

If, after the Fall, "Adam had put forth his hand immediately, and partaken of the tree of life, he would have lived forever, according to the word of God, having no space for repentance; yea, and also the word of God would have been void, and the great plan of salvation would have been frustrated" (Alma 42:5). Again we learn that Adam's transgression brought probation, the necessity of repentance, the opportunities to do good, and the possibility of salvation. "But behold, it was appointed unto man to die-therefore, as they were cut off from the tree of life they should be cut off from the face of the earth -and man became lost forever, yea, they became fallen man" (Alma 42:6). Adam and Eve's being cut off from the tree of life means they became mortal and would not continue to live without death. The mortal state, being lower than the immortal state, is thus a fallen state.

"And now, ye see by this that our first parents were cut off both temporally and spiritually from the presence of the Lord; and thus we see they became subjects to follow after their own will." Temporal death is the natural death, the separation of body and spirit; spiritual death is to die as pertaining to the things of the Spirit, which are the things of righteousness. "Now behold, it was not expedient that man should be reclaimed from this temporal death, for that would destroy the great plan of happiness." (Alma 42:7-8.) Death is essential to the plan of salvation. Only in death do we have hope of a glorious resurrection and of eternal life. Fulness of joy is available only when body and spirit are inseparably connected in immortality (see D&C 93:33-34).

"Therefore, as the soul [the spirit] could never die, and the fall had brought upon all mankind a spiritual death as well as a temporal, that is, they were cut off from the presence of the Lord, it was expedient that mankind should be reclaimed from this spiritual death." Those who are reclaimed from spiritual death become alive to the things of righteousness and are thereby qualified to return to the presence of the Lord. "Therefore, as they had become carnal, sensual, and devilish, by nature, this probationary state became a state for them to prepare; it became a preparatory state." (Alma 42:9-10.) And thus the foundation was laid and the need established for the great and eternal plan of redemption.

CONCLUSION

From Genesis to Revelation no story in scripture has been the source of more theological mischief than the story of Eden. It is the prime example of scriptural misuse and abuse. The errors that have come from the perversions of this story have given birth in turn to a thousand more. In no story have the figurative and the literal been so thoroughly confused, and in no other story has the absence of "plain and precious" parts caused more to stumble. In the mystery of Eden we have a classic case study of the dangers and difficulties with which uninspired scriptural exegesis is fraught, and the manner in which the scriptures remain a sealed book to all save those who know that same Spirit by which they were originally given.

Sexual desire is evil; infants are infected from the moment of conception with the stain of original sin; infants that die without baptism are everlastingly lost; our paradisiacal state was unnecessarily lost -each of these beliefs claims to be a fruit of Eden; each is bitter to the taste. Yet those who partook of Eden's fruits declared them to be "most sweet" and to bring "great joy" (1 Ne. 8:11-12). Our promise is of fruits sweet above all that is sweet, white above all that is white, pure above all that is pure, fruits upon which we may feast until we know hunger and thirst no more (see Alma 32:42).

Indeed the story of Eden has remained a mystery. Too often the picture that is painted is that of Adam, bent and bowed in his new world of thorns and thistles, with the weak and gullible Eve dutifully following behind. Revealed religion exults in the Fall and rejoices in the blessings that flow from it (2 Ne. 2:25). The Adam we see is one who "blessed God and was filled, and began to prophesy concerning all the families of the earth, saying: Blessed be the name of God, for because of my transgression my eyes are opened, and in this life I shall have joy, and again in the flesh I shall see God. And Eve, his wife, heard all these things and was glad, saying: Were it not for our transgression we never should have had seed, and never should have known good and evil, and the joy of our redemption, and the eternal life which God giveth unto all the obedient. And Adam and Eve blessed the name of God, and they made all things known unto their sons and their daughters." (Moses 5:10-12.)

In the story of man's earthly origin we find the rich blend of figurative and literal that is so typical of the Bible, of the teachings of Christ, and of our daily experience-this that the story might unfold according to the faith and wisdom that we bring to it. Like all scriptural texts, its interpretation becomes a measure of our maturity and our spiritual integrity. Such is the mystery of Eden.

---
Notas:
[^1] There was no death for man or the animals in the garden. Father Lehi states that there was no death among all the creations God had made on this earth until Adam ate the forbidden fruit: "And now, behold, if Adam had not transgressed he would not have fallen, but he would have remained in the garden of Eden. And all things which were created must have remained in the same state in which they were after they were created; and they must have remained forever, and had no end." (2 Ne. 2:22.) SPIRIT CREATION Temporal-physical death.
[^2] There would have been no children born in the garden. Lehi is forthright in his explanation that without the Fall Adam and Eve would not have had children (2 Ne. 2:23). And Lehi is not the only one who mentions that Adam and Eve would have had no children if there had been no fall. Eve herself realized the situation and spoke forth with gladness, "Were it not for our transgression we never should have had seed" (Moses 5:11). This marvelous declaration is not found in our present Bible and was made known through the translation of the Bible by the Prophet Joseph Smith. It no doubt was upon the plates of brass, which seems to be the source for Lehi's understanding. In addition, we have the confirming words of the prophet Enoch: "Because that Adam fell, we are; and by his fall came death" (Moses 6:48). PHYSICAL-SPIRITUAL CREATION Spiritual-separation or alienation from things of God.
[^3] There was no blood in the bodies of Adam and Eve in the garden. That there was no blood in the bodies of Adam and Eve before the Fall, and that blood came as a result of the Fall, is not categorically stated in any one passage of scripture, but leading doctrinal teachers such as President Joseph Fielding Smith and Elder Bruce R. McConkie have declared that such was the case. [^7] This conclusion is scripturally based and takes into account that blood is the mortal life of the body (see Gen. 9:2-6; Lev. 17:10-15).
