Robert L. Millet, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Man Adam ( 1990)

4

The Fall of Man

Robert J. Matthews [^1]

This chapter is written from the vantage point of a belief in the four standard works of the Church as sacred, revealed scripture. We start with the assurance that these scriptures are correct and convey an accurate impression as to the purposes of God in the creation of the earth, the divine origin of man, the reality of the fall of man, and the provision for redemption from the Fall.

It is not the aim of this chapter to seek to harmonize conflicting views generated by those who look to nonscriptural, secular, or philosophical sources for information on the subject of the Fall, or who desire to rationalize or compromise in order to make the pieces fit a nonscriptural frame of reference. It is my conviction that the scriptures are consistent within themselves, and even though all the details are not made known, there is sufficient information in them to enable us to understand what caused the Fall, what its effects have been, and what its role is in the purposes of God. Enough has been revealed to enlighten us on the practical and useful purposes that the Fall serves in man's progress toward salvation, and to help us realize that neither Adam nor God regretted that the Fall occurred-in fact, this event is a matter for ultimate rejoicing. Since the point of view in this chapter is that the scriptural account is accurate (if not complete), our energies will not be spent on trying to determine the correctness of the record, but only to learn what the scriptures really say and the interpretation placed upon them by the latter-day prophets.

There is a good reason why we should look to and rely upon the scriptures as our chief source of information about the origin of things, including man's roots. Until we know just what these origins are, it is impossible to gain a perspective. None of us remembers being present at the creation of the earth, or at the creation of Adam, or at the Fall. None of us remembers from our own experience what the conditions were, or what discussions took place previous to, during, or after the Creation or the Fall. We are totally dependent on sources outside ourselves for information about these things. Since no other human being on earth has any personal recollection of these things, a revelation from someone who does remember is absolutely necessary if we are to have reliable information on the subject.

There is a story that Diogenes of Sinope, the Greek educator of about 300 B.C., once listened to a philosopher talk with overmuch certainty about eternal things, whereupon Diogenes approached him and asked, "When did you come back from heaven?" [^2] Likewise, the Prophet Joseph Smith, commenting on our need for revelation if we want correct information, said: "Men of the present time [speak] of heaven and hell, and have never seen either; and I will say that no man knows these things without [revelation]." And he also said: "We never can comprehend the things of God and of heaven, but by revelation. We may spiritualize and express opinions to all eternity; but that is no authority." The Prophet further declared: "Could you gaze into heaven five minutes, you would know more than you would by reading all that ever was written on the subject." [^3]

Our purpose, therefore, in this chapter is to present and comment upon what the Lord, who was present and who remembers the situation, has revealed about the fall of man and its effects on man and the entire creation.

THE PLAN OF SALVATION: A DOCTRINAL FRAMEWORK OF FIXED PRINCIPLES

A special contribution of latter-day revelation is the Concept that there is a plan of salvation that has existed in the mind of God from before the creation of the world, a concept about which the present biblical record makes no definitive statements. While there is not enough in the Bible alone to learn that God does indeed have such a plan, after learning about the plan from latter-day scriptures one can then discern traces of it in the Bible.

The Father's plan calls for the fall of man as an indispensable step and process in His purpose to "bring, to pass the immortality and eternal life of man" (Moses 1:39). Thus the Creation, the Fall, and the Redemption are all necessary parts of the Lord's grand design; all were planned, and each is essential to the success of the others.

That God has a plan for mankind is mentioned at least twenty-eight times in latter-day scripture. These scriptures give various names for the divine plan, such as the following:

"Great and eternal plan" (Alma 34:16)

"Great plan of happiness" (Alma 42:8)

"Great plan of redemption" (Jacob 6:8; Alma 34:31)

"Plan of deliverance" (2 Ne. 11:5)

"Plan of mercy" (Alma 42:15, 31)

"Plan of our God" (2 Ne. 9:13)

"Plan of redemption" (Alma 12:25, 26, 30, 32, 33; 17:16; 18:39; 22:13; 29:2; 39:18; 42:11, 13)

"Plan of restoration" (Alma 41:2)

"Plan of salvation" (Jarom 1:2; Alma 24:14; 42:5; Moses 6:62)

"Plan of the Eternal God" (Alma 34:9)

"Plan of the great Creator" (2 Ne. 9:6)

"Their [the Gods'] plan" (Abr. 4:21)

The plan of God calls for a creation, a fall that brings two kinds of death, a probationary period, a set of commandments and ordinances, an infinite atonement by a God, a resurrection, a judgment, and an assignment to one's everlasting destiny. It would destroy the plan if any part or any step were changed or omitted (see Alma 42:8). The plan is a package-none of it is superfluous, none is optional. The whole of it is "fitly joined together" by that which "every joint supplieth" (Eph. 4:16).

The Prophet Joseph Smith taught that there are immutable laws that govern the premortal, mortal, and postmortal existences. He called these laws "fixed principles."

We are only capable of comprehending that certain things exist, which we may acquire by certain fixed principles. If men would acquire salvation, they have got to be subject, before they leave this world, to certain rules and principles, which were fixed by an unalterable decree before the world was ....

The organization of the spiritual and heavenly worlds, and of spiritual and heavenly beings, was agreeable to the most perfect order and harmony: their limits and bounds were fixed irrevocably, and voluntarily subscribed to in their heavenly estate by themselves, and were by our first parents subscribed to upon the earth. Hence the importance of embracing and subscribing to principles of eternal truth by all men upon the earth that expect eternal life.

I assure the Saints that truth, in reference to these matters, can and may be known through the revelations of God. [^4]

And again from the Prophet:

God has made certain decrees which are fixed and immovable; for instance, God set the sun, the moon, and the stars in the heavens, and gave them their laws, conditions and bounds, which they cannot pass, except by His commandments; they all move in perfect harmony in their sphere and order, and are as lights, wonders and signs unto us. The sea also has its bounds which it cannot pass. God has set many signs on the earth, as well as in the heavens; for instance, the oak of the forest, the fruit of the tree, the herb of the field, all bear a sign that seed hath been planted there; for it is a decree of the Lord that every tree, plant, and herb bearing seed should bring forth of its kind, and cannot come forth after any other law or principle. [^5]

WHY WE SHOULD LEARN ABOUT THE FALL

The reason why it is important for us to know that God has a plan for the salvation of man, and that the plan includes the fall of man, is such knowledge dignifies the Fall and gives man a sense of security by removing the idea of chance or happenstance. The idea of a plan of God directs us to the conclusion that the Fall (1) was necessary, (2) was not a surprise to God, (3) was not an outright rebellion, (4) was an actual occurrence, and (5) is an essential part of the journey of man toward perfection. There may be other dimensions to the Fall, but the above conclusions are philosophically and doctrinally of basic importance for man to know while he lives on the earth as a mortal. If it were not for the concept that a comprehensive, intelligent plan of God is being carried out in behalf of the earth and man, it would not be possible for us to gain the necessary perspective and to have the necessary faith in the atonement of Jesus Christ. The revelations unfold to us a doctrinal framework of understanding so that we can have faith in the right things.

President Ezra Taft Benson has given us a very good reason why we should understand the Fall:

The Book of Mormon Saints knew that the plan of redemption must start with the account of the fall of Adam. In the words of Moroni, "By Adam came the fall of man. And because of the fall of man came Jesus Christ . .. and because of Jesus Christ came the redemption of man." (Morm. 9:12.)

Just as a man does not really desire food until he is hungry, so he does not desire the salvation of Christ until he knows why he needs Christ. No one adequately and properly knows why he needs Christ until he understands and accepts the doctrine of the Fall and its effect upon all mankind. And no other book in the world explains this vital doctrine nearly as well as the Book of Mormon. [^6]

STATEMENTS ABOUT THE FALL

There are many evidences in the world that mankind is in a fallen condition. We understand that the human family is the offspring of Deity-not just one of his creations, but literally his spirit children-his sons and his daughters. Man therefore has a different relationship to God than do the animals, the earth, and the planets and stars. Those things are the work of his hands; man is his offspring. Yet surprisingly, despite this divine lineage, man has displayed much hatred, selfishness, greed, war, sickness, and other traits far beneath the majesty and high moral character of an all-wise, all-knowing, perfect, and benevolent God. A little reflection on the history of mankind, and the nature of man's society, will lead one to conclude either that man is not the offspring of a noble Deity or that man has departed from the ways of God and fallen from any position of holiness and righteousness that he once had. At any rate, mortal man, past and present, has not consistently displayed the traits of virtue or the physical, moral, spiritual, and intellectual perfection that naturally one would expect to be found in the family of a perfect, glorious God.

The Lord has given an explanation through his prophets as to how these conditions were brought about. They are the results of the fall of Adam, or the fall of man. In the Doctrine and Covenants we read: "We know that there is a God in heaven, who is infinite and eternal, from everlasting to everlasting the same unchangeable God...; and that he created man, male and female, after his own image and in his own likeness, created he them; and gave unto them commandments that they should love and serve him, the only living and true God .... But by the transgression of these holy laws man became sensual and devilish, and became fallen man." (D&C 20:17-20.)

This same doctrine was taught by Aaron, son of Mosiah:

And it came to pass that when Aaron saw that the king would believe his words, he began from the creation of Adam, reading the scriptures unto the king-how God created man after his own image, and that God gave him commandments, and that because of transgression, man had fallen.

And Aaron did expound unto him the scriptures from the creation of Adam, laying the fall of man before him, and their carnal state and also the plan of redemption, which was prepared from the foundation of the world, through Christ, for all whosoever would believe on his name.

And since man had fallen he could not merit anything of himself; but the sufferings and death of Christ atone for their sins, through faith and repentance. (Alma 22:12-14.)

There are many other statements in the scriptures, particularly in latter-day scriptures, that delineate the effects of the Fall. The story of the fall of Adam is given in Genesis, chapter 3, and in Moses, chapter 4. An account of the Fall also was contained on the plates of brass, for the Book of Mormon record tells us that Lehi, having received the plates, read "of Adam and Eve, who were our first parents" (1 Ne. 5:10-11; see also 2 Ne. 2:17-20). In addition, the Book of Mormon contains a great many references to Satan's temptation of Adam and Eve in the Garden of Eden. It is clear that the Nephite prophets were well acquainted with the scriptural account of the Creation and of Adam, Eve, the tree of life, the tree of knowledge, Lucifer, the temptation, the transgression, the expulsion from Eden, and the effects of the Fall on Adam and Eve and their entire posterity. These particular items are spoken of in detail by Lehi, Jacob, Benjamin, Abinadi, Alma, Amulek, Aaron, Ammon, Samuel the Lamanite, and Moroni. Even the apostate Antionah shows some acquaintance with the content of the Nephite scripture when he questions Alma about the flaming sword, the Garden of Eden, and the tree of life (see Alma 12:20-21).

From the details given in the Book of Mormon, we can discern that the account of the Fall given on the plates of brass was more complete than the one given in our present book of Genesis. The plates of brass evidently contained a record very much like that found in the book of Moses, which is an extract from the Prophet Joseph Smith's inspired translation and restoration of the Genesis account. Obviously the biblical account of the Fall has suffered from the removal of many plain and precious things, which has resulted in a clouding and weakening of the message.

THE FALL WAS AN ACTUAL OCCURRENCE

In order to be of eternal value, it is essential that the fall of Adam be a historical event that actually happened at a specific time and place. We accept Adam and Eve as real persons who lived, transgressed, and brought about their own fall and the consequent fall of all mankind. If we had a complete record it would be possible to mark on the calendar the actual time that the Fall occurred. Likewise, if we had an adequate map it would be possible to mark the exact spot where the transgression occurred. The Fall is just that real and absolute. A real man and a real woman did, at a particular time and geographical location, transgress a commandment which brought about the fall of man, an event which has affected not only all of mankind but also the whole creation. The Fall is a historical event, an actual fact, an absolute occurrence, and is not simply a philosophical or so-called "religious" truth.

CONDITIONS OF LIFE IN THE GARDEN OF EDEN

What was the type of life experienced by man and the animals in the Garden of Eden before the Fall? According to the scriptures, and the interpretations made by many of the Brethren, the conditions were as follows:

Similarly we read in the book of Moses: "And out of the ground made I, the Lord God, to grow every tree, naturally, that is pleasant to the sight of man; and man could behold it. And it became also a living soul. For it was spiritual in the day that I created it; for it remaineth in the sphere in which I, God, created it, yea, even all things which I prepared for the use of man; and man saw that it was good for food." (Moses 3:9; italics added.)

We note that the above statements do not pertain to man alone, but to the whole creation. Lehi speaks of "all things which were created," and the passage from the book of Moses refers to "all things which I [the Lord] prepared for the use of man." Thus the message of these two passages is dear: when God created the earth, man, and all things in the earth, there was no death, and all of these things would have remained forever and had no end if death had not entered by the transgression of Adam. This brings to mind the declaration in the Doctrine and Covenants that to God all things are spiritual, and that he has given no temporal or mortal commandment (D&C 29:34-35). That is, God is everlasting and endless; he is a spiritual being, and that which he does is spiritual, not mortal and not temporal. According to the scriptures it was Adam, not God, that brought death. Death was not part of the Lord's original creation of this earth or of anything in the earth.

A further point supporting the conclusion that Adam and Eve had no blood in their premortal, non-death bodies is that we are assured by the Prophet Joseph Smith that resurrected beings do not have blood but possess bodies of flesh and bones "having spirit in their bodies, and not blood." The Prophet also said, "When our flesh is quickened by the Spirit, there will be no blood in this tabernacle." In speaking of the place where God dwells, the Prophet said, "Flesh and blood cannot go there; but flesh and bones, quickened by the Spirit of God, can." [^8] (See also 1 Cor. 15:50.)

This much we know about blood: (a) it is a vital part of our mortal lives and is basic to the reproductive process of mortals; (b) it was the agent of redemption in the atonement of Jesus Christ, he shedding his blood to redeem all people from the effects of the Fall and, upon the condition of repentance, from their personal sins; and (c) blood will not exist in the bodies of resurrected beings. With these known facts it becomes evident that blood is the badge of mortality, and since it will not exist in the deathless bodies of Adam, Eve, and their posterity in the resurrection, it is therefore reasonable to conclude that blood did not exist in the deathless, premortal bodies of Adam and Eve prior to the Fall.

innocence, Â� doing no good, for they knew no sin" (2 Ne. 2:23).

The five conditions outlined above, which were characteristic of Eden, no longer exist on the earth. They have been taken away and replaced by physical death, reproduction, blood, sin, and separation from God. This is the mortal, temporal, fallen world into which we were born. Since the Fall, mankind has, by the birth process, come directly from the premortal spirit world into a world of mortality. However, Adam, Eve, and the animals-those beings placed first upon the earth-went from the premortal condition, into the Garden, and then into mortality.

DEFINITIONS OF KEY WORDS

It will be helpful at this point to examine and define some terms that are frequently used in the scriptures and that relate to the subject of the Fall.

Soul

A soul is defined in scripture as being the combination of a spirit body and a physical body (D&C 88:15; see also Gen. 2:7; Moses 3:7, 9, 19; Abr. 5:7). Man, trees, animals, and the earth itself are all living souls. All are created first as spirits and become living souls upon receiving tabernacles-tabernacles which have been mortal, or temporal, since the fall of Adam.

Spirit and Spiritual

A spirit is a personage, composed of spirit material too refined and subtle for the mortal eye to perceive naturally or the mortal hand to touch (D&C 129:6-8; 131:7). All things pertaining to this earth were created as spirits before anything was created physically. This would properly be spoken of as the spirit creation. Then God created all things physically, but there was no death and no sin attached. Therefore the physical creation (as described in Gen. 1 and 2) was tangible in nature, but spiritual in its conditions. A resurrected body is a physical, tangible tabernacle, as much so as our bodies are at this time in mortality; but a resurrected body is not subject to death, and so it is called a spiritual body (not a spirit body). In this sense, physical, tangible resurrected bodies are spoken of as spiritual in the scriptures (see Alma 11:45; D&C 88:26-28; 1 Cor. 15:42-49). There can be no doubt from the context of these scriptural passages that a physical body is being spoken of, as contrasted to a spirit body, even though the word spiritual is used.

Having thus determined how the word spiritual is used in various scriptures that speak of death and resurrection, we can gain a most important understanding of the condition of the earth and everything in the earth when they were first created. The six-day accounts of creation in Genesis, Moses, and Abraham are records of the spiritual creation, which was a physical creation under deathless conditions. We have no detailed account, however, of the spirit creation-that creation which occurred before the spiritual creation-other than to know that there was one.

Flesh

The word flesh has several connotations in the scriptures, one of which is mortality. We are warned repeatedly not to trust in the "arm of flesh" (2 Ne. 4:34; 28:31; Jer. 17:5), and are reminded that all "flesh is grass" (Isa. 40:6). The scriptures also speak of the "lusts of the flesh" (1 Ne. 22:23; Gal. 5:19; 1 Jn. 2:16). These all refer to man in his mortal, fallen condition. There are also references pertaining to the flesh of resurrected beings, such as in the Gospel of Luke where Jesus says, "A spirit hath not flesh and bones, as ye see me have" (Luke 24:39). However, in the majority of cases the word flesh has reference to man in his fallen, mortal state. Therefore, when Adam is spoken of as the "first flesh upon the earth," it has reference to his being the first to become mortal (Moses 3:7). Flesh in this case means mortal. In the physical creation, man was placed on the earth after the animals. But in the process of the Fall, man became mortal before the animals. This being the case, man could not have evolved from the animals, since there was no mortality before Adam's fall, and without mortality there was neither birth nor death on the earth.

The three-step process by which man and the earth became mortal is illustrated on the accompanying chart.

Death

Death literally means "separation" or to be "separated from." Thus the physical death is the separation of the body from the spirit. Spiritual death means to be out of the presence of, or alienated or separated from, God or righteousness.

THE EFFECTS OF THE FALL

Having defined the relevant terms, we are now prepared to discuss the effects of the Fall. One of the clearest statements about these effects was made by Jacob, son of Lehi:

I know that ye know that our flesh must waste away and die; nevertheless, in our bodies we shall see God ....

For as death hath passed upon all men, to fulfil the merciful plan of the great Creator, there must needs be a power of resurrection, and the resurrection must needs come unto man by reason of the fall; and the fall came by reason of transgression; and because man became fallen they were cut off from the presence of the Lord. (2 Ne. 9:4, 6.)

Creation, Fall, and Atonement

Our present mortal world is the result of a three-step process:

Â No detailed account given; we only know it occurred.

Â Earth, plants, animals, and mankind all created as spirits-"In heaven created I them" (Moses 3:5).

Â Accounts given in Gen. 1; Moses 2-3; Abr. 4-5.

Â Consisted of six creative periods.

Â A physical, tangible creation, but no blood, no death, no reproduction, and no sin.

Â Animals and plants created and placed on earth prior to man.

3, THE MORTAL, TEMPORAL, FALLEN WORLD

Â Accounts of Fall given in Gen. 3; Moses 4-5.

ÂÂ· The physical, tangible world with blood, death, reproduction, and sin.

Â Man the first to fall, become mortal; other forms of life became mortal after man.

The Fall brought two kinds of death:

The Atonement rescues man from these two deaths.

In this passage Jacob touches on the two deaths that came as a consequence of the Fall. The penalty affixed by the Lord to partaking of the forbidden fruit was that "in the day that thou [Adam] eatest thereof thou shalt surely die" (Gen. 2:17). First to take effect was a spiritual death, or in other words, being cut off from the presence of God. This is, as Alma describes it, a "death as to things pertaining unto righteousness" (Alma 12:32). Adam experienced this death after partaking of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil. How fast the process was we do not know, but it came as a direct result of partaking of the fruit, and the impression given is that it was relatively soon.

The physical death did not come so quickly. The record states that Adam lived 930 years after becoming mortal (Moses 6:12). Even so, Adam's physical death occurred within a Lord's day-which is one thousand of our years -for, as Abraham observes, at the time the penalty of death was announced Adam and the earth were still functioning on the Lord's time (see Abr. 5:13; 3:4).

Thus the first judgment which came upon man was death, both kinds of death, according to the warning of the Lord. In the context of discussing the Atonement, Jacob carefully defines the effects of the Fall:

Wherefore, it must needs be an infinite atonement-save it should be an infinite atonement this corruption could not put on incorruption. Wherefore, the first judgment which came upon man must needs have remained to an endless duration. And if so, this flesh must have laid down to rot and to crumble to its mother earth, to rise no more.

O the wisdom of God, his mercy and grace! For behold, if the flesh should rise no more our spirits must become subject to that angel who fell from before the presence of the Eternal God, and became the devil, to rise no more.

And our spirits must have become like unto him, and we become devils, angels to a devil, to be shut out from the presence of our God, and to remain with the father of lies, in misery, like unto himself. (2 Ne. 9:7-9.)

These deaths, the physical and the spiritual, are so real, so terrible, and, without Christ's redemption, so destructive to the happiness of mankind-the separation from God being especially dreadful-that Jacob calls them an "awful monster": "O how great the goodness of our God, who prepareth a way for our escape from the grasp of this awful monster; yea, that monster, death and hell, which I call the death of the body, and also the death of the spirit." And later he says again: "O the greatness of the mercy of our God, the Holy One of Israeli For he delivereth his saints from that awful monster the devil, and death, and hell, and that lake of fire and brimstone, which is endless torment." (2 Ne. 9:10, 19.)

Because of the fall of Adam the approach of physical death is inevitable for everyone. Decay and death are the literal inheritance of every living thing on this earth. Medical science and proper physical care may postpone the day of physical death, but nothing can prevent it. If an accident or disease does not cause death, the unremitting march of time and "wasting away" of the flesh will eventually bring it. Even those who are translated will eventually experience a kind of death, a change, albeit an instantaneous one. They will not "taste" death, but they will have to undergo this change in order to be resurrected. (See 3 Ne. 28:6-8, 17, 36-40; John 21:21-23.)

The other death, which also is inherited from Adam by all mankind, is separation from God. None of us reading this page has experienced the physical death, but every one of us has already experienced the spiritual death. Just by being born as a descendant of Adam we have experienced spiritual death, at least in the sense that we are out of the presence of God. This condition begins at mortal birth, and it increases after we pass the beginning of accountability at eight years of age, unless or until we receive the rebirth of the Spirit.

Jacob graphically describes what the effect of the Fall would be on all mankind if there were no atonement: there would be no resurrection of our dead bodies, and our spirits would all become devils, forever miserable, shut out from the presence of God to dwell everlastingly with the devil. This is the legal, just, and ultimate extension of the Fall if there were no redemption - in Jacob's words, "The first judgment which came upon man must needs have remained to an endless duration." What was the first judgment? It was "Thou shalt surely die" (Gen. 2:17; Moses 4:17).

The reason why there are two kinds of death is the Fall affects both body and spirit. Jacob explained the situation more pointedly than perhaps any other person in scripture. We could not appreciate Jesus as our Savior unless we knew what was lost and what he saved us from, and Jacob provides us with this important information.

Samuel the Lamanite also taught that there were two deaths as the result of the Fall: "All mankind, by the fall of Adam being cut off from the presence of the Lord, are considered as dead, both as to things temporal and to things spiritual" (Hel. 14:16). The brother of Jared, humbly expressing his sense of weakness and unworthiness, pleaded with the Lord for mercy, saying, "Because of the fall our natures have become evil continually" (Ether 3:2).

In our dispensation also the Lord has spoken concerning the effect of the Fall upon Adam and his posterity. Note that both kinds of death are discussed in the following:

Wherefore, it came to pass that the devil tempted Adam, and he partook of the forbidden fruit and transgressed the commandment, wherein he became subject to the will of the devil, because he yielded unto temptation.

Wherefore, I, the Lord God, caused that he should be cast out from the Garden of Eden, from my presence, because of his transgression, wherein he became spiritually dead, which is the first death, even that same death which is the last death, which is spiritual, which shall be pronounced upon the wicked when I shall say: Depart, ye cursed.

But, behold, I say unto you that I, the Lord God, gave unto Adam and unto his seed, that they should not die as to the temporal death, until I, the Lord God, should send forth angels to declare unto them repentance and redemption, through faith on the name of mine Only Begotten Son. (D&C 29:40-42.)

Paul, as recorded in the New Testament, succinctly states that "as in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive" (1 Cor. 15:22). Other scriptural passages help us understand clearly that Paul's statement has reference to more than the physical death alone; it also has application to the spiritual death. Every being dies the spiritual and the mortal death because of Adam. Likewise, because of Christ (as will be demonstrated in the next chapter) every being shall be redeemed from the spiritual death and the physical death, both of which were inherited from Adam. Man will thereafter be judged for his own sins and not for Adam's transgression. (See Hel. 14:15-18.)

WHEN ADAM FELL THE WHOLE CREATION FELL

Thus far, in discussing the effects of the fall of Adam, we have emphasized primarily the effect on mankind. However, we noted earlier that the scriptures apply the Fall to "all things which were created" (2 Ne. 2:22; Moses 3:9). It has been the teaching of many of the Brethren over the years that when Adam fell the whole creation fell. We see evidence of the universal fall in the death and mortal, temporary nature of all plants, animals, and birds. Death is the order of this creation in which we live.

The scripture says that even the earth shall die and be renewed again: "The earth abideth the law of a celestial kingdom... wherefore, it shall be sanctified; yea, notwithstanding it shall die, it shall be quickened again" (D&C 88:25-26). This gives added meaning to the tenth article of faith, which states that the earth "will be renewed and receive its paradisiacal glory."

Among the Brethren who have taught the doctrine that the whole creation fell was Elder Orson Pratt, who said: "The heavens and the earth were thus polluted, that is, the material heavens, and everything connected with our globe; all fell when man fell, and became subject to death when man became subject to it." [^9]

Similarly, Elder Parley P. Pratt wrote:

It now becomes my painful duty to trace some of the important changes which have taken place and the causes which have conspired to reduce the earth and its inhabitants to their present state.

First, man fell from his standing before God by giving heed to temptation, and this fall affected the whole creation, as well as man, and caused various changes to take place. He was banished from the presence of his Creator; a veil was drawn between them, and man was driven from the Garden of Eden to till the earth, which was then cursed for his sake and should begin to bring forth thorns and thistles, and with the sweat of his face he should earn his bread, and in sorrow eat of it all the days of his life, and finally return to dust ....

Now, reader, contemplate the change. This scene, which was so beautiful a little before, had now become the abode of sorrow and toil, of death and mourning: the earth groaned with its production of accursed thorns and thistles; man and beast at enmity; the serpent slyly creeping away, fearing lest his head should get the deadly bruise; and man startling amid the thorny path, in fear lest the serpent's fangs should pierce his heel; while the lamb yields his blood upon the smoking altar. Soon man begins to persecute, hate, and murder his fellow, until at length the earth is filled with violence, all flesh becomes corrupt, the powers of darkness prevail. [^10]

In more recent years Elder Bruce R. McConkie wrote of the universal fall: "To Adam the decree came: 'Cursed shall be the ground for thy sake; in sorrow shalt thou eat of it all the days of thy life. Thorns also, and thistles shall it bring forth to thee.' Thus the paradisiacal earth was cursed; thus it fell; and thus it became as it now is." [^11] Another statement from this same Apostle reads, "Radical changes were in the offing for man, the earth, and all forms of life when the fall came." And he further declared, "When Adam fell, the earth fell also and became a mortal sphere, one upon which worldly and carnal people can live." [^12]

From a discourse of President Brigham Young we note the following:

[Adam and Eve] transgressed a command of the Lord, and through that transgression sin came into the world. The Lord knew they would do this, and He had designed that they should. Then came the curse upon the fruit, upon the vegetables, and upon our mother earth; and it came upon the creeping things, upon the grain in the field, the fish in the sea, and upon all things pertaining to this earth, through man's transgression. [^13]

And finally from President Joseph Fielding Smith we have this succinct statement regarding the effect of Adam's fall on all creation: "After Adam's fall, the Lord declared that he placed a 'curse' upon the earth, and this mortal condition then passed upon the earth and all upon its face." [^14]

Animals, plants, and the earth evidently do not have the moral responsibility that man has, but all other effects of the Fall seem to pertain to the whole creation and not to man alone. The significance of realizing that Adam's fall brought mortality to the whole creation is that it denies the concept that man evolved from lower forms of life by organic evolution. Adam was the first to become mortal-the first to have the power to reproduce.

THE QUESTION OF ORIGINAL SIN

Since the effects of the fall of Adam have been passed on to all of Adam's posterity through birth into mortality, every one of Adam's descendants, except Jesus Christ, has fully partaken of the fall of Adam and will experience both physical and spiritual death. Jesus came into the world as the Only Begotten of the Father in the flesh, and therefore death did not dominate him as it does the rest of Adam's posterity. Jesus had ancestry through the Father outside of or beyond the descent from Adam, and therefore Jesus had "life in himself" because he was the Son of God in the flesh (John 5:26; 10:17). Thus he was able to atone for the Fall and pay the debt occasioned by Adam; hence what we lost in Adam we regain by Christ. Although all must die, Jesus will raise all of Adam's descendants in the resurrection, so that they will never die a physical death again (Alma 11:45). All of Adam's posterity has been shut out of the presence of God by virtue of the Fall, but because of the Atonement-made by Jesus Christ who had no sin - all of Adam's posterity will be rescued from the spiritual death and be brought back into the presence of God for a judgment of individual deeds (Alma 42:23; Hel. 14:17). If an individual at that time has unremitted sins, he may be sent away again from the presence of God permanently-for his own sins, not for Adam's transgression.

Because man inherits the effects of the fall of Adam, it raises the question of original sin and whether or not children are born sinners, having inherited sin from Adam. Advocates of original sin, a concept taught for centuries throughout Christendom, rely on their interpretation (or misinterpretation) of Paul's writings for justification of their opinions.

Paul is more specific than other biblical writers in discussing the Fall, and he testifies that Adam's fall has descended upon man's nature. For example, to the Corinthians he wrote, "In Adam all die" (1 Cor. 15:22), and to the Roman Saints he declared: "Wherefore, as by one man sin entered into the world, and death by sin; and so death passed upon all men, for that all have sinned .... For if through the offence of one many be dead, much more the grace of God, and the gift by grace, which is by one man, Jesus Christ, hath abounded unto many .... For as by one man's disobedience many were made sinners, so by the obedience of one shall many be made righteous." (Rom. 5:12, 15, 19.)

Even though Paul discusses the relationship of Adam to Christ better than any other writer in the Bible, his writings in their present form do not approach the clarity of the Book of Mormon, the Doctrine and Covenants, or the Pearl of Great Price. Because of the particular wording of the above passage from Romans, theologians have concluded that infants actually inherit the sin of Adam. This they call "original sin."

"Original sin" is the concept that, since Adam's fall brought death and alienation to all of the human family, little children are born in sin, or under the penalty of sin, and are out of favor with God: therefore, should they die in their infancy without baptism, they would be forever shut out from the presence of the face of God. This belief seems to stem from an awareness of the effects of the Fall without a complete awareness of the results of the Atonement. This concept of original sin is indeed a false doctrine, because it recognizes the Fall and the consequent death and sin but fails to acknowledge the work of the Savior in redeeming mankind from the Fall. The doctrine of original sin would be partly true if there had been no atonement wrought by Jesus Christ, and it would apply not only to children but also to the whole human family. But since Christ did perform an atonement, the doctrine of original sin, as it has been traditionally taught, is not correct.

The doctrine of original sin, as held throughout portions of Christianity, is based on the reasoning of various philosophers who lived during the era of the Apostasy. It arose among these philosophers as early as the second and third centuries A.D., and was more fully developed by Augustine in the fifth century. This reasoning held that the posterity of Adam actually sinned by Adam's transgression. Proponents of this concept would cite Rom. 5:12, 15, 19 (quoted above), which they interpreted to mean that through Adam sin entered into the world, and so in the trespass of Adam all men sinned themselves. We should note at this point that there is a difference between a child's inheriting the actual sin itself and his inheriting only the consequences of the sin. It appears that the church fathers of the second to fourth centuries A.D. were teaching that children actually sinned in Adam. Latter-day revelation teaches that man inherits only the consequences, not the sin itself.

Since children were regarded as actual sinners from birth, it was but a short intellectual journey for the uninspired philosophers to suppose that children would therefore be denied a place in heaven if they died before receiving baptism. Hence the concept of infant baptism was developed to accommodate this particular view of the fall of Adam.

This mistaken view of original sin -holding that little children are born in sin-also led to the development in Catholicism of the doctrine of the "immaculate conception." This doctrine is not, as many have supposed, a reference to Jesus' own conception; rather, it is the belief that Mary, mother of Jesus, was conceived miraculously in her mother's womb so that she (Mary) would not be born with the taint of original sin, and thus she could be free to conceive the holy child Jesus.

There is nothing in our present Old or New Testaments that clearly and unequivocally explains just how the fall of Adam applies to children-whether mankind actually sinned in Adam, or whether man only suffers the consequences of the Fall. Nor does there appear in the Bible a statement that clearly defines how the Atonement specifically relates to children. There is just such a statement, however, in the book of Moses, which was revealed as part of the Prophet Joseph Smith's translation of Genesis.

In this particular passage the prophet Enoch teaches the people about Adam and how death and sin came into the world. Enoch reminds his hearers just what was taught to Adam and how the plan of salvation was explained to the first man:

And he [God] called upon our father Adam by his own voice, saying: I am God; I made the world, and men before they were in the flesh.

And he also said unto him: If thou wilt turn unto me, and hearken unto my voice, and believe, and repent of all thy transgressions, and be baptized, even in water, in the name of mine Only Begotten Son, who is full of grace and truth, which is Jesus Christ, the only name which shall be given under heaven, whereby salvation shall come unto the children of men, ye shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost, asking all things in his name, and whatsoever ye shall ask, it shall be given you.

And our father Adam spake unto the Lord, and said: Why is it that men must repent and be baptized in water? And the Lord said unto Adam: Behold I have forgiven thee thy transgression in the Garden of Eden.

Hence came the saying abroad among the people, that the Son of God hath atoned for original guilt, wherein the sins of the parents cannot be answered upon the heads of the children, for they are whole from the foundation of the world. (Moses 6:51-54; italics added.)

We are fully assured by this passage that Adam stands forgiven of his transgression in the garden and that his posterity is free from all responsibility for that transgression. We are held accountable only for our own sins. If this passage had remained in the book of Genesis, or if the correct doctrine had survived in our present New Testament, the whole mistaken concept of original sin and infant baptism as taught and practiced by much of Christianity for the past eighteen hundred years could have been avoided.

In a discourse recorded in the Book of Mormon, King Benjamin explains that man inherits his fallen condition from Adam, but he also says that the atonement of Christ shields the untaught and the little children from the full force of the Fall. "For behold," he says, "and also his blood atoneth for the sins of those who have fallen by the transgression of Adam, who have died not knowing the will of God" (Mosiah 3:11). And further on he states, "I say unto you they [little children] are blessed; for behold, as in Adam, or by nature, they fall, even so the blood of Christ atoneth for their sins" (Mosiah 3:16).

Likewise the Lord has spoken in our day on this subject: "Every spirit of man was innocent in the beginning; and God having redeemed man from the fall, men became again, in their infant state, innocent before God" (D&C 93:38). Implicit in the foregoing passage is this: Every man, upon being born into mortality, is fallen through being a descendant of Adam, but because of the atonement of God (Christ) all little children in their infant mortal state are innocent before God.

In our sophisticated and "enlightened" age many religious peoples reject the idea of original sin and the guiltiness of little children. But they do it for the wrong reasons. They do not reject it because they have a better understanding of the atonement of Jesus Christ, but because they have also rejected the fall of Adam and the fall of mankind. Taking a humanistic approach they have discarded the story of Adam and thus have dissolved the necessity for an atonement. Instead of being theologians, they are ecclesiastical sociologists and teachers of ethics. The gospel of Jesus Christ provides the only correct answers to the great questions and problems concerning life, and death, and sin, and innocence. These answers are found in the true doctrine of the fall of Adam and the atonement of Jesus Christ.

We thus see the power and importance of the Book of Mormon and the other doctrinal revelations that were given to us through the Prophet Joseph Smith. Furthermore, we come to appreciate the energy with which Mormon testified against the baptism of little children, as recorded in the Book of Mormon. Having "inquired of the Lord" regarding this very practice, Mormon wrote to Moroni, his son:

The word of the Lord came to me by the power of the Holy Ghost, saying:

Listen to the words of Christ, your Redeemer, your Lord and your God .... Little children are whole, for they are not capable of committing sin; wherefore the curse of Adam is taken from them in me, that it hath no power over them; and the law of circumcision is done away in me.

And after this manner did the Holy Ghost manifest the word of God unto me; wherefore, my beloved son, I know that it is solemn mockery before God, that ye should baptize little children ....

But little children are alive in Christ, even from the foundation of the world ....

Little children cannot repent; wherefore, it is awful wickedness to deny the pure mercies of God unto them, for they are all alive in him because of his mercy.

And he that saith that little children need baptism denieth the mercies of Christ, and setteth at naught the atonement of him and the power of his redemption. (Moro. 8:7-9, 12, 19-20; italics added.)

Mormon did not deny the effects and reality of the Fall; rather, he astutely placed the Fall and the Atonement in proper perspective.

WHY THE LORD DID NOT SIMPLY CREATE MAN MORTAL

Perhaps our treatment of the fall of man would not be adequate without an attempt to deal with a question often raised during discussions about the Fall: Why didn't the Lord simply create man mortal in the first place and avoid all the trauma and experience of a fall brought to pass through transgression and seemingly conflicting commands?

There are in the scriptures no one-sentence answers to this question, but we have been given enough knowledge concerning God's plan to think through a possible response. In the plan of salvation God does for mankind only what they cannot do for themselves. Man must do all he can for himself. The doctrine is that we are saved by grace, "after all we can do" (2 Ne. 25:23). We recognize this principle both in the salvation of the living and in the work for the dead. We must do all we can do for ourselves. If Adam and Eve had been created mortal, they would have been denied one of the steps in the process that they were capable of performing themselves. As we read in the Book of Mormon, man "brought upon himself" his own fall (Alma 42:12). Since the Fall was a necessary part of the plan of salvation, and since man was capable of bringing about the fallen condition himself, he was required-or rather it was his privilege-to take the necessary steps.

If God had created man mortal, then death, sin, and all the circumstances of mortality would be God's doing and would be eternal and permanent in their nature; whereas if man brings the Fall upon himself, he is the responsible moral agent, and God is able to rescue and redeem him from his fallen state. Moreover, Adam and Eve's having brought about the Fall themselves made them subject to punishment or reward for their actions. A little reflection upon these matters leads one to conclude that the Fall was accomplished in the very best possible way. As Lehi said about the Fall and the Atonement, "All things have been done in the wisdom of him who knoweth all things" (2 Ne. 2:24). Furthermore, the Lord has explained to us that he does not create temporal or mortal conditions nor function on a mortal level (D&C 29:34-35).

We can benefit from the observation of Elder Orson F. Whitney, who said, "The fall had a twofold direction-down-ward, yet forward." [^15] It is as the Prophet Joseph Smith said: "Adam was made to open the way of the world." [^16] Adam and Eve had the privilege of getting things under way by their own actions. This is far better than their being created mortal and sinful.

THE FALL OF ADAM WAS A BLESSING

How should we regard the Fall? How did Adam and Eve feel about it? We do not know their immediate reaction, but after they were enlightened with the gospel and had eternal insight, they rejoiced in the Fall because of its ultimate benefits. Of Adam we read: "And in that day Adam blessed God and was filled, and began to prophesy concerning all the families of the earth, saying: Blessed be the name of God, for because of my transgression my eyes are opened, and in this life I shall have joy, and again in the flesh I shall see God" (Moses 5:10).

And of Eve it is written: "And Eve, his wife .... was glad, saying: Were it not for our transgression we never should have had seed, and never should have known good and evil, and the joy of our redemption, and the eternal life which God giveth unto all the obedient. And Adam and Eve blessed the name of God, and they made all things known unto their sons and their daughters." (Moses 5:11-12.)

President Brigham Young spoke with much favor toward Adam and Eve and the Fall:

Some may regret that our first parents sinned. This is nonsense. If we had been there, and they had not sinned, we should have sinned. I will not blame Adam or Eve, why? Because it was necessary that sin should enter into the world; no man could ever understand the principle of exaltation without its opposite; no one could ever receive an exaltation without being acquainted with its opposite. How did Adam and Eve sin? Did they come out in direct opposition to God and to His government? No. But they transgressed a command of the Lord, and through that transgression sin came into the world. The Lord knew they would do this, and He had designed that they should. [^17]

And again from President Brigham Young:

Mother Eve Â� [partook] of the forbidden fruit. We should not have been here today if she had not; we could never have possessed wisdom and intelligence if she had not done it. It was all in the economy of heaven, and we need not talk about it; it is all right. We should never blame Mother Eve, not the least. I am thankful to God that I know good from evil, the bitter from the sweet, the things of God from the things not of God. When I look at the economy of heaven my heart leaps for joy, and if I had the tongue of an angel, or the tongues of the whole human family combined, I would praise God in the highest for His great wisdom and condescension in suffering the children of men to fall into the very sin into which they have fallen, for He did it that they, like Jesus, might descend below all things and then press forward and rise above all. [^18]

President Joseph Fielding Smith declared that the fall of Adam was a blessing: "When Adam was driven out of the Garden of Eden, the Lord passed a sentence upon him. Some people have looked upon that sentence as being a dreadful thing. It was not; it was a blessing. I do not know that it can truthfully be considered even as a punishment in disguise." He also explained that "the transgression of Adam did not involve sex sin as some falsely believe and teach. Adam and Eve were married by the Lord while they were yet immortal beings in the Garden of Eden and before death entered the world." [^19]

Again in praise of Adam and Eve, President Smith stated:

Now, I can open the Bible, almost any Bible-maybe I can this one-and find written here that Adam [in the headings at the top of the page], not the words of the scriptures but man's interpretation, that he committed a dreadful sin. No, he didn't. Adam did not commit a sin. He came to do the thing that he was called upon to do, that he was assigned to do before he ever came here ....

I think I have said in this room before that I am very, very grateful for Mother Eve. If I ever get to see her, I want to thank her for what she did and she did the most wonderful thing that ever happened in this world and that was to place herself where Adam had to do the same thing that she did or they would have been separated forever ....

Â· . . Adam and Eve did the very thing they had to. I tell you, I take my hat off to Mother Eve and I rejoice and I want to read what she said. When Eve learned what the full condition was, the result of that fall, she preached this discourse. It is the first discourse ever recorded- that is, that we have. [Cites Moses 5:11. ] [^20]

President Smith also gave an enlightening definition and application to the idea of the "forbidden fruit." He indicated that the "forbidden" aspect was not in the partaking, but instead had reference to Adam and Eve's not being able to remain in the garden if they partook. This explanation suggests that the Lord wanted the Fall to occur. President Smith expressed these ideas as follows:

Why did Adam come here? Not subject to death when he was placed upon the earth, there had to come a change in his body through the partaking of this element-whatever you want to call it, fruit-that brought blood into his body; and blood became the life of the body instead of spirit. And blood has in it the seeds of death, some mortal element. Mortality was created through the eating of the forbidden fruit, if you want to call it forbidden, but I think the Lord has made it clear that it was not forbidden. He merely said to Adam, if you want to stay here [in the garden] this is the situation. If so, don't eat it. [^21]

CONCLUSION

In this chapter we have presented some of the major doctrinal and historical factors relating to the fall of man. Special emphasis has been given to the need for the Fall and to the concept that the fall of Adam affected the whole creation. Because of the Fall, man and all created things became mortal and stood in need of a redemption. The Fall is an integral and necessary part of the plan of salvation, and Adam and Eve are heroes, deserving our praise. If the account of the Fall is correct as given in the scriptures, and we believe it is, then Adam could not have come into existence on this earth through the process of organic evolution from lower forms of life, for Adam and Eve were the first to become mortal and the first to have the power to reproduce.

---
Notas:
[^1] There was no death for man or the animals in the garden. Father Lehi states that there was no death among all the creations God had made on this earth until Adam ate the forbidden fruit: "And now, behold, if Adam had not transgressed he would not have fallen, but he would have remained in the garden of Eden. And all things which were created must have remained in the same state in which they were after they were created; and they must have remained forever, and had no end." (2 Ne. 2:22.) SPIRIT CREATION Temporal-physical death.
[^2] There would have been no children born in the garden. Lehi is forthright in his explanation that without the Fall Adam and Eve would not have had children (2 Ne. 2:23). And Lehi is not the only one who mentions that Adam and Eve would have had no children if there had been no fall. Eve herself realized the situation and spoke forth with gladness, "Were it not for our transgression we never should have had seed" (Moses 5:11). This marvelous declaration is not found in our present Bible and was made known through the translation of the Bible by the Prophet Joseph Smith. It no doubt was upon the plates of brass, which seems to be the source for Lehi's understanding. In addition, we have the confirming words of the prophet Enoch: "Because that Adam fell, we are; and by his fall came death" (Moses 6:48). PHYSICAL-SPIRITUAL CREATION Spiritual-separation or alienation from things of God.
[^3] There was no blood in the bodies of Adam and Eve in the garden. That there was no blood in the bodies of Adam and Eve before the Fall, and that blood came as a result of the Fall, is not categorically stated in any one passage of scripture, but leading doctrinal teachers such as President Joseph Fielding Smith and Elder Bruce R. McConkie have declared that such was the case. [^7] This conclusion is scripturally based and takes into account that blood is the mortal life of the body (see Gen. 9:2-6; Lev. 17:10-15).
[^4] There was no sin in the Garden of Eden until the transgression of Adam and Eve. This fact seems to be without controversy. The whole concept of the Fall is based upon it. Lehi declared that without the Fall Adam and Eve "would have remained in a state of
[^5] Adam and Eve were in the presence of God in the Garden of Eden. Although the Father was not constantly in the garden with Adam and Eve, he visited them from time to time, and they could see him and talk with him. However, after the Fall occurred and they were cast out of the garden, they were able to hear God's voice, but "they saw him not; for they were shut out from his presence" (Moses 5:4).
[^6] 6. Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, comp. Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1976), p. 181.
[^8] 8. In Journal of Discourses, 9:317.
[^9] 9. John Taylor, cited in The Vision, comp. N. B. Lundwall (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, n.d.), p. 146; italics added.
[^10] 10. Lectures on Faith 2:12.
[^11] 11. Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, comp. Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1976), pp. 248-49.
[^12] 12. Joseph Fielding Smith, Doctrines of Salvation, comp. Bruce R. McConkie, 3 vols. (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1954-56), 1:76.
[^13] 13. In Journal of Discourses, 1:281.
[^14] 14. Joseph Fielding Smith, Man: His Origin and Destiny (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1954), pp. 362, 376-77.
[^15] 15. Bruce R. McConkie, "Christ and the Creation," Ensign 12 (June 1982): 13.
[^16] 16. Bruce R. McConkie, "Christ and the Creation," Ensign 12 (June 1982): p. 13.
[^17] 17. As cited in Matthias F. Cowley, Wilford Woodruff: History of His Life and Labors (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1964), p. 481; see also pp. 545-46. Compare John Taylor, The Mediation and Atonement (Salt Lake City: Deseret News Co., 1882), pp. 69-70; George Q. Cannon, in Journal of Discourses, 11:336-37.
[^18] 18. Bruce R. McConkie, "Christ and the Creation," Ensign 12 (June 1982): p. 11.
[^19] 19. Bruce R. McConkie, The Promised Messiah (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1978), p. 62.
[^20] 20. Bruce R. McConkie, A New Witness for the Articles of Faith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1985), p. 63.
[^21] 21. Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, comp. Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1976), p. 137.
