Robert L. Millet, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Man Adam ( 1990)

5

The Revelation of the Gospel to Adam: The Meaning of the Atonement

Robert J. Matthews [^1]

How long it was after Adam and Eve were cast out from the Garden of Eden, and out of the Lord's presence, before the gospel was made known to them we do not know. It seems unlikely that it was a long time. The particular way that events are chronicled in Moses 5 and 6 could give the impression that Adam and Eve were grandparents before the gospel was taught to them (see Moses 5:1-12). However, that impression may only be the result of the way the account is written. I, for one, do not see the account's sequence of events as decisive evidence for an insistence on a long period of ignorance for father Adam.

We learn from the scriptures that Adam and his posterity were all shut out of the presence of the Lord and made subject to physical death as a result of the Fall. If there were no infinite atonement wrought by Jesus Christ, Adam and Eve and all of their posterity to the latest generation would be everlastingly subject to physical death with no hope of resurrection. Their bodies would rot and crumble into dust, never to be reclaimed; worse, the spirits of all men would become devils, forever miserable, with no hope of redemption or release (2 Ne. 9:6-9). The fall of Adam is that powerful!

We are indebted to latter-day revelation for clarification of these matters. The Bible tells us what happened as regards the Fall and the Atonement, but latter-day revelation gives the reasons why these events are so important. Because of this clarity of latter-day revelation, in addition to the wonderful information in the Bible, Latter-day Saints ought to have the greatest appreciation of all people for Adam and for Jesus Christ. We are everlastingly indebted to both of them.

VALUE OF THE BOOK OF MOSES IN TEACHING ABOUT ADAM

In this chapter we will emphasize certain aspects of the Atonement that are particularly made clear in the book of Moses in the Pearl of Great Price and that pertain primarily to the revelation of the gospel to father Adam. There is a certain expansion and elaboration of these matters in the Pearl of Great Price not found in the other standard works. For example, we learn from every standard work that the gospel was taught to the ancient patriarchs and that they knew of Christ. But the book of Moses is an actual record of the way in which it was done and provides details and concepts not found in any other account. The book of Moses is an excerpt from Joseph Smith's translation of Genesis and therefore more nearly presents what Moses wrote originally (see Moses 1:40-41). It also more nearly offers what the Nephites had on the plates of brass (1 Ne. 5:10-11) than any other document available to us today.

In treating the subject of the revelation of the gospel to Adam, with particular emphasis on what that revelation teaches us about the Atonement, we will focus mainly upon Moses 5:1-12 and 6:51-62. The first of these passages deals with the words of an angel to Adam and the meaning of animal sacrifice as it pertains to the mission and person of Jesus Christ. It also records Adam's response to the teaching he received. The second deals with the teaching of Enoch seven generations after Adam. But it is from Enoch, who appears to have been recounting and quoting from Adam's ancient "book of remembrance," that we learn of a further revelation to Adam about why men must repent, be baptized, and receive the gospel of Jesus Christ in order to be saved.

In both of the above passages the situation is particularly focused upon Adam himself. This is especially meaningful because Adam (after his fall) is the prototype of all other mortal men, but since he is the very one (along with Eve) through whom mortality was introduced into the world, special notice is made of his unique status and historical situation. And thus the book of Moses provides for us a more detailed account of the gospel as taught to Adam than any other record to which we have access at the present time. As noted above, it probably reads like the plates of brass. The book of Moses not only attests to the antiquity of the gospel but also teaches a particular concept about the Atonement as it relates to Adam that is nowhere else available in such detail, especially as it pertains to Adam's unique situation before and after his transgression in the Garden of Eden.

THE PLAN OF SALVATION IS ALWAYS THE SAME

In order to properly appreciate that the fulness of the gospel was taught to Adam and the early patriarchs of the earth, we must understand that the gospel and the plan of salvation are older than the earth. The plan was known and talked about among the hosts of heaven ages ago, existing in the mind of God and in the minds of millions of his sons and daughters long before the earth was created. In fact, we see that the earth was created in compliance with the plan. Creations, foreordinations, promises, ordinances, agencies, and all that pertains to the fall and redemption of the earth were all known and provided for even before the earth was formed. It was therefore no surprise to heaven when Adam and Eve partook of the forbidden fruit and became mortal. The Fall was foreordained from before the foundation of the world. Certainly we know that Jesus was called and foreordained before the world was formed to make an atonement, as noted in the following passages:

Christ [is] a lamb without blemish and without spot:

Who verily was foreordained before the foundation of the world (1 Pet. 1:19-20).

[Jesus is] the Lamb slain from the foundation of the world (Rev. 13:8; see also Moses 7:47).

Behold, I am he who was prepared from the foundation of the world to redeem my people. Behold I am Jesus Christ. (Ether 3:14.)

They would not... believe on his Only Begotten Son... who was prepared from before the foundation of the world (Moses 5:57).

The Fall and the Atonement go hand in hand. Both were known in the premortal world, and both are necessary for the advancement of mankind from the spirit state to the final resurrected state. The Fall made the Atonement necessary, and as the atonement of Christ was foreordained so also was the fall of Adam.

The plan of salvation is older than the earth and has not been added to or changed since that early time. This is attested in the following passages:

There is a law, irrevocably decreed in heaven before the foundations of this world, upon which all blessings are predicated-

And when we obtain any blessing from God, it is by obedience to that law upon which it is predicated (D&C 130:20-21).

For all who will have a blessing at my hands shall abide the law which was appointed for that blessing, and the conditions thereof, as were instituted from before the foundation of the world (D&C 132:5).

And will I appoint unto you, saith the Lord, except it be by law, even as I and my Father ordained unto you, before the world was? (D&C 132:11.)

Along this same line, the Prophet Joseph Smith taught: "Everlasting covenant was made between three personages before the organization of this earth, and relates to their dispensation of things to men on the earth; these personages, according to Abraham's record, are called God the first, the Creator; God the second, the Redeemer; and God the third, the Witness or Testator." [^2]

Elder Orson Pratt expressed his understanding of the antiquity and unchangeableness of the plan as follows: "The dealing of God toward his children... is a pattern after which all other worlds are dealt with .... The creation, fall, and redemption of all future worlds with their inhabitants, will be conducted upon the same general plan .... The Father of our spirits has only been doing what his Progenitors did before Him." Elder Pratt further explained that when new worlds are formed, their inhabitants "are redeemed after the pattern by which more ancient worlds have been redeemed." [^3]

The reason that Elder Pratt's statements make doctrinal sense is that the plan of God is perfect, and perfection is unchanging. If the plan of redemption varied from time to time, from world to world, or from person to person, men would be saved by different means, and salvation would have its bargain days. The "sameness" of the plan of salvation does not mean that every world is an exact, monotonous, and unimaginative copy of every other, or that there are the same number of inhabitants on each. It means that the same eternal principles, the same kind of mortality, and the same kind of salvation are in effect wherever there are gods and devils and men.

JESUS THE PERFECT EXAMPLE OF A SAVED BEING

At this point we might well ask, What constitutes true salvation? Salvation in its fullest sense means to become like God. Those things that lead to godhood are saving principles. Jesus is the prototype or best example of a "saved" person. We read in the Lectures on Faith:

In order to have this subject clearly set before the mind, let us ask what situation must a person be in in order to be saved? or what is the difference between a saved man and one who is not saved? Â· . . But to be a little more particular, let us ask-Where shall we find a prototype into whose likeness we may be assimilated, in order that we may be made partakers of life and salvation? or, in other words, where shall we find a saved being? for if we can find a saved being, we may ascertain without much difficulty what all others must be in order to be saved. We think that it will not be a matter of dispute, that two beings who are unlike each other cannot both be saved; for whatever constitutes the salvation of one will constitute the salvation of every creature which will be saved; and if we find one saved being in all existence, we may see what all others must be, or else not be saved. We ask, then, where is the prototype? or where is the saved being? We conclude, as to the answer of this question, there will be no dispute among those who believe the Bible, that it is Christ: all will agree in this, that he is the prototype or standard of salvation; or, in other words, that he is a saved being.

And if we should continue our interrogation, and ask how it is that he is saved? the answer would be-because he is a just and holy being; and if he were anything different from what he is, he would not be saved; for his salvation depends on his being precisely what he is and nothing else; for if it were possible for him to change, in the least degree, so sure he would fail of salvation and lose all his dominion, power, authority and glory, which constitute salvation; for salvation consists in the glory, authority, majesty, power and dominion which Jehovah possesses and in nothing else; and no being can possess it but himself or one like him. Thus says John, in his first epistle, third chapter, second and third verses: "Beloved, now are we the sons of God, and it doth not yet appear what we shall be; but we know that, when he shall appear, we shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is. And every man that hath this hope in him, purifieth himself, even as he is pure." Why purify themselves as he is pure? Because if they do not they cannot be like him. [^4]

IMPORTANCE OF KNOWING THAT THE PLAN IS OLDER THAN THE EARTH

Continuing our discussion on the antiquity of the gospel plan, we turn to one of the clearest explanations in scripture, given by Alma, of why the entire plan of salvation had to be known before the creation of the world. When his son was concerned as to why the gospel should be known so long before the mortal advent of Jesus, Alma said:

And now I will ease your mind somewhat on this subject. Behold, you marvel why these things should be known so long beforehand. Behold, I say unto you, is not a soul at this time as precious unto God as a soul will be at the time of his coming?

Is it not as necessary that the plan of redemption should be made known unto this people as well as unto their children?

Is it not as easy at this time for the Lord to send his angel to declare these glad tidings unto us as unto our children, or as after the time of his coming? (Alma 39:17-19.)

When we contemplate the antiquity and eternal nature of the plan of salvation, we can conclude that the Grand Council in Heaven, as it is sometimes called, was not a single meeting but rather a series of meetings-an entire education, so to speak-in which we, as the sons and daughters of God, were taught the gospel and became acquainted with eternal principles and with the great and noble personages who would be the future leaders of the kingdom of God on the earth. We first met Jesus and the great prophets and patriarchs in the premortal life, and we are learning again those same principles and laws we knew in that ancient sphere but have forgotten because of our mortality. The Savior, the prophets, the wives and mothers of the prophets, and other noble and great ones were all selected in that premortal world according to their obedience to the plan of salvation, the same plan that is now taught to us on the earth through the scriptures and the living prophets.

THE WAR IN HEAVEN HAS NEVER ENDED

In studying the revelation of the gospel to Adam, it will be helpful to have a brief background of what preceded that revelation. Not only had the plan of salvation been presented to the spirit children of God and the prospect of eternal life been shown, but also a war had broken out among the spirits on the principle of how the human family would be saved. The Prophet Joseph Smith explained: "The contention in heaven was-Jesus said there would be certain souls that would not be saved; and the devil said he could save them all. [^5] And Elder Bruce R. McConkie has written: "Lucifer wanted to... impose salvation upon all men without effort on their part-an impossible thing since there can be no progression except by the upward pull of obedience to law." [^6]

As a result of Lucifer's rebellion in seeking to obtain as his personal reward the very throne and power of God, he and the spirits who followed him were cast out and thrust down to the earth without the privilege of being born and obtaining mortal bodies of flesh and bones and blood (Moses 4:1-4; JST Rev. 12:1-17). "And thus came the devil and his angels" (D&C 29:37).

Lucifer has continued the war on this earth among mankind. The same issues, the same participants, and the same inevitable results prevail, only on a different battleground. [^7]

WHAT IF THERE HAD BEEN NO CHRIST?

An explanation of the Atonement would not be adequate if it did not consider the consequences if there were no atonement wrought by Christ. What if there were a fall but no redemption? What would have been the condition and the fate of the human family, including Adam, if there were no atoning sacrifice to pay for the transgression in the Garden of Eden and also for man's own sins? Could any individual or group of individuals have saved themselves? The teaching of the scriptures is a resounding no to this vital question. We read the following from the teachings of Jacob:

Wherefore, it must needs be an infinite atonement-save it should be an infinite atonement this corruption could not put on incorruption. Wherefore, the first judgment which came upon man must needs have remained to an endless duration. And if so, this flesh must have laid down to rot and to crumble to its mother earth, to rise no more.

O the wisdom of God, his mercy and grace! For behold, if the flesh should rise no more our spirits must become subject to that angel who fell from before the presence of the Eternal God, and became the devil, to rise no more.

And our spirits must have become like unto him, and we become devils, angels to a devil, to be shut out from the presence of our God, and to remain with the father of lies, in misery, like unto himself. (2 Ne. 9:7-9.)

This same doctrine is taught by Lehi as recorded in 1 Ne. 10:6 and in 2 Ne. 2:8; by King Benjamin as recorded in Mosiah 3:11-17; and by Aaron as found in Alma 21:9. It is also implicit in the words of Jesus: "For God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but have everlasting life" (John 3:16).

This total dependence on the atonement of Jesus Christ was no doubt known in the premortal world by the spirits who would be coming to earth to gain mortal bodies and was a trial to those who had not strong faith in and a testimony of Jesus Christ. It was no doubt a factor in causing some to align themselves with the "guaranteed," "no-risk," "no-effort," "no-individual-responsibility" seduction of Lucifer.

Our relationship to Jesus Christ is just that vital and critical. He is our Redeemer, and without him we could do nothing (see John 15:1-6). True it is that, in order to receive all the blessings offered through the Atonement, we must give our best efforts; but without him, no one could ever attain to even a particle of salvation. Thus the meaning of the word gospel-the good news! Jesus is good news to all mankind.

OFFERING SACRIFICE A TEST OF ADAM'S FAITH

When Adam and Eve were in the Garden of Eden, the devil, Satan, tempted them and was successful in getting them to eat of the forbidden fruit and to be cast out of the garden into the world. Having now become mortal, Adam and Eve needed to be taught the gospel, the same plan of salvation they had known beforehand but had forgotten now that they were here upon the earth.

Adam was commanded by the Lord to offer sacrifices. The account in the book of Moses is as follows:

And Adam and Eve, his wife, called upon the name of the Lord, and they heard the voice of the Lord from the way toward the Garden of Eden, speaking unto them, and they saw him not; for they were shut out from his presence.

And he gave unto them commandments, that they should worship the Lord their God, and should offer the firstlings of their flocks, for an offering unto the Lord. And Adam was obedient unto the commandments of the Lord. (Moses 5:4-5.)

In this passage it is made clear that Adam and Eve were fallen, for they were "shut out" of God's presence. The information about animal sacrifice is especially instructive because of the command to offer the "firstlings of their flocks."

The word firstlings puts certain qualifications and restrictions and even determines the quality of faith that is used in offering the sacrifice. Firstling does not necessarily denote the oldest of the flock but the firstborn of its particular mother. A firstling is a male, the first "that openeth the matrix" of its mother (Ex. 34:19; 13:2). Each mother in her lifetime could produce only one firstling, but a flock of sheep could have several firstlings born each year. In order to know which lambs were acceptable for sacrifice, the owner would have to know his flock. Some notice would have to be made of mothers and of young. Otherwise, how could anyone know which mothers had produced offspring for the first time? There is no way that a man, Adam or anyone else, could know which males were firstlings unless a record and some identification of mothers and offspring were kept. This requirement removes the element of chance and of haphazard or sometime obedience. Not only is one's faith shown in the willingness to offer a sacrifice but also in the care required and the preparation needed beforehand in making the selection of the proper animal.

This particular passage of scripture illustrates the concept that the commandments of God require the intelligent and deliberate attention of those who are seeking salvation. It gives a reason for Paul's observation that "without faith it is impossible to please" God (Heb. 11:6), for without faith one would not have kept a record and marked (at least mentally) which animals were proper for sacrifice.

The passage in Moses continues:

And after many days an angel of the Lord appeared unto Adam, saying: Why dost thou offer sacrifices unto the Lord? And Adam said unto him: I know not, save the Lord commanded me.

And then the angel spake, saying: This thing is a similitude of the sacrifice of the Only Begotten of the Father, which is full of grace and truth.

Wherefore, thou shalt do all that thou doest in the name of the Son, and thou shalt repent and call upon God in the name of the Son forevermore. (Moses 5:6-8.)

Adam acted by faith, not by full understanding, and because of his obedience an angel of the Lord came and explained the future sacrifice of Jesus Christ. The symbolic nature of the sacrifice is emphasized in the words: "This thing is a similitude of the sacrifice of the Only Begotten of the Father, which is full of grace and truth." Surely the shedding of the blood of animals cannot remit man's sin except it be done in imitation of something such as the shedding of the blood of Jesus Christ.

One of the most important concepts of this passage is the clear declaration that Adam was to do all that he did "in the name of the Son," to repent and "call upon God in the name of the Son forevermore." This is the same doctrine taught in many other scriptural passages, of which the following are a few:

Neither is there salvation in any other: for there is none other name under heaven given among men, whereby we must be saved (Acts 4:12).

Jesus Christ [is] the only name which shall be given under heaven, whereby salvation shall come unto the children of men (Moses 6:52).

There shall be no other name given nor any other way nor means whereby salvation can come unto the children of men, only in and through the name of Christ, the Lord Omnipotent (Mosiah 3:17; see also 2 Ne. 31:20-21).

And there is none other salvation save this which hath been spoken of; neither are there any conditions whereby man can be saved except the conditions which I have told you (Mosiah 4:8).

Behold, Jesus Christ is the name which is given of the Father, and there is none other name given whereby man can be saved;

Wherefore, all men must take upon them the name which is given of the Father (D&C 18:23-24).

Thus we see that this most fundamental of all doctrines-that there is only one plan of salvation with only one Savior-was taught to Adam right from the start. These passages also specify that there were no alternate plans nor alternate saviors. We note that in the passages cited above only two (Acts 4:12 and D&C 18:23-24) were uttered after Jesus had accomplished the Atonement. All the other passages were uttered centuries before his birth, showing that there never was an alternate plan or person.

The Holy Ghost subsequently bore record to Adam: "And in that day the Holy Ghost fell upon Adam, which beareth record of the Father and the Son, saying: I am the Only Begotten of the Father from the beginning, henceforth and forever, that as thou hast fallen thou mayest be redeemed, and all mankind, even as many as will" (Moses 5:9). The foregoing is the earliest recorded direct mention to Adam in his mortal state that he was fallen and that he could be redeemed-not only he but also all mankind-through the intercession of the Only Begotten Son. Again the Fall and the Atonement are linked together. It was apparently the Holy Ghost that caused Adam and Eve to understand more fully the consequences of their fall and the means of their redemption.

The passage continues to record the history of Adam and Eve and how they rejoiced to learn of the prospect of their redemption:

And in that day Adam blessed God and was filled, and began to prophesy concerning all the families of the earth, saying: Blessed be the name of God, for because of my transgression my eyes are opened, and in this life I shall have joy, and again in the flesh I shall see God.

And Eve, his wife, heard all these things and was glad, saying: Were it not for our transgression we never should have had seed, and never should have known good and evil, and the joy of our redemption, and the eternal life which God giveth unto all the obedient.

And Adam and Eve blessed the name of God, and they made all things known unto their sons and their daughters. (Moses 5:10-12.)

The expression of Adam's joy and also of Eve's realization that she and Adam could not have had seed if it were not for their transgression are corollaries to Lehi's explanation that without the Fall "they [Adam and Eve] would have had no children" and that "Adam fell that men might be; and men are, that they might have joy" (2 Ne. 2:23, 25). When Lehi uttered these words, he was expressing a concept he had read in the plates of brass (see 2 Ne. 2:17). Evidently the account on those plates is similar to what we now have in the Joseph Smith Translation of the Bible, of which the book of Moses is an extract. This same doctrine of the childless condition of Adam and Eve if there had been no fall is borne out by Enoch, who seems to have learned this concept from Adam's book of remembrance: "Because that Adam fell, we are; and by his fall came death" (Moses 6:48).

We thus have three passages on which to base the teaching that without the fall of Adam the human family would not have been born-2 1 Ne. 2:23, 25; Moses 5:11-12; and Moses 6:48-a doctrine, by the way, of which the whole Christian and non-Christian world is totally unaware, but which is basic to a proper understanding of life and of mankind's origin and purpose for being on the earth. The book of Moses and the Book of Mormon support each other in teaching this important and fundamental truth, and both clarify the biblical account.

We see, then, that in the initial revelation of the gospel to Adam this much was accomplished: the offering of sacrifice was taught, Adam learned to be obedient, the doctrine of the atonement of the Son of God was made known unto him, and the Holy Ghost taught Adam and Eve the consequences of their fall and the joy of a redemption.

THE PLAN OF SALVATION REVEALED TO ADAM

Sometime after the initial revelation to Adam by the angel and by the workings of the Holy Ghost, Adam received further instructions, as Enoch later explained:

And he [God] called upon our father Adam by his own voice, saying: I am God; I made the world, and men before they were in the flesh.

And he also said unto him: If thou wilt turn unto me, and hearken unto my voice, and believe, and repent of all thy transgressions, and be baptized, even in water, in the name of mine Only Begotten Son, who is full of grace and truth, which is Jesus Christ, the only name which shall be given under heaven, whereby salvation shall come unto the children of men, ye shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost, asking all things in his name, and whatsoever ye shall ask, it shall be given you. (Moses 6:51-52.)

The foregoing is a very revealing passage and details something concerning Adam which is not as clearly specified anywhere else. We are familiar with Adam's singular transgression in the Garden of Eden, which was the cause of his fall into mortality. However, in this passage the Lord directed Adam to "repent of all [his] transgressions [plural]," not having reference to the event in the garden but to any other transgressions that Adam may have committed after he became mortal. We do not have an account of any of these, but we could confidently expect that since he was mortal there might be some. This passage seems to say that Adam was not without transgressions.

That these plural transgressions of which Adam was to repent deliberately did not include the original transgression in the Garden of Eden is borne out in the following verses:

And our father Adam spake unto the Lord, and said: Why is it that men must repent and be baptized in water? And the Lord said unto Adam: Behold I have forgiven thee thy transgression in the Garden of Eden.

Hence came the saying abroad among the people, that the Son of God hath atoned for original guilt, wherein the sins of the parents cannot be answered upon the heads of the children, for they are whole from the foundation of the world. (Moses 6:53-54.)

It appears from this passage that Adam was not required to repent of the transgression that he had committed in the garden. In verse 52 the Lord was promising future forgiveness to Adam, whereas in verse 53 the Lord tells Adam that He had already forgiven him his "transgression in the Garden of Eden." Hence the saying that the Son of God "hath atoned for original guilt." We might have reasoned from other scriptures that Adam did not have to repent of his transgression committed in the garden, but this scripture categorically says it in one sentence.

In other words, this passage, probably more than any other scripture, shows that Adam was, after his fall, in the same position as all mankind now is. The Atonement unconditionally covers Adam's original sin (covers it for Adam as well as for us) and also covers our own sins on condition of our repentance and baptism, which ordinance brings with it the promise of the Holy Ghost to come upon us.

The Lord subsequently explained to Adam the process of spiritual rebirth and its parallel to the mortal birth involving spirit, water, and blood (Moses 6:58-61). Then the Lord said: "And now, behold, I say unto you: This is the plan of salvation unto all men, through the blood of mine Only Begotten, who shall come in the meridian of time" (Moses 6:62).

We thus are treated in the book of Moses to a very clear, lucid, and extensive account of how the fulness of the gospel, with the plan of salvation and the doctrine of the atoning blood of Jesus Christ, was made known to our father Adam, how he taught it to his children, and how it was handed down from generation to generation. We learn of these great truths and historical events from the writings of Moses, who recorded the teachings of Enoch, who seems to have read of these things in the "book of remembrance" which was begun in the days of Adam himself. This important revelation of the gospel to Adam is alluded to in other scriptures (see, for example, 2 Ne. 2:15-26; Alma 12:22-37; D&C 20:17-29; 29:40), but it is delineated only in the account given in the Joseph Smith Translation as found in the book of Moses in the Pearl of Great Price.

We would also understand from various other scriptures and statements by the Prophet Joseph Smith that the fulness of the plan of salvation-all of the ordinances that pertain to the temple, the endowment, the covenants, the full understanding of everything that leads to exaltation-was made known to Adam and to Eve.

The Prophet Joseph Smith taught that Adam stands next to Christ and presides over the human family and the spirits of all mankind and holds the keys of all dispensations. [^8]

There is nothing about the gospel and its ordinances and blessings, as we have them today, that Adam did not have.

TRUE REPENTANCE THROUGH THE ATONEMENT

We have noted that Adam was commanded to "call upon God" and also to "repent of all [his] transgressions." These two things are inseparable. To be effective, repentance must be directed toward one's relationship to God. A person may be sorry he has lost a blessing, or he may be unhappy that he is not permitted to continue "to take happiness in sin" (Morm. 2:13; see also Alma 41:10). His sorrow may be brought on only by the embarrassment of being caught. That type of "repentance" will not cleanse a soul of its unrighteousness. Indeed, Paul indicated that some repentance itself needs to be repented of:

Now I rejoice, not that ye were made sorry, but that ye sorrowed to repentance: for ye were made sorry after a godly manner ....

For godly sorrow worketh repentance to salvation not to be repented of: but the sorrow of the world worketh death.

For behold this selfsame thing, that ye sorrowed after a godly sort, what carefulness it wrought in you, yea, what clearing of yourselves! (2 Cor. 7:9-11.)

True repentance follows when a person has deep remorse that he has offended God by breaking his laws and being disobedient. He is sorry because of the alienation from God that the sin has brought into his life. His repentance then is "of the godly sort," and he learns that "wickedness never was happiness" (Alma 41:10). Because repentance requires a broken heart and a contrite spirit, nothing less will bring permanent relief. Mormon lamented that the Nephites were sorrowful for the wrong reason: "Their sorrowing was not unto repentance, because of the goodness of God; but it was rather the sorrowing of the damned" (Morm. 2:13). Even though the scripture says the blood of Jesus Christ "was shed for the remission of [our] sins" (D&C 27:2), yet, because nothing but genuine remorse on our part for having offended God can bring forgiveness, the Lord has also said: "My blood shall not cleanse them if they hear me not" (D&C 29:17).

A PAYMENT FOR A DEBT

One of the dimensions to the Atonement that was emphasized in the revelation of the gospel to Adam and that must be understood is that the shedding of the Savior's blood was more than an evidence of his total dedication and commitment (see Moses 6:59-60). It was a payment, and the medium of exchange was the blood of Jesus Christ-the blood of one who had no sin and who was not himself totally subject to the fall of Adam. The shedding of Jesus' precious blood was a payment so that mercy would not rob justice. It was a ransom so that he could be our Savior and Redeemer -to rescue all mankind from the grasp of the law that was broken in the Garden of Eden and to rescue as many as repent from the effects of their personal sins. Thus the gospel becomes a means of redemption, of salvation, and of exaltation. Amulek, as recorded in the Book of Mormon, expressed it this way:

For it is expedient that an atonement should be made; for according to the great plan of the Eternal God there must be an atonement made, or else all mankind must unavoidably perish; yea, all are hardened; yea, all are fallen and are lost, and must perish except it be through the atonement which it is expedient should be made.

For it is expedient that there should be a great and last sacrifice; yea, not a sacrifice of man, neither of beast, neither of any manner of fowl; for it shall not be a human sacrifice; but it must be an infinite and eternal sacrifice.

Now there is not any man that can sacrifice his own blood which will atone for the sins of another. Now, if a man mur-dereth, behold will our law, which is just, take the life of his brother? I say unto you, Nay.

But the law requireth the life of him who hath murdered; therefore there can be nothing which is short of an infinite atonement which will suffice for the sins of the world ....

And behold, this is the whole meaning of the law, every whit pointing to that great and last sacrifice; and that great and last sacrifice will be the Son of God, yea, infinite and eternal.

And thus he shall bring salvation to all those who shall believe on his name; this being the intent of this last sacrifice, to bring about the bowels of mercy, which overpowereth justice, and bringeth about means unto men that they may have faith unto repentance.

And thus mercy can satisfy the demands of justice, and encircles them in the arms of safety, while he that exercises no faith unto repentance is exposed to the whole law of the demands of justice; therefore only unto him that has faith unto repentance is brought about the great and eternal plan of redemption. (Alma 34:9-12, 14-16.)

This payment is the theme of one of our hymns, wherein we sing:

Behold the great Redeemer die, A broken law to satisfy. He dies a sacrifice for sin, That man may live and glory win. He died, and at the awful sight The sun in shame withdrew its light! Earth trembled, and all nature sighed In dread response, "A God has died!" [^9]

When Jesus died there were great quakings of the earth, even so much that on the American continent "the whole face of the land was changed" (3 Ne. 8:12). In 1 Ne. 19:12 we read that the prophet Zenos, predicting the event, said that "kings of the isles of the sea shall be wrought upon by the Spirit of God, to exclaim: The God of nature suffers."

The idea of Christ's payment for us was also suggested by Peter in his words to the early Church: "Ye are a chosen generation, a royal priesthood, an holy nation, a peculiar people" (1 Pet. 2:9). Peculiar in this instance is not used in the sense of being odd but of being unusual, beyond ordinary, and a special treasure. The word used in the Greek manuscripts from which the English translation was made was peripoiesis, which means an acquisition. A similar instance in Ex. 19:5 uses the Hebrew segullÃ¢, meaning a treasure or special possession. This purchase of us by Jesus was spoken of by Paul: "Know ye not that... ye are not your own? For ye are bought with a price." (1 Cor. 6:19-20.) Also Peter, when speaking of false teachers, said that they even deny "the Lord that bought them" (2 Pet. 2:1). Inasmuch as redeemed means "to be recovered for a price," Peter was teaching the same doctrine when he said, "Ye know that ye were not redeemed with corruptible things, as silver and gold Â� but with the precious blood of Christ" (1 Pet. 1:18-19).

The ransom, or redemption, has to do with the just payment of a debt incurred by the transgression against divine law. The debt was incurred at a time and a place by a person or persons. The payment must be as stable and real and substantial as the debt. The Atonement, the payment of the blood, was made at a time and a place by a person as real as the debtor. Anything less than this would rob the gospel of its power and legitimacy. To deny that Jesus made the payment is to deny the legal basis for salvation, and chaos would reign in the universe!

WHY PAYMENT HAD TO BE BY BLOOD

That there was a broken law to be paid for in order to satisfy justice is plainly taught in the scriptures. What might not be quite so evident is that the payment required blood and could not be done in any other way. It is important to note that in every instance when the plan of salvation is explained in holy writ, whether it be to Adam, Enoch, Noah, Abraham, Moses, the meridian Twelve, or to those who recorded the doctrines of the plan in the Book of Mormon or in the Doctrine and Covenants, the blood of Jesus Christ is always mentioned in connection with the Atonement (see Mosiah 3:11-16; D&C 45:4; 76:69).

Early in this article we noted passages from the Doctrine and Covenants that indicate that the plan of salvation was in full existence and operation even before the world was created and that nothing has been added to it since that time (D&C 130:20-21; 132:5, 11). It was also shown that Jesus is called the Lamb slain from before the foundation of the world. Since Jesus came not to do his own will but the will of the Father who sent him, and since sacrifices by the shedding of blood were inaugurated in the earliest revelation of the gospel to Adam as a similitude of Christ, it seems inescapable that the plan of salvation always called for the shedding of the blood of Jesus Christ and that it therefore could be done in no other way.

We are familiar with the scenes in the Garden of Gethsemane, when Jesus pleaded with the Father, "If it be possible, let this cup pass from me" (Matt. 26:39). The "cup" was the excruciating experience through which Jesus would take upon him the sins of all mankind and, as a result, would suffer and bleed at every pore (see Luke 22:44; Mosiah 3:7; D&C 19:16-20). Jesus cried aloud, "Father, all things are possible unto thee; take away this cup from me: nevertheless not what I will, but what thou wilt" (Mark 14:36). This was the Father's Chosen and Beloved Son, his Only Begotten, pleading for an escape from the experiences that resulted in his blood oozing through the pores of his skin. Yet the Father did not excuse him nor devise another way. If there were another way, this would have been the time to put it into operation. The fact that no other system was used, even at the Son's pleading, suggests in the strongest terms that no other way was possible. Surely, if there had been any other way, the Father would have hearkened when his Son thus pleaded.

But why blood? Why not some other substance? Blood is thought of as the substance of the Fall. Blood is the "life of the flesh," meaning mortal flesh (see Lev. 17:11-14). It is the "red badge," so to speak, of mortality. It will not exist in resurrected beings, for they are immortal (see 1 Cor. 15:50). [^10] In blood are the seeds of mortal life and death. The scripture says: "As in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive" (1 Cor. 15:22). In other words, as by Adam's sin came blood which brings death, so by Christ's blood came redemption from sin and death.

Luke recorded that in the Garden of Gethsemane Jesus "kneeled down and prayed .... And there appeared an angel unto him from heaven, strengthening him. And being in an agony he prayed more earnestly: and he sweat as it were great drops of blood falling down to the ground." (JST, Luke 22:41-44.) Elder Bruce R. McConkie postulated that this angel was likely Adam. [^11]

If this angel was Adam (and there seems to be no reason to doubt it), here was the Messiah in the Garden of Gethsemane in his greatest of all trials, shedding his blood to redeem mankind from the effects of Adam's transgression in the Garden of Eden and also from the results of each person's own sins. There appeared from heaven to strengthen him the very person of Adam himself-he who brought mortality and blood and death and sin into the world. The parallel issue is unmistakable! The plan of salvation to which both Adam and Jesus subscribed in the premortal world was being worked out in the world of Adam's posterity. Each had fulfilled his foreordained part, and now the two principals were together as Jesus triumphed over sin and mortality. The next day Jesus would die upon the cross, and three days later he would rise from the grave, totally triumphant, not only over the death of the body but also over the death of the spirit-which is alienation from God.

He who was slain from before the foundation of the world is alive forevermore, and the doctrine of the blood atonement that was so long beforehand revealed to Adam has become an accomplished fact. Adam and all of the children of men between Adam and the final generation are on the road to immortality and eternal life, just as had been anticipated in the plan of salvation as discussed in the councils of God before the world was.

---
Notas:
[^1] There was no death for man or the animals in the garden. Father Lehi states that there was no death among all the creations God had made on this earth until Adam ate the forbidden fruit: "And now, behold, if Adam had not transgressed he would not have fallen, but he would have remained in the garden of Eden. And all things which were created must have remained in the same state in which they were after they were created; and they must have remained forever, and had no end." (2 Ne. 2:22.) SPIRIT CREATION Temporal-physical death.
[^2] There would have been no children born in the garden. Lehi is forthright in his explanation that without the Fall Adam and Eve would not have had children (2 Ne. 2:23). And Lehi is not the only one who mentions that Adam and Eve would have had no children if there had been no fall. Eve herself realized the situation and spoke forth with gladness, "Were it not for our transgression we never should have had seed" (Moses 5:11). This marvelous declaration is not found in our present Bible and was made known through the translation of the Bible by the Prophet Joseph Smith. It no doubt was upon the plates of brass, which seems to be the source for Lehi's understanding. In addition, we have the confirming words of the prophet Enoch: "Because that Adam fell, we are; and by his fall came death" (Moses 6:48). PHYSICAL-SPIRITUAL CREATION Spiritual-separation or alienation from things of God.
[^3] There was no blood in the bodies of Adam and Eve in the garden. That there was no blood in the bodies of Adam and Eve before the Fall, and that blood came as a result of the Fall, is not categorically stated in any one passage of scripture, but leading doctrinal teachers such as President Joseph Fielding Smith and Elder Bruce R. McConkie have declared that such was the case. [^7] This conclusion is scripturally based and takes into account that blood is the mortal life of the body (see Gen. 9:2-6; Lev. 17:10-15).
[^4] There was no sin in the Garden of Eden until the transgression of Adam and Eve. This fact seems to be without controversy. The whole concept of the Fall is based upon it. Lehi declared that without the Fall Adam and Eve "would have remained in a state of
[^5] Adam and Eve were in the presence of God in the Garden of Eden. Although the Father was not constantly in the garden with Adam and Eve, he visited them from time to time, and they could see him and talk with him. However, after the Fall occurred and they were cast out of the garden, they were able to hear God's voice, but "they saw him not; for they were shut out from his presence" (Moses 5:4).
[^6] 6. Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, comp. Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1976), p. 181.
[^7] 7. In Journal of Discourses, 17:143.
[^8] 8. In Journal of Discourses, 9:317.
[^9] 9. John Taylor, cited in The Vision, comp. N. B. Lundwall (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, n.d.), p. 146; italics added.
[^10] 10. Lectures on Faith 2:12.
[^11] 11. Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, comp. Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1976), pp. 248-49.
