Robert L. Millet, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Man Adam ( 1990)

7

Adam's Role from the Fall to the End and Beyond

Larry E. Dahl [^1]

With the Fall, Adam entered a new phase of his ongoing stewardship of helping to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man. His mortal ministry lasted nine hundred thirty years. After that, he continued his close involvement with his posterity on the earth, directing through successive dispensations the restoration of the priesthood and its keys. Undoubtedly he also presided over the spirits in the post-earth spirit world, supervising their efforts to prepare for the Savior's mortal ministry and subsequent personal visit to that spirit realm, with all that those events would entail for them. In addition he maintained, and will continue to maintain, a constant vigil against the power of the devil and his angels as they "maketh war with the saints of God, and en-compasseth them round about" (D&C 76:29). In making war with the Saints of God, the devil and his angels not only apply directly their trade upon the Saints but also employ other mortals whose hearts they can capture and who "love darkness rather than light, because their deeds are evil" (D&C 10:20-21). ,At pivotal points throughout earth's history Adam has had to confront the devil personally, or reveal his deceit to others when the devil has appeared pretending to be an angel of light. Hence the war that began in heaven continues on earth. That war will continue to rage until its final battle, what the scriptures call the "battle of the great God," which will take place at the end of the Millennium (D&C 88:110-15). In the meantime Adam will keep the devil in check and one day preside at a special council at Adam-ondi-Ahman in preparation for the Lord's second coming. Furthermore, he will play a key role in the judgment and resurrection of all mankind and then continue in a presiding role-in the patriarchal order of the priesthood-in the eternities to come.

ADAM'S MORTAL MINISTRY

The Fall brought death -both spiritual and temporal. Spiritual death involved Adam's being cast out of the Garden of Eden and out of God's immediate presence; becoming subject to the temptations and weaknesses associated with that fallen, mortal condition; and being estranged from God and in need of reconciliation. Temporal death for Adam was to come later -nine hundred thirty years later (Gen. 5:5)-but still within the "day" spoken of by God when he instructed Adam and Eve concerning the tree of knowledge of good and evil (Moses 3:16-17). [^2] The atonement of Jesus Christ provided the means for Adam and his posterity to overcome both of these deaths-to be resurrected and to be reconciled to God (see D&C 29:40-43; Alma 42; 2 Ne. 9).

Adam Had the Fulness of the Gospel

For man to become reconciled to God requires that man be obedient to the principles and ordinances of the everlasting covenant, or the fulness of the gospel (D&C 22:1; 66:2; 133:57). The gospel is the same in all ages for all men. Adam had the fulness of the gospel. He was baptized by water. He was "baptized with fire, and with the Holy Ghost." He was given the priesthood "after the order of him who was without beginning of days or end of years," becoming "a son of God." (Moses 6:64-68.) What does it mean to enter into this order? President Ezra Taft Benson explained: "To enter into the order of the Son of God is the equivalent today of entering into the fullness of the Melchizedek Priesthood, which is only received in the house of the Lord. Because Adam and Eve had complied with these requirements, God said to them, 'Thou art after the order of him who was without beginning of days or end of years, from all eternity to all eternity.' " [^3]

Indeed, "all things were confirmed unto Adam, by an holy ordinance, and the Gospel preached, and a decree sent forth, that it should be in the world, until the end thereof" (Moses 5:59).

Adam's Language- Pure and Undefiled

"The first man placed upon this earth was an intelligent being," President Joseph Fielding Smith explained, "created in the image of God, possessed of wisdom and knowledge, with power to communicate his thoughts in a language, both oral and written, which was superior to anything to be found on the earth today." [^4] Adam and Eve had sons and daughters who "began to divide two and two in the land, and to till the land, and to tend flocks, and they also begat sons and daughters" (Moses 5:3). A goodly number of these children rejected the gospel when their parents taught it to them. They "loved Satan more than God" and "began from that time forth to be carnal, sensual, and devilish." (Moses 5:12-13.) But "Adam hearkened unto the voice of God, and called upon his sons to repent" (Moses 6:1). More children were born, among them Seth, who, like his father Adam, was a handsome, righteous man. [^5] With Seth there began a line of faithful patriarchs for many generations-Seth, Enos, Cainan, Mahalaleel, Jared, Enoch, Methuselah (all seven of whom were ordained high priests in the patriarchal order of the priesthood by Adam himself), Lamech (who was ordained by Seth), and Noah (who was ordained by Methuselah). Speaking of Adam, Seth, and Enos the scriptural record says:

And then began these men to call upon the name of the Lord, and the Lord blessed them;

And a book of remembrance was kept, in the which was recorded, in the language of Adam, for it was given unto as many as called upon God to write by the spirit of inspiration;

And by them their children were taught to read and write, having a language which was pure and undefiled ....

Â� And a genealogy was kept of the children of God. And this was the book of the generations of Adam, saying: In the day that God created man, in the likeness of God made he him;

In the image of his own body, male and female, created he them, and blessed them, and called their name Adam, in the day when they were created and became living souls in the land upon the footstool of God. (Moses 6:4-9.)

Oh, that we had that book of remembrance! Portions of it, perhaps only fragments, have been preserved in the Bible. What appear to be additional parts have been restored through the instrumentality of the Prophet Joseph Smith and are found in latter-day scriptures-the Book of Mormon, the Doctrine and Covenants, the Pearl of Great Price, and the Joseph Smith Translation of the Bible. Perhaps if we had access to the full record as kept by Adam and other righteous patriarchs, we would have an understanding of the Creation, the Fall, and the works of God in the earliest generations of Adam's posterity as "pure and undefiled" as the language in which the record was written. Someday we will have it.

Adam's Government-A Patriarchal Theocracy

The first government on earth was patriarchal and theocratic. That is, it was administered through families, with fathers presiding, and was directed by God. The keys of the kingdom were held by the oldest righteous patriarch. He ordained and presided over other faithful patriarchs according to the revelations of the Lord to him. The Prophet Joseph Smith taught: "The Priesthood was first given to Adam; he obtained the First Presidency, and held the keys of it from generation to generation .... He had dominion given him over every living creature." [^6] That dominion was both civil and religious. About this early government, Elder Bruce R. McConkie has written:

Adam, our father, the first man, is the presiding high priest over the earth for all ages. The government the Lord gave him was patriarchal, and from the expulsion from Eden to the deans-ing of the earth by water in the day of Noah, the righteous portion of mankind were blessed and governed by a patriarchal theocracy.

This theocratic system, patterned after the order and system that prevailed in heaven, was the government of God. He himself, though dwelling in heaven, was the Lawgiver, Judge, and King. He gave direction in all things both civil and ecclesiastical; there was no separation of church and state as we now know it. All governmental affairs were directed, controlled, and regulated from on high. The Lord's legal administrators on earth served by virtue of their callings and ordinations in the Holy Priesthood and as they were guided by the power of the Holy Ghost.

"This order was instituted in the days of Adam, and came down by lineage." It was designed "to be handed down from father to son." It came down in succession; it is priesthood government; it is the government of God both on earth and in heaven. And even today, it "rightly belongs to the literal descendants of the chosen seed, to whom the promises were made." (D&C 107:40-41.) That it is not now in full operation simply means that fallen men have departed from the ancient ways and are now governing each other as they choose.

But in the beginning the Lord's true system prevailed. The successive sons who held rulership of one kind or another in the original earthly kingdom were Adam, Seth, Enos, Cainan, Mahalaleel, Jared, Enoch, Methuselah, Lamech, and Noah. In their respective days there were, of course, apostate peoples who set up governments of their own. But those who believed the gospel and sought salvation remained subject to the patriarchal order revealed and established by the Eternal Patriarch. [^7]

Adam presided over his righteous posterity under this patriarchal theocracy for nine hundred thirty years, receiving revelation, keeping a book of remembrance, teaching, ordaining, crying repentance, offering sacrifices in anticipation of the Savior's infinite and eternal atoning sacrifice, and otherwise faithfully exercising First Presidency keys as head of the initial gospel dispensation on the earth. As the end of his mortal ministry drew near, Adam called his righteous posterity together to give them his last blessing.

A Farewell Council at Adam-ondi-Ahman

In March of 1835, a revelation received by the Prophet Joseph Smith was recorded that included some interesting and important information originally recorded in the book of Enoch, a book that was probably a part of that ancient book of remembrance:

Three years previous to the death of Adam, he called Seth, Enos, Cainan, Mahalaleel, Jared, Enoch, and Methuselah, who were all high priests, with the residue of his posterity who were righteous, into the valley of Adam-ondi-Ahman, and there bestowed upon them his last blessing.

And the Lord appeared unto them, and they rose up and blessed Adam, and called him Michael, the prince, the archangel.

And the Lord administered comfort unto Adam, and said unto him: I have set thee to be at the head; a multitude of nations shall come of thee, and thou art a prince over them forever.

And Adam stood up in the midst of the congregation; and, notwithstanding he was bowed down with age, being full of the Holy Ghost, predicted whatsoever should befall his posterity unto the latest generation.

These things were all written in the book of Enoch, and are to be testified of in due time. (D&C 107:53-57.)

Joseph Smith taught that the blessing Adam gave his children was a "patriarchal blessing" and that Adam's hope was "to bring them into the presence of God." [^8] That hope was realized as the Lord appeared to them, not just to Adam. What a marvelous scene-generations of Adam's righteous posterity gathered to honor and receive a blessing from their venerable father as he neared the completion of his mortal ministry, and having the Savior minister to them! And what a fitting tribute was given to Adam by the Lord, affirming that he is Michael, the prince, the archangel, and that he is to be the head or prince over his posterity forever.

In that grand setting Adam, by the power of the Holy Ghost, "predicted whatsoever should befall his posterity unto the latest generation." We do not have access currently to that prophecy, but we are assured that it is recorded in the book of Enoch and is "to be testified of in due time." Like Moroni, Adam saw down through the corridors of time to the winding up scenes of this earth's mortal existence and wrote, in effect, prophetic history (see Morm. 8:35). What a powerful testimony it will prove to be when that prophetic history is read, after the fact, by those who denied or doubted God's foreknowledge and his power to reveal the future to his prophets. And there will be plenty of evidence. All God's prophets have been shown these things and have left their records as testimonies. Elder Wilford Woodruff taught:

Adam, our first great progenitor and father, after the fall, received this Gospel, and he received the holy Priesthood in all its power, and its keys and ordinances. He sealed these blessings upon his sons-Seth, Enos, Jared, Cainan, Mahalaleel, Enoch and Methusaleh. All these men received this high and holy Priesthood. They all professed to give revelation. They all had inspiration and left their record on the earth; and not one of them but what saw and prophesied about the great Zion of God in the latter-days. And when we say this of them, we say it of every Apostle and Prophet who ever lived upon the earth. Their revelations and prophecies all point to our day and that great kingdom of God which was spoken of by Daniel, that great Zion of God spoken of by Isaiah and Jeremiah, and that great gathering of the house of Israel spoken of by Ezekiel and Malachi and many of the ancient Patriarchs and Prophets. [^9]

Three years after this momentous family gathering in Adam-ondi-Ahman, [^10] Adam died. His mortal ministry came to an end, but his involvement with the world's history and earth's inhabitants did not. He still held the "keys of salvation under the counsel and direction of the Holy One" (D&C 78:16). Only one of the seven "days" of the earth's "temporal existence" (D&C 77:6) had passed. Adam's "keys of salvation" include, as Joseph Smith explained, the keys of all dispensations "to the end of the dispensations that are to be revealed." [^11] There was still much to be done.

PRIESTHOOD AND KEYS REVEALED BY ADAM'S AUTHORITY

From Adam's death to the present there have been numerous universal apostasies necessitating the restoration of the gospel and the priesthood. The Prophet Joseph Smith explained that Adam has directed these restorations. "The Priesthood is an everlasting principle," he said, "and existed with God from eternity, and will to eternity, without beginning of days or end of years. The keys have to be brought from heaven whenever the Gospel is sent. When they are revealed from heaven, it is by Adam's authority." [^12] In keeping with the order of heaven, there would be delegation or a chain of command through which Adam would accomplish this important work. The Prophet taught: "Christ is the Great High Priest; Adam next." [^13] He also gave this explanation regarding Adam's position in authority: "The Priesthood was first given to Adam; he obtained the First Presidency, and held the keys of it from generation to generation .... Then to Noah, who is Gabriel: he stands next in authority to Adam in the Priesthood .... These men held keys first on earth, and then in heaven." [^14] Hence, when John the Baptist brought the Aaronic Priesthood to Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery, declaring he acted under the direction of Peter, James, and John (Joseph Smith-History 1:72), we can assume Peter, James, and John also acted under someone's direction-namely, Adam or Noah or some other authorized individual. The same would be true of those who appeared on the Mount of Transfiguration (see Matt. 17:1-9), and it would be true of all who came in any dispensation.

Adam and Noah not only direct others in restoring the priesthood and its keys but they also have come themselves for varying purposes on occasion. Noah or Gabriel appeared to Zacharias, telling him of his future son, John (Luke 1:5-23). He also announced to Mary her singular privilege of becoming the mother of the Son of God (Luke 1:26-38). Both Michael and Gabriel were among those who came to Joseph Smith in this, the dispensation of the fulness of times. The Doctrine and Covenants recounts the latter-day appearances not only of Moses, Elias, and Elijah (see D&C 110) but also of Moroni; John the Baptist; Peter, James, and John; Raphael; and "divers angels, from Michael or Adam down to the present time, all declaring their dispensation, their rights, their keys, their honors, their majesty and glory, and the power of their priesthood; giving line upon line, precept upon precept; here a little, and there a little" (D&C 128:20-21). We know little of most of these visits except that they occurred and that they occurred under Adam's direction.

COORDINATING DIFFERENT SPHERES

It is interesting to contemplate the logistics of Adam's coordinating and directing the efforts of different beings from different spheres in these various restorations and visitations. Evidently Adam was in the post-earth spirit world from the time of his death until at least the time of Christ's resurrection. Since, at an earlier time, he had been given the keys to preside over the spirits of all men, he undoubtedly continued to preside over the spirits there. From his location in the post-earth spirit world, Adam must have continued to do all that he did "under the counsel and direction of the Holy One," which means he would have been in constant touch with the Savior. In addition, some of those who were sent to the earth to restore the priesthood and its keys under Adam's direction, before the first resurrection, were translated beings, such as Moses and Elijah. Joseph Smith, speaking of these translated beings, taught that "their place of habitation is that of the terrestrial order, and a place prepared for such characters He [God] held in reserve to be ministering angels unto many planets, and who as yet have not entered into so great a fullness as those who are resurrected from the dead." [^15] Thus, for about three thousand years, Adam-from his abode in the post-earth spirit world-would have coordinated efforts of at least these three spheres of action. Then, after the resurrection was instituted in the meridian of time (and it seems only right that Adam would have been one of the first persons, if not the first one, resurrected after Christ), Adam's base of operation would be from wherever such righteous resurrected beings go to await the time when this earth will become celestialized and become their eternal home. Again we should remember that Adam's priesthood keys go with him -from the pre-mortal world, through his mortal ministry, into the post-earth spirit world, and into the resurrection.

KEEPING THE DEVIL IN CHECK

The devil's obsession is to thwart the work of God, to "deceive and to blind men, and to lead them captive at his will" (Moses 4:4), to make all men "miserable like unto himself" (2 Ne. 2:27), to make "war with the saints of God, and [encompass] them roundabout" (D&C 76:29), to "seal [us] his" and have "all power over [us]" (Alma 34:35). In a vision Enoch saw that when Satan had temporarily succeeded in the days of Noah, "he looked up and laughed, and his angels rejoiced" (Moses 7:26). Satan looked up to mock God and rejoiced in his power. The devil does have power-within limits. As Joseph Smith taught:

The spirits of good men cannot interfere with the wicked beyond their prescribed bounds, for Michael, the Archangel, dared not bring a railing accusation against the devil, but said, "The Lord rebuke thee, Satan."

It would seem also, that wicked spirits have their bounds, limits, and laws by which they are governed or controlled, and know their future destiny; hence, those that were in the maniac said to our Savior, "Art thou come to torment us before the time," and when Satan presented himself before the Lord, among the sons of God, he said that he came "from going to and fro in the earth, and from wandering up and down in it;" and he is emphatically called the prince of the power of the air; and, it is very evident that they possess a power that none but those who have the Priesthood can control. [^16]

The Prophet also gave this succinct explanation: "The devil has no power over us only as we permit him. The moment we revolt at anything which comes from God, the devil takes power." [^17] It appears that, for the most part, we can avoid being overcome by the power of the devil by being submissive to God. There are times, however, when Satan attempts to overstep his bounds and must be held in check by someone with more power than he has. There are three occasions in the scriptural record when Adam was that someone.

A Dispute with the Devil Over the Body of Moses

Adam disputed with the devil over the body of Moses (Jude 1:9). Why? Evidently, the devil insisted that Moses die, that his body be turned over to him. Adam, however, overruled the devil and Moses was translated. Elder Joseph Fielding Smith has suggested that it was necessary for Moses and Elijah to be preserved from death "because they had a mission to perform, and it had to be performed before the crucifixion of the Son of God, and it could not be done in the spirit. They had to have tangible bodies." [^18] Concerning this dispute between Adam and the devil, Elder Bruce R. McConkie has written: "It appears, then, that Satan-ever anxious to thwart the purposes of God-'disputed about the body of Moses,' meaning that he sought the mortal death of Israel's lawgiver so that he would not have a tangible body in which to come -along with Elijah, who also was taken up without tasting death-to confer the keys of the priesthood upon Peter, James, and John." [^19]

As Moses was not the first to be translated from this earth, perhaps this same dispute-with the same principals-had occurred before.

Withstanding the Prince of the Kingdom of Persia

In Daniel, chapter 10, there is an account of a heavenly messenger sent to Daniel to help him understand his vision of the latter days. The messenger explained to Daniel that he had been detained because "the prince of the kingdom of Persia withstood [him] one and twenty days: but, lo, Michael, one of the chief princes, came to help [him]" (Dan. 10:13). It seems clear that the prince of the kingdom of Persia was Satan or one of his emissaries, stirring up a nation hostile to the Lord's people. Michael came to help.

Detecting the Devil When He Appeared as an Angel of Light

In reminding the Saints in 1842 of some of the marvelous events of the restoration of the gospel, Joseph Smith included an experience he had had with the devil and Michael on the banks of the Susquehanna River. The devil appeared as an angel of light. And Michael came to expose him. (See D&C 128:20.) How many other occasions have there been throughout the history of the earth when Lucifer and Michael have locked horns, as it were? It is reasonable to believe that there have been many.

ANOTHER COUNCIL AT ADAM-ONDI-AHMAN

Adam held an important meeting with his righteous posterity at Adam-ondi-Ahman three years before his death. Before the Lord's second coming, Adam will call another important meeting at that same sacred spot. Again it will be a gathering of the righteous, and again the Lord will appear. This time, however, instead of predicting "whatsoever should befall his posterity unto the latest generation," Adam will hear reports from his posterity. Of this future event, Joseph Smith taught:

Daniel in his seventh chapter speaks of the Ancient of Days; he means the oldest man, our Father Adam, Michael, he will call his children together and hold a council with them to prepare them for the coming of the Son of Man. He (Adam) is the father of the human family, and presides over the spirits of all men, and all that have had the keys must stand before him in this grand council. This may take place before some of us leave this stage of action. The Son of Man stands before him, and there is given him glory and dominion. Adam delivers up his stewardship to Christ, that which was delivered to him as holding the keys of the universe, but retains his standing as head of the human family. [^20]

Added insights are given by Joseph Fielding Smith:

This gathering of the children of Adam, where the thousands, and the tens of thousands are assembled in the judgment, will be one of the greatest events this troubled earth has ever seen. At this conference, or council, all who have held keys of dispensations will render a report of their stewardship. Adam will do likewise, and then he will surrender to Christ all authority. Then Adam will be confirmed in his calling as the prince over his posterity and will be officially installed and crowned eternally in this presiding calling. Then Christ will be received as King of kings, and Lord of lords. We do not know how long a time this gathering will be in session, or how many sessions may be held at this grand council. It is sufficient to know that it is a gathering of the Priesthood of God from the beginning of this earth down to the present, in which reports will be made and all who have been given dispensations (talents) will declare their keys and ministry and make report of their stewardship according to the parable. Judgment will be rendered unto them for this is a gathering of the righteous, those who have held and who hold keys of authority in the Kingdom of God upon this earth. It is not to be the judgment of the wicked. When all things are prepared and every key and power set in order with a full and perfect report of each man's stewardship, then Christ will receive these reports and be installed as rightful Ruler of this earth. At this grand council he will take his place by the united voice of the thousands who by right of Priesthood are there assembled. This will precede the great day of destruction of the wicked and will be the preparation for the Millennial Reign. [^21]

Truly, that meeting at Adam-ondi-Ahman will be a high point for Adam. But the end is not yet. There is still a key role for him in the resurrection and final judgment and in the final battle with the devil and his angels.

ADAM'S ROLE IN THE RESURRECTION AND JUDGMENT

"Behold, verily I say unto you, before the earth shall pass away, Michael, mine archangel, shall sound his trump, and then shall all the dead awake, for their graves shall be opened, and they shall come forth-yea, even all" (D&C 29:26). It was the Savior who overcame death through his own death and resurrection, but evidently the keys of accomplishing the resurrection of all others are given to Adam and from him to others. President Spencer W. Kimball spoke of the keys of resurrection in the April 1977 general conference, quoting briefly from President Brigham Young. In the address from which he quoted, President Young said:

It is supposed by this people that we have all the ordinances in our possession for life and salvation, and exaltation, and that we are administering in these ordinances. This is not the case. We are in possession of all the ordinances that can be administered in the flesh; but there are other ordinances and administrations that must be administered beyond this world. I know you would ask what they are. I will mention one. We have not, neither can we receive here, the ordinance and the keys of the resurrection. They will be given to those who have passed off this stage of action and have received their bodies again, as many have already done and many more will. They will be ordained, by those who hold the keys of the resurrection, to go forth and resurrect the Saints, just as we receive the ordinance of baptism, then the keys of authority to baptize others for the remission of their sins. This is one of the ordinances we cannot receive here, and there are many more. [^22]

How appropriate it is that Adam, who brought death into the world through the Fall, should be the one to call forth his posterity from the grave, to herald the resurrection with the sound of his trumpet. Inasmuch as all the dead do not arise at the same time, some even as far apart as one thousand years, that trumpet may have to sound again and again before all of Adam's children are brought forth (see D&C 88:94-102).

Resurrection and judgment are, in a sense, simultaneous events, as "your glory shall be that glory by which your bodies are quickened" (D&C 88:28). But, in addition, there will be an accounting, then commendation or otherwise, and an affirmation of our places in the varied kingdoms prepared to accommodate all mankind. As with the resurrection, undoubtedly the judgment will be a matter of keys and delegation. Elder Bruce R. McConkie has written: "The Ancient of Days, the oldest and most ancient of men, Adam our father, sits in judgment over the righteous of his race. Be it remembered that the Twelve Apostles of the Lamb, who were with the Lord in his ministry in Jerusalem, shall judge the whole house of Israel, meaning that portion of Israel who have kept the commandments, 'and none else.' (D&C 29:12.) There will be a great hierarchy of judges in that great day, of whom Adam, under Christ, will be the chief of all. Those judges will judge the righteous ones under their jurisdiction, but Christ himself, he alone, will judge the wicked." [^23]

The Prophet Joseph Smith saw in vision a tender judgment scene, highlighting the role of Adam in presenting his righteous posterity to our Heavenly Father and to the Savior to receive their eternal reward. The vision is reported by Heber C. Kimball in his journal: "There Father Adam stood and opened the gate to them [the Twelve], and as they entered, he embraced them one by one and kissed them. He then led them to the throne of God, and then the Savior embraced each one of them and kissed them, and crowned each one of them in the presence of God .... The impression this vision left on Brother Joseph's mind was of so acute a nature, that he never could refrain from weeping while rehearsing it." [^24]

During an 1861 address in the Salt Lake Tabernacle, President Kimball mentioned this same vision: "This brings to my mind the vision that Joseph Smith had, when he saw Adam open the gate of the Celestial City and admit the people one by one. He then saw Father Adam conduct them to the throne one by one, when they were crowned Kings and Priests of God. I merely bring this up to impress upon your mind the principles of order, but it will nevertheless apply to every member of the Church." [^25]

THE BATTLE OF THE GREAT GOD

Resurrection and judgment will go on during the thousand years from the time the Savior comes and the Millennium begins. "And Satan shall be bound, that old serpent, who is called the devil, and shall not be loosed for the space of a thousand years. And then he shall be loosed for a little season, that he may gather together his armies." (D&C 88:110-11.) Sadly, toward the end of the thousand years there will be those mortals on the earth who will "again begin to deny their God" (D&C 29:22). No doubt some of these will be part of the army Satan will gather at that time. The other part of his army will consist of all those spirits who have chosen to follow Lucifer. Satan will gather all who deny God, whose mentality and end are described in modern revelation: "That which breaketh a law, and abideth not by law, but seeketh to become a law unto itself, and willeth to abide in sin, and altogether abideth in sin, cannot be sanctified by law, neither by mercy, justice, nor judgment. Therefore, they must remain filthy still." (D&C 88:35.)

Satan and his "hosts of hell" will come up to battle against Michael and his armies, "even the hosts of heaven." This battle at the end of the Millennium is the final battle in the war that started in heaven. It is called the "battle of the great God" or the battle of Gog and Magog. [^26] The outcome is sure. "The devil and his armies shall be cast away into their own place, that they shall not have power over the saints any more at all. For Michael shall fight their battles, and shall overcome him who seeketh the throne of him who sitteth upon the throne, even the Lamb. This is the glory of God, and the sanctified; and they shall not any more see death." (See D&C 88:112-16.)

When the battle of the great God is over and all are placed in their respective kingdoms, Adam will continue to preside over his posterity through all eternity.

---
Notas:
[^1] There was no death for man or the animals in the garden. Father Lehi states that there was no death among all the creations God had made on this earth until Adam ate the forbidden fruit: "And now, behold, if Adam had not transgressed he would not have fallen, but he would have remained in the garden of Eden. And all things which were created must have remained in the same state in which they were after they were created; and they must have remained forever, and had no end." (2 Ne. 2:22.) SPIRIT CREATION Temporal-physical death.
[^2] There would have been no children born in the garden. Lehi is forthright in his explanation that without the Fall Adam and Eve would not have had children (2 Ne. 2:23). And Lehi is not the only one who mentions that Adam and Eve would have had no children if there had been no fall. Eve herself realized the situation and spoke forth with gladness, "Were it not for our transgression we never should have had seed" (Moses 5:11). This marvelous declaration is not found in our present Bible and was made known through the translation of the Bible by the Prophet Joseph Smith. It no doubt was upon the plates of brass, which seems to be the source for Lehi's understanding. In addition, we have the confirming words of the prophet Enoch: "Because that Adam fell, we are; and by his fall came death" (Moses 6:48). PHYSICAL-SPIRITUAL CREATION Spiritual-separation or alienation from things of God.
[^3] There was no blood in the bodies of Adam and Eve in the garden. That there was no blood in the bodies of Adam and Eve before the Fall, and that blood came as a result of the Fall, is not categorically stated in any one passage of scripture, but leading doctrinal teachers such as President Joseph Fielding Smith and Elder Bruce R. McConkie have declared that such was the case. [^7] This conclusion is scripturally based and takes into account that blood is the mortal life of the body (see Gen. 9:2-6; Lev. 17:10-15).
[^4] There was no sin in the Garden of Eden until the transgression of Adam and Eve. This fact seems to be without controversy. The whole concept of the Fall is based upon it. Lehi declared that without the Fall Adam and Eve "would have remained in a state of
[^5] Adam and Eve were in the presence of God in the Garden of Eden. Although the Father was not constantly in the garden with Adam and Eve, he visited them from time to time, and they could see him and talk with him. However, after the Fall occurred and they were cast out of the garden, they were able to hear God's voice, but "they saw him not; for they were shut out from his presence" (Moses 5:4).
[^6] 6. Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, comp. Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1976), p. 181.
[^7] 7. In Journal of Discourses, 17:143.
[^8] 8. In Journal of Discourses, 9:317.
[^9] 9. John Taylor, cited in The Vision, comp. N. B. Lundwall (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, n.d.), p. 146; italics added.
[^10] 10. Lectures on Faith 2:12.
[^11] 11. Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, comp. Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1976), pp. 248-49.
[^12] 12. Joseph Fielding Smith, Doctrines of Salvation, comp. Bruce R. McConkie, 3 vols. (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1954-56), 1:76.
[^13] 13. In Journal of Discourses, 1:281.
[^14] 14. Joseph Fielding Smith, Man: His Origin and Destiny (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1954), pp. 362, 376-77.
[^15] 15. Bruce R. McConkie, "Christ and the Creation," Ensign 12 (June 1982): 13.
[^16] 16. Bruce R. McConkie, "Christ and the Creation," Ensign 12 (June 1982): p. 13.
[^17] 17. As cited in Matthias F. Cowley, Wilford Woodruff: History of His Life and Labors (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1964), p. 481; see also pp. 545-46. Compare John Taylor, The Mediation and Atonement (Salt Lake City: Deseret News Co., 1882), pp. 69-70; George Q. Cannon, in Journal of Discourses, 11:336-37.
[^18] 18. Bruce R. McConkie, "Christ and the Creation," Ensign 12 (June 1982): p. 11.
[^19] 19. Bruce R. McConkie, The Promised Messiah (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1978), p. 62.
[^20] 20. Bruce R. McConkie, A New Witness for the Articles of Faith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1985), p. 63.
[^21] 21. Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, comp. Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1976), p. 137.
