Robert L. Millet, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Man Adam ( 1990)

8

The Book of Adam in Judaism and Early Christianity

Stephen E. Robinson [^1]

The figure of Adam was powerful medicine in the literature of Judaism and of early Christianity, and the source of that power was the paradigmatic nature of Adam's role. He was ha'adam, the human being-the archetype, prototype, and pattern for all subsequent human beings. M. Eliade, among others, has shown from the evidence offered by many different cultures how powerful the figure of the original ancestor can be. [^2]

In the mind of first-century Jews and Christians, what Adam was, we are; what Adam could become, we can become. Therefore, if one could alter the way Adam was perceived in the popular mind, one could change the contemporary view of the nature and function of man, of what it meant to be human. As E. Pagels notes: "Since everyone agreed that the story of Adam and Eve offered a basic paradigm for ordering human society, argument over the role of government most often took the form of conflicting interpretations of that story." [^3] Pagels shows how the fifth-century church changed its understanding of the story of Adam and Eve from an affirmation of free agency and the necessity of voluntary choice to an affirmation of man's inability to govern himself. Where Christians in earlier centuries had argued for human free agency and the necessity of individual self-government based on gospel principles, [^4] Christians after Augustine rejected both the doctrine of free agency and the possibility of individual self-government. Consequently, they looked to the church or the civil government to control humanity, to make right choices for them, and to enforce those choices. [^5] This is a prime example of how, in religious societies or societies with a state religion, control of the Adamic paradigm was also both theological and social control.

Such was the power of the Adamic paradigm that both sides of a controversy would often appeal to it, just as both sides in a religious community today might still appeal to one and the same Bible to support contradictory views. For example, the author of 4 Ezra, a determinist, blamed human failure on the sin of Adam, who was created with a defect: "For the first Adam, burdened with an evil heart, transgressed and was overcome, as were also all who were descended from him. Thus the disease became permanent; the law was in the people's heart along with the evil root, but what was good departed, and the evil remained .... O Adam, what have you done? For though it was you who sinned, the fall was not yours alone, but ours also who are your descendants." [^6] Thus, in the pessimistic view of 4 Ezra, it was the "evil heart" with which Adam was "burdened" by his creator that was the ultimate cause of all human sin.

The author of 2 Baruch, however, insists that each of us is free to make our own decisions, unburdened by the sin of Adam: "For, although Adam sinned first and has brought death upon all who were not in his own time, yet each of them who has been born from him has prepared for himself the coming torment. And further, each of them has chosen for himself the coming glory ....

Adam is, therefore, not the cause, except only for himself, but each of us has become our own Adam." [^7]

Jesus himself used the Adamic paradigm to justify his break with the traditions of the elders on the permissability of divorce. Even though the law of Moses specifically permitted divorce, Jesus argued: "Moses because of the hardness of your hearts suffered you to put away your wives: but from the beginning it was not so" (Matt. 19:8; italics added). In other words, man's original condition in Eden set a stronger precedent in the mind of Jesus than the subsequent legislation on Sinai. What happened in the case of our first parents is normative.

The normative power of the Adamic paradigm is manifest also in the pastoral Epistles: "But I suffer not a woman to teach, nor to usurp authority over the man, but to be in silence. For Adam was first formed, then Eve. And Adam was not deceived, but the woman being deceived was in the transgression." (1 Tim. 2:12-14.) Again the pattern set by the Adamic paradigm was called upon to justify the practice of the contemporary Church, just as in the modern Church the example of Adam and Eve are of paramount importance to the Latter-day Saint understanding of the relationship between husbands and wives and of the nature and purpose of life.

Modern secular society has difficulty in understanding how powerful the Adamic paradigm could be in other times and places, but that is because modern secular society no longer believes in Adam and Eve. The experience of the first parents has become irrelevant to modern society because modern society no longer believes there were first parents. We either have chosen other less compelling paradigms ("man is the featherless biped" - the purely scientific model) or have attempted to do away with paradigms altogether ("existence precedes essence"-the existential model).

Nevertheless, anciently the normative power of the Adamic paradigm was such that a considerable literature was spawned among both Jews and Christians in an attempt to redefine the nature of man by repainting the picture of the first man, Adam.

THE BOOK OF ADAM

According to Joseph Smith's translation of the Bible, Adam wrote a book of remembrance in which was kept a genealogy of the children of God and also the things which he wrote under the influence of the Spirit of God (see Moses 6:5, 46; see also 1:40-41). The Doctrine and Covenants records that Adam called his posterity together at Adam-ondi-Ahman to bless them and that he, "being full of the Holy Ghost, predicted whatsoever should befall his posterity unto the latest generation" (D&C 107:56). The information revealed to Adam was to be made available to Adam's posterity in the book of Enoch (D&C 107:57). This is also the view expressed in 2 Enoch, where Enoch is to preserve the writings of Adam and Seth as well as his own in the book which bears his name: "And give them the books of thy handwriting, children to children, kinsmen to kinsmen, race to race, as mediator, Enoch, of my general Michael, because thy handwriting and the handwriting of thy fathers Adam and Seth shall not be destroyed till the end of time." [^8] Both Adam's prophecy of the future of the world and the book which he left to his posterity are well attested in the ancient literature.

Beginning with the rabbinic literature, we find several references to the Book of Adam in the Midrash Rabbah: "While Adam lay a shapeless mass before Him at whose decree the world came into existence, He showed him every generation and its Sages, every generation and its judges, scribes, interpreters, and leaders. Said He to him: 'Thine eyes did see unformed substance: the unformed substances [viz., thy potential descendants] which thine eyes did see have already been written in the book of Adam': viz., THIS IS THE BOOK OF THE GENERATIONS OF ADAM." [^9] Notice the interesting claim that Adam, like Moses in the Pearl of Great Price, witnessed the primeval creation out of unformed substance (or "matter unorganized").

Also from the midrashim is the following: "God did not, however, tell Moses whom he should appoint, hence Moses inquired: To whom shall I speak?' God replied: 'I will show thee.' So what did the Holy One, blessed be He, do? He brought him the book of Adam and showed him all the generations that would arise from Creation to Resurrection, each generation and its kings, its leaders, and its prophets, saying unto him: 'I have appointed all these [for their destinies] from that time [Creation], and Bezalel, too, I have appointed from that time.' " [^10] Again we have the clear belief that Adam had a knowledge of the entire history of the world from the Creation to the end and that the information was preserved in the Book of Adam. Moreover, Moses was allowed the same vision that had originally been given to Adam.

The Babylonian Talmud contains at least two references to the Book of Adam:

But did not Resh Lakish [himself] say, What is the meaning of the verse This is the book of the generations of Adam? Did Adam have a book? What it implies is that the Holy One, blessed be he, showed to Adam every [coming] generation with its expositors, every generation with its sages, every generation with its leaders. [^11]

Samuel Yarhina'ah was Rabbi's physician. Now, Rabbi having contracted an eye disease, Samuel offered to bathe it with a lotion, but he said, "I cannot bear it." "Then I will apply an ointment to it," he said. "This too I cannot bear," he objected. So he placed a phial of chemicals under his pillow, and he was healed. Rabbi was most anxious to ordain him, but the opportunity was lacking. Let it not grieve thee, he said; I have seen the Book of Adam, in which is written, "Samuel Yarhina'ah [86a] shall be called 'Sage,' but not 'Rabbi,' and Rabbi's healing shall come through him." [^12]

Note the common element in the rabbinic traditions that the Book of Adam recorded his predictions of future history down to the end of the world, or, in other words, "whatsoever should befall his posterity unto the latest generation" (D&C 107:56).

The so-called Book of Raziel should also be mentioned here, since it deals with many of the same themes as the Book of Adam. The book itself is a late medieval compilation of magical and mystical Jewish lore, some of which goes back to talmudic times (ca. A.D. 800). That part of the collection called the Sefer ha-Razim (Book of Secrets) relates that after the Fall, God sent the angel Raziel, whose name means "secrets of God," to Adam with a book which told him the future of the world down to its end. Raziel read passages from the book to Adam until the latter fell down in fear. But the heavenly messenger raised him up, saying, "Arise, Adam!" and gave him possession of the book which was then passed on to Adam's righteous posterity. [^13] As we shall see below, the heavenly messenger(s) who raises Adam up and reveals the future or the knowledge necessary for redemption is a theme common to much of the Adam literature of antiquity.

In Christian sources, the Apostolic Constitutions mention a Book of Adam that was considered to be "pernicious and repugnant to the truth," even though it was written by "the ancient ones." [^14] A Book of Adam is also mentioned as one of the apocryphal books of the Old Testament in the eighth century canon list of books called the "Sixty Books." [^15] In the thirteenth century, Mechitar of Ayrivank compiled a canon list in which a Book of Adam known to him was listed among "the books which the Jews have in secret." [^16] However, while mention of an ancient Book of Adam may be found in the sources, no actual text with this title has survived to modern times. Nevertheless, several other books attributed to or associated with Adam have come down to us.

Though the above are the specific witnesses to a Book of Adam, rabbinic literature in general has a few more things of interest to say about the first man. For example, the rabbis interpreted Gen. 1:27 ("So God created man in his own image, in the image of God created he him; male and female created he them") to mean that Adam and Eve were originally one perfect creation containing both male and female characteristics. When the female Eve was taken out of the male Adam, the two parts were less than perfect unless and until they could be joined together again. [^17] The Zohar tells us that Eve was not Adam's first wife but that he had been married before to Lilith. Since Lilith was created out of the ground like Adam, she would not obey him but left him and became the evil spirit that causes crib death in babies. God corrected the mistake by creating Eve out of Adam's own flesh and bone so that she would be obedient to her source. [^18] According to Aboda Zara 8a, Adam was the first man to offer sacrifice to God.

The early rabbis also accepted the pre-existence of souls, since they believed that all souls were created within the soul of Adam at creation though deposited in the heavens until their individual bodies were created. [^19] The creation of Adam was seen as a microcosm for the creation of the world: Adam's hair was like the forests, his tears like the rivers, and so forth. [^20] An expanded form of this idea appears in medieval times in the kabbalistic doctrine of Adam Kadmon (primordial man). According to this view, the created Adam, indeed creation itself, proceeds from and is patterned after a prior Adam, the divine Adam Kadmon, as Gershom Scholem explains: "In contrast to the First Man Adam, this spiritual man is called in the Zohar proper the adam kadma'ah ila'ah ('primordial supreme man'), and in Tikkunei Zohar he is called Adam Kadmon ('primordial man') or Adam Kadmon le-khol hakedumim ('prototype of primordial man') .... This Adam Kadmon is the most sublime manifestation of the Deity that is to some extent accessible to human meditation." [^21] Concerning this doctrine of Adam Kadmon, the same writer has observed: "The tendency to interpret human life and behavior as symbols of a deeper life, the conception of man as a micro-cosmos and of the living God as a macro-anthropos, has never been more clearly expressed and driven to its farthest consequences." [^22]

The ancient Mandaeans, whose descendants still inhabit the area of the Shatt-al-Arab waterway between Iran and Iraq, also believed in the two Adams: "The earthly or bodily Adam and his sons, the Adamites, were, according to this mythology, only images of the heavenly Adam, called Addam r(ab)ba or Adakas (from adam kasya or 'hidden Adam'). The earthly Adam had a wife, called Eve (Hawwa), and there was also the heavenly Adam whose wife was called the 'cloud of light.' " [^23]

Philo of Alexandria shared with the later kabbalists, Gnostics, and Mandaeans a belief that there were two Adams-the heavenly, spiritual man and the earthly, carnal man. [^24] Philo interpreted the two accounts of the creation of man (Gen. 1:27 and 2:7) as describing two separate creations of two separate Adams: "Who is the 'moulded' man? And how does he differ from him who is (made) 'in accordance with the image (of God)?' The moulded man is the sense-perceptible man and a likeness of the intelligible type. But the man made in accordance with (God's) form is intelligible and incorporeal and a likeness of the archetype, so far as this is visible. And he is a copy of the original seal. And this is the Logos of God, the first principle, the archetypal idea, the pre-measurer of all things." [^25]

Philo interpreted the story of Adam and Eve in completely allegorical terms along Platonic philosophical lines. As a thoroughly hellenized Jew, he interpreted the story as though it were a lesson in Platonic philosophy. For Philo, Adam symbolized nous (Greek for "mind"). He stood for all the higher, noble, and rational aspects of human personality. Eve, on the other hand, symbolized aisthesis (Greek for "sensation") and represented all the lower, physical, and emotional qualities of humans, including the appetites and passions. [^26] Of course, Philo's view represents a hybrid of the language he inherited from scripture and the philosophical concepts he had adopted from the hellenistic world. While his philosophy mingled with scripture had great influence on later Christian theology, he does not represent a widespread religious view among Jews of the first century.

The cosmic or universal nature of Adam is revealed in another common tradition, namely that Adam's name represents the four points of the compass. [^27] In Greek the four directions are Anatole (East), Dusis (West), Arctos (North), and Mesembria (South). Thus the name Adam could be understood as an acronym for the four directions. This was supported by the belief that the dirt used in Adam's creation was taken from the four corners of the earth. D. Cerbelaud believes that the symbolism involves Adam's body being understood as a temple and that it was therefore necessary for it to be cosmically oriented to the four points of the compass. She further suggests that since Adam's name is equivalent to the number forty-six in Jewish gematria, Jesus' statement about destroying and raising the temple (see John 2:19-22) should be interpreted symbolically as a statement concerning the replacement of the temple represented by the body of the first Adam with the temple represented by the body of Christ, the second Adam. [^28]

Another topic which generated a surprising amount of commentary among the rabbis is the "garments of skins" given to Adam and Eve in the Garden of Eden. One interpretation has been that the garment of skins was the physical body itself. Another is that the first parents were dressed in the skin of the serpent of Leviathan, the great sea-monster. Since in Hebrew the word for "skin" is almost identical to the word for "light," some have suggested that the term should be read "garments of light." Others have insisted that the garments were made of wool or linen. In the Pseudepigrapha the celestial garments of Adam and Eve are often identified with the garments the righteous receive in the hereafter. Adam's garments of skins were generally perceived to have mystical qualities and were identified as high priestly garments which Adam passed down with the priesthood to his righteous posterity. [^29]

The rabbis were divided on whether Adam was created mortal or immortal. It seems that there were three basic viewpoints. The first was that Adam was created immortal in the garden but was punished with death, which was hereditary in his posterity. The second view was that Adam was created immortal but that his punishment was personal, not hereditary. That is, men die because of their own sins and not because of Adam's sin. Thus if a man were to live without sin, he would still be immortal. In fact, the rabbis pointed to Enoch and other translated individuals as examples of this kind of man. The third view was that Adam was created mortal and that his eventual death was inevitable; his sin, however, brought about violent, painful, and premature death. Had he not sinned, death would have been, after a long and happy life, a beautiful transition from this life to the next. [^30] More recent theologians have pointed out that Adam cannot be considered to have been "immortal" at his creation, at least not in the strict sense, since he had the ability to die in the event of his sinning. In this sense, the state of the first Adam parallels the state of the second Adam, Christ. For in their respective gardens, Eden and Gethsemane, each had the ability to die if they so chose, but neither was under the necessity of dying.

THE APOCALYPSE (REVELATION) OF ADAM

While no book entitled the Apocalypse (Revelation) of Adam is mentioned in the surviving Jewish sources, Epiphanius of Salamis states that more than one such work was circulating among Gnostic Christians in the fourth century. [^31] In 1945, a collection of Gnostic writings was found at Nag Hammadi in Upper Egypt which date to around the fourth century A.D. Among these there is indeed an Apocalypse (Revelation) of Adam (CG V, 5). [^32]

In the Nag Hammadi Apocalypse, Adam, in the last year of his life, reveals to Seth the secrets of creation and the future history of the world, including the promise of a coming Savior. Bentley Layton maintains that the Apocalypse is based on some independent form of the Adam myth known to the Gnostics rather than on Genesis itself. [^33] This is intriguing to Latter-day Saints especially, since our own understanding of Adam is also largely determined by an independent tradition. In the Apocalypse, Adam is approached after the Fall by three heavenly messengers who wake him from his slumber. Saying, "Arise, Adam!" they reveal to him his true origin and identity. Again we have the common theme of the raising of Adam by heavenly messengers. Usually these messengers reveal the future of the world, the esoteric knowledge needed for salvation, and/or the coming of a future Savior from the highest heavens in later times. In the Apocalypse of Adam the information and promise given to Adam by the heavenly messengers is transmitted to his posterity through Seth rather than by a general convocation of Adam's posterity.

George MacRae, among others, has argued that the theme of the promised Savior found in the Apocalypse of Adam must be pre-Christian, since he sees no evidence of Christianity in the document. [^34] Other scholars resist the idea that there could have been any ancient "redeemer myth" before the appearance of Christianity in the first century. Yet among the Mandaeans, who are hostile in the extreme to the identification of Jesus as the Messiah, Adam is said to have been taught the mysteries of the cosmos and the rituals of salvation after the Fall by a heavenly messenger called Manda d'Hayye, which means "the knowledge of life." [^35] For Man-daeans the promised Messiah was not Jesus but John the Baptist.

In the Apocalypse of Adam and some other Gnostic texts, the Fall is attributed not to the partaking of forbidden fruit but specifically to the separation of the male and female aspects within Adam. [^36] This may be the reason why several Gnostic texts define salvation as an eternal reunion of the male and female principles within a single entity. [^37]

Finally, the Nag Hammadi Apocalypse of Adam was not the only document which circulated in antiquity under that title. The Epistle of Barnabas and the Christian writers Irenaeus and Clement of Alexandria all share a common, identical passage which the Constantinople manuscript of Barnabas identifies as coming from an Apocalypse of Adam: "A sweet smelling fragrance to the Lord is a heart that glorifies the one who made it." Since this passage is not found in the Apocalypse of Adam from Nag Hammadi, it must be taken from a different Apocalypse of Adam which has not survived.

In Gnostic sources generally, though generalization is sometimes difficult, Adam is perceived as the first human-as in Judaism and Christianity-but his physical body is created by lesser beings, the archons, while his spirit comes from the realm of the Eternal Father. Since many of the Gnostic sources equate the creator, Jehovah, with Satan, true religion for Adam consists in learning to avoid the deception of the god of this world (Jehovah/ Satan/Ialdabaoth) while receiving messengers from the Father in Heaven who teach him the gnosis, the esoteric knowledge needed for him to ascend past the archons set in his way and enter into salvation. [^38]

The Gnostic Adam is created in the image of a heavenly Man. In fact, the heavenly Man, the divine model for the creation of earthly Adam, is sometimes called Geradamas or Pigeradamas, which means "the alien Adam," or the Adam from another place. [^39] Thus there is in these sources, as in the Judaism and Mandaeism sources, an Adam senior, the perfect heavenly Adam, and an Adam junior, the first earthly prototype or copy. [^40] According to H. Jackson, the Gnostics "coined the name Geradamas with the intent of distinguishing the heavenly Adam who, like them, was a stranger to this world, from the earthly, corporeal Adam created by and owing allegiance to the cosmic powers.' [^41] The idea found in 2 Enoch 32 may be related. F. Andersen comments on that passage: "This curious exegesis of Gen 3:19b," he notes, "seems to be unique. It implies that Adam, made in a heavenly Paradise from materials brought from the earth, is now sent back to his native element to live there." [^42]

THE LIFE OF ADAM AND EVE (APOCALYPSE OF MOSES)

One of the most influential of the Adam books appears to have been a Jewish composition of the first century A.D. entitled the Life of Adam and Eve. [^43] This is found in two roughly similar versions which unfortunately have quite different titles. The Latin version of the Life of Adam and Eve is known as the Vita Adae et Evae, but the Greek version is called the Apocalypse of Moses. The Latin version, but not the Greek, contains an account of Satan's being cast out of heaven, Adam and Eve's repentance, and the birth of Cain. The Greek version, but not the Latin, contains the story of the Fall as narrated by Eve and an account of the death and burial of Adam. The Life of Adam and Eve is a Jewish document written around A.D. 100, probably in a Hebrew original.

The familiar themes of Adam's prophecy of the future and specifically the coming of Christ are found in the Vita at 25-30 and 42.2, respectively. The convocation of his posterity (Adam-ondi-Ahman) is described at 30.1-3. Also of interest in this document are the appearance of Satan as an angel of light to deceive Adam and Eve [^44] and the importance of washing and anointing. When Adam and Eve are first expelled from the garden, they stand up to their necks in the Jordan and Tigris rivers, respectively, in an attempt to expiate their guilt. [^45] But when Satan appears, disguised as an angel of light, Eve is deceived a second time and the attempt at penance fails. However, in the Slavonic version Eve is warned by Adam: "Take great care of thyself. Except thou seest me and all my tokens, depart not out of the water, nor trust in the words, which are said to thee, lest thou fall again into the snare." [^46] Thus, properly equipped, Eve does not succumb to Satan the second time, according to the Slavonic version.

In his prophecy of the future, Adam describes the purification by water that will be available only when the Messiah comes (Vita 29.14), and when Adam is dying he sends Seth to fetch the oil of mercy from the tree of life in the garden, that Adam might be anointed and saved from pain and death. But Seth is turned away with the promise that Adam will receive the oil of mercy in the last days through Christ. After his death, Adam is carried off by angels and washed three times in the presence of God in the Acherusian Lake.

In this document there is an interesting variation on the theme of the heavenly messenger(s) who calls out "Adam, Arise!" Here it is Eve who cries out, "Adam, Adam, where are you? Arise! Come to me and I will show you a great secret." This image of Eve as motivator and revelator was picked up and expanded in Gnosticism, sometimes to the point where she actually becomes the heavenly messenger. [^47] At other times Eve was identified, or at least associated, with the serpent as the bringer of wisdom on the one hand, or as the tool of Satan in the seduction of Adam on the other. Very early in Judaism the idea developed that Adam was saved by the wisdom of God. For example, we read in the Wisdom of Solomon 10:1-2: "Wisdom protected the first-formed father of the world, when he alone had been created; she delivered him from his transgression, and gave him strength to rule all things." In subsequent Jewish sources the wisdom of God is identified with the Torah, the law of Moses. But in Gnosticism, since the Greek word for wisdom is sophia, the wisdom of God became Sophia, the heavenly woman. From there it was a short step to associate the heavenly Sophia with the earthly Eve, particularly since the wisdom (sophia) which saves Adam could so easily be identified with the knowledge (gnosis) Eve brought to Adam in the forbidden fruit. [^48] The association of Eve and the serpent was supported by an unfortunate similarity in many of the Semitic languages between the name Eve and the word for "serpent" (hawwah/hiwya in Hebrew; hayyat/hauyat in Arabic; hawah/hawyah in Syriac). [^49]

According to the Life of Adam and Eve, and those later works dependent upon it, the body of Abel could not be buried in the earth until after the body of Adam had been buried. Cain had tried to bury his slain brother but could not. Only after he who had been taken from the earth, Adam, had been buried would the earth receive the body of slain Abel. [^50] After the burial of Adam, Eve instructs Seth to write down the life and teachings of Adam and Eve. The death of Eve is said to have occurred six days after that of Adam, whereupon "his rib" was returned to him.

JUBILEES

The Book of Jubilees has been called the Little Genesis, and it does relate the story of Adam and Eve. Written in the second century B.C., its purpose was to support the legislation of the law of Moses against the creeping hellenization of Judaism. Thus the stories of Adam and the patriarchs are retold from the perspective of a Torah-observing hasidic Jew, complete with an anachronistic concern for the details of the law of Moses. Little is added to the tradition concerning Adam, but the author does suggest a solution to the problem of "in the day that thou eatest thereof thou shalt surely die," pointing out that when Adam died he "lacked seventy years from one thousand years, for a thousand years are like one day in the testimony of heaven and therefore it was written concerning the tree of knowledge, 'In the day you eat from it you will die.' Therefore he did not complete the years of this day because he died in it [i.e. in the same thousand year period]." [^51]

THE TESTAMENT OF ADAM

Adam was just as powerful a figure in early Christianity as he was in Judaism, and several Christian books belong to the Adam cycle. Sometime in the late third or early fourth century A.D. a Christian author used older Jewish traditions about Adam to create the Testament of Adam. This document was very popular in the Christian church, and versions have been found in six different languages. The original language was Syriac. [^52]

The Testament of Adam consists of a description of who and what praise God at which hour of the day and night, Adam's prophecy of the future of the world, and a description of the nine classes of angels and their different functions. Like the Life of Adam and Eve, the Testament of Adam adds many midrashic details about our first parents and their fall. For example, we are told that the forbidden fruit was the fig [^53] and that Cain really killed Abel out of jealousy over their sister Lebuda. [^54] Adam tells Seth that, before he fell, he used to hear the sounds of the angels praising God in their ranks at their appointed times and that he could hear the sound of mighty waves from the ocean above the heavens. We find an elaboration on this in 2 Enoch 31:2, which states that in Paradise the heavens were open and that Adam saw and heard everything that went on there. Of course, the standard theme of Adam's prophecy is the whole substance of the second section of the Testament of Adam, and once again the information is handed down through Seth in written form. The specific information of the prophecy centers on the Flood and the coming of Christ into the world.

It is theologically significant that in this document Adam is promised that he will eventually become a god through the merits of the promised Messiah. He says to his son, Seth: "'He [God] spoke to me about this in Paradise after I picked some of the fruit in which death was hiding: "Adam, Adam do not fear. You wanted to be a god; I will make you a god, not right now, but after a space of many years .... And after three days, while I am in the tomb, I will raise up the body I received from you. And I will set you at the right hand of my divinity, and I will make you a god just like you wanted." ' " [^55]

The Testament of Adam also divides history into a seven-thousand-year scheme-one thousand years from the Creation to the Flood, and six thousand years from the Flood to the end.

THE PENITENCE OF ADAM

A book called the Penitence of Adam is listed in the Gelasian Decree (sixth century A.D.) as apocryphal. At the end of the twelfth century A.D., Samuel of Ani noted a Penitence of Adam as one of the books Nestorian Christians had brought into Armenia from Syria, and in 1896 the Armenian Penitence of Adam was published by S. Josepheanz. [^56] The Armenian Penitence is very similar to the Life of Adam and Eve. In the former as in the latter, Satan reveals that his animosity against Adam had its origin in the preexistence, when they were both in the presence of God. [^57] Also here, as so often in the Adam literature, Adam is promised that he will be redeemed when Christ shall come into the world.

Other books of the Adam cycle found in the Armenian tradition are an Armenian version of the Life of Adam and Eve and six very short documents: History of the Creation and of the Transgression of Adam; History of the Expulsion of Adam from the Garden; History of Cain and Abel; the Promise of Seth; Adam's Words to Seth; and the Death of Adam.

THE CAVE OF TREASURES

Another early Christian composition dealing with Adam is the fourth-century work called the Cave of Treasures. [^58] Widely distributed anciently, it has come down to us primarily as part of a later composite work called the Book of the Rolls. [^59] The real focus of the Cave of Treasures is not Adam but Christ, and the document is a lengthy reinterpretation of Genesis from a narrowly Christian and, unfortunately, anti-Jewish point of view: the sacrament of bread and wine is read back into the Genesis account to replace the practice of sacrifice; Jesus wasn't really a Jew and wasn't really circumcized; and so forth. Beyond the Genesis material, the book is quite pedestrian, spending a great deal of time on chronology, genealogies, and the number of generations between biblical events.

A few points can be found in this book, however, that are worthy of note: Adam is said to have been created in Jerusalem; the fall of Adam and Eve, as well as the fall of Satan from heaven, was effected by removing from them their heavenly garments; Eden is understood as a mountain, with symbolic parallels to the later temple, the mountain of the Lord's house. Also, according to the Cave of Treasures, Christ was crucified over the exact spot upon which Adam had been buried, and he was crucified on the poles once used to carry the ark of the covenant. Like the Testament of Adam, this document also divides up the history of the world into seven one-thousand-year periods.

THE CONFLICT OF ADAM AND EVE WITH SATAN

A later Christian work entitled the Conflict of Adam and Eve with Satan is heavily dependent upon the Life of Adam and Eve, the Penitence of Adam, and the Cave of Treasures. [^60] Originally found in an Ethiopic version, it is divided into three parts, of which only the first actually deals with Adam and Eve. In this is described the straggles Adam and Eve had with Satan after their expulsion from the Garden of Eden. The second part of the work is a history of the patriarchs from Adam to Melchizedek, and the third part gives a history of Israel from Moses to the birth of Christ.

THE HOMILY OF ADAM IN HADES TO LAZARUS

A late medieval composition in Old Slavonic entitled the Homily of Adam in Hades to Lazarus describes a message sent from Adam to the mortal Christ via the revivified Lazarus. [^61] According to this work, when Jesus restored Lazarus to life, Lazarus brought the plea from Adam in Hades not to leave the patriarch and his righteous posterity any longer in their sufferings. The theology and the view of Hades reflected in this document are thoroughly "orthodox."

CONCLUSION

There was a rich tradition of Adam literature in ancient Judaism and early Christianity. The interest in Adam and the focus on his experiences both before and after the Fall were much more intense during those earlier periods of history than in the modern world generally, where the figure of the primal ancestor has lost its normative character. Perhaps as a result of that loss of interest, many of the ancient books attributed to or associated with Adam have not survived, among them the Book of Adam, the Book of the Generations of Adam, the Testament of the Protoplasts, the other Apocalyse(s) of Adam, and the Book of the Daughters of Adam. [^62]

Among the Latter-day Saints, however, the figure of Adam largely retains its normative character. In this sense the Latter-day Saints are closer to the ancient world and to the early Church than are most of our contemporaries. Indeed, the Latter-day Saint temple endowment may be said in some sense to be our own "Book of Adam and Eve," and functions in the Latter-day Church in precisely the same way that extra-canonical Adam literature functioned in ancient Judaism and early Christianity.

It is also remarkable that Joseph Smith could reconstruct the main outlines of the ancient extra-canonical Adam literature without benefit of acquaintance with the Pseudepigrapha known to us in the twentieth century. Among the non-canonical themes found in the writings of Joseph Smith-themes confirmed to be ancient ones in light of the literature discovered only after his death -are the heavenly messengers, the raising of Adam, Adam's detection of Satan disguised as an angel of light (a false messenger), the promise to Adam of a coming Savior, the gathering of Adam's righteous posterity to receive his final blessing or testament, and Adam's prediction of future world history. In addition, the doctrine of the two Adams-the divine, heavenly Adam and the created, earthly Adam-found in many of the ancient traditions but mostly unknown to scholars until around the turn of the century, may have some application to certain cryptic remarks of Brigham Young on the subject of our primal ancestor.

---
Notas:
[^1] There was no death for man or the animals in the garden. Father Lehi states that there was no death among all the creations God had made on this earth until Adam ate the forbidden fruit: "And now, behold, if Adam had not transgressed he would not have fallen, but he would have remained in the garden of Eden. And all things which were created must have remained in the same state in which they were after they were created; and they must have remained forever, and had no end." (2 Ne. 2:22.) SPIRIT CREATION Temporal-physical death.
[^2] There would have been no children born in the garden. Lehi is forthright in his explanation that without the Fall Adam and Eve would not have had children (2 Ne. 2:23). And Lehi is not the only one who mentions that Adam and Eve would have had no children if there had been no fall. Eve herself realized the situation and spoke forth with gladness, "Were it not for our transgression we never should have had seed" (Moses 5:11). This marvelous declaration is not found in our present Bible and was made known through the translation of the Bible by the Prophet Joseph Smith. It no doubt was upon the plates of brass, which seems to be the source for Lehi's understanding. In addition, we have the confirming words of the prophet Enoch: "Because that Adam fell, we are; and by his fall came death" (Moses 6:48). PHYSICAL-SPIRITUAL CREATION Spiritual-separation or alienation from things of God.
[^3] There was no blood in the bodies of Adam and Eve in the garden. That there was no blood in the bodies of Adam and Eve before the Fall, and that blood came as a result of the Fall, is not categorically stated in any one passage of scripture, but leading doctrinal teachers such as President Joseph Fielding Smith and Elder Bruce R. McConkie have declared that such was the case. [^7] This conclusion is scripturally based and takes into account that blood is the mortal life of the body (see Gen. 9:2-6; Lev. 17:10-15).
[^4] There was no sin in the Garden of Eden until the transgression of Adam and Eve. This fact seems to be without controversy. The whole concept of the Fall is based upon it. Lehi declared that without the Fall Adam and Eve "would have remained in a state of
[^5] Adam and Eve were in the presence of God in the Garden of Eden. Although the Father was not constantly in the garden with Adam and Eve, he visited them from time to time, and they could see him and talk with him. However, after the Fall occurred and they were cast out of the garden, they were able to hear God's voice, but "they saw him not; for they were shut out from his presence" (Moses 5:4).
[^6] 6. Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, comp. Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1976), p. 181.
[^7] 7. In Journal of Discourses, 17:143.
[^8] 8. In Journal of Discourses, 9:317.
[^9] 9. John Taylor, cited in The Vision, comp. N. B. Lundwall (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, n.d.), p. 146; italics added.
[^10] 10. Lectures on Faith 2:12.
[^11] 11. Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, comp. Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1976), pp. 248-49.
[^12] 12. Joseph Fielding Smith, Doctrines of Salvation, comp. Bruce R. McConkie, 3 vols. (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1954-56), 1:76.
[^13] 13. In Journal of Discourses, 1:281.
[^14] 14. Joseph Fielding Smith, Man: His Origin and Destiny (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1954), pp. 362, 376-77.
[^15] 15. Bruce R. McConkie, "Christ and the Creation," Ensign 12 (June 1982): 13.
[^16] 16. Bruce R. McConkie, "Christ and the Creation," Ensign 12 (June 1982): p. 13.
[^17] 17. As cited in Matthias F. Cowley, Wilford Woodruff: History of His Life and Labors (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1964), p. 481; see also pp. 545-46. Compare John Taylor, The Mediation and Atonement (Salt Lake City: Deseret News Co., 1882), pp. 69-70; George Q. Cannon, in Journal of Discourses, 11:336-37.
[^18] 18. Bruce R. McConkie, "Christ and the Creation," Ensign 12 (June 1982): p. 11.
[^19] 19. Bruce R. McConkie, The Promised Messiah (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1978), p. 62.
[^20] 20. Bruce R. McConkie, A New Witness for the Articles of Faith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1985), p. 63.
[^21] 21. Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, comp. Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1976), p. 137.
