In April 1915 the First Presidency—Joseph F. Smith, Anthon H. Lund, and Charles W. Penrose—introduced a formal family home evening program. The program was endorsed for the entire Church in the June 1915 Improvement Era.

“We advise and urge the inauguration of a ‘Home Evening’ throughout the Church,” the First Presidency wrote, “at which time fathers and mothers may gather their boys and girls about them in the home and teach them the word of the Lord. … This ‘Home Evening’ should be devoted to prayer, singing hymns, songs, instrumental music, scripture-reading, family topics and specific instruction on the principles of the Gospel, and on the ethical problems of life, as well as the duties and obligations of children to parents, the home, the Church, society and the Nation.”

The First Presidency concluded: “If the Saints obey this counsel, we promise that great blessings will result. Love at home and obedience to parents will increase. Faith will be developed in the hearts of the youth of Israel, and they will gain power to combat the evil influences and temptations which beset them.”

The Prophet Joseph Smith’s family was a continual support to him, and they loved each other very much. See how much you know about them.

- 1. How did the Prophet Joseph’s parents, Lucy Mack and Joseph Smith Sr., meet?
  a. Joseph worked for Lucy’s father.
  b. Lucy came to visit her brother in Tunbridge, Vermont, and met Joseph.
  c. They grew up on neighboring farms in Massachusetts.

- 2. Which of the Prophet’s immediate family members were witnesses of the gold plates?
  a. Joseph Sr., Alvin, Hyrum
  b. Hyrum, Samuel, Don Carlos
  c. Joseph Sr., Hyrum, Samuel

- 3. About which brother did the Prophet Joseph Smith say, “[He] possesses the mildness of a lamb, and the integrity of a Job, and in short, the meekness and humility of Christ” (History of the Church, 2:338)?
  a. Alvin
  b. Hyrum
  c. Samuel

Answers:

You might not be in your class presidency or an officer at your school, but chances are there is someone who looks up to you. Make it a goal to be a good example to your friends and your brothers and sisters—an example of obedience, kindness, and Christlike love.
