Victor L. Ludlow, Principles and Practices of the Restored Gospel ( 1992)

Introduction

After decades of teaching religion topics on three continents in at least three languages, the beauty and power of the restored gospel message of Jesus Christ continues to amaze and inspire me. To help teach others, both in classroom settings as a professor of theology at Brigham Young University and during informal discussions with friends and neighbors, I have often felt the need for a clear, correct, and complete guide to Latter-day Saint teachings and practices. The principles of the restored gospel are rich with eternal value, like a heavenly treasure chest waiting to be opened, and they need to find place in our hearts. As we reach for and strive to understand God's inspired teachings, we naturally desire to live by them and to help others do the same. Although the gospel truths are worth studying, their greater value lies in learning how to apply them in our own lives. Indeed, Latter-day Saint beliefs are something precious to live by.

In explaining the importance of living the gospel, President Ezra Taft Benson has distinguished between the doctrines and practices of a religion: "Theology is not religion, although the terms are used loosely and often as if they were completely interchangeable in meaning. Both are important. Theology is a science—religion is an art. The sciences stress the acquisition of knowledge while the concern of the arts is mainly the development of specific skills. 'The difference between theology and religion is much like the difference between knowing and doing.' Theology represents what we know and say regarding God—our beliefs. Religion is what we do about it—the way we live our beliefs." [^1] Thus, this book, Principles and Practices of the Restored Gospel, is about both theology and religion. It will present the major LDS beliefs and teachings about the restored gospel of Jesus Christ, and it will also emphasize the application and living of those principles. In particular, this book will concentrate on the principal truths that lead toward the path of eternal life and salvation.

Truths of Salvation

In the normal course of life, we have a variety of priorities we must establish. Foremost among them should be a study and application of the gospel teachings of Jesus Christ. As President Joseph F. Smith taught, "the greatest things in this world are the greatest truths, and there are no truths of greater worth than the truths of salvation. To know and live those truths which bring us again into the presence of God is the crowning achievement of man." [^2] Joseph Fielding Smith, President Smith's son and later president of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, taught in a similar vein that the "truths of salvation [are] easily understood" and that "salvation should be a subject uppermost in the minds of all men. It is, without question, the most important subject that could possibly be considered, . . . as it may be applied in their lives." [^3]

The truths about salvation help us understand our eternal nature and our special relationship with our Heavenly Father and his Son, Jesus Christ. These eternal doctrines of the gospel help prepare us to enter a covenant commitment with God, and knowing and believing them help us more faithfully keep his commandments. Living true to these beliefs will allow us to "be saved in the kingdom of God, which is the greatest of all the gifts of God; for there is no gift greater than the gift of salvation." (D&C 6:13.)

We have a long path to travel before we stand before God to see if we are ready and worthy to receive his gift of salvation. Until then, the gospel truths of salvation can bring peace and purpose into our lives. As President Ezra Taft Benson stated: "Thank God for the eternal truths of the gospel of peace and salvation. Thank God for the anchor, the feeling of security, the inner calm that the everlasting truths of the gospel bring to every faithful child of God." [^4] By carefully studying and then diligently applying the gospel principles, we place ourselves upon the path of eternal life, which will bring us back into our Heavenly Father's presence.

In this book, our study of basic LDS beliefs will be in five segments. First, we will review the nature of truth and seek an understanding about the members of the Godhead and the ways they communicate to us through prayer, revelation, the prophets, and the scriptures. Second, we will learn about the plan of salvation with emphasis upon the purpose of this earth life and the reality of our eternal existence, glorified through the atoning sacrifice of the Savior. Third, we will study the basic gospel principles and ordinances of the gospel, learning how we can mature spiritually as children of God. Fourth, we will review the commandments of God and LDS religious practices, many of which are found in traditional Christianity, while others are similar to the religious behavior observed in non-Christian religions. Finally, we will study the priesthood roles and offices and the purposes and programs of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, including its role in preparing God's children for Christ's second coming.
