Victor L. Ludlow, Principles and Practices of the Restored Gospel ( 1992)

Part 1:

The Members of the Godhead and Our Relationship to Them

Footnotes

Chapter 1

Why Search for Truth?

At times, we all contemplate the ultimate meaning of our existence. Our reflections often arise when we are in the presence of something mysterious or awe-inspiring, such as the innocence of a newborn child, the sublime thought of a philosopher, the inspiration of the scriptures, the unsurpassed beauty of nature's panorama, or the grief at a loved one's death. At such moments, we join humanity in a pursuit of truth.

Our search for truth might be compared to a wandering young man who came upon an ancient sage. He asked the old man to teach him all the wisdom he had accumulated. Wondering about the young man's commitment to such an education, the sage replied by asking the lad to accompany him to a nearby lake. Standing chest deep in the water, the wise man then said, "If I am to teach you, you must first learn to trust me by putting yourself completely into my hands." The youth agreed and soon found his hands tied firmly behind his back. Then the old man grabbed the lad's head and held it underwater. Before long, the lad started to struggle, twist, and kick, but he could not pull his head out of the water. The old man kept the young man's face under the water until he was just a moment from unconsciousness. When the old man finally released the youth's head, the lad burst out of the water and gasped for air. "Young man," the mentor said, "when you desire learning and truth with the same zeal you just had for air and life, then come and I will teach you."

How do people measure their desire to master truth? Is learning experienced like normal breathing—a thing done casually, without thought or appreciation? Or is learning manifested like the breath of life—something individuals intensely desire with a probing, constant effort and great sacrifice? And what keeps people searching for understanding until they feel they have mastered the topic at hand? Various circumstances seem to motivate humans with a longing to understand the ultimate verities of existence. For example, the wonders of nature might prompt such a period of meditation as one studies the still splendor of a moonlit night, observes the verdant beauty of a misty forest, gazes at a flaming sunset over a desert valley, or watches a new day dawn over a mountain peak. The quest for truth may be roused within the walls of a classroom, a library, a laboratory, or a private study. One person may feel the need to be completely alone as he or she ponders some new knowledge. Another may need the company of others to stimulate thoughtful probing by raising questions or suggesting answers about important truths.

The inquiring minds of scientists, philosophers, and other curious people have invested countless hours, energy, and wealth in the pursuit of truth. Most have searched for truth with their eyes: observing nature and human behavior, looking at microscopes and gauges, and studying manuscripts and computer printouts. Some have sought truth through their other physical senses: listening to sounds and tones, noting tastes and smells, and detecting chemical and physical conditions. Others have tried to find truth through the mind: pondering problems and perspectives, discussing ideas and arguments, and developing theorems and conclusions. Still others have pursued truth with their inner soul or spirit: sensing unseen dimensions and powers, responding to conscience and promptings, and seeking inspiration and revelation from higher sources of divine intelligence. And although many truths have been learned through these approaches, we know that many, many more truths await discovery.

Some people, young children especially, have a natural desire to discover new truths. This desire does not necessarily leave us as we finish school or become older, but it often becomes secondary to other priorities. However, regardless of age, inclination, or education, we sense that most knowledge remains beyond our understanding. Daily we face questions and situations beyond our comprehension. How often we think: "What's going on here?" or "I wish I knew!" Many people shrug off these moments of ignorance, learn little from them, and continue their daily routine. Others accumulate some bits of knowledge through these circumstances as they journey through life. Still others, really wanting to understand, use these opportunities to pursue new knowledge, searching for understanding.

Not only do we vary in the settings where we search for insight, but most of us usually discriminate and select the certain areas of knowledge we want to pursue. We are selective because we sense there are greater, more important and eternal truths compared to lesser, more mundane and temporal truths. For example, the truth about exactly when the sun will set tomorrow is not as important as knowing the rules of good health, which will enable us to enjoy many more years of sunsets. President Benson taught that "all truths are not of the same value. The saving truths of salvation are of greatest worth." [^1] We somehow feel that if we, personally, could possess the more valuable truths, they would grant us wisdom, honor, and even wealth. While a mastery of pure truth entices us like an elusive pot of gold at the end of the rainbow, we accept with some frustration the reality that we mortals are very limited in our capacity to learn and apply the great truths of the universe. So we are caught in a constant dilemma—we want to know more truths, especially those of an eternal nature, yet we do not usually know where or how to find them.

In short, there are a variety of types or levels of truth. The Prophet Joseph Smith revealed this principle in modern scripture, saying that "all truth is independent in that sphere in which God has placed it." (D&C 93:30.) [^2] Among other things, this means that distinct realms of truth exist, each with its own method or approach to understanding. A simple model encompassing the different types and dimensions of learning truth will be helpful. To begin, we need to examine three spheres of truth: physical, moral, and spiritual.

Sphere of physical truth.

The Sphere of Physical Truths

We experience our first and primary contact with reality through our physical senses. We say we "know" what we can see, hear, taste, smell, touch, and feel through our senses. In such an empirical approach, we practice the scientific method, collecting data and drawing conclusions that can be verified by further observations. With experience and maturity, we appreciate that the physical body is a marvelous instrument through which we learn much about the universe.

We observe early on, however, that our bodies are imperfect and our physical senses are often deficient. Though human beings are intellectually superior to animals, many animals have more highly developed senses. As examples, people cannot see as well as cats, hear as well as dogs, or move as easily in the dark as bats.

Furthermore, the senses we do possess are vulnerable and easily deceived. A preschooler realizes that the world seems to spin when viewed from a merry-go-round and that a stick will appear bent in water when it really isn't. Older children wonder why lukewarm water seems hot to snow-chilled fingers and why a lemon tastes especially sour when eaten after a sweet dessert. Youth have amused themselves by blindfolding a friend and offering him an apple to eat, while holding an onion under his nose, and then laughing as the confused friend naturally refuses to take a bite. There are many ways our physical senses fail us.

A third limitation of physical senses is that the knowledge we gather through them is often incomplete. Most of our understanding is limited to how much reality we experience and understand. We are often blind to the whole dimension of truth—like the six blind men who had no previous knowledge of elephants and based their interpretation of elephants on the single animal part they first touched. The first, holding the trunk, thought the elephant was a giant snake; the second, touching a tusk, considered it a curved spear; the third, grabbing an ear, believed this animal was a huge leaf or fan; the fourth, touching the stomach, knew it was a leather tent canopy; the fifth, rubbing a leg, assumed it was a large tree trunk; and the sixth, holding the tail, thought an elephant was a whip. They each were correct but incomplete in their understanding.

A fourth challenge we face in our physical perception of truth is that our understanding is always conditional upon our point of view. Numerous examples illustrate this dilemma of natural, human bias. One compares the perspectives of a group of people who had each raised and studied many roses from their own gardens. In listening to them discuss the rose bush, one would think they each were talking about a different plant. A botanist highlights the colors and texture of the flower. A perfumer, with eyes closed, describes the roses' fragrance. A cook tells how to make rose tea from the dried petals. A tailor compares the thorn's sharp points and their hardness with that of needles. A farmer explains how rose vines strung along the fence rows protect his watermelon patch from careless teenagers. A weaver talks of roots that can be woven into a strong cord. Each of these people has a true but completely different perspective that affects their orientation and discussion of a common plant.

In summary, our physical senses are valuable avenues for learning, but they are also weak, vulnerable, limited, and biased. We need to continually increase our understanding of physical truths by expanding our perception of the world around us and by multiplying the means through which we seek these truths.

The Sphere of Moral Truths

Our perceptions in the second dimension of truth, within the moral sphere, also begin as innate learning skills. Every person is born with a conscience, an inner knowledge of basic right and wrong. Though different ages and cultures have exhibited slight variations in this "moral law," most peoples have possessed common values of justice, mercy, honesty, loyalty, sexual restraint, respect for life, and so on. (See Alma 29:8; 2 Ne. 2:27; 29:7-13.) [^3] In the human race as a whole, the idea of decent behavior is accepted as the moral standard. [^4]

Moral truths, as they affect behavioral motives, go beyond the physical realm into our souls. Physical truths might describe how we act, but moral truths reflect why we act. Moral truths define conformity to established sanctioned codes and accepted notions of right and wrong. They also evaluate ethical questions of fairness, integrity, and virtue. The moral dimension incorporates our spirit or conscience in the search for truth. [^5]

Unfortunately, our understanding of moral truths can also be weakened or twisted out of balance. Abusive upbringing, peer pressures, corrupt life-styles, and negative influences can dilute and distort our moral perspectives. Just as some people become blind, deaf, or otherwise physically handicapped, a few individuals may become seriously impaired in moral understanding, especially if they are raised in a corrupt environment or if they abuse moral values with destructive, egotistical, and selfish behavior. As will be discussed later, a regular pattern of upright behavior and personal integrity strengthens moral character and leads to a far greater understanding and appreciation of moral truths. [^6]

The Sphere of Spiritual Truths

Unlike physical learning and moral perception, spiritual sensitivity, which is the highest realm of truth, is not easily accessible or inherent to our existence. Indeed, the quest for truths within the spiritual sphere often goes against the grain of human nature and contemporary society. Spiritual truths cannot be attained by the usual empirical method through the normal physical senses; they must be learned through the Spirit. Jesus taught that the Holy Ghost, also known as the Spirit of God, is the means to receive truth. Indeed, Christ promised that the Spirit would guide us "into all truth" since he reveals only what the Father gives him. (John 16:7-15, especially v. 13.)

The Apostle Paul taught the Corinthians that the natural person cannot receive spiritual truths except through the Spirit of God. He said that God has prepared insights for us that can be neither physically seen by the eye nor heard by the ear, "but God hath revealed them unto us by his Spirit." He also taught that although we know our own thoughts, "the things of God knoweth no man, except he has the Spirit of God." The words of the apostle Paul make it clear that spiritual knowledge is available only by revelation from God through his Spirit. (1 Cor. 2:6-16, especially vv. 10-11, JST.)

The prophet Joseph Smith learned from the Lord that those seeking spiritual insight should learn both by study (using the physical and mental senses) and by faith (using the spiritual senses). (See D&C 88:118.) He also taught that whatever intelligence and understanding we acquire in this life will remain with our spirits after our death. (See D&C 130:18.) Additionally, we should learn spiritual truths because the glory of God is intelligence, and we cannot be saved in his presence in ignorance. (See D&C 93:36; 131:6.)

Studying spiritual truths is eternally important because our perception of them teaches us eternal values about the purpose of existence and includes an understanding of the glory, nature, and purpose of God. These truths are revealed through visions and revelations recorded by ancient prophets in the Holy Scriptures, are taught through the teachings of modern-day prophets, and, finally, are received through personal enlightenment by the Holy Ghost. Sometimes, enlightenment into spiritual truths comes to us directly and profoundly. Usually, however, we receive spiritual insights indirectly and subtly through gentle spiritual whisperings. Whether learned or sensed, the most valuable and enduring truths cannot be learned in a laboratory; they can be perceived only through the Spirit. Such personal revelation requires a great deal of effort on our part because we must exercise faith in things not perceived by our senses, open our souls to spiritual promptings through meditation and prayer, and keep God's commandments. (See D&C 93:27-30.) In summary, a genuine personal commitment, along with keen spiritual sensitivity, is necessary to learn truths of the spiritual realm. [^7]

Physical, Moral, and Spiritual Types of People

As we look about us in the world, we can see these levels of truth—physical, moral, and spiritual—reflected in the lives of different types of people. Those who think almost entirely within the physical realm are those for whom everything must be apparent and measurable to be "proven." Searching for data and raw knowledge, they feel comfortable with scientific discoveries and the theories of evolution and natural selection, which seem to explain the physical world around us. Unfortunately, a knowledge of physical truths and powers carries no guarantee that they will be applied for society's best good. For example, a knowledge of the physical laws of atomic power can lead to destructive bombs. Also, dependence upon physical strength alone can lead a society to justify gross behavior upon weaker members—such as demonstrated by Nazi manipulation during the Holocaust. It is no wonder, then, that a common theme of our modern age has been the "survival of the fittest"; for, especially in the natural world, it seems that "might makes right" and the "law of the jungle" prevail. In the physical world, fear and selfishness motivate people while force and oppression often seem to rule.

The search for truth should move beyond these attitudes and platitudes because a complete dependence upon natural, physically observable truths weakens our potential to perceive transcendental moral and spiritual truths. Following personal intuition and centuries of reasoning based upon the observation of society, most people innately believe in the higher, moral laws mentioned earlier. As enlightened by their conscience and motivated by their desire to improve society, people following moral laws bring us out of an animal-like existence into a friendly, productive social order. Modern scripture describes those people as the "honorable men of the earth." (D&C 76:75.) These are people governed by the "strength of justice," rather than the brute force of the "survival of the fittest." Higher moral values provide their ruling principles. Moral people do not seek to manipulate or dominate others, but they try to use personal, social, and legal means to promote the general good. In the moral world, logic directs human behavior as the power of reason governs.

Finally, those sensitive to the promptings of the Holy Spirit are the people who are enlightened and motivated by spiritual truths. Responding to personal revelations, they live by faith in the word of God. While not neglecting the good and the enjoyment that can be experienced on earth, they hope for a future that lies beyond what is humanly possible. Spiritual people desire to share their insights and hopes with others. Looking beyond the "survival of the fittest" or even the "strength of justice," they strive for what can be called the "glory of the righteous," which is eternal life and service in the presence of God. In the spiritual world, love permeates society as the power of righteousness prevails.

Our understanding of most truth is relative to our individual perceptions and is conditional upon our evaluation of perceived reality in the various physical, moral, and spiritual levels. Indeed, insights from the three different levels motivate our relationships with other people. Next, we need to appreciate how insight and knowledge within these three spheres of truth have dramatically expanded in the past century.

From Absolute Ignorance to Complete Light

To add another dimension to our model of truth, let us now imagine a horizontal plane bisecting any one of our spheres of physical, moral, and spiritual truths. As the spheres lie open before us, in their center lies darkness, or complete ignorance; on the outside edges is light, or an absolute knowledge of all truth within that sphere.

Illustration of bisected sphere.

Considering just the physical world, movement toward the light has made remarkable progress as mankind's knowledge of the material world has expanded more in the last century than in all preceding ages combined. Physical truths about the universe have always surrounded us, but we have not always understood them. The principles governing electricity, nuclear energy, satellite communication, microchip technology, and many other modern marvels may have always existed, but they were independent of man's knowledge until recently. We have now progressed to the point where we have learned enough about some of these laws so we can put them to use. As an unknown thinker said: "Truth is never changing, but our perception of it is ever changing."

We are now living in the midst of a "knowledge explosion," in which scientific information is growing at an ever-increasing rate. To illustrate the dramatic nature of this phenomenon, consider a youth graduating from high school today. Since the child entered first grade just twelve years ago, man's knowledge has expanded tenfold. Ninety percent of current scientific knowledge has been discovered during his school years. With finer new instruments to take more exact measurements, newer computers and programs to sort and organize data, and continuous study in all scientific fields, much more is added daily to the store of information. New discoveries correct earlier ideas, challenge old theories, and open up completely different avenues for understanding. Since so much seems to remain unknown, we probably have not progressed very far along the spectrum from complete darkness and ignorance towards absolute light and knowledge. Indeed, some wonder if we can even know how much knowledge is available or how we can ever reach the end.

In a moral and spiritual sense, every person is born in ignorance and darkness, the same condition in which Adam and Eve lived before they ate of the forbidden fruit and acquired the knowledge of good and evil. Unlike the physical realm, where knowledge is expanding faster than any single person can begin to keep up, in the moral realm each individual has to learn the moral verities and values for himself or herself. As we mature, our innate moral sense develops, aided by the teachings of others and our own experiences and challenges. Eventually, we can develop the same foundation and appreciation for lasting moral values as any other person.

While building a secure, consistent moral foundation, we often search beyond ethical principles and seek spiritual truths to support our moral values and to give eternal purpose to our lives. We receive spiritual enlightenment from family, friends, teachers, religious leaders, and the prophets. As in the physical realm, where one's education in math begins with simple calculations and progresses to complex equations and theories, our development in the spiritual realm follows the same pattern of going from the simple to the sophisticated. At the top of the pyramid of learning and intelligence stands God. Latter-day Saints believe that God has a mastery of all truth—he is omniscient, all knowing. (See Ps. 147:5; 2 Ne. 9:20.)

We also understand that God gradually reveals his eternal truths to us as we are able and willing to accept them: "Whom shall he teach knowledge? and whom shall he make to understand doctrine? them that are weaned from the milk, and drawn from the breasts. For precept must be upon precept, precept upon precept; line upon line, line upon line; here a little, and there a little." (Isa. 28:9-10.)

Even with progress, however, Isaiah points out that our earthly understanding of eternal principles will always be severely limited when compared with God's infinite understanding: "For as the heavens are higher than the earth, so are my ways higher than your ways, and my thoughts than your thoughts." (Isa. 55:9.)

God has revealed much truth in the physical, moral, and spiritual spheres to many, but he has so much more knowledge that he could reveal to us collectively and individually. As we hearken unto divine counsels and learn wisdom, God promises us new truths and understanding. (See 2 Ne. 28:30.) Eventually, the Lord will reveal all things about this earth to its inhabitants, and then we will have access to a complete knowledge of physics, chemistry, geology, botany, and so on. (See Alma 12:10; D&C 101:32-34.) Thus, God's influence in our search for truth takes us to the frontiers of knowledge and new dimensions of intelligence and understanding.

Truth: Past, Present, and Future

Adding a third dimension to our model of truth will help further illustrate our difficulty in coming to absolute light and knowledge. This dimension of learning takes us through the time periods of the past, present, and future. We need to add this dimension because modern scripture defines truth as a "knowledge of things as they are, and as they were, and as they are to come." (D&C 93:24.) Revelation also tells us that God knows all things—past, present, and future—because "all things are present" before his eyes. (D&C 38:2.) Although God has known all things from the time before the beginning of this earth, we study truth within the context of our own time and then expand our understanding into the past and the future.

For the most part, we live exclusively in the present, with some understanding of the recent past. Certain fields of human endeavor are making inroads into understanding the past (such as archaeology and ancient textual studies) and even the future (such as scientific projections based on environmental factors). We remain, however, basically ignorant of either the past or the future of our own earth, and we are even less aware of our earth's relation to the rest of time and space.

Returning to our model of the sphere that had been cut open, we need to draw a line on the horizontal plane of the flat interior surface. This line represents knowledge about one particular topic in the time periods of the past, present, and future. The line is hard to draw because the beginning of knowledge on any topic is hidden in our past and because we are uncertain how knowledge will continue into the unknown future after it passes through our present stage. This line weaves around on the plane through the sphere, showing that sometimes knowledge is lost or distorted and must be regained. What we now know may be more or less about that topic than was known in the past or than will be known in the future.

Illustration of bisected sphere.

In summary, our model of truth shows that most of man's knowledge lies in the present physical realm, knowledge that is also recently acquired and, at the most, only tenuous. Basic moral understanding has remained more constant throughout history, but it too is limited, unable to elevate man much above human nature. Of absolute, spiritual truths, we know the very least, yet it is significant that what we do know is unchanging and most valuable.

Much of the value of eternal spiritual truth also lies in the way it can illuminate our understanding of the other realms of truth. For example, an understanding of God's past role as Creator of heaven and earth enables us to establish present moral values and to anticipate future order and progression in the universe. The theory of human evolution, on the other hand, necessarily attributes the origin of mankind and humanity's progress to random chance, rendering our existence both physically and morally insecure.

When human beings are reduced to mere animal status, we search for truth like moles searching for food beneath fruit trees at night. The fruit the moles find is that lying on the ground, bruised and half rotten, like many partial truths among the "commandments of men." (JS-H 1:19.) [^8] Through the light of divine truth, however, we can look up, find, and enjoy the rich, ripe fruit hanging from God's trees of knowledge and life. (See 1 Ne. 8:10-12.) We can then learn to master and apply various truths for our own edification and the betterment of others.

Knowledge—Learning—Wisdom: Stages of Applied Truth

The process of understanding and applying truth requires at least three stages. First, we broaden the available information by gaining knowledge (the body of facts in a field of study) as we seek truth. This process can be compared to compiling data into a company's computer. Then, we evaluate and organize our material through a process of learning (the mastery of knowledge or a skill) as we come to an understanding of truth. This step is like organizing the data to recognize patterns or trends and printing them out. And finally, as we share and apply truth with others, we use wisdom (the discerning application of knowledge and learning) to achieve the desired results. This last stage is similar to presenting the insights to an executive meeting of the company to assist in making major policy decisions.

First, we need to gain knowledge by acquiring facts, data, and details within the physical, moral, or spiritual realm we wish to study. Within the physical realm, reading, asking questions, and observing are keys to acquiring the knowledge discovered by scientists, researchers, and others as they have been enlightened by the spirit of truth. We learn the moral truths by being sensitive to the feelings of our conscience and responding to the ethical teachings of noble people. We acquire the spiritual ideas by studying the inspiration revealed through prophets, apostles, psalmists, and other inspired men and women. All these bits and pieces of knowledge are like the separate pieces of a puzzle that must be gathered together before the puzzle can be constructed.

Second, we need to study and evaluate the things we know by sorting and organizing the information through a learning process. We learn to recognize linkages between facts and to compare the form, texture, and essence of different elements. We learn to appreciate the values of different physical items, moral ideas, and spiritual beliefs. Persistent study, analysis, and meditation help bring our facts, concepts, and creeds into sharper focus. This learning process is like joining the pieces of the outer edge of the puzzle together and connecting some puzzle clusters as the puzzle picture begins to develop.

Finally we need wisdom to apply what we have learned while joining all the pieces together in a meaningful way. A clear mental vision, combined with physical persistence, helps bring the learning project to fruition. In the physical realm, we experiment and observe as we follow the laws of nature and science. In the moral realm, we practice integrity and discipline as we live goodly lives. In the spiritual realm, we develop sensitivity and exercise righteousness as we follow the promptings of the Spirit. In all areas of our lives, we develop wisdom through applied learning, especially as we observe the results of our actions. Indeed, we hope the time will come when the puzzle is fully assembled and displayed with its organized picture clear to all.

The Value of Truth

Truth can be a powerful tool that blesses or intimidates mankind. God uses truth to bless others. As Ammon in the Book of Mormon declared: God has a comprehensive knowledge of all truth; he understands all fields of learning, and he applies truth with complete wisdom. The key to God's use of truth is that his absolute power is motivated by love as he brings salvation to the righteous. (See Alma 26:35.)

The key to the value of truth for humans also depends upon the person's intent. If a person acquires knowledge with a sincere desire to strengthen himself, then evaluates his learning with a positive attitude to help others, and finally applies his wisdom with a noble motive to serve God, the truths in his power will bless others and himself. As President Ezra Taft Benson taught, "Wisdom is the proper application of true knowledge." He also indicated that "the truths upon which our eternal salvation rests are the most crucial truths that we must learn." [^9]

Truth should always be viewed first as a means to an end—and not the end itself. More specifically, truth needs to be seen as a means to a noble and righteous end that will benefit all. The members of the Godhead have a full understanding and mastery of truth, which they share for the understanding, glory, and blessing of the righteous. (See D&C 93:27.) We can summarize the value of applied truth by reviewing a question that members of one international service club ask of their words and deeds. After determining if something is true, Rotarians ask, "Is it fair, friendly, and favorable to all concerned?" [^10] If all the truths that we know were only spoken or applied in situations that were "fair, friendly, and favorable to all concerned," then truth would surely benefit all.

Our knowledge of divine truth is the key to attaining, understanding, and righteously applying all knowledge that is available to us in this life. Divine truth comes to us first and foremost through the Holy Scriptures, which testify of Jesus Christ. (See John 5:39.) Jesus is our mediator with the Father, not only for remission of sins, but also for our reception of divine truth. Indeed, truth is embodied in him, as he said, "I am the way, the truth, and the life: no man cometh unto the Father, but by me." (John 14:6.) In the Doctrine and Covenants, the resurrected Lord further confirms our promise that we may eventually possess all divine truth: "He that receiveth me receiveth my Father; and he that receiveth my Father receiveth my Father's kingdom; therefore all that my Father hath shall be given unto him." (D&C 84:37-38.)

The Truth Will Make Us Free

When Jesus Christ was brought before Pontius Pilate, Pilate asked the age-old question, "What is truth?" (John 18:38.) Like many, he asked without really searching for an answer, although he, ironically, was in the presence of the very embodiment of truth. His attitude led Jesus to say, "Every one that is of the truth heareth my voice," meaning that one who lives by the Spirit of God is receptive to his message. Indeed, Jesus testified that he came into the world to bring truth. (See John 18:37.)

Christ promises us enlightenment if we will seek, search, and plead for the truth. (See Matt. 6:33; 7:7-8; D&C 11:7, 21; 2 Tim. 3:16.) Jesus particularly promises his obedient followers that they shall know the truth; so in addition to actively seeking and praying for truth, we need to live worthy of God's inspiration. (See John 8:31.)

The capstone of Jesus's promises concerning truth is that the truth will make us free. (See John 8:32.) Truth in every sphere brings us freedom. Researchers and scientists have discovered and applied many physical truths that make life safer and more enjoyable. In the fields of health and medicine, for instance, we are being freed more and more from disease and other infirmities of the flesh. The sages and philosophers have enlightened us with moral truths that make existence more compatible and stable, freeing us from fear and social chaos. And most of all, God has revealed spiritual truths that make the path to eternal life clearer, freeing us from ignorance and sin.

To receive these highest spiritual truths requires the greatest effort, but they yield the most valuable rewards. We must seek for and value them above all physical wants and desires, all worldly honors and successes. We must "hunger and thirst" after spiritual understanding, just as one gasps for the breath of life after his head has been held under water. As we do so, we will be "filled with the Holy Ghost," the revelator of all truth, and the mysteries of God will be unfolded to us. (See D&C 76:7; 3 Ne. 12:6.) As we know truth, it will free us from darkness, ignorance, superstitions, and lies. (See John 8:32.) As we learn the great, eternal truths, we will come to know God, our Savior, ourselves, and our bonds of love with each other. (See John 17:3.) [^11]

To conclude our discussion, we can say that TRUTH is an accurate understanding of physical, moral, and spiritual reality that God imparts through the ages to bless his children, bringing them freedom. Although most truth is relative to our perceptions and is conditional upon our understanding of reality, absolute truth is a complete knowledge of all things (past, present, and future), which can be perceived on various physical, moral, and spiritual levels. To assist and bless mankind, God imparts many truths to his children, endowing them with opportunities for freedom. Truth does not just free us from damning bondages of ignorance, fear, and sin, but it also frees us toward favorable liberties of health, opportunity, and service. Truth frees us to make decisions with a full understanding of options and consequences. With the truth, and God's help, we are free to achieve the full measure of our creation. A fullness of truth brings freedom into our lives and gives them meaning and purpose. We need to constantly thank God for the blessings of truth.

For further study, refer to the following entries:

TG: BD: EM: Education Knowledge Knowledge Knowledge Philosophy Light Reason and Revelation Truth Truth

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Ideas on moral and spiritual development are developed further in the previous chapter (truth), in chapter 12 (the sinful nature of mankind), in chapter 17 (repentance), and in chapter 20 (spiritual growth).
[^2] Chapter 11 contains more details on the purposes of life on this earth.
[^3] A lengthy discussion on human agency and God's role in it is presented in chapter 10. The purposes of this earth life, including suffering and pain, are presented in chapters 11-13.
[^4] Further information about the many means by which God reveals himself and his will is found in chapters 6 and 7. The written record and witness of God's earlier involvement with people on this earth is in the scriptures, the subject of chapter 8.
[^5] LF, 2:31.
[^6] The importance of faith and prayer in this search for understanding God is discussed in further detail in chapters 5 and 16.
[^7] The creation, nature, and purposes of life on earth are presented in chapters 9-14. The edifying values of God's commandments are discussed in chapters 24-30. Jesus Christ and his atoning roles are highlighted in chapters 3, 13, and 16-18. The testifying gifts of the Holy Ghost are reviewed in chapters 4 and 19-20.
[^8] For differing views by LDS authors on resolving the evolution/religion controversy, see A. Lester Allen, ''Science and Theology: A Search for the Uncommon Denominator,'' in BYU Studies 29, no. 3 (Summer 1989): 71-78; and Reid E. Bankhead, The Fall of Adam, the Atonement of Christ, and Organic Evolution (Levan, Utah: RAM Books, 1978). Both authors quote authoritative Church leaders to support their positions, which can at least serve to direct the reader to original Church statements and sources on the subject.
[^9] God's plan of salvation for us and this earth will be discussed in chapters 6-10. We can draw nearer to God both as we learn more about his messenger of truth, the Holy Ghost (addressed in chapter 4), and also as we understand the power of prayer (written about in chapter 5).
[^10] 6. For more insights, see chapter 24 on obedience to God's laws.
[^11] 7. Chapters 16 and 20 will provide more specific guidelines into developing our understanding of spiritual truths.
