Victor L. Ludlow, Principles and Practices of the Restored Gospel ( 1992)

Chapter 2

One Supreme Being

David, the Hebrew psalmist, pondered about the greatness of God's creations compared to the insignificance of mankind, so he asked God: "What is man that you should spare a thought for him?" David recognized that man was God's crowning achievement, so he responded: "You have made him little less than a god." (Ps. 8:4-5, Jerusalem Bible.) Wondering people today ask a similar question: "Who is God that we should think of him?" Many answer: "He is a living entity far more glorious than man." Some respond: "He is probably just a higher force than man has yet discovered or developed." Others might comment: "Why worry about God? He doesn't seem to be present on this earth." A few may even say: "Some misguided men have made up the idea of a supreme being; he is no more than a figment of their imaginations."

Most people believe in some type of God, power, or force who rules the universe. Is their belief in God merely a response to intense feelings, or can this concept be substantiated by any sort of proof? In other words, is God a fantasy or is he a reality? And if God does exist, can we know it for ourselves, or must we rely upon our naÃ¯ve faith or the belief of others? These are a few questions about God, sincere seekers of spiritual truth often ask. The answers are found in the restored gospel. The first Article of Faith claims a belief in God the Eternal Father. He is viewed as the Heavenly Father of all human spirits, and all people may receive a personal witness of his reality.

Who Is God That We Should Think of Him?

Most people begin to think seriously about the possible reality and power of God after an intense emotional experience, either positive or negative. Positive experiences might occur when we feel a oneness with nature and the universe. A quiet stroll on a starlit night, a peaceful walk through a vibrant forest, an intense observation of a gathering storm, or a careful study of plant and animal life—any of these might lead us to contemplate the order and majesty of the universe as the work of a supreme creator. Negative experiences might occur during periods of severe emotional distress, mortal danger, or personal tragedy. In these times, people who do not consider themselves "religious" often tend to appeal, almost instinctively, to some higher power for aid. Their prayer may be just a desperate effort, based only on faint hope, but it is also an indirect acknowledgement of the universal idea of God.

What constitutes the universal idea of God? To begin our investigation, let us first recognize that the idea of a supreme being or force in the universe forms the foundation of most traditional cultures—Christian and pagan, civilized and barbaric. But while the general idea of God is universal, a definition of his specific nature and purposes is not universally agreed upon, for many rival conceptions of God exist throughout the world.

The differences existing among religious systems today can be attributed to a diversity of teachings about God that have evolved through time as distinct world cultures developed. The primary ideological divergence exists between the Western and Far-Eastern religions. Judaism, Islam, and Christianity are the Western world's three great monotheistic religions (sharing belief in a single Supreme Being). They also share verified historical ties to Moses and Abraham, the prophetic heirs of the Adamic tradition. They proclaim a God who is separate and superior to nature, who in fact created and controls the universe.

As a contrast, the oriental religions of the Far East—Hinduism, Buddhism, Confucianism, and Taoism—all set forth "God" as a pervasive force within nature. Also, the Eastern religions emphasize the relationships of people with each other and with nature rather than the relationships between people and God. With religion and philosophy considered as a way of life, not as a mere social or intellectual activity, the aim of the Eastern religions involves a liberation from worldly cares and suffering. The orientals seek harmony with noble moral values and nature, including the higher ideals and powers of the divine within nature.

People today who do believe in a higher force of goodness and in other attributes credited to God have the weight of history and tradition in their support. Adherents of the Western religions also practice a monotheistic tradition supported through written scriptures. Through the Bible in particular, the world possesses a written canon that dates to the beginning of recorded time, containing the witnesses of prophets and others who claim to have seen and spoken with God.

There are important differences among the major Western religions as they attempt to describe God and the monotheistic nature of their own beliefs. Judaism and Islam are the most strictly monotheistic, with the Jews worshipping Yahweh and the Moslems following Allah. Among Christians, however, Catholics and many Protestants worship the Holy Trinity, which is one God, but composed of three parts—Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. Some Protestants reject a literal three-in-one God and are actually more "tritheistic," believing that the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost form a unified godhead, but are separate from one another. Some others, however, believe that God is simply a spirit or a force of nondescript form. Latter-day Saints adhere to the tritheistic concept, proclaiming that the Father and Son are separate beings with perfected bodies of flesh and bones. Mankind is thus literally made in their image. The Holy Ghost is also a separate divine person with a spirit body in the image of God. Like most Christians, however, we maintain the belief that the members of the godhead are figuratively "one" in love, doctrine, testimony, purpose, and power. (See 3 Ne. 11.)

The Skeptics of God

Unfortunately, some individuals scattered throughout the world claim they do not believe in God at all. Others do not consider it possible or valuable to learn about God, even if one should exist. These skeptics fall into three general camps: atheistic, agnostic, and apathetic. The atheist denies that God exists; he believes in no divine power whatsoever. The agnostic is not quite so audacious; he just denies the possibility of knowing whether a divine being exists. The apathetic is not much concerned one way or the other; he considers the issue irrelevant. In any case, these groups leave God with few choices to manifest himself to any of them. Since the attitudes and ideas of the skeptics often confront God-believers and those seeking to know the reality and true nature of God, discussing the major arguments and fallacies of these three types of nonbelievers will be helpful.

ATHEISM

Atheists argue that if there were a God with supreme knowledge, power, and goodness, he would not permit the overwhelming injustice and innocent suffering that has often characterized human history. They point to the many examples of violence, wars, genocides, and holocausts that a divine, powerful being should be able to prevent if he really existed and had concern for people on this planet. Christians (and the followers of many oriental religions) respond that mankind is responsible for most of the evils of the world. God gave Adam and Eve agency—the power to choose—and let them have dominion over all the earth, to rule and take care of it. (See Gen. 1:26.) So we humans—not God—are the ones who both cause and tolerate most of the suffering of our own race as we yield either to our own selfishness or to the temptations of Satan.

The atheist would then question why a God would give mankind the agency to bring suffering upon each other, or why a God would not give people a more powerful conscience so they would avoid the injustices that otherwise prevail in the world. Granted, one might ask where the atheist develops his ideas of justice/injustice, or guilt/innocence in the first place. These ideas are an inherent part of universal moral truths that frame Western religions' concept of God. In other words, the atheist's criticism of God is based on inherent principles of conscience (a gift given by God) and on ideals derived from God's own divine character and laws (as recorded in the scriptures from God). Christianity claims that people have a conscience and agency to act as they will so that they can grow and develop within the moral and spiritual realms of truth. [^1] A major purpose of mortality provides people the opportunity to develop spirituality in a corrupt environment. [^2] In his own time and way, God will bring all people to a correct understanding of right and justice. (See Rom. 14:11-13; Isa. 45:23; 55:8-9.) The prophets declare and the scriptures witness that divine laws of eternal justice, as administered by God, will eventually rectify and compensate all the suffering that mankind brings upon itself.

The atheists then argue, if God exists, why does he not at least prevent the afflictions resulting from natural catastrophes? God may give people their agency, but nature should be under his dominion. Why, they ask, does he allow droughts, famines, earthquakes, diseases, and other natural sources of physical suffering? God himself answers this question through the scriptures, which record that the rains, the storms, and other natural phenomena are shared by all, the good and the evil, the rich and the poor. (See Matt. 5:45; 7:25; D&C 90:5.) However, according to the level of obedience to various physical, moral, and spiritual laws, the people who are prepared, righteous, and faithful will weather the storms and other natural catastrophes with less suffering and trauma. God chooses to not shelter us completely from the world of pain, but he desires to prepare us for life and the suffering that can be a part of it. He does give us inspiration and help to adjust to the temporary circumstances of the natural world, and he instructs us to help each other in times of disaster. He also commands us to assist the hungry, the thirsty, and others in need. If we did not complicate the situations of physical catastrophes with our injustices or selfishness, we could quickly alleviate most of the suffering resulting from the natural world. [^3]

Agnosticism

The agnostics are willing to concede that a God may exist, but to them he is unknown and unknowable. They think it is impossible to know whether there is a God or a future life, or anything beyond material phenomena. They would ask, even if God should exist, how does one obtain and maintain faith in a being who often has left man in such dire circumstances, like those described earlier as part of the atheist arguments? Another characteristic of agnostics, which atheists also share, is to reject the credibility of others who claim to have received revelation from God, saying that these people are deluded souls at best or outright liars at worst. Agnostics abstain from either affirming or repudiating the existence of God. They do not deny God's existence, but they deny the possibility of knowing him because such knowledge is beyond human comprehension. As agnostics refuse to make judgments concerning the realities of spiritual truths, they avoid both the power that religion could bring into their lives and the responsibility that religious conviction might impose upon them. Thus they forfeit opportunities for spiritual development.

Apathy

The apathetics do not want heated discussions—they are willing to let each believe and act as he will, as long as belief and action do not infringe on another's life-style. What these indifferent people really demand is that God reveal himself personally to them, or they will not believe or care whether he exists. But in refusing to search for an unseen and distant being, they reject the principles of faith, obedience, fasting, prayer, and so on—the very methods God has established for us to come to know him. If their hearts remain hardened against God, they will exclude themselves from ever knowing him. (See 1 Ne. 15:11.) Jesus warned against an apathetic attitude when he told those who were lukewarm that he would spew them out of his mouth like vomit. (See Rev. 3:16 and fn. 16b.) Insensitive individuals who procrastinate their spiritual development and reject the Lord because of worldly cares risk a forfeiture of the blessings and ordinances of the gospel. (See D&C 39:5-10; Alma 34:33.)

In the end, the atheist's arguments do not disprove the reality of God, they just cast doubt on his purposes and designs. The concerns of the agnostic, on the other hand, are not so much whether God exists, but whether it is possible for mankind to find the truth about God. Finally, the apathetic person feels that all the questions, concerns, and arguments about God have no direct bearing on his life, as long as he is free to pursue his own priorities.

The Search for Truth about God

In comparison, those who walk the path in search of truth about God must necessarily ask at least three key questions about God as they seek to establish his reality and purpose: "Is there a God?" "Does God ever reveal himself or his power on this world?" and "Would God ever make himself known to me?" Coincidentally, the answers to each of these questions also address the basic issues raised by the atheist, agnostic, and apathetic. The first key question we and the atheists must resolve is "Does God even exist at all?"

Does God Exist?

First, either there is a God or there is not a God. If God has ever existed in the past, he must by nature and definition still exist today because one of the divine attributes of God is that he must be immortal and unchanging in his essence. So, supposing the atheist could empirically search the universe for God, he would first need to know what he was looking for. The earliest concepts about God were recorded in the ancient scriptures, but they have since been dispersed and corrupted into many varied traditions and beliefs about God. If, however, the believer and nonbeliever could come to terms on what they were seeking, the only way to independently disprove the existence of God would be to explore instantaneously the entire universe with some sort of miraculous, superhuman vision. One would have to establish the fact that at any given instant, there was not on any planet, in any cloud, within any cave, behind any sun, indeed anywhere in creation any power, force, or being that could be identified as God. Only then could one be sure that God was nowhere to be found.

Ironically, to prove the truth or falsity of God's existence, one would himself have to be a god. Instantaneous observation of the whole universe and comprehension of all available data would itself require a godlike power. In the end, atheism is an unprovable proposition. (See Alma's response to Korihor's atheistic statements in Alma 30.) This brings us back to where we started: all that we know or can know of God is what he reveals to those he chooses. Thus, on the basis of no evidence (but with our own ideas about what God should be doing on earth), we can choose to ignore God. Or, on the basis of some evidence (and with personal hopes and feelings about what God might expect of us), we can choose to seek him. (See Mosiah 4:9.)

Does God Make His Presence Known?

Assuming that God does exist, we and the agnostics then come to our second key question: "Does God ever reveal himself to people on earth?" If he should choose to remain hidden from us, we could never find him and come to know him. He must make his presence known to man, or his existence would mean nothing to us—our lives would be as frustrated and meaningless as if he were not there at all.

We have comfort, though, because God has revealed himself to many prophets throughout history: Adam, Enoch, Abraham, Moses, Jacob, Isaiah, and John the Baptist in the Old World; Lehi, Nephi, Jacob, Alma, Mormon, Moroni, and Joseph Smith in the New World; to name just a few. The scriptures provide a great written witness of the Lord's dealings with humanity over the course of thousands of years. Furthermore, Latter-day Saints believe that God continues revealing himself in the present day through appointed living prophets, "For do we not read that God is the same yesterday, today, and forever, and in him there is no variableness neither shadow of changing?" (Morm. 9:9.)

In addition to the prophets' voices, we also have the feelings and experiences of others who testify that they have received a personal witness of God's reality. These people, who have been prompted by the Holy Ghost to come to an understanding of God, let us know that God continues to communicate with some of us. Although their involvement is not as profound and expansive as the prophetic experience, they help us appreciate that God maintains contact with people on this earth. From the cumulative experiences of others, we can come to know more about the identity and attributes of God, especially that he exists and that he reveals his mind and will. [^4]

Does God Make Himself Known to Me?

Though God may continue to reveal himself, does he communicate only with a select few, who in turn minister to the rest of us? Or is he personally accessible to everyone—common people like ourselves? This is the third key question that we ask as we search for God: "Does God communicate with me?" And with those who are apathetic, we would also ask: "Is it important that God communicates with me?" The answer of the restored gospel is an emphatic "yes!" The invitation to personally know God is extended to all. While God's criteria must be met before he chooses to reveal himself to us, we are the ones who must decide whether we seek to gain his communication. For his part, God pleads with us to keep searching: "Ask, and it shall be given you; seek, and ye shall find; knock, and it shall be opened unto you: For every one that asketh receiveth; and he that seeketh findeth; and to him that knocketh it shall be opened." (Matt. 7:7-8.) Again, every person can apply this formula: "For there is no respect of persons with God." (Rom. 2:11.)

On a few occasions—as with Paul in the New Testament or Alma the Younger in the Book of Mormon—God seems to have revealed himself to some people who did not seem interested in him, or who were actually rebelling against him. These cases, however, form a minority of the spiritual conversions recorded in the scriptures. For the most part, a divine response is rarely given unless an honest question is ardently asked with a sincere desire. For example, God's revelations to the Prophet Joseph Smith generally follow this pattern. From the First Vision, when the Father and the Son initially appeared to him, through the revelations recorded in the Doctrine and Covenants, most of the divine communications came in response to the prophet's prayers. Also, by the time Joseph asked a question, he was usually prepared in heart and mind to receive the answer and to live by it.

The Prophet Joseph Smith taught in his Lectures on Faith that the first man, Adam, had the correct perception of God because of his direct association with Heavenly Father in the Garden of Eden. "Adam, thus being made acquainted with God, communicated the knowledge which he had unto his posterity; and it was through this means that the thought was first suggested to their minds that there was a God, which laid the foundation for the exercise of their faith, through which they could obtain a knowledge of his character and also of his glory." [^5]

Who Is God?

In order for each of us to receive our own personal witness of God, we must seek after him. We should first study the messages and witnesses of the prophets. Then we should ask God to send us our own individual witness through the promptings of the Holy Spirit. [^6] As we study the word of God and respond to spiritual promptings, we begin to understand his character and attributes. With this perspective, we might define the nature of God as follows: God our holy Father is an immortal, perfect being whose infinite wisdom, supreme power, and active love offer us immortality and the possibility of eternal life with him.

First, God is holy. Holiness is an attribute of those who are dedicated and consecrated to sacred, eternal values of goodness and truth. God is full of goodness, light, and truth. His righteousness, glory, and sacredness are beyond description, and his ultimate desire is to help us become more like him. He has consecrated himself to eternally serve others, and he is dedicated to fostering holiness in his children and in all creation. We should join Moses and the ancient Israelites in singing, "Who is like unto thee, O Lord, among the gods? who is like thee, glorious in holiness?" (Ex. 15:11; see also Lev. 11:44-45; 2 Ne. 9:20.)

Second, God is the father of our spirits, since he provided our primal intelligence with an organized spirit body. That spirit body would later give life to the mortal body we call flesh. Thanks to God, we have the capacity to enjoy existence in our present state. God is also the father of the eternal plan of salvation, which his Son implements in our behalf. In the beginning, God also was the father or creator of this earth and of the physical bodies of our primal ancestors, Adam and Eve. In prayer and song, one of the most sacred names we invoke for God is expressed when we call him our Heavenly Father. (See Matt. 6:9; Acts 17:28-29; Mosiah 2:34.)

Third, God is immortal. His essence, or intelligence, is eternal, without beginning or end. In body and soul, he lives forever, and he has shown us the path towards immortality. The reality and power of his being cannot be destroyed or diminished. His will and purposes are unchanging—he is the same yesterday, today, and forever. (See D&C 20:12, 17-19; 1 Ne. 10:18; James 1:17.)

Fourth, God is a perfect being with a glorified, resurrected body. He is absolutely complete and pure in his physical, emotional, social, intellectual, moral, and spiritual nature. His perfection is so all-encompassing that multitudes of titles can barely begin to describe his glory. He enjoys the ultimate, highest form of existence and excellence. (See Matt. 5:48; Alma 42:15; D&C 130:22.)

Fifth, God is all-knowing. Past, present, and future are before him, and he sees the beginning from the ending. Not only is he master of all physical and spiritual laws in the universe, but he also knows each of us intimately and completely. We, too, were in the beginning with him, and from our eternal intelligences he created our spiritual bodies. God has knowingly and justly placed us each on earth in circumstances conducive to our individual development. He allows disease and hardship, wickedness and war to exist so mankind can experience a full range of feelings and can foster attributes of humility, sensitivity, and service. Ultimately, his knowledge and justice will rectify all temporal imbalances, and he will reward each as deserved. (See 1 Sam. 2:3; 1 Ne. 9:6; D&C 38:2; 88:6, 41.)

Sixth, God is all-powerful. He manifests his power through his works, his servants, and his priesthood. He controls the elements, performs miracles, and blesses the lives of his children both physically and spiritually. Though he allows mankind its agency to choose evil and thereby permits Satan temporary power on earth, the Almighty God will eventually cleanse the earth from all corruption and wickedness. He will then prevail forever because righteousness is the source of his power, which he uses only for the benefit of humanity. (See Rom. 13:1; Alma 26:35; 57:26; D&C 61:1.)

Seventh, God is active. He continues to create and sustain worlds, speak to prophets, answer prayers, and heal the physically and spiritually sick. He administers through his appointed servants on earth and by the Holy Spirit to direct and inspire us, his spirit children. His works also continue beyond death on this earth, extending to the spirit world, where the gospel is preached to all those who have died, and where individual spiritual progression continues toward resurrection and eternal life. God did not, as some modern philosophers contend, simply set the world in motion and leave us to our own devices. Modern revelation confirms that he is very much involved with us—indeed, as much as we allow him. (See Job 37:14; 3 Ne. 21:9; JS-H 1:17.)

Finally, God is loving. With no further perfection to gain for himself, his expanding glory and the sole purpose for his existence is our salvation, and his sole motive is love. This he succinctly revealed to Moses: "Behold, this is my work and my glory—to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man." (Moses 1:39.) To accomplish this end, God sent his Only Begotten Son, Jesus Christ, to show us the way of salvation and to atone for our sins so that we may follow the gospel path back to God's presence. (See John 3:16; 1 Jn. 4:8; 2 Ne. 1:15.)

These eight definitions highlight only a few key attributes of God. Many of them are summarized in a profound declaration of the Prophet Joseph Smith. As recorded in Doctrine and Covenants 20, he revealed some essential reasons why "we know that there is a God in heaven, who is infinite and eternal, from everlasting to everlasting the same unchangeable God, the framer of heaven and earth, and all things which are in them." (V. 17.) Almighty God's creation of humankind in his own likeness, his holy laws, the redemption of his Only Begotten Son, and the witness of the Holy Ghost are the primary means by which we know there is a God in heaven. (See vv. 18-28.) These manifestations of God will be discussed later as valid and personal demonstrations of the continuous love that Heavenly Father has for us, his children. [^7] Our best response to these witnesses of God's existence is to follow the Prophet Joseph's admonition, declaring "that all men must repent and believe on the name of Jesus Christ, and worship the Father in his name, and endure in faith on his name to the end, or they cannot be saved in the kingdom of God." (V. 29; italics added.) As we study the scriptures and learn more about God our Father, we strengthen our resolve to worship him with sincerity of heart and conviction of spirit.

An understanding of God and his divine nature gives us confidence in his laws and teaches us about the purposes of our existence. The knowledge that God ultimately controls the universe is essential to comprehending our world's history and its present conditions. As discussed in chapter one, a proper knowledge of spiritual truths illuminates other spheres of truth and places our limited human understanding in its proper perspective. Remembering the divine attributes of Heavenly Father helps us counter the philosophies of men that would deny or distort God's power.

Some Philosophies of Man That Negate God

Through the ages, various theories, philosophies, and false religions have drastically distorted or even negated the teachings about the nature of God. As one example in our day, some concepts of the theory of evolution, or natural selection, challenge God's supreme position as creator and controller of the universe.

The Theory of Evolution

Evolution in its purest and simplest theory holds that all life forms as we know them on this earth evolved from a single life form—a simple cell—billions of years ago. This original cell, too, came into being quite by chance in one of this earth's primeval seas. Obviously, this theory takes God out of the picture, and man's achievements and native supremacy over other life forms becomes an amazing series of accidents.

Granted, the Latter-day Saint ideas of successive periods of creation (evolving ages), progression of life forms from spirit to physical to immortal bodies (a type of evolution), and the ultimate triumph of good over evil (the survival of the fittest) could be viewed as refined, spiritual interpretations of natural evolutionist theories. However, there are two critical areas where these theories of man and the scriptural accounts of God differ.

First, according to the theory of evolution, all forms of life on this earth had to originate and evolve from a state of primal lifelessness. Some aspects of this theory may be true in the universal development of life, but they may not apply specifically to this earth. For the evolutionists, no form of life could have entered this earth's biosystem from without, and no outside life forms could have influenced the natural course of earth life, for life evolves uniformly in a closed system. But the scriptures and the prophets declare that God (a powerful, living entity from outside this earth's natural biosystem) organized and created this earth. He prepared the earth to bring forth plant life and to sustain animal life. (See Abr. 4:11-12, 20-22, 24-25.) He ordered plants and animals to be placed on the earth, and he commanded them to multiply, each in their own kind. (See Moses 2:11-25.) Whether God received these plant and animal life forms from seed stock originating on this earth or from other biological sources is not revealed to us. This involvement of God runs counter to the basic tenets of the theory of natural selection.

Second, the theories of evolution emphasize the physical forms of existence, formed only here on earth. The scriptures record, however, that humans, animals, plants, and all forms of life had a spirit creation prior to their physical existence on this earth. (See Moses 3:5.) Thus the existence and form of living organisms were not determined solely by physical antecedents on earth, but also upon their spirit form and divine purpose, established before any physical material became a new organism—plant, animal, or human. This spirit entity gives both life and direction to the physical organism. Thus, external, physical life forms can be influenced by the spirit within.

The scientific problems and religious arguments surrounding the theory of evolution have filled thousands of volumes and cannot be adequately approached in this chapter. It is also important to remember that all the facts have not yet been revealed by God or discovered by man, and so differences and gaps remain between the theories of men and the limited records of God's revelations. But we should state that, at least in its most radical form, natural selection is ultimately incompatible with the teachings of the scriptures and the revealed gospel, especially as the theory of evolution takes God out of the picture and does not recognize his influence upon the life of this earth.

In summary, God's involvement in the creation and the influence of spirits within all life forms both affect our existence in ways that cannot be explained or understood by theories of natural selection and evolution. Every thinking person must therefore choose (on faith, if you will, in either some teachings of men or the declarations of the scriptures) his basic assumption—that the world was either formed completely by random chance or created purposefully by divine design—and proceed cautiously from there. [^8]

Is There Life on Other Worlds?

Another increasingly popular theory also takes God out of our picture of earth life. While science strives to explain the world by wholly natural phenomena, a growing number of people in the "space age" explain some supernatural occurrences not as "miracles" from God, but as extraterrestrial intervention from even higher "life forms" than ourselves. The most widely known theory of this kind is outlined in various books of the supernatural and science fiction that hold that ancient Americans must have received help from extraterrestrial beings to develop extremely accurate calendars and to construct what, from high altitude photography, appears to be remarkable "airfields," or landing sites and other wonders.

Similar apologists for the Bible would say, for example, that the prophet Elijah was not taken into heaven by one of God's fiery chariots (as recorded in scripture), but rather in a spaceship belonging to superhuman beings. The fiery chariot was not a miracle; Elijah was just a member of an advanced society far ahead of the Israelites of his time. This would also explain his control over the weather, his raising people "from the dead," and other miracles. These advocates of extraterrestrial contacts with earth explain that by the same token, if some of us could travel years back in time on this earth or to some other place where we could visit more primitive people, we too could amaze and subdue these undeveloped people with the magic of a videocamera and a giant projection screen, an x-ray or sonar-graph machine, or any number of other modern electronic "miracles." We could also heal many of their number with our medications and bring prosperity through our application of agricultural knowledge until, within a short time, these people would worship us as gods or at least as angels of some supernatural divine being. As outlandish as extraterrestrial theories may seem, they illustrate the lengths to which some modern people will go to circumvent God and his truly miraculous and mysterious ways.

Faith in God

A simple belief and faith in God and his plan, however, does not completely explain all the mysteries and wonders of this earth. Neither the scriptures nor man's understanding have yet supplied ready answers to apparent contradictions within some fields of science and between some theories and theology. Many truths remain to be discovered, and until then God has seen fit to reveal what he considers to be most important for our spiritual development and salvation. His truths are sometimes called the "mysteries of God," and they are only slowly revealed to this children. But like a good mystery novel, where our major interest is to discover "Who did it?" and "Why did they do it?" God has revealed the answers to "who" and "why" in the scriptures. He tells us that he himself created, or organized, this earth and that he did it to help us progress toward immortality and eternal life. (See Moses 1:39.)

In addition, God reveals enough about himself and his plan that we can develop faith in him. His loving efforts are also manifest enough upon this earth so we can know that he remains active in our lives. A true knowledge of God anchors us in life so that we are not easily seduced by every new idea, "carried about with every wind of doctrine, by the sleight of men." (Eph. 4:14.) More important, a correct perception of God gives us a secure foundation on which to build a further understanding of unchanging, eternal, spiritual truths, such as the identity of God's Son, Jesus Christ, which will be treated in the next chapter. [^9]

In conclusion, GOD OUR HOLY FATHER is an immortal, perfect being whose infinite wisdom, supreme power, and active love offer us immortality and the possibility of eternal life with him. A true knowledge of God profoundly enriches our lives. As we acknowledge his creative powers in our behalf, strive to keep his commandments, develop faith in his Son, and listen to the promptings of the Holy Spirit, we will come to know and love our Heavenly Father. As we study, ponder, and pray about his works and teachings as taught in the scriptures, we will appreciate his true nature. As we associate with others who have strong testimonies of God, we strengthen our own convictions concerning our holy Father and his expectations of us. And as we serve and love others, we serve and love him who gave us life.

For further study, refer to the following entries:

TG: BD: EM: Apathy God Elohim God, Access to God God, Body of God the Father God, Creator Holiness God, Eternal Nature of Love God, Foreknowledge of Name of God God, Intelligence of Omnipotent God; Omnipresence of God;

God, Justice of Omniscience of God

God, Love of God, Manifestations of God, Mercy of God, Omniscience of God, Perfection of God, Power of God, Presence of God, Wisdom of God, Works of God the Father Holiness Holy, Holier, Holiest

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] MD, 129.
[^2] James E. Talmage, Jesus the Christ, Classics in Mormon Literature edition (salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1982), 77.
[^3] Further insights into the atonement, crucifixion, and resurrection of Jesus the Messiah are found in chapters 13 and 15.
[^4] The key principles and ordinances necessary for us to receive these gifts are outlined in chapters 16-20.
[^5] TPJS, 312.
[^6] The Interpreter's Dictionary of the Bible (New York: Abingdon Press, 1962), 2:410.
[^7] See MD, 169-70.
[^8] ''Jesus Christ Is Basis of LDS Beliefs,'' CN, March 29, 1980, pp. 8-10, 13.
[^9] God's plan of salvation for us and this earth will be discussed in chapters 6-10. We can draw nearer to God both as we learn more about his messenger of truth, the Holy Ghost (addressed in chapter 4), and also as we understand the power of prayer (written about in chapter 5).
