Victor L. Ludlow, Principles and Practices of the Restored Gospel ( 1992)

Chapter 3

Our Holy Brother

As people in the workplace observe many managers and supervisors, they soon recognize different qualities and styles of leadership. True leadership requires more than a position of authority, it includes proper training, a farsighted vision, a loving attitude, and diligent effort. Ideally, solid guidance and noble motives would permeate all levels of management in business, government, education, or wherever positions of influence are found. Typically, however, the one person who establishes the administration pattern for any organization is the head. The founder or leader determines the governing philosophy and directs the efforts of the whole group. People seeking employment would obviously prefer working in an association presided over by a wise, loving, and conscientious leader.

Similar expectations carry over into other social organizations, such as churches or religions. Without a doubt, one reason Christianity has become the largest religion in the world is because of the sterling qualities of its founder, Jesus, the humble carpenter's son and teacher of righteousness from Nazareth. Even the adherents of other religions usually recognize the example of his life and appreciate the values of his teachings. He is a model of holiness for the world.

Jesus is revered by one-third of humanity as the supreme Lord of this earth. Eventually all peoples and nations of the earth will recognize Jesus the Messiah as the Lord and King of this earth; then the prophecies of Isaiah and John the Revelator will be fulfilled. (See Isa. 45:23; Rev. 17:14; 19:16.) Until then, Christians have the responsibility to practice the Savior's teachings as they share his gospel with others. An in-depth understanding of the divine nature of Jesus will inspire his followers and educate non-Christians as they converse with each other.

To help understand who this person, Jesus, is, we will focus on three of his names that define his relationship to God the Father and ourselves. These are familiar names that we use in our earthly families: Son, Brother, and Father.

Jesus: The Son of God

Through the writings of the New Testament, Jesus Christ is familiar to Christendom as the "Son of God." Even so, many Christians consider the title to be the figurative expression of a mysterious and transcendental state of being. They accept the carpenter's son as a spiritual embodiment of divine holiness but do not believe that Jesus is the literal, physical Son of the living God. Through the revelation of the Prophet Joseph Smith, however, Latter-day Saints boldly declare that Jesus is literally the Son of God—his spirit child, his only begotten in the flesh, and his fully obedient offspring. The son of Mary was also the Son of Heavenly Father, spiritually, physically, and ideally.

The Firstborn Son of God as a Spirit Child

Spiritually speaking, Jesus was the first spirit being whom God the Father formed from the eternal intelligences that dwelt with him. The early apostles understood this important dimension of Jesus. Thus Paul taught that God knew Jesus beforehand and designated him to be formed in his image as his Son, that Jesus "might be the firstborn among many." (Rom. 8:29.)

Also, the gospel of John begins with an important reference to Christ's premortal existence. Though brief and somewhat cryptic, John's introduction reveals a great deal about the divinity and role of the Savior before he ever walked upon the earth: "In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God. The same was in the beginning with God." (John 1:1-2.) To understand the meaning of these sentences, we must first consider the Greek term logos, which is generally translated into English as "word." Logos is akin to logic, the faculty of thinking, reasoning, or intelligence that man particularly possesses among all creation and that is evidenced above all through his use of language. Thus, in the beginning, there was an intelligent being who was both with God and became himself God.

The Lord Jesus clarifies his premortal status in modern revelation: "I was in the beginning with the Father, and am the Firstborn." (D&C 93:21.) Of all the eternal, primal intelligences in the presence of God, Jesus was the first that Heavenly Father formed into a spirit being—he was thus the "firstborn" in the spirit and was present with the Father from the beginning of the spirit creation of the earth's inhabitants.

The Lord further explained to Abraham that when "there are two spirits, one being more intelligent than the other; there shall be another more intelligent than they; I am the Lord thy God, I am more intelligent than they all." (Abr. 3:19.) The late apostle Bruce R. McConkie interpreted this passage to mean that through "obedience and devotion to the truth he [Christ] attained that pinnacle of intelligence which ranked him as a God, as the Lord Omnipotent, while yet in his pre-existent state." [^1] To rephrase and interpret the beginning words of John: "From eternity there existed an intelligence, and this intelligent being was with God as his firstborn spirit child and became also himself a God." The spirit of Jesus in the premortal existence was the most advanced of all spirit beings. Through diligence and obedience, he was foreordained by God, and he acted as a member of the Godhead, with God's power, before taking upon himself a body of flesh and bones.

The Only Begotten Son of God in the Flesh

When Jesus was born on earth, his physical body was the offspring of a mortal mother and a divine Father. He was the firstborn child of his mortal mother, Mary, and more important, the Only Begotten Son of God in the flesh. (See John 1:14; 3:16; Moses 6:52.) Being the son of both a mortal and a divine being was "not in violation of natural law but in accordance with a higher manifestation thereof." [^2] As the son of a mortal woman, Jesus "learned . . . obedience by the things which he suffered." (Heb. 5:8.) That is, he had to personally experience all the physical and spiritual hardships common to the human family. Thus, he became the great teacher or "rabbi" among the Jews of his time. On the other hand, Jesus was able to overcome all mortal difficulties, including the agony of sin and the bond of death, because he was the literal, physical son of God the Father. "He received not of the fulness at first, but continued from grace to grace, until he received a fulness. . . . And he received all power, both in heaven and on earth, and the glory of the Father was with him, for he dwelt in him." (D&C 93:13, 17.)

Jesus did not receive a physical body merely to experience life as we know it on this earth. He also needed a special body, empowered by the divine nature inherited from his Father, in order to become the Savior of mankind. The suffering of his atoning sacrifice in Gethsemane, the freewill offering of his life at Golgotha, and the liberating power of his resurrection from the garden tomb would have been impossible without the godly faculties inherent within his physical body. [^3] As the Only Begotten Son of God in the flesh, Jesus was able to provide the gifts of immortality and eternal life to us, his spirit brothers and sisters. [^4] In this, he became the exemplary son of our Heavenly Father.

The Obedient Son of God in All Things

Christ gradually obtained the full power of the Father because he was a fully obedient son. When any son honors his father through obedience and virtuous living, he is his father's son in the truest, most complete sense of the word. In contrast, an earthly father may "disown" his natural son if the son chooses a way of life contrary to the father's highest values. Furthermore, we naturally assume that children will "follow in their parents' footsteps," and we are shocked and surprised if they reject the values they have been taught from parents who are exemplary members of society and who have properly taught their children.

According to the scriptures and the teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, Christ patterned his life exactly after the Father. When criticized by the Pharisees for making himself equal with God, "then answered Jesus and said unto them, Verily, verily, I say unto you, The Son can do nothing of himself, but what he seeth the Father do: for what things soever he doeth, these also doeth the Son likewise." (John 5:19.) Joseph Smith expounded upon this scripture, teaching that the Father had earlier developed the faculties and feelings that Jesus would later experience, for "the Son doeth what He hath seen the Father do: then the Father hath some day laid down His life and taken it again." [^5] Because the life of the Savior duplicated that of the Father in so many ways, Jesus could say, "He that hath seen me hath seen the Father." (John 14:9.) Not fully understanding the intimate relationship between Christ and the Father, many Christian sects have taken this and similar passages to mean that the Father and Son are simply manifestations of the same holistic person or abstract entity.

To summarize the roles of Jesus as a son—he was both a Son of Man and a Son of God. As the Son of Man, Jesus was the son in the flesh of an outstanding woman, Mary, and he remembered and cared for her until his dying day. (See John 19:26-27.) As the Son of God, he was the firstborn spirit son, the only begotten physical son, and the only perfect exemplary son of God. In fact, he became such a complete son of Heavenly Father that he appeared and administered like God, his father.

Jesus, Our Holy, Elder Brother

Within his earthly family, Jesus was known as the brother of James and other family members. (See Gal. 1:19; Matt. 13:55.) Though he is not referred to as such in the scriptures, Jesus Christ has also been commonly called our "elder brother" by modern prophets. He has been given this title because we were all with him from the beginning as intelligent entities and later as spirit personages. (See D&C 93:21-23.) No doubt our common spiritual parentage is the source of Christ's great love for us, as it should be the wellspring of love among men. When we obtain Christ's love, we should develop further love for others: "In this the children of God are manifest, and the children of the devil: whosoever doeth not righteousness is not of God, neither he that loveth not his brother. For this is the message that ye heard from the beginning, that we should love one another." (1 Jn. 3:10-11; italics added.) The scriptures contain many sad examples of people, such as the murderer Cain, who turned away from natural affection and instead embraced envy and hatred for their brothers in the flesh. Christ, on the other hand, loves all his family of followers and "esteemeth all flesh in one," for he has redeemed all flesh. (1 Ne. 17:35.)

As God in the premortal, spirit world, Jesus was known as Jehovah (or Yahweh). As the firstborn and most righteous spirit son of God, Jesus set a noble example and became the primary supporter of God the Father. He became the chief advocate of God's plan of salvation, which would provide us with free agency and personal development. Due to the imperfection and weakness of human nature, this plan of redemption required the atoning sacrifice of a redeemer, and Jesus volunteered to be its foreordained savior. "The Lord said: Whom shall I send? And one answered like unto the Son of Man: Here am I, send me." (Abr. 3:27.) The role of the high priest in ancient Israel was to offer ritual animal sacrifices to God. Jesus Christ, the Great High Priest, would come to offer the ultimate sacrifice—himself. Thus he became the "author of eternal salvation" after the Father selected him as the administrator of his plan of redemption. (Heb. 5:9.)

Our elder brother, Jesus, not only advocates our Father's plan to us, but he also advocates our needs with the Father, pleading our case as any good older brother would in support of his siblings. And just as younger children look to their older brothers as examples of how to live, so Jesus is our teacher and role model: "Whither I go ye know, and the way ye know. . . . I am the way." (John 14:4, 6.) Like a stronger older brother who saves the younger from drowning or from other physical harm, Christ has the power to rescue us from sin: "Cry unto him for mercy; for he is mighty to save." (Alma 34:18.)

As our older brother, the premortal Jesus fulfilled a variety of important roles to prepare the world and its inhabitants for the salvation offered by Heavenly Father's plan. As the younger spirit brothers and sisters of Jesus would come to this earth, they would have opportunities for spiritual understanding and growth. Jesus provided spiritual help in his role as the Lord of the ancient patriarchs and prophets, who, in turn, instructed the children of God concerning the laws and commandments. Jesus was also the God of justice and mercy who extended the promises of divine retribution and redemption to peoples on earth. In all these callings, the premortal Jesus represented Heavenly Father as the legal administrator of God's plan.

The God of the Old Testament

Though, as we have shown, Jesus was a God before he came to earth and even before the earth existed, his complete identity has been unknown, obscured and misunderstood throughout the centuries. As Jesus told his followers, "The light shineth in darkness; and the darkness comprehended it not." (John 1:5.) Indeed, until Christ revealed himself as Jehovah to Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery (see D&C 110:3-4), his premortal role as God of the Old Testament had become virtually unrecognized in the Christian world. The Lord was also forgotten periodically in ancient times, such as among the children of Israel who grew up in Egyptian bondage. When Jehovah commanded Moses from the burning bush to deliver Israel, the prophet was not sure how to identify his God. "Moses said unto God, Behold, when I come unto the children of Israel, and shall say unto them, The God of your fathers hath sent me unto you; and they shall say to me, What is his name? what shall I say unto them?" (Ex. 3:13.) Jehovah replied with a name that embodies the preeminence of his being and power: "I AM THAT I AM: and he said, Thus shalt thou say unto the children of Israel, I AM hath sent me to you." (Ex. 3:14.)

In the original Hebrew, "I AM THAT I AM" is translated from three words, the first and last sharing the same root—eh'yeh. This is the verb signifying being or presence. The center word 'asher is an all-purpose conjunction whose translation can vary among that, so that, as, for, because, and so on. Translations can vary slightly, then, but the common sense is that the being, or existence, of the Lord precedes and supersedes everything else. As expounded in modern scripture, "he comprehendeth all things, and all things are before him, and all things are round about him; and he is above all things, and in all things, and is through all things, and is round about all things; and all things are by him, and of him, even God, forever and ever." (D&C 88:41.)

Simply said, Jesus "is He who He is"—the Lord of this earth. The same Hebrew verb of being or presence that forms the root of "I AM" also provides the root for his premortal name "Jehovah." The original Hebrew was written without vowels, and thus there are varying transliterations of his name, with the standard King James Version being Jehovah. Transliterations closer to the original Hebrew phonetics would be Yahweh, or Jahveh. Two translations of the Hebrew Yahweh (or Jehovah) are currently advocated: one interprets Israel's God as "The One who is," while the other defines the Lord's name as "The One who causes to be" whatever comes to pass at his command. [^6] Yahweh is who he is—our God. And he causes whatever he will—especially the glorification of this earth and its inhabitants.

From the words of John, then, we learn that Jesus was with God the Father from the beginning and that he became a God. Jesus directed the creation and became the light of the world. He was the God of the Old Testament, even though most living on the earth, even many among the chosen people of Abraham, did not always recognize and follow him.

The God of Justice

What the children of Israel needed to learn in the days of Moses was that the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob still lived and governed as the supreme Lord of the whole earth. In antiquity, the captive Israelites, like other ancient peoples, seemed to believe that different lands were dominated by certain deities who required homage from the people in their territories. These local gods were capricious characters who often were angered with humans and could only be placated by many gifts and animal sacrifices.

Jehovah too required ritual sacrifices, but they were not given to feed or appease him. They served a symbolic purpose in pointing the people toward repentance, obedience, and the real redemption of man through the future sacrifice of the Messiah. In themselves, the sacrifices meant nothing to Jehovah: "The sacrifice of the wicked is an abomination to the Lord: but the prayer of the upright is his delight." (Prov. 15:8.) In contrast to pagan deities, Jehovah was a God who demanded righteousness and obedience to his laws.

Modern scripture helps us understand Jesus as the God of justice by revealing that spiritual laws, like God himself, were present "in the beginning" and are unchanging and eternal: "There is a law, irrevocably decreed in heaven before the foundations of this world, upon which all blessings are predicated—and when we obtain any blessing from God, it is by obedience to that law upon which it is predicated." (D&C 130:20-21.) Indeed, the Lord himself is subject to eternal law and operates within it: "I, the Lord, am bound when ye do what I say; but when ye do not what I say, ye have no promise." (D&C 82:10.)

After ancient Israel left Egypt, Jehovah gave them the Law of Moses, a group of "carnal" commandments that the Apostle Paul called a "schoolmaster to bring us unto Christ." (Gal. 3:24.) The children of Israel truly were like children during this time, in need of strict commandments with immediate rewards for obedience and punishments for wickedness. Israel often failed to acknowledge Jehovah's authority or to recognize the immediate link between actions and their consequences. From the record of forty years in the wilderness, we find that many disobeyed and immediately received the Lord's punishments, usually including death. Thus, Jehovah gained the reputation of being an overly harsh God, and this opinion remains today among people with only a superficial knowledge of the scriptures.

New sets of prophetic instructions were given, however, once Israel came into maturity and was established in the land of Canaan. Instead of instant, negative reinforcement for disobedience, God delayed the punishments, sometimes for generations. Jehovah sent prophets to warn the people of calamities to come from their wickedness, giving them opportunity to measure the spiritual effects of their acts and to exercise agency and repentance. Israel could then begin to act on faith and spiritual sensitivity, rather than to react in fear of instant physical punishment.

The God of Mercy

Nonetheless, the children of Israel in Canaan did not seem to reach the level of spiritual maturity later exemplified by the Nephites in the New World, who from the outset preached Jesus Christ while keeping the Law of Moses, so that their "children [might] know to what source they [might] look for a remission of their sins." (2 Ne. 25:26.) Because of their faith in Christ hundreds of years before his earthly ministry, the Nephites sought forgiveness from sin through the Atonement that was to come. (See Mosiah 26:20-22.) God rewarded their righteous efforts, and he extended a promise of forgiveness and redemption from sin if they would repent and look to Christ as their savior. (See Mosiah 4:6; 13:28.) The actual gift of redemption would not be given until the time of Christ's atonement, but the premortal Messiah could suspend their suffering for sin.

What is left for us to decide is the relationship we will establish with God's son. Whether we view the justice of God with fear and trembling or with hope and rejoicing depends upon where we personally stand in relation to eternal laws. If we are afraid of God's judgments, as Israel was in the wilderness, we reveal our own sinfulness and a need for the strict discipline of carnal laws. On the other hand, if we are glad that God is just as well as merciful, it is because we have hope of receiving rewards for our righteous acts. Finally, if we add good works to our faith in Christ, we can lay hold upon his mercy, which blesses the righteous and will "satisfy the demands of justice, and encircles them in the arms of safety, while he that exercises no faith unto repentance is exposed to the whole law of the demands of justice." (Alma 34:16.)

Those who live under carnal laws, then, receive a harsher judgment; those who have struggled to live spiritual laws earn the benefits of mercy. Slothfulness and wickedness become more difficult for all of us in the long run as their effects catch up with us. In contrast, spiritual industry and righteousness become easier for those of us who follow Christ as he shares his rewards with us. We choose, then, the manner of our own judgment before the eternal Christ, our holy, elder brother.

Jesus as the Brother Who Represents the Father through Divine Investiture

Our elder brother could pronounce judgments and deliver punishments or grant forgiveness and promise redemption through the power he received from God the Father before this world was organized. When Jesus said "I am in the Father, and the Father in me" (John 14:10), he was speaking of what we call "divine investiture." As a God of justice and mercy, Jehovah represents the Father through the law of divine investiture. That is, God empowered the premortal Jesus to represent him in all the affairs of this earth. All that the Lord Jehovah proclaimed, bound, sealed, and promised was guaranteed effective by God Elohim.

The law of divine investiture is similar to, but far more encompassing than the so-called "power of attorney" that mortals can give one to another, in which one person gives another the power to act in his name in all legal affairs. To give someone power of attorney, we must have full confidence that the person will always act in good judgment and in our best interest. By Christ's diligence in antemortality (the premortal existence), he gained not only the Father's trust, but also his power, and through divine investiture of that power, Christ created the earth and its inhabitants. By later proving himself obedient in the flesh as well, Jesus received power to atone for the sins of mankind, bring all men to judgment, and exalt the faithful with himself. Thus in a glorious vision of the Savior, Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon beheld "that by him, and through him, and of him, the worlds are and were created, and the inhabitants thereof are begotten sons and daughters unto God." (D&C 76:24.) God the Father has decreed that Jesus is his representative to this earth, and anything of eternal value and divine power must be done in the name of Christ. (See Matt. 28:19; John 17:1-10; D&C 50:27.)

The Father has not only invested in the Son power to act in his name, but he has also declared that all things must be done through Jesus Christ to be binding on earth and in heaven. The Book of Mormon prophets clearly understood and emphasized this fact over and over again in their teachings: "This is the way; and there is none other way nor name given under heaven whereby man can be saved in the kingdom of God. And now, behold, this is the doctrine of Christ, and the only and true doctrine of the Father." (2 Ne. 31:21; see also 2 Ne. 25:20; Mosiah 3:17; 5:8.) Most religions of the world worship some form of Supreme Being akin to God the Father, though he is called by many different names. But unless men, when taught the truth, accept that God the Son has come in the flesh and call upon his name for redemption, they cannot be saved. Whoever Christ accepts, the Father will accept also, and whoever Christ rejects will not enter into the kingdom of heaven: "The keeper of the gate is the Holy One of Israel; and he employeth no servant there; and there is none other way save it be by the gate." (2 Ne. 9:41.)

Jesus, the Father Figure on Earth

Understanding the principle of divine investiture, we can appreciate that Jesus' statement, "I am in the father and the father in me," is an expression of oneness in power, not identity. (John 14:10.) Revealing a fuller account of the apostle John's witness, the Lord expounded to Joseph Smith upon this point: "I am in the Father, and the Father in me, and the Father and I are one—the Father because he gave me of his fulness, and the Son because I was in the world and made flesh my tabernacle." (D&C 93:3-4.) Christ first became the Son of God in the flesh, and then later became like the Father when he received the fullness of God's glory and power.

In a more limited sense, this is the same way all human beings progress from children to adults. Each man is born a son to another. After having fully matured, the son himself becomes a father and brings life to yet another son. The same process, of course, applies to daughters and mothers. It follows, then, that as Christ has become as the Father, he begins to function more and more in the role of a father. There are many ways that Jesus serves us in a fatherly role, especially as the father of this earth and of our salvation.

The "Father" or Creator of this Earth

Holding the administrative authority and power of God, Jehovah was able to create the world: "All things were made by him; and without him was not any thing made that was made." (John 1:3.) God the Father directed and supervised the operation, but he delegated the actual process of creation to his firstborn, Jehovah, who was assisted in turn by the archangel, Michael, who later became the first man, Adam. [^7]

Jehovah supervised the six creative periods including the creation of the Garden of Eden on this earth. He assisted the Father in placing Adam and Eve in the garden, and after their fall from grace, he directed them out of the garden and taught them about his redemptive powers and the gospel truths that would bring them salvation. For this reason, the Apostle John wrote, "In him was life; and the life was the light of men." (John 1:4.)

The "Father" or Head of His Kingdom

Jesus was foreordained to serve many important roles throughout time. As God's representative, he fathered or initiated some physical and many more spiritual things that continue to bless us. In the physical realm, Jesus was the creator or organizer of this earth. (See Heb. 1:2.) In the spiritual dimension, he is the father or head of his gospel and his church, which is called the Church of Jesus Christ. (See Col. 1:18.) As evidences of his love and power, he is the father of our salvation through the saving ordinances of his gospel, the redeeming powers of his priesthood, and the sanctifying grace of his atonement. (See Heb. 5:4-9; Rom. 5:11.) He is the acting head or father of his kingdom, both in heaven and on earth.

The fatherly role of Jesus is seen most vividly in the blessings he provides his disciples. Followers of Jesus are called "Christians" after they have accepted his gospel truths and entered into a covenant relationship within his church. As his gospel and priesthood blessings transform their lives, they are "born again," becoming spiritual children of Christ. King Benjamin in the Book of Mormon taught this concept, telling his listeners, "Because of the covenant which ye have made ye shall be called the children of Christ, his sons, and his daughters; for behold, this day he hath spiritually begotten you; for ye say that your hearts are changed through faith on his name; therefore, ye are born of him and have become his sons and his daughters." (Mosiah 5:7.)

Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon also bore witness of this fact: "For we saw him [Christ], even on the right hand of God; and we heard the voice bearing record that he is the Only Begotten of the Father—that by him, and through him, and of him, the worlds are and were created, and the inhabitants thereof are begotten sons and daughters unto God." (D&C 76:23-24.) Because we are spiritually reborn through Christ, Jesus is called the Father of our salvation.

Christ was the only person born on earth of a mortal woman and an immortal Father, allowing him the opportunity of opening the gates of resurrection and immortality. We all will be physically born into immortality through the Savior's gift of resurrection. However, if we are to become spiritually exalted as his true sons and daughters as well, we must follow the path he marked on earth as he "continued from grace to grace, until he received a fulness." (D&C 93:13.) Thus, the Savior's promise to us: "For if you keep my commandments you shall receive of his [the Father's] fulness, and be glorified in me as I am in the Father; therefore, I say unto you, you shall receive grace for grace. And now, verily I say unto you, I was in the beginning with the Father, and am the Firstborn; and all those who are begotten through me are partakers of the glory of the same, and are the church of the Firstborn." (D&C 93:20-22.)

Just as Jesus was an obedient son to his Father, we have the opportunity to follow Christ while he serves us as the father of his church and gospel. Just as Jesus' mortal life emulated that of the Father, we become Christ's sons and daughters in the truest sense as we follow, obey, and honor him. Finally, as Jesus took upon himself the name of Father in relation to us, so we, in baptism, take upon ourselves the name of Christ, "for by this name shall [we] be called at the last day." (3 Ne. 27:5.) In this light, the words of the Savior recorded by John become clearer: "At that day ye shall know that I am in my Father, and ye in me, and I in you." (John 14:20.) Christ is speaking of that heavenly, celestial state in which exalted beings are of one heart and one mind.

Though Jesus Christ is known by many different names and titles—over one hundred in the Book of Mormon alone—his three most intimate are those we have elaborated in this chapter: Son, Brother, and Father. To summarize, JESUS is the firstborn, literal, and perfect son of Heavenly Father, and he is also our holy, elder brother who became the chief advocate and administrator of God's plan, serving as the father of his gospel and our salvation. Indeed, he is the Lord of this earth!

As a fitting capstone to this chapter, the language of the scriptures provides the best summation of the man whom we call Jesus. This rendition is based on an edition of the LDS Church News in 1980, where many titles describing Jesus were published in a special Easter article. This collection of major titles reads like a prose poem. The various names used in the scriptures define and describe the multitudinous roles and characteristics of the Son of God. They invoke many images while portraying the grand scope of this unique individual, Jesus, our Holy Brother: [^8]

Jesus Christ, the Cornerstone of Mormon Beliefs

We know that Jesus is the divine Son of God and the Father of our salvation, and we bear testimony of him.

The Son

He is the Firstborn Son of God in the spirit, and thus is the Elder Brother of us all. He is the Only Begotten Son of God in the flesh—actually, literally, physically, and biologically—and from his immortal Father he received power to conquer physical death. He is the Beloved Son in whom the Father is well pleased because he speaks and does the will of the Father, submitting his desire to that of his Divine Parent. He is separate from God the Father in both spirit body and physical body, but is one with the Father in witness, testimony, truth, ideals, and goals; the work and glory of the Father is also the work and glory of the Son, "to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man." (Moses 1:39.)

The Father

Jesus Christ also can be referred to rightfully as the Father. He is the only legal heir of the Father upon the earth, and the Father has bestowed his powers upon him by divine investiture of authority. Because the gospel was made efficacious upon the earth through his atonement, Jesus Christ is also the Father of those who accept his gospel and become his sons and daughters spiritually. Because the immortality of all mankind was assured through the gift of his life, Jesus Christ is the Father of all our resurrected bodies. Because the earth and its heavens were created and organized under his direction, Jesus Christ is the Father of the earth; all of the elements quickly and gladly obey the will of this God of nature and of miracles.

Jesus has many other honored titles, and he fulfills many other worthy callings.

The Eternal One

He is Alpha and Omega, the first and the last, the beginning and the end. He is the GREAT I AM, the pre-earthly Existent One. As the pre-earthly Jehovah, he served as the God of the Old Testament, the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob and thus of all Israel, the God who spoke with Moses on Mount Sinai and with all the ancient prophets. As the glorified Lord, he is God of the whole earth, forever and ever.

The Anointed One

He is the Anointed One of Jewish hope and expectation, called the Messiah in the Old Testament. In anticipation of his coming, the ancients offered up sacrifice because he was the Lamb of God without spot or blemish who was foreordained from before the foundations of the world to be slain as a sacrifice in the meridian of time. He is the Anointed One of Christian belief and practice, called the Christ in the New Testament. His full name and title, Jesus the Christ, is the only name under Heaven whereby salvation and exaltation come.

The Savior

He is the Holy Child of Bethlehem, born of the virgin Mary. He is the boy of Nazareth and of the temple where he wanted to be about his Father's business. He is the Immanuel, or "God with us" of the Galilee and of Jerusalem. He is our Mediator with the Father. He is the promised Savior and Redeemer of us all, past, present, and future, having atoned for the transgression of Adam unconditionally and for our sins upon the condition of our repentance, and having provided for the resurrection of all mankind.

We should remember him and his atonement each time we partake of the sacramental emblems: the bread in remembrance of his resurrected flesh when he atoned for physical death, and the liquid in remembrance of the blood he shed in Gethsemane when he atoned for spiritual death.

The Lord of This Earth

He is the Stone of Israel, the Rock of Salvation; those who build upon him as their foundation shall be safe and secure from the winds and storms of the adversary. He is the Lord of the vineyard, and through partaking of the fruits of his gospel, we can enjoy the fruits of eternal life. He is the Good Shepherd and knows his sheep and is known of them. He desires to gather his sheep together that they might hear his voice and become one fold with him as their Shepherd.

He is the Founder and the Prince of Peace, and only through following his example and living his gospel can we find the peace that surpasses all understanding. He is the Eternal and Everlasting Judge; the Keeper of the Gate; a God of justice, law, and order; a God of mercy, kindness, and love. Only through him can we return unto our Heavenly Father.

The Millennial Ruler

He is the King of kings, who will return to the earth in the last days, cleansing it from all iniquity and establishing the conditions of peace and righteousness that shall last for a thousand years. From Zion—the New Jerusalem on the American continent—his law to govern all the earth shall go forth.

He is the Lord of lords, the High Priest over his Church, whose second coming in power and glory will fulfill the prayer, "Thy Kingdom come. Thy will be done in earth, as it is in heaven." (Matt. 6:10.) From the Old Jerusalem, which shall become a holy city at his presence, shall go forth his word to the faithful saints. May we be among that blessed number!

Of these things we bear witness concerning Jesus Christ, the divine Son of God.

For further study, refer to the following entries:

TG: BD: EM:

Jesus Christ, Advocate Advocate The Father and Son: A Doctrinal Jesus Christ, Antemortal Existence of Christ Exposition by the Presidency Jesus Christ, Authority of Firstborn and the Twelve Jesus Christ, Creator Jehovah Jehovah, Jesus Christ Jesus Christ, Divine Sonship Jesus Jesus Christ Jesus Christ, Firstborn Messiah Jesus Christ, Fatherhood and Jesus Christ, Foreordained Son of God Sonship of Jesus Christ, Head of the Church Jesus Christ, Names and Titles of Jesus Christ—Jehovah Jesus Christ, Mediator Jesus Christ, Messiah Jesus Christ, Relationships with the Father

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] See EM, 2:649.
[^2] See also TPJS, 190; GD, 61-63.
[^3] See EM, 2:649; BD, 776-77.
[^4] See BD, 725.
[^5] TPJS, 190.
[^6] See TPJS, 199.
[^7] See BD, 704.
[^8] More insights into the gift of the Holy Ghost are presented in chapter 19.
