Victor L. Ludlow, Principles and Practices of the Restored Gospel ( 1992)

Chapter 4

A Messenger of Truth

Boy Scouts of America have long followed the motto "Do a good turn daily." As part of the spirit of this service, they are not to seek recognition or reward for their good deeds. In a similar service emphasis, groups of young women in local Mormon congregations often have a program of "secret sisters," where each girl is given the name of another young woman in the group. For a number of weeks they are to do special good deeds for their secret sister. Although the name of the Boy Scout or the identity of the young woman may not be known, evidence of their good deeds can be recognized as widows find their lawns mowed by unknown helpers and families find plates of cookies on their porches. One does not have to know or see the person rendering the service to receive and appreciate the good that has been done in their behalf. Similar acts of goodness by many anonymous people can bring many blessings into a neighborhood or among a group of friends.

In a similar pattern of service, the three members of the Godhead often help and assist us in many ways where we may not recognize their hand in the blessings we are receiving. This is particularly true for the abundant spiritual benefits that we receive through the promptings of the Holy Spirit. This third member of the Godhead, also called the Holy Ghost, is the least named in the scriptures, yet should be the most familiar to people because of their personal spiritual experiences. The scriptures are full of information regarding the character of both God the Father and his Son, Jesus Christ, revealed primarily through their personal interactions with the prophets and apostles. Except for these special witnesses, however, very few people have ever had direct contact with either the Father or the Son. On the other hand, relatively little has been revealed as to the personal origin, role, titles, and destiny of the Holy Ghost. Yet all spiritual knowledge and guidance comes to people through the power of the Holy Spirit, and it is through him that most of us have come to know God the Father and his Son, Jesus Christ. All righteous people who search for spiritual guidance have access to the presence and influence of this obscure, yet personal, Godhead member—the Holy Ghost.

Personal Attributes of the Holy Ghost

What we do know about the Holy Ghost's individual attributes we learn primarily through modern revelation: "The Father has a body of flesh and bones as tangible as man's; the Son also; but the Holy Ghost has not a body of flesh and bones, but is a personage of Spirit. Were it not so, the Holy Ghost could not dwell in us." (D&C 130:22.) Previous to his mortal birth through Mary, Jesus Christ also lacked a body of flesh and bones, but he was still a spirit son of Heavenly Father and the God of the Creation and the Old Testament, revealing himself and his power to men from the beginning of time. The Holy Ghost likewise is a spirit son of the Father and a God with eternal power, though his role is different from that of either the Father or the Son. [^1]

Unlike the Father and Son, the Holy Ghost can "dwell in us." That is, his Spirit can enter into our bodies and commune directly with our own spirit. Mortal man cannot endure the glorified presence of the Father and Son unless his flesh be transfigured, so the Holy Ghost is sent to prepare men and lead them gradually back into God's presence. (See D&C 76:11-12.) It should not seem too strange that the Holy Ghost, as a spirit person, can actually enter into the body of a human being, since the scriptures record examples of spirits, both good and evil, who have entered into people. For example, the New Testament records one account where a legion of demons possessed a person's body to overwhelm and bind his whole soul. (See Mark 5:1-15; cf. Matt. 8:28-32.) Then, too, the power and influence of wickedness—like that of the Holy Ghost—can be spread throughout the world and among many people at once as Satan's legions undermine the spiritual influences of the members of the Godhead.

Because the Holy Ghost is a distinct entity, he does not and cannot transform himself into any other form, nor can he personally be in more than one place at one time. Thus, "a man may receive the Holy Ghost, and it may descend upon him, and not tarry with him." (D&C 130:23.) [^2] However, the power of the Holy Ghost is infinite—for he is a God—and thus his influence can be manifested everywhere at any time. In this way, his power is like the effect of God's love or the Light of Christ, which at once permeates all creation and accompanies everyone in the world. (See D&C 121:46; 84:46.)

What Is Meant by the "Spirit of God"?

The identity of the Holy Ghost is sometimes confused with the character of either the Father or the Son. As discussed in earlier chapters on both God and Jesus, these two members of the Godhead both have a spirit as an integral element of their divine being. Thus the term Spirit of God could refer to any of the three Godhead members. However, the usual context of this term in the scriptures is applied to the Holy Ghost, who is also called the Holy Spirit, Spirit of God, Spirit of the Lord, and the Comforter. [^3] A brief discussion and example will clarify some distinctive spiritual roles of each member in the Godhead.

God the Father's own spirit exercises a subtle, loving influence through the nature of his divine being. He is the great planner and director of his plan of salvation for all his spirit children. Since he has delegated most of the responsibility for this earth and its inhabitants to his Son, his spiritual influence and pervasiveness appear refined and indirect.

More direct is the spiritual force emanating from Christ's own spirit, called the "light of Christ," which is the constant, goodly influence radiating into the souls of all, prompting them toward moral integrity and righteousness. (See Moro. 7:18; John 8:12.) This divine inducement interacts with us and is known as our conscience, telling us right from wrong. (See Moro. 7:12-19.) It is also the light that proceeds through Christ into the world, enlightening everyone coming to the earth and quickening human understanding. (See D&C 88:6-13, 41.) Since the light of Christ is an influence emanating from Jehovah, it should not be confused with the actual personage of either Christ or the Holy Ghost. Its purpose is to strive with the children of men until it brings them to the possession of the greater light and testimony of the Holy Spirit. Its effect seems both preliminary and preparatory to one's receiving the power and gift of the Holy Ghost. [^4]

The Holy Ghost, also commonly referred to as the Spirit of God, manifests the most direct spiritual power in our lives; he is the Spirit sent by God the Father to this earth to minister to the spiritual needs of his children. The ancient prophet Nephi testified that the Holy Ghost is a "gift of God unto all those who diligently seek him. . . . For he that diligently seeketh shall find; and the mysteries of God shall be unfolded unto them, by the power of the Holy Ghost, as well as in these times as in times of old, and as well in times of old as in times to come." (1 Ne. 10:17-19.) The Holy Ghost is the great teacher and testifier of gospel insights.

The Prophet Joseph Smith has explained that the three members of the Godhead made an "everlasting covenant" before the organization of this earth. There they planned for the progress and salvation of mankind. Because of special assignments, they would be known to us as "God the first, the Creator; God the second, the Redeemer; and God the third, the witness or Testator." [^5] He also taught that while the temporary influence of the Holy Ghost, the divine power of witnessing gospel truths, can be received before baptism, the lasting gift or constant companionship of the Holy Ghost can be received only after baptism and the laying on of hands. [^6] Thus, the Holy Ghost is manifested to people on earth in two distinct ways: the power of the Holy Ghost and the gift of the Holy Ghost. Through his power, a person learns and receives a witness of gospel truths, even before he or she is baptized. Through his gift, a person receives the right for the constant companionship of the Holy Spirit after one's baptism. [^7] Most of our discussion about the Holy Ghost in this chapter deals with the power of the Holy Ghost. [^8]

Because we experience stages of spiritual darkness in mortality that cause us difficulty in distinguishing the spiritual manifestations of the three Godhead members, comparing these three spiritual influences with three forms of light will be helpful. Imagine being in a well-lit room at late dusk as a full moon is rising in the heavens outside. The electrical light is the most apparent illumination source in the room, and it can be compared to the power of the Holy Ghost, which is of greatest immediate aid in the coming night. The bright, silver light of the full moon outside is like the light of Christ, casting enough shadows so we can distinguish objects (or right and wrong) and providing enough light to assist us through the night. But as we look toward the west, we see the refracted light from the afterglow of the setting sun, which can be compared to the distant, subtle influence and love of God the Father softly illuminating the horizon, promising new light after the darkness.

Although the most powerful light of all—that of the fiery sun—is the furthest removed and the least visible to us, its power and glory surpass all else, sustaining life on this planet just as assuredly as the glory of Heavenly Father maintains spiritual life. However, just as mortals should not stand in the direct sunlight and look unprotected straight at the sun, we, as imperfect beings, cannot abide the direct light and glory of our Father in Heaven.

The light of the full moon is closer, reflecting the sun's light into our night of moral and mortal darkness. This light of Christ is sufficient to direct our paths if it is not blocked out by clouds of wickedness or the insensitivity of our souls.

The closest light, which assists us most directly through the night, comes into most homes through electrical energy, although many abodes are still lit with oil lamps and cooking fires. In any case, the light in the room derives almost entirely from the mineral and natural resources provided by God's prior efforts, but man's use of these sources is often affected by his understanding and action. Likewise, God has provided our lives with a source of valuable, spiritual light through the Holy Ghost. Just as we see much better in the forms of light available to us in our homes, we usually live better under the enlightening influences of the Holy Ghost. Prophets occasionally bask in the direct light of God as they receive profound revelations, but we would be blinded in such circumstances. Instead, we should strive to improve ourselves to be ready and worthy to receive daily, constant inspiration through the Holy Ghost. First, we must learn about the powers of the Holy Ghost and then understand how to gain access to them. [^9]

The Threefold Power of the Holy Ghost

To fulfill his role of bringing us to Christ and the Father, the Holy Ghost has a threefold manifestation of his power. He is a revelator of knowledge concerning the other members of the Godhead and of the gospel; he is a testator of the truthfulness of what he reveals; and he is a comforter to us in our earthly sojourn away from the presence of God.

Revelator of Truth

In the first chapter on the nature of truth, we emphasized that just as human knowledge can be acquired only through human faculties, so also spiritual knowledge can be acquired only through revelation by the Holy Ghost. This is why, even when Christ was in the flesh among his disciples, the power of the Holy Ghost still had to reveal the Lord's divine identity to them: "When Jesus came into the coasts of Caesarea Philippi, he asked his disciples, saying, Whom do men say that I the Son of man am? And they said, Some say that thou art John the Baptist; some, Elias; and others, Jeremias, or one of the prophets. He saith unto them, But whom say ye that I am? And Simon Peter answered and said, Thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God. And Jesus answered and said unto him, Blessed art thou, Simon Bar-jona: for flesh and blood hath not revealed it unto thee, but my Father which is in heaven." (Matt. 16:13-17.)

Christ had already identified himself as the Savior to his disciples, and again in these verses he calls himself the Son of Man, referring to his unique relationship with the only exalted man at that time, God the Father. [^10] Nonetheless, Peter could testify of Christ only because God the Father had revealed the Savior's divinity to him through the power of the Holy Ghost. In the verses that follow, Christ continues his lesson on the importance of divine knowledge through the Spirit because such knowledge serves as the foundation of his church: "Upon this rock [Christ's revelation] will I build my church; and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it." (Matt. 16:18.) [^11]

As a member of the Godhead, the Holy Ghost knows the truth of all things. (See D&C 35:19.) He can reveal a knowledge of things past, present, and even future. (See 1 Pet. 1:2.) Those seeking eternal truth and salvation must be taught by the Holy Ghost because spiritual things can only be understood when taught and learned by the Holy Spirit. (See D&C 50:11-24.) Latter-day Saints are admonished to seek and teach by the power of the Holy Ghost as they go forth representing Christ. The Savior told them "to teach the children of men the things which I have put into your hands by the power of my Spirit." (D&C 43:15.) The Holy Ghost is such a valuable source of gospel knowledge that to have his constant influence is called the greatest gift a person can receive in mortality. (See D&C 121:46.)

The marvelous power of the Holy Ghost in his role as a revelator is demonstrated in the complex sophistication of his communicative abilities. As he interacts with our own spirits, even if just for an instant, he transmits simultaneous, instant, and personal messages. In simultaneous action, he speaks to many people at the same time through the miraculous nature of his spirit. His messages are also instant and spontaneous to the immediate situation; they are not prerecorded transmissions. Finally, his revelations are personal and tailored to the individual on the receiving end.

Witness of God's work

At the same time the Holy Ghost reveals knowledge to man, he also testifies that what he reveals is true. Whatever people speak under the influence of the Holy Spirit is scripture—sacred, inspired, and true. (See D&C 68:3-4.) When a person speaks by the power of the Holy Ghost, a spiritual conviction of the message's truthfulness is transmitted into the soul of the receiver. (See 2 Ne. 33:1.) This is why spiritual knowledge, though coming from the unseen world, is more sure than any temporal knowledge. No scientific or logical assertion can be its own proof—additional support from other sources is needed to establish validity. For example, mass confusion has resulted from both radio and television programs that were misinterpreted. A classic example is the Orson Wells radio drama The War of the Worlds. Many people thought it was a live news broadcast, and large numbers believed the earth was being attacked by alien invaders. A more recent example may be what appears to be a television news program where the footage or the newscaster's comments may not accurately portray what really is happening in that part of the world. We assume the reporting is truthful, but we do not really know until we can verify it with additional sources.

One might then ask, "How does a person know if he or she has received a true witness through the Holy Ghost?" To answer this question to a person who has never experienced the power of the Holy Spirit in their own soul is as difficult as describing the taste of salt to a person who has never tasted salt or the color green to a person blind from birth. The closest descriptions of the witnessing power of the Holy Ghost conveys a sensation of unusual warmth, often encompassing the whole being. Some people describe it as a special feeling of calmness and serenity, or even an "out of the physical body" experience of spiritual supernaturalness. The scriptures mention feelings of spiritual fullness, peace, joy, and power that accompany the Holy Ghost. (See Acts 13:52; Rom. 14:17; Moro. 6:9.) The best answer, as inconclusive as it may appear, is to encourage the questioner to plead and petition the Almighty for his or her own personal witness through the Spirit, for only the Holy Ghost can let a person know for a surety of the validity of any revealed truth.

To highlight, the Holy Spirit as a testator is both the medium of revelation and its confirmation. The Holy Ghost not only communicates information, but he simultaneously verifies the truthfulness of the data. Thus, the seemingly paradoxical words of Paul about faith make more sense: faith is not just a belief and hope in revealed truth, but also the "substance of things hoped for, the evidence of things not seen." (Heb. 11:1; italics added.)

Comforter for the Human Soul

Furthermore, in the absence of direct communication and association with God and Christ, the Holy Ghost is a comforter to our souls. Though the power of the Holy Ghost revealed a testimony of Christ to Peter even while he enjoyed the Lord's presence, Jesus told the apostles: "It is expedient for you that I go away: for if I go not away, the Comforter will not come unto you; but if I depart, I will send him unto you." (John 16:7.) Even though Jesus dwelt personally among the apostles, he could not—as the Holy Ghost later could—dwell within them.

When the Spirit is within us, we receive comfort in the sense of the original Latin roots of the word: com = together + fortis = strong. As the Holy Spirit literally comes together with our own spirit, we receive great strength as well as peace, for the Spirit adds his power to our soul. An example of how the Spirit's comfort can strengthen a person is demonstrated in the Apostle Peter. The Peter who walked with Christ became weak in an hour of personal danger and denied the Savior three times. However, the Peter who later received the Comforter resolutely followed in the footsteps of Christ, even in the manner of his death. We, likewise, with the Spirit can have the inner peace and strength to overcome whatever heartache or hardship life may bring us. [^12]

Communication through the Spirit

Within the past fifty years, the means of human communication have expanded and diversified in a way not previously imagined. Anciently, the spoken word could carry only as far as the strength of one's voice would allow; even the written word had to be hand copied and delivered. The rise of industrialization and technology has brought us improvements through the printing press, the telegraph and telephone, radio and television, and finally the computer and the facsimile machine. Through these inventions, many people can receive the same information, often at the same time. For example, many simultaneously watch satellite broadcasts from space as men circle the globe or walk on the moon's surface. Or, they observe the world Olympics from distant places. Through the medium of television, we see as though we are there, actually witnessing people and events very clearly although they occur thousands of miles away.

To appreciate how recent these technological advances are in human history, imagine the innocent ignorance of our great-grandparents when they were our age. How could we have described some of these things to them: what a television was, how people would see Americans walking around in space or on the surface of the moon, how clearly they could witness dozens of foreign Olympic events—some so clearly that they could see drops of sweat on the faces of athletes more vividly from thousands of miles away than people who were sitting in the grandstands personally witnessing the events could see them. Our great-grandparents would have been dumbfounded at our explanations and descriptions, and they might have even thought that we were crazy.

Communication technology has advanced greatly in the past few decades. Electronic and computer technology can now start to compensate for human defects in communication. For example, scientists are now developing a type of videocamera connected directly to the vision center of the brain to enable the blind to "see" images without their eyes. Also under research is a tiny microchip receiver of radio and television transmissions that could be implanted in the skull. Natural electrical impulses in the brain would conduct the signals directly to sound and sight centers of the nervous system, eliminating the need for external radio and TV receivers. With such advances, our great-grandchildren will consider the radios, televisions, compact disc players, and other devices of our age as historic relics of primitive communication.

Miraculous as these innovations are, they are still by no means as sophisticated as the means that God has developed through his supreme knowledge and power over the ages. His primary means of communication with us is to transmit information, truth, and comfort through the Holy Ghost. We mentioned earlier that only the Spirit can verify truthfulness while communicating. Also unique to the Holy Ghost is his ability to transmit personalized information to an infinite number of individuals at the same time. Each individual has a personal communication link with God through the Holy Ghost, and no matter how many people are seeking access at any moment, the circuits are never overcrowded.

A statement from the First Presidency of the Church in 1855 expresses some of the feelings that the Holy Ghost can bring into our souls: "Incomparable delight and happiness fill the soul of the faithful Saint, who has the testimony of Jesus and the Spirit of the living God to enlighten his understanding. Happiness supreme and love divine fill his bosom. . . . Thus our holy religion absorbs every feeling, desire, ambition, motive, and action of our natures. . . . It forms the vitality of our very existence. . . . This is true of every person who . . . has received the Holy Ghost, and continues to walk in the light, and be led by its gentle influence." [^13]

In summary, we can say that the HOLY GHOST is a spirit personage who serves as a revelator of truth, a witness of God's work, and a comforter for the human soul. In other words, he teaches, testifies, and transforms us while he lovingly serves us as the third member of the Godhead. [^14]

The intensity of revelation received through the Holy Ghost also surpasses any other mode of communication—Spirit speaking directly to spirit—and it has the power to motivate us to action as no word or image can. The Holy Ghost can bear a special, strong witness as he comes into our being, or he can inspire us through more subtle influences. His actual presence might last only a microsecond, but the residual afterglow could and should last for a much longer period. His effect upon our spirit can be like the catalytic agent in a chemical reaction—once the Holy Spirit starts the process, the reaction should continue long afterward until we weaken it with insensitivity or unworthiness. Finally, though the Holy Ghost can and does enlighten us in all types of learning, the spiritual knowledge alone that he conveys has the power to lead us to salvation. [^15]

For further study, refer to the following entries:

TG: BD: EM: Holy Ghost Comforter Holy Ghost Holy Ghost, Comforter Holy Ghost Holy Spirit Holy Ghost, Mission of Light of Christ Light of Christ Holy Ghost, Source of Testimony Spirit, The Holy

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] See also BD, 752-53 for further insights. Additional details about our spirit-child relationship with God are discussed in chapter 9.
[^2] See WNTCD, 1414.
[^3] See BD, 752.
[^4] See index, Book of Mormon.
[^5] The Hiding Place (New York: Bantam Books, 1971), 197-98.
[^6] Ibid., 198-99.
[^7] Ibid., 209.
[^8] See EM, 1:309.
[^9] After this manner therefore pray ye: Our Father which art in heaven, Hallowed be thy name. 10. Thy kingdom come. Thy will be done in earth, as it is in heaven. 11. Give us this day our daily bread. 12. And forgive us our debts, as we forgive our debtors. 13. And lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil: for thine is the kingdom, and the power, and the glory, for ever. Amen. (See also 3 Ne. 13:9-13.) See HC, 1:21-23; D&C 3, 10.
[^10] See BD, 753. Further perspectives into recognizing answers to prayers and understanding the different types of revelations are discussed in the next chapter.
[^11] EM, 3:1119.
[^12] See BD, 753.
[^13] Latter-Day Saints' Millennial Star, 17:503.
[^14] We assume that the Holy Ghost will have an opportunity some time and place to receive his own body of flesh and bone in order to achieve his own ultimate, personal perfection. Without further revealed insights, we can only speculate under what circumstances this would take place.
[^15] The next chapter discusses in more detail the process of prayer, through which we communicate with God and receive our own testimony of his truths. Additional insights into how the Holy Ghost and the spiritual gifts from God can transform us into spiritual children of our Heavenly Father are discussed in chapter 19 on the gift of the Holy Ghost.
