Victor L. Ludlow, Principles and Practices of the Restored Gospel ( 1992)

Chapter 5

The Gift of Prayer

Modern technology has provided society with marvelous means of communication. Particularly through the telephone, people can talk with each other around the globe. The same technology can sometimes be abused if it is not used properly, or it can be frustrating if it does not meet our needs. For example, telephone communication can be disrupted through atmospheric conditions or downed telephone lines. It can be abused by obscene or frivolous calls. Taped commercial messages or answering machines can frustrate our attempts to make effective use of our phone.

Prayer is much like our telephone communication—it is a great blessing if it is used frequently, wisely, and appropriately. But if neglected or abused, effective communication with our Heavenly Father can be severely weakened. We can also misuse prayer by asking for trivial things or things we should not ask for. Our Heavenly Father wants us to keep the lines of prayer open to him.

The divine command found most often in the scriptures is "to repent," perhaps because so many of God's children are inclined to turn away from him. The second most repeated injunction is "to pray," or to seek and ask God, a behavior that draws God's children nearer to him. (See D&C 4:7.) Prayer provides direction and comfort in our journey through life as we draw nearer to God. "Pray always," we are told, that we may "come off conqueror"—choosing good and conquering evil. (D&C 10:5.) Lacking the strength to prevail alone, we need to humble ourselves and seek help from God. In addition, prayer develops our understanding and testimony of gospel truths when the Holy Ghost bears pure witness. For these reasons, God has ordained that we should pray and has promised us that he will answer our prayers. The values, examples, and steps of prayer, along with its language and blessings, will be discussed in this chapter.

Spiritual Communion with God

Among all creations, only man has the ability to communicate through language with his maker. Because we possess this divine gift, we share a unique opportunity to establish contact with the supreme source of wisdom and compassion in our universe. When we realize and appreciate our relationship with God as his spirit children, we naturally and instinctively turn to him in prayer. When we ignore or disrupt this relationship, we find it difficult to pray. (See 2 Ne. 32:8-9.) [^1]

Our prayers should be both simple and sincere. A simple prayer is the means by which the minds of the Father and the child are brought into connection with each other. A sincere prayer takes the contact one step further and brings the wills into harmony with each other. We do not pray to change God's will but to become sensitive to his desires so that we might request and receive the comfort, direction, and other blessings that he gives to those ready, worthy, and desirous to receive them. Some blessings from God, especially those of a spiritual nature, are conditional upon our asking for them, and if we ask, we will be answered. (See Matt. 7:7; James 1:5-6.) This requesting function of prayer reflects the ancient origin of the term prayer, which derives from the Latin precarius, meaning something "obtained by begging," coming from the Latin root precari, meaning "to entreat." [^2] As we bring our will into contact and harmony with God, we entreat him for those things that he desires for us. As we understand his will, we find peace in our souls, knowing we are in the loving care of a divine being.

Prayer in the Teachings of the Ancient Prophets

The ancient prophets of the Bible and Book of Mormon indicate that prayers have been offered to God since the days of Adam and the patriarchs. (See Gen. 4:26; 12:8; 32:9-11.) Adam and Eve began praying to Heavenly Father after they were cast from the Garden of Eden. Although they were separated from God, they were able to communicate with him. (See Moses 5:4, 8.) The great patriarch Abraham often sought God in prayer as he requested blessings and protection from above. (See Gen. 12:8; Abr. 1:2-4; 2:6, 17.) The mighty prophet Moses often went to God in prayer seeking for strength and direction as the Lord's prophet. (See Moses 1:20; Ex. 5:22; Num. 21:7.) Daniel knelt in prayer three times daily to give thanks to God. (See Dan. 6:10.) Enos and Alma in early Book of Mormon times also cried to God in mighty prayer. (See Enos 1:4; Alma 5:46; 8:10.) The ancient servants of God were often in contact with him through prayer.

Besides the prayers of the patriarchs and the prophets, the ancient scriptures record examples of various people praying: men and women, kings and common folk, individuals and multitudes. Prayers also took place in a variety of locations: at the temple and in the home, in public synagogues or street corners and in private closets and gardens, on mountain tops and in deserts. [^3] Prayers were also given at different occasions: in times of war and peace, as expressions of sorrow and gladness, in periods of famine and prosperity, and at moments of private devotion and communal worship. [^4] We learn much about prayer from the examples and teachings of the ancient prophets.

Jesus Teaches Us How to Pray

Jesus also provided valuable examples and instructions about prayer. He has constantly admonished us to "pray always." One way to have a constant prayer in our hearts is to remember that "to pray" means "to entreat or petition" God. If we wanted to effectively petition someone (such as our boss for a raise in pay or a neighbor for a special favor), we would surely spend time and mental effort in carefully pondering and preparing how we would communicate our desires with the person. In a similar manner, we should expend many moments of sincere thought prior to beginning a prayer with our Heavenly Father. In essence, we should be carrying a prayer in our heart at all times. (See Luke 21:36; 3 Ne. 18:18-21; D&C 81:3.)

Prayers are also meant to be personal and sincere. Prior to giving his exemplary prayer recorded in the Sermon on the Mount in Matthew 6, the Lord first warned his followers not to pray like the hypocrites, "to be seen of men." (V. 5.) This does not mean that public prayers are necessarily inappropriate but rather that prayers of a personal nature should be kept private. (See v. 6.) Similarly, Christ instructs his disciples to avoid "vain repetitions" (v. 7) characteristic of heathens petitioning their false, impersonal gods (who are perhaps hard of hearing as well as impotent). The living God, in contrast, knows our needs before we ask him, and before we even know them ourselves. (See v. 8.) With this introduction, Jesus then offers a prayer that is the model of humility, brevity, and sincerity:

As discussed in chapter 3, the familiar and loving title of "Father" is preferred by God himself, and when we apply this title to deity, it is uniquely holy. After addressing God the Father, Jesus adds a phrase of acknowledgment and praise, which alternately translated from the Greek could read, "Let thy name be sanctified." (V. 9.) The Lord also voices a commitment to put God's will before his own. (See v. 10.) Christ repeats and fulfills this devotion later during his ministry in Gethsemane: "Father, if thou be willing, remove this cup from me: nevertheless not my will, but thine, be done." (Luke 22:42.) To bring our petitions into harmony with the will of God is a mark of mature prayer and the beginning of true spiritual confidence and power.

Verse 11 of Matthew 6 includes an element in prayer familiar to most of us—asking for help within the context of our physical lives. The infirmities of the flesh are so constant that we continuously need God's help to maintain our health and well-being. In establishing his covenant with Israel through Moses, God repeatedly promises the chosen people that if they would do his will, they would never want for the necessities of life. The first request of Jesus' prayer, in verse 11, recalls how God miraculously fulfilled that promise during Israel's forty years in the wilderness. It is also a humble admission of our daily dependence on God for life itself.

The Lord's next request highlights a most profound part of this model prayer—freedom from sin and spiritual faults. First, we should be willing to forgive others of their offenses as we would have God forgive our debts to him. (See v. 12.) The original Greek word translated as "debts" in this verse also means offenses, faults, or sins. We need relief from our spiritual debts and failures, and we should also be willing to help others relieve their burdens. In verses 12 and 13, the emphasis of the prayer shifts from ourselves and our personal needs toward the needs of others and our relationship with our Savior. We move from the physical into the moral and spiritual dimensions of our existence as we look at our hidden infirmities. Jesus teaches us here to ask for godly protection from sin and deliverance from spiritual weaknesses. The constant need to confess our weaknesses and to seek for divine forgiveness and aid is apparent in these important verses.

The Lord's Prayer concludes as it began, with a recognition of God's power and glory. It ends with the word "Amen," meaning "so be it," or "it is firm and true," an affirmation of our sincere entreaty with God.

In reviewing the Lord's Prayer, note that Jesus twice praises God, twice concerns himself with spiritual well-being, and only once asks for a material blessing (and then only for "daily bread," not the riches of this world). Most people, even Latter-day Saints, are often too preoccupied with material rather than spiritual needs and desires, and they need to remember the other elements of praise, thanksgiving, and devotion in their prayers.

The Seven Steps of Prayer

Children raised in the church are taught at a young age four basic steps of prayer: we address God as our Father in Heaven; we thank him for our blessings; we ask him for the things we need; and we close our prayer in the name of Jesus Christ. The Lord's Prayer adds two more important elements often found within prayer: praising God for his goodness, power, and glory; and confessing our weaknesses and sins before God. As Jesus taught his followers in the Book of Mormon, he built upon another element alluded to in the Lord's Prayer, expressing commitment, love, and devotion to God. (See 3 Ne. 19:20-23.) Except for the natural location of the introductory and closing parts of a prayer, there is no set order for the elements of a prayer. The following is a suggested order of these steps that might be reflected in many of our prayers:

Opening—addressing our Heavenly Father Praise—recognizing God's glory and goodness Thanksgiving—voicing appreciation for blessings received Confession—admitting our sins and weaknesses Petition—asking for personal and other people's needs Commitment—expressing our love and sincere devotion Closing—concluding in the name of Jesus Christ

Each of these steps warrants further explanation.

Addressing Heavenly Father

Since the purpose of prayer is to commune with God, the creator of our spirits, we must first direct our mental and spiritual concentration toward that communication by specifically addressing Heavenly Father with any of the many appropriate titles by which we know him; such as, Heavenly Father, our Father who art in heaven, God our Father, God, Elohim, and so on. As we develop a trusting relationship with our Heavenly Father, we will feel comfortable addressing him in all types of circumstances—pleasant or painful, calm or chaotic, personal or public.

Praising God

Much of the beautiful language of the ancient psalms and the modern hymns is in the form of praises to God. As we understand his infinite knowledge, power, goodness, and glory, we have a natural desire to express our feelings through song and prayer. Praising God is not required by him so that he might condescend to listen to our prayers, rather it is a valuable element to bring us into a reverential feeling and to bolster our trust in him. Such feelings take us out of the natural world and bring us into a more holy sphere. Praising God at the beginning of prayer is like Moses taking off his sandals as he approached the Lord on Mt. Sinai—we come in awe and respect before God in prayer as we recognize and express appreciation for what God is.

Thanking God for Blessings

One problem with prayers is that they tend to center more on what we want rather than what we have already received from God. No matter what our circumstances, we are commanded to "in everything give thanks: for this is the will of God in Christ Jesus concerning you." (1 Thes. 5:18.) Christian missionary Corrie ten-Boom included a moving account of this scripture about gratitude in her autobiographical book, The Hiding Place. During World War II, Miss ten-Boom was sentenced with her sister, Betsie, to a German concentration camp for hiding Jews and helping them escape from occupied Holland. Having been placed in a crowded, dirty, flea-infested barracks, Corrie complained:

"Betsie, how can we live in such a place!"

[Betsie muttered,] "Show us. Show us how." It was said so matter of factly it took me a second to realize she was praying. More and more the distinction between prayer and the rest of life seemed to be vanishing for Betsie.

"Corrie!" she said excitedly. "He's given us the answer! Before we asked, as He always does! In the Bible this morning. Where was it? Read that part again!"

"It was in First Thessalonians," I said. . . .

"'Rejoice always, pray constantly, give thanks in all circumstances; for this is the will of God in Christ Jesus.' That's it, Corrie! That's His answer. 'Give thanks in all circumstances!' That's what we can do. We can start right now to thank God for every single thing about this new barracks!" [^5]

In turn, then, Betsie gave thanks: that their Bible had not been discovered because there was no initial inspection; that crowded quarters meant more women could hear the word of God; and that they had the company of fleas. At this point, Corrie protested:

The fleas! This was too much. "Betsie, there's no way even God can make me grateful for a flea."

" 'Give thanks in all circumstances,' " she quoted. "It doesn't say, 'in pleasant circumstances.' Fleas are part of this place where God has put us."

And so we stood between piers of bunks and gave thanks for fleas. But this time I was sure Betsie was wrong. [^6]

Betsie was not wrong, however, for the sisters later realized that the reason they were able to hold evening Bible meetings miraculously undetected was because the guards would not enter the flea-infested barracks. Corrie concluded: "My mind rushed back to our first hour in this place. I remembered Betsie's bowed head, remembered her thanks to God for creatures I could see no use for." [^7]

As difficult as circumstances might be for any of us, surely we are not in such dire straits that we cannot give thanks as the ten-Boom sisters did. We all have many things for which we can be thankful, and we should express appreciation for these blessings in our prayers.

Confessing Personal Sins and Weaknesses

We often are able to quickly identify transgressions and imperfections in the lives of others, but we find it harder to recognize and admit these failures in our own character. John warns us that "if we say that we have no sin, we deceive ourselves, and the truth is not in us." (1 Jn. 1:8.) Before we can seek divine help in our weak areas, we must be aware of what they are. Through prayer and contemplation before God, our weaknesses can be revealed to us. Except for Christ, all have sinned, and we should concentrate on our own transgressions rather than finding fault in others.

As we recognize and admit the errors of our ways, we are ready to correct our faults. Confessing our sins becomes a healthy catharsis as we attempt to purge ourselves of our moral and spiritual blemishes. Latter-day Saint practice does not require public confession of all sins to a priesthood leader, but all are expected to confess their sins to the Lord, who alone can provide forgiveness. [^8] Such confessions are best done in an attitude of prayer. When we come to the Lord with a contrite spirit and a willingness to admit areas of weakness, then we can establish an open, honest dialogue with our Heavenly Father. We have no secrets to camouflage, and with a sincere and humble confession, we are then in the spiritual framework to be taught and assisted by God's Spirit as we pray for his help to overcome our weaknesses. (See D&C 38:14; Ether 12:24-27.)

Petitioning for Help

After praising God, giving thanks for his blessings, and confessing our weaknesses, we are usually more discreet in what we then ask for from God. Nephi wrote from his experience, "My God will give me, if I ask not amiss." (2 Ne. 4:35; italics added.) The Savior likewise counseled the Nephites, "Whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my name, which is right, believing that ye shall receive, behold it shall be given unto you." (3 Ne. 18:20; italics added.) Even if we ask in faith and are worthy to receive God's blessings, if we ask for the wrong things, God reserves the right to withhold answers and favors from us if they would not be for our benefit.

The Prophet Joseph Smith learned this lesson in a bitter way when he persistently asked the Lord to allow him to lend the first 116 pages of the Book of Mormon manuscript to Martin Harris—even after the Lord twice told him "no." Finally, the Lord consented, presumably to teach Joseph a lesson, and gave him specific instructions for handling the manuscript. After Martin disregarded these instructions, the manuscript was lost, and the gift of translation was temporarily taken from the Prophet as punishment, which taught Joseph to be sensitive to God's will. [^9]

Our ultimate goal, likewise, should be to refine our desires and conform them to the will of God. We accomplish this by learning to pray through the promptings of the Holy Ghost, for the Spirit "teacheth a man to pray." (2 Ne. 32:8.) When the things we ask for, as well as the answers we receive, are inspired by the Holy Ghost, we will not "ask amiss," and we will discover what we and our loved ones truly need to progress toward holiness.

Expressing Love and Devotion

Sometime during a full, sincere prayer, while we are recognizing God's glory, gifts, and forgiveness, or even while we are petitioning him for additional assistance, we should sense that he does so much more for us than we could ever do for him or others. Beyond a new expression of love and appreciation, such feelings motivate us with a desire to give rather than just to receive. We would like to do unto others as our Heavenly Father has done for us. With what few gifts and abilities we have, we want to share them with others to help and assist them. This dimension in prayer brings us into harmony with the most important commandments of God.

The first and greatest commandment is to love the Lord with all our heart, might, mind, and strength. (See Matt. 22:37; Deut. 6:5.) The second great commandment is like the first, as we learn to love and serve others. Prayer provides a beautiful opportunity to express our feelings toward God and our commitment to serve him and others. In these tender moments of divine communion, we find the love and empathy lacking in most of society. As we voice our love to God, we draw within the shadow of his protective care. As we proclaim our devotion to him and his teachings, we draw upon his strength and receive courage to meet the challenges ahead. And as we resolve and promise him that we will help others as he has helped us, we draw into a compact with God, vowing to do something for him. Prayer gives us the occasion to renew our commitments to our Father in Heaven, thereby maintaining a strong link with our Supreme Benefactor.

Concluding in Christ's Name

Jesus taught us that we should pray always and that our prayers should be directed to the Father in the name of Jesus Christ. (See John 14:13-14; 3 Ne. 18:19.) We truly pray in Christ's name when our mind and will are united with his. Our wishes will then be the same as his, and our requests will be possible for God to grant. (See John 15:7.) As we discussed earlier in the chapter on Jesus, he represents the Father in all aspects here on this earth, and any blessing we receive must come through his permission. As we conclude our prayers in Christ's name, we want to feel confident that our supplications are in harmony with God's mind and will so that God, through Christ, can accept our words and grant the righteous desires of our hearts.

The usual last word of a prayer expresses the sincerity of our communication. The word amen means "truly," and it witnesses a final oath of genuine expression. An amen is a seal and a pledge: with it, we both conclude our prayers to God and solemnly promise to remain faithful to the words of our communication. (See Deut. 27:14-26; 1 Chr. 16:36; D&C 20:77-79.) A proper amen focuses our whole soul upon the expressions of our prayer. (See Neh. 8:6.)

As a short review, the following simple prayer contains all seven steps:

Father in heaven, Thou art good and kind. Thou hast blessed me abundantly. Forgive me, please, of my transgressions. Please help me with my material and spiritual needs. I commit myself into thy service, In the name of Jesus Christ, Amen.

Frequent inclusion of each of these seven steps within our prayers will greatly enrich our spiritual communion with God. Our prayers will be less narrow and selfish and will expand our perspective of life and appreciation for Heavenly Father.

Unanswered Prayers

Sometimes we feel that the Lord does not answer our prayers. On other occasions, we sense that perhaps he is communicating to us, but we do not recognize his methods. Joseph Smith received some specific counsel on how to recognize God's answers early in his prophetic experience. The Lord sent some instructions through Joseph to be given to Oliver Cowdery, and the advice remains fresh and pertinent for us today: "Behold, I say unto you, that you must study it out in your mind; then you must ask me if it be right, and if it is right I will cause that your bosom shall burn within you; therefore, you shall feel that it is right. But if it be not right you shall have no such feelings, but you shall have a stupor of thought that shall cause you to forget the thing which is wrong." (D&C 9:8-9.)

Many of our prayers, which we think were unanswered, may have been answered through the types of spiritual promptings and feelings just mentioned, but we may have been insensitive to them. On other occasions, it seems that God does not answer our prayers because he wants us to search and ponder some more before he responds, or he is waiting for us to first come to a decision before he can confirm that decision through the Spirit. In some situations, he respects our agency and spiritual maturity and lets us decide and act for ourselves. In other situations, he hesitates to respond because we are not spiritually mature or sincere enough to accept or even recognize his responses. Some prayers remain unanswered because they do not represent Christ's mind at all, but they spring out of the ignorance of a person's mind or the selfishness of his or her heart. [^10] Rather than lose faith in God because he does not seem to answer our prayers, we need to evaluate the motives and attitudes of our prayers and work to improve our spiritual sensitivity. As with other important matters of eternity, we must be patient, for we might not receive an answer or witness until after a test of our faith and perseverance. (See 1 Pet. 1:7; Ether 12:6; D&C 105:19.)

The Language and Attitude of Prayer

The kind of language we use in general conversation indicates more than our knowledge and vocabulary—it also reflects our feelings and attitude. Prayer language is likewise very important since it is often influenced by our daily speech patterns yet needs to reflect our spiritual mood. Our divine petitions will not be readily answered if we are in the habit of careless, vulgar, or angry speech as in some normal conversations: "The tongue can no man tame; it is an unruly evil, full of deadly poison. Therewith bless we God, even the Father; and therewith curse we men, which are made after the similitude of God. Out of the same mouth proceedeth blessing and cursing. My brethren, these things ought not so to be. Doth a fountain send forth at the same place sweet water and bitter?" (James 3:8-11; italics added.)

Made after the similitude of God, we should strive to make our everyday language with our fellowman pure as a "sweet fountain" so that we may also confidently and effectively communicate with God in prayer, the highest use of the gift of language.

In our communication with God, we are commanded to "pray vocally as well as in . . . [our] heart." (D&C 19:28.) There are a couple of reasons why oral prayer can be more effective than silent prayer. Vocal prayers, spoken out loud, help us focus on ideas the same way our speech focuses our thought. Without external visual or verbal stimulus, the average span of attention on any idea is about twenty to thirty seconds for most adults, and even shorter for children. Also, thought and speech are so closely linked that an idea is usually not fully formed until it is expressed. If we say we understand something but cannot explain it, we probably don't fully understand it at all. In addition, we all know that talking over our feelings and problems with someone else helps us understand them more clearly and relieves our burden. In the same way, vocal prayer first makes our thoughts and feelings clear and precise and second brings us insight and comfort.

To help us elevate our verbal prayers to a higher plane, we are also encouraged to address the Lord using formal pronouns and adjectives like thou, thee, thy, and thine, rather than the familiar you and yours. Ironically, the now-formal English of thee and thine was originally used among people familiar with each other, such as family members and peers, and our present informal form of you and yours was used with strangers or superiors in class. Later political and social democratization weakened class distinctions in English-speaking countries. Public communication gradually eliminated the thee and thine form from common usage and changed the formal form to the universal you and yours.

The King James Bible and the works of Shakespeare are the major writings that have remained with us in the original, sixteenth-century idiom. Orally, the only type of speech that has retained the older patterns is prayer. In this way, the language of the scriptures and prayer has gradually assumed an unfamiliar and formal air. Despite the illogical historical reversal (taking what once was common, familiar speech and using it now in formal prayer language), the language of our prayers reminds us that prayer is no ordinary conversation with just anybody, but indeed it is sacred communication with God. As President Kimball has commented, "In all our prayers, it is well to use the pronouns thee, thou, thy, and thine instead of you, your, and yours inasmuch as they have come to indicate respect." [^11]

Our priorities in prayer should be first to pray with genuine feelings and then to check if we are accurately expressing the correct terminology. Our greatest priority is to pray with full heart as we express our genuine, immediate feelings. We can foster this genuineness as we think and ponder while we pray and as we avoid vain repetitions and idle clichÃ©s. Our second priority is to search out the precise words and prayer style that best communicate our feelings. In any prayer, the use of proper language can help us remember the supreme, divine being with whom we are communicating. The formality of address or a special style of prayer need not be, nor is it meant to be, a barrier to communication. Children raised with the formal language in prayers find them completely natural, and even uninitiated adults who are unfamiliar with this style of speech can gradually adapt themselves comfortably to the elevated language of prayer. As an expansion of the simple prayer given earlier, a short prayer using the more traditional prayer style and including all the seven steps might sound like this:

Father in Heaven, Thou art holy and righteous. Through thy love, thou hast given me life and many blessings that bring me comfort and peace. Please forgive me of my sins against thee and of my transgressions against others. Bless me, please, with the physical and spiritual necessities that my family and I need. I pledge myself to be of service to thee and others. I ask these things in the name of thy son, Jesus the Christ. Amen.

Besides using special language to show respect for the Lord, we should also seek a quiet, tranquil place and kneel to say our prayers—particularly our private prayers—whenever possible. On our knees with our heads bowed, we are in a position expressive of complete humility and trust. In ancient times, when one knelt before a king or conqueror, he placed himself not only at the ruler's disposal, but also at his mercy, for in a kneeling position the petitioner was physically vulnerable and unable to defend himself. When we kneel before God, then, we acknowledge both his greatness and our own helplessness and dependency on him for all we are and all we possess.

Prayers do not need to be long and complicated. A short, simple, and sincere prayer will be far more edifying than a lengthy, elaborate, and hypocritical one. Genuine prayers bond us with our Heavenly Father and increase our desire to communicate more often with him. As we listen to the whisperings of his Spirit and meditate upon the spiritual impressions we receive, we gain confidence in our capacity to commune with the Divine. Occasions will then arise in which we will want to have longer, more detailed prayers with our Father in Heaven. These longer prayers will need much earnest, spiritual intensity. Like any effective dialogue, a proper prayer requires effort and concentration on our part. The rewards for this spiritual endeavor will provide much spiritual nourishment for our souls.

We conclude this chapter with this summary: PRAYER is the communication gift between God and mortals through which we praise Deity, give thanks, confess weaknesses, petition needs, and express devotion to our Heavenly Father in the name of Jesus Christ. As we seek for strength and help from God, we need to remember that most blessings require some work and effort on our part. Often the physical and mental effort that we expend in the proper language and attitude of prayer results in more intense, sincere prayers, which in turn bring us closer to receiving the desired blessings. True prayer is a form of spiritual work, and it is God's appointed means for obtaining the highest of all his blessings. [^12] Regular, sincere prayer is the single, most powerful spiritual quality that puts us onto the path of spirituality and keeps us in the way of righteousness.

For further study, refer to the following entries:

TG: BD: EM: God, Access to Prayer Amen Petition Family Prayer Praise Lord's Prayer Prayer, Pray Prayer Supplication Thankfulness Thank Thanksgiving

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] See also TPJS, 274.
[^2] More details about earlier gospel dispensations and this period of apostasy from early Christianity are found in chapter 31.
[^3] TPJS, 160.
[^4] DBY, 39.
[^5] See EM, 1:40-41.
[^6] See EM, 4:1511.
[^7] Chapter 8 contains more insights about the role and values of the scriptures.
[^8] Chapter 22 contains further insights about the variety and power of priesthood blessings and ordinances.
[^9] Further insights about the temple and its ordinances and values are found in chapter 23.
[^10] HC, 3:381.
[^11] MD, 786.
[^12] TPJS, 324.
