Victor L. Ludlow, Principles and Practices of the Restored Gospel ( 1992)

Chapter 6

God Reveals His Will

At times, all people have had the sensation of knowing certain facts but being unable to recall that information at a given time. For example, many humans have experienced the embarrassment of not being able to recall the name of an acquaintance when they see the person unexpectedly. They know they recognize the person, and they can even remember many experiences that they shared, but they cannot remember the person's name. This temporary forgetfulness is especially true when trying to recollect particular names and facts about people and events from one's youth.

As we search for a clearer remembrance of our past, a variety of aids can help refresh our memory. Sometimes as we read an old newspaper or periodical, leaf through a scrapbook, scan our high school yearbook, or review our comments in a teenage journal, certain images assist our recollection, bringing the past into immediate focus. We not only recall names and events, but we also bring to remembrance many concepts and opinions that we had believed as a youth and then forgotten and discarded during the later pursuits of life. As we refresh our mental memories, we occasionally recognize that some of the innocent ideas and images of our younger years were really very wise and valuable, and maybe we appreciate them even more now.

God's process of revelation fulfills a similar function in the spiritual dimension of our lives, his divine promptings bringing eternal truths into immediate focus. Indeed, the word "reveal" means "to unveil what was hidden." Some things that could be hidden from us might be a remembrance of our past or an understanding of our present and future. God's revelation unveils our recollections and the knowledge of him that we had in our premortal existence. Divine revelation also unveils the gospel truths that we had known or believed earlier, but that we have forgotten during the course of mortal life. In addition, spiritual revelation can unveil new insights and perspectives about our present and future life. Especially when coupled with the learning experiences our physical bodies provide, spiritual revelation helps us comprehend the purpose of life and our eternal priorities.

In the first chapter in this book, different levels of truth and their methods were outlined, with the conclusion that the highest form of truth—eternal and spiritual—can be known only as it is revealed by the Eternal One through his Spirit. We cannot understand the things of God through our own physical or mental faculties. As the Book of Mormon prophet Jacob so beautifully expressed: "Great and marvelous are the works of the Lord. How unsearchable are the depths of the mysteries of him; and it is impossible that man should find out all his ways. And no man knoweth of his ways save it be revealed unto him." (Jacob 4:8; italics added.)

God has seen fit to reveal many truths about himself and his expectations for his children through the ancient prophets and apostles. Unfortunately, this religious knowledge and these spiritual truths were soon distorted and forgotten by later generations. Thus God has to continuously unveil what has become lost and hidden. In every dispensation, the knowledge of God, his plan of salvation, and the keys of the priesthood have been revealed anew to the prophets.

The remedy to avoid the loss of revealed truth is found in the New Testament. Jesus was the fountain of truth for his disciples, but toward the close of his ministry, he warned his followers that he would shortly be taken from them. To prepare his apostles for their leadership role, Jesus affirmed to Peter that revelation would be the "rock [upon which] I will build my church; and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it." (Matt. 16:18.) [^1] When the apostles died and revelation ceased, Christ's true church lost its spiritual direction and the priesthood keys were taken from the earth. [^2] Only through revelation could the gospel truths be restored. The restoration of Christ's church in the latter days naturally commenced with a divine revelation (the First Vision) to Joseph Smith. Joseph later affirmed the value of such revelations through his statement, "Salvation cannot come without revelation." [^3]

The Prophet's declaration applies as much to individual members of the Church as it does to the inspired leaders of gospel dispensations. The same Spirit that has inspired the prophets can and must also enlighten us. Only through divine inspiration can we come to know the mysteries of God and God himself. This is the promise of the scriptures: "Verily thus saith the Lord: It shall come to pass that every soul who forsaketh his sins and cometh unto me, and calleth on my name, and obeyeth my voice, and keepeth my commandments, shall see my face and know that I am." (D&C 93:1.) This promise can only be ours as we follow the promptings of the Holy Ghost, who will lead us to God. We cannot receive personal salvation without this enlightenment and guidance of the Holy Ghost: "For the natural man is an enemy to God . . . unless he yields to the enticings of the Holy Spirit . . . and becometh a saint through the atonement of Christ." (Mosiah 3:19.) The Spirit communicates to us through various forms of revelation.

Types of Revelation

Ranging from majestic, personal visitations from members of the Godhead to simple insights gained while studying the scriptures, the ways in which God reveals truth to us are almost innumerable. Divine revelations may be direct and profound experiences, encompassing our whole physical and spiritual senses, or they may be manifest as subtle spiritual promptings. In fact, the Prophet Brigham Young taught that any time truth is communicated to us, either directly through the Holy Ghost or indirectly through others, we have received revelation: "No person [has] received knowledge, only upon the principle of revelation, that is, by having something revealed to them. . . . Who reveals? Everybody around us; we learn of each other." [^4]

Since God the Father does not regularly communicate face-to-face with us, he has prepared many ways and means by which he may reveal truths to us. A few messages are delivered personally by him, and many more by his representatives. Other communications are given by heavenly and inner voices, through visions or dreams, or by the gentle instruction of the Spirit. God also uses physical objects, miracles, scriptures, the prophetic word, worship services, and a host of other means to reveal his will to his children. Initially, God can communicate to us directly or indirectly, and either on a one-to-one basis or as a member of a larger group. There are at least three general categories of revelation through which we usually receive divine communication: person-to-person visitations, supra-spiritual channels, and subsidiary means of revelation.

Person-to-person visitations

When we think of communication, we usually associate two or more people in conversation or contact with each other. Communication between individuals is an important source of revelation. God can either reveal himself and his message directly to an individual, or he can do it indirectly through angels or mortals, such as prophets and apostles.

Direct Personal Manifestation of God. The rarest and most profound of personal revelations is to have God the Father or Jesus Christ appear directly to an individual. Moses records that the ancient patriarchs, such as Enoch and Jacob, saw God and walked together with him. (See Gen. 5:24; 32:30.) Moses could easily identify with this special direct, divine manifestation because he and seventy elders of Israel shared a similar experience. (See Ex. 24:9-11.) Later prophets and apostles also bore a similar witness. Although Jesus promised that the pure in heart will see God, few mortals have had the purity or calling to see God while in the flesh. This form of personal revelation is primarily reserved for the prophets. It is significant that the founder of Christ's church in our day, the prophet Joseph Smith, had such a profound experience when he saw both the Father and the Son. (See JS-H 1:17.)

In the few recorded occasions when God the Father has clearly unveiled himself to mortals, he has usually introduced and testified concerning his Son, such as at the baptism of Jesus, at the transfiguration, or in his witness to the Book of Mormon peoples just prior to the resurrected Christ appearing to them. (See Matt. 3:17; 17:5; 3 Ne. 11:7.) Thereafter and in most cases where the prophets record a visitation from God, it is usually the Son who communicates directly with the mortals on earth.

Angelic Appearances. From the experiences recorded in the scriptures, a personal visitation from God the Father and/or the Lord Jesus Christ is generally reserved for prophets who are called to open a gospel dispensation or perform a significant work. Premortal spirits, resurrected beings, and other heavenly messengers are more frequently employed by God to make personal visits. According to the root meaning of "angel," any messenger sent by God to people on earth is an angel.

Adam, Lot, Jacob, Daniel and other people had angels appear to them during the Old Testament period. (See Moses 5:6; Gen. 19:1; 32:1; Dan. 8:15.) Angels appeared to Nephi, Jacob, and Samuel in Book of Mormon times. (See 1 Ne. 11:14; 2 Ne. 6:9; Hel. 14:9.) Angels also appeared to Mary, Joseph, Philip, John, and others during the New Testament period. (See Luke 1:30; Matt. 1:20; Acts 8:26; Rev. 10:9; 17:7.) Angels were also used as messengers during the restoration of the gospel, as when Moroni delivered the gold plates to Joseph Smith, when the Prophet received the Aaronic and Melchizedek priesthoods from John the Baptist and Peter, James, and John, respectively, and when other angelic beings appeared to Joseph. (See JS-H 1:30-33, 68; D&C 27:5-12.) John the Revelator prophesies that the fullness of the gospel is to be restored through the ministry of angels in the last days. (See Rev. 14:6.) Mormon also records that God has used angels through the ages to reveal gospel truths. (See Moro. 7:22-32.) [^5]

Inspired Prophets and Church Leaders. Just as God can send angelic messengers from heaven to minister to his children, he can direct people on earth to pass on important truths and revealed guidance. Prophets and apostles of the Lord can transmit divine counsel to all Church members, while local Church leaders can act as God's intermediaries to us. Heads of families, priesthood leaders, teachers, and home and visiting teachers have the spiritual right to receive revelation and inspiration concerning those in their stewardship.

Accepting counsel from inspired leaders is a type of indirect revelation where others receive the communication, and we must have the spiritual sensitivity and courage to act upon their words. Action on their inspired wisdom can eliminate the sorrow of sin and spiritually enrich our lives. Such counsel includes general conference addresses and other talks given by Church leaders, as well as private counsel from our local leaders. For example, receiving inspired direction from a bishop provides an immediate, personal form of revelation. Unless we recognize these leaders as inspired and respect the stewardship they have over us, receiving such counsel may be difficult. However, if we accompany their counsel with prayer, we can receive confirmation that it is a type of revelation directed to us. We can then act with a spiritual confidence knowing that we are responding to Heavenly Father's will.

Supra-spiritual channels

Normally, our spirits are incapable of "tuning in" to God's divine will because of the limitations and distortions caused by the physical body and our wicked, worldly environment. We have to go beyond the usual, natural capacities of our spirits and refine their ability to recognize God's will. Sometimes Heavenly Father will dramatically enrich our spiritual understanding through special, profound types of revelation. However, he usually encourages us to develop the spiritual gifts that he gives us so we can become sensitive to our spiritual feelings and recognize what he desires to communicate to us. In any of these examples, we become "supra-spiritual" beings, at least for a while. The prefix "supra" means "beyond." In other words, a supra-spiritual revelation is something beyond the normal spiritual experience that a person would have. Supra-spiritual channels of revelation can include hearing a voice from heaven, seeing a vision or special dream, and feeling definite spiritual promptings.

A Voice from Heaven. The voice of God or other angelic beings may be audible and heard through our physical ears. (See Matt. 3:16-17; 2 Pet. 1:17-18; Hel. 5:33; D&C 130:13.) As examples, the children of Israel heard the voice of God on three important occasions. The Lord God spoke to assembled Israel at Mount Sinai as he gave them the Ten Commandments and other instructions. (See Ex. 20:1, 19, 22.) Some heard God's voice from heaven near the Jordan River when Jesus was baptized by John. (See Matt. 3:17.) The voice of God was heard by the people gathered at Bountiful before the resurrected Christ appeared to them. (See 3 Ne. 11:7.) These few examples demonstrate that God can literally speak from heaven as he gives revelation.

In another direct manner, God can communicate clearly to our minds as he implants a message straight into our consciousness. As an example, the prophet Enos recorded this experience after he had gone into the forest one day, "My soul hungered; and I kneeled down before my Maker, and I cried unto him in mighty prayer and supplication for mine own soul; and all the day long did I cry unto him. . . . And there came a voice unto me, saying: Enos, thy sins are forgiven thee, and thou shalt be blessed." (Enos 1:4-5.) Because of Enos's great humility and diligence in seeking the Lord, and also because the Lord called him to the ministry and gave him specific promises concerning the Nephites and Lamanites, Enos received a revelation through the actual voice of God himself. Enos describes it as "the voice of the Lord" coming into his mind. (Enos 1:9-10.) Whether one hears God's voice through human ears or directly in the mind, the listener receives the clear communication along with a sure witness through the Holy Ghost, testifying that the voice and message are from God.

Visions. In our age of television, we can surely relate to the reality of people communicating directly to individuals over vast distances. Although the physical eyes of the viewer do not actually see the other person (they see instead the image on the screen), they are able to bridge the gap of space. Just as we can transmit movies, photos, and other images through television and facsimile machines, God reveals much to his children on earth through visions. Instead of having personal appearances, hearing words spoken, or receiving subtle promptings, this visual mode of communication presents distinct images into the mind. (As examples, see Ezek. 40:2; Acts 10:9-17; Ether 3:19-26; D&C 67:10-14; 76:12-14; 93:1.)

Visions are a powerful means of divine communication that takes the recipient beyond the realm of his or her normal physical senses. For example, upon receiving the first ordinances of the temple endowment, Joseph Smith recorded: "The heavens were opened upon us, and I beheld the celestial kingdom of God, and the glory thereof, whether in the body or out I cannot tell." (D&C 137:1; italics added.) One LDS scholar has stated that visions "anchor all the rest of God's communion by a visual link with an ordinarily unseen world that directs the destiny of humankind. They provide a vivid sense of the nature of God and his design for the world that gives coherence to all other scripture and inspiration." [^6]

Dreams. Some great men among the Gentiles, such as the pharaohs of Egypt and the kings of Babylon, have received revelations through dreams and then sought for their interpretations from the prophets of the God of Israel. For example, Joseph interpreted a pharaoh's dreams, and Daniel clarified a number of King Nebuchadnezzar's dreams. (See Gen. 41; Dan. 1-5.) Of course, the prophets and apostles themselves have also had great dreams and visions, usually concerning events to come or the mysteries of heaven.

A distinction is sometimes made between dreams and visions—the former received during sleep and the other experienced while awake. In either case, important insights are disclosed as images are viewed in the consciousness of the mind. They are real experiences that mortal man normally cannot perceive with the physical senses. Like X-rays or atomic particles that we cannot see or feel, these divine manifestations are real, but they can only be perceived and understood when the person is quickened by the Spirit of God. Although dreams may take place outside normal consciousness, they do provide indelible impressions that the person remembers after awakening. As clarified and confirmed by the Holy Spirit, visionary dreams can be an insightful means of heavenly communication.

Definite and Subtle Promptings of the Spirit. Responding to firm promptings from the Spirit gives us opportunity to apply the truths revealed to us. We may feel compelled to speak to a friend about faith or a special gospel teaching. We may receive a prompting to call someone, cancel a vacation, turn down a job that otherwise looks acceptable, or write a family member a letter. If we listen to the "still, small voice" of the Holy Ghost, we can receive day-to-day direction on how to live our lives. (See 1 Kgs. 19:12-13.)

Often the promptings of the Spirit will be so soft and subtle that we may not appreciate how much they influence us. Often it is only when we lose the gift of the gentle, constant companionship of the Holy Spirit that we realize how much it has been a part of our lives. Spiritually sensitive people recognize immediately when they have lost this spiritual companionship, and they usually strive to regain it.

We should not become disappointed if we do not receive a vision or supra-spiritual experience every time we seek religious insight or divine guidance. Revelation does not have to be an overwhelming experience; sometimes the subtle spiritual promptings affect us even more, especially as they are a more constant part of our daily lives. Among the many ways that revelation may come to us, Heavenly Father prefers the gentle promptings of the Spirit. The guidance of God is most often a feeling within us put there by his Spirit. This guidance is as important and meaningful as any of the other types of revelation.

God respects our agency, and thus he desires to treat us like mature, spiritual beings. Like a parent, especially with older children, he would prefer to counsel a child with mild words of wisdom and gentle prompting rather than with shouts, threats, overwhelming evidence, or signs of power. God does not want to be a harsh taskmaster or a supreme power-broker. Instead, he prefers to be a loving shepherd who gently drives the sheep while personally attending the needs of the weak. (See Isa. 40:11.) With spiritual gentleness, he leads us by the subtle promptings of the Spirit through the darkness of this worldly wilderness.

Subsidiary Means of Obtaining Revelation

In addition to the more personal, direct, and individualized types of revelation discussed above, Heavenly Father also uses a variety of secondary, subtle, and general means of communication with his children. His will can be revealed through physical means (miracles, signs, a Urim and Thummim, etc.), through the message of his word (as it is passed on either orally or in written form, such as in the scriptures), and through association with other inspired people. A brief discussion of some of God's supplemental means of revelation helps us appreciate just a few of the many ways he is trying to communicate with us.

Signs and Miracles. Because of their dramatic and sacred nature, revelations such as the voice of God or the appearance of heavenly messengers remain quite rare in the records of the scriptures. A more common manifestation of the divine will comes through signs and miracles, especially when they are accompanied by a witness of the Spirit. Miraculous signs can sometimes be a highly effective way of demonstrating God's power and of calling even the most wicked to repentance.

Both the Apostle Paul and Alma the Younger were shocked and frightened to repentance by such manifestations. (See Acts 9:1-22; Mosiah 27:8-32.) Laman and Lemuel, unfortunately, were not so moved, and their revelations became condemnations because of their increased accountability before God. (See 2 Ne. 5:19-25.) Many of the wicked Nephites at Zarahemla were more receptive to a great sign, and they came to believe in Christ when a day, a night, and a day passed without darkness at the time of his birth. (See 3 Ne. 1:15-22.)

Usually, however, visitations, signs, and miracles are withheld from the unrighteous because they would not heed them anyway. So the Lord speaks to the wicked of their physical and spiritual destruction by means of earthquake, fire, war, and pestilence: "O, ye nations of the earth, how often would I have gathered you together as a hen gathereth her chickens under her wings, but ye would not! How oft have I called upon you . . . by the voice of earthquakes, and great hailstorms, and by the voice of famines and pestilences of every kind . . . but ye would not!" (D&C 43:24-25.) Miraculous signs will strengthen the faith and understanding of the righteous while confounding and condemning the wicked.

Physical Instruments. One physical method of revelation is worth mentioning, though it is only rarely discussed in the scriptures. From time to time, or perhaps more than we know, the prophets have possessed certain instruments to aid them in receiving revelations. For examples, the Liahona guided Lehi's family to the promised land, the Urim and Thummim helped prophets obtain revelation and translate languages, and seer stones helped some prophets see into the future.

Though these types of instruments may seem strange to us on earth, they are apparently common fixtures in heaven: "The place where God resides is a great Urim and Thummim. This earth, in its sanctified and immortal state, will be made like unto crystal and will be a Urim and Thummim to the inhabitants who dwell thereon." (D&C 130:8-9.) Individuals living on the earth as celestial beings at that time will also have their own physical means of learning the truths of the universe with an individualized seerstone. John the Revelator indicates that those in Christ's church who are true and faithful will receive a special seerstone with a new name, a special key word, written in it. It will apparently help the recipient to receive "hidden manna," or special spiritual strength and understanding from God. (See Rev. 2:17.) Joseph Smith reveals that "the white stone mentioned in Revelation 2:17, will become a Urim and Thummim to each individual who receives one, whereby things pertaining to a higher order of kingdoms will be made known." (D&C 130:10.)

Scriptures. A primary source of spiritual truth is, of course, the written words of God as found in the Holy Scriptures. Studying the scriptures provides an opportunity to "feast upon the words of Christ; for behold, the words of Christ will tell you all things what ye should do." (2 Ne. 32:3.) More than just running our eyes over the words of the page, "feasting" includes searching, pondering, praying, and living the gospel principles outlined in the passages. As we search for God's truths in the scriptures, the Spirit will accompany our reading and testify of their validity. The Spirit will also bring passages of scripture to mind when we are in need of counsel and inspiration.

Although most scriptures were recorded many centuries ago, the application of their messages find value in our contemporary lives. God's will and directions to his children in ancient times should be a source of personal inspiration to us. Through the stories and teachings in the scriptures, we come to know Heavenly Father and his Son and their dealings with the children of men. As the Spirit prompts us during our scripture studies, we also come to know ourselves and our relationship to the gospel. We should read the scriptures as if they were written to us, and then open our spirit for the Spirit of God to instruct us accordingly. Thus the scriptures will be a constant source of inspiration, regardless of what we are reading at the time. [^7]

Inspired Family Records. Along with the scriptures, the written experiences of others, especially our own ancestors and family members, can strengthen our testimonies. The canonized scriptures are themselves largely records of certain key families throughout the gospel dispensations. Just as we can benefit from the spiritual insights and religious experiences of other people, we can spiritually help and strengthen others through our writings. If we write our own records under the influence of the Holy Ghost, as did the prophets of old, our posterity can receive the spirit of revelation through them. Likewise, we can look to the inspired writings of our progenitors, when they are available, for guidance, testimony, and insight.

Priesthood Blessings. Blessings through the power of the priesthood of God are available to Latter-day Saints today, just as they were to the ancient Israelites and early Christian Saints. We see numerous examples of such blessings in the scriptures, some with promises carrying over into many generations, such as Jacob's and Lehi's blessings on their children. (See Gen. 48-49; 2 Ne. 1-4.) Father's blessings are still a form of revelation by which righteous priesthood bearers can direct their children. Church patriarchs also draw upon the powers of revelation to give patriarchal blessings to those Saints who are worthy to receive counsel from the Lord. (See D&C 107:39-53.) Priesthood leaders give blessings of inspiration and revealed counsel as they perform priesthood ordinances, set members apart to Church callings, anoint the sick, and perform other priesthood blessings. These blessings can offer personal, specific direction and revelation to their recipients.

As many bishops can testify, one of the most physically demanding, emotionally exhausting, and spiritually challenging experiences of their calling is giving appropriate blessings when performing ordinances or directing and comforting individuals in times of need. Bishops also have many opportunities to give blessings to young people coming from part-member, nonmember, or inactive families, who have never before received a father's blessing. Giving blessings is an exhilarating opportunity for priesthood leaders as they struggle to become in tune with the Spirit and to give the counsel that the Lord himself would give if he were speaking. In a similar fashion, patriarchs say that it is physically strenuous for them to give more than five or six blessings at a time because such intense spiritual experiences are physically exhausting. Latter-day Saints should appreciate the spiritual direction that this avenue of revelation can provide. [^8]

Oral Messages and Testimonies. Church members also have a tradition of sharing their spiritual experiences with one another formally in fast and testimony meetings, as well as informally among family and friends. And, when righteous Church members speak, "whatsoever they shall speak when moved upon by the Holy Ghost shall be scripture." (D&C 68:4.) Thus bearing and receiving testimonies, when accompanied by the Spirit, can be a form of revelation for both parties. This is one effective means of edifying each other that fulfills a commandment: "When ye are assembled together ye shall instruct and edify each other, that ye may know how to act . . . upon the points of my law and commandments which I have given." (D&C 43:8.) As righteous saints testify to each other, either in formal meetings or informally as visiting and home teachers, family members, and friends the Spirit can reveal new spiritual strengths and insights to all those sensitive to its promptings.

Temple Worship. Participation in temple ordinances also provides a great source of revealed knowledge for all worthy saints. Indeed, temples are built for the dual purpose of administering ordinances of salvation and obtaining revelations. (See D&C 94:3; 124:40-41.) As we worship in the temples, we receive guidance on how to walk in godly paths. Not only can we receive general instructions meant for all temple-going Saints, we can also receive personal revelation and spiritual confirmations as a part of our temple visits. After completion of the Kirtland Temple, the Lord appeared there, declaring, "I have accepted this house . . . and I will manifest myself to my people in mercy in this house." (D&C 110:7.) Every temple has been built to serve as a "house of learning" for the righteous who seek to know God's will concerning them. (D&C 88:119.) [^9]

Prayers. The revelatory potential through prayer is one of the most readily available and effective means for receiving divine communication. The Lord promises, "Surely shall you receive a knowledge of whatsoever things you shall ask in faith, with an honest heart, believing that you shall receive. . . . Behold, I will tell you in your mind and in your heart, by the Holy Ghost. . . . This is the spirit of revelation." (D&C 8:1-3; italics added.) The scriptures are full of examples of individuals who received guidance from the Lord only after sincere and fervent prayer. (As examples, see Dan. 9; Luke 9:28-31; 1 Ne. 1:5-6; D&C 121; Moses 1:24-26.)

Although we may not receive revelation every time we pray, we do place ourselves in a state of mind to receive counsel and guidance from our Heavenly Father. In company with sincere asking, listening for these answers is a vital element of prayer. With continued effort and honest desire, an answer will be given through our prayers. (See Moro. 7:9.) If we follow the guidelines of prayer as explained in the scriptures and outlined in the previous chapter, we can receive revelation in response to our heart's desires.

Pondering Gospel Topics. Pondering is not only an important element of both prayer and scripture study, it is also an opportunity to receive revelation in and of itself. Pondering involves a careful consideration of a concept, thinking deeply about it, especially in terms of its validity, significance, or outcome. Christ recognized how searching for such insights can instruct through the Spirit. When he saw that his listeners were having difficulty understanding all he taught, he asked them to go "home and ponder." (3 Ne. 17:3.)

In order for pondering to be a means of revelation, we must search in faith for the truthfulness and importance of the things we ponder. For example, we may ponder, "Is Joseph Smith a true prophet?" As our mind wanders through different mental channels in an effort to understand this and related principles, various spiritual promptings in harmony with gospel truths will attend the ponderings. As we ponder further, we can also receive revelation on how to act upon these truths. The Lord's counsel for pondering is, "You must study it out in your mind; . . . and if it is right . . . your bosom shall burn within you; therefore, you shall feel that it is right." (D&C 9:8.) Pondering is an important subsidiary step leading to revelation.

The Light of Christ within our Conscience. As we faithfully seek truth and come unto Christ, we shall feel his presence with us. As we desire to do good continually, his spirit will become our guiding light. The scriptures promise us that we can receive the light of Christ: "The Spirit giveth light to every man that cometh into the world; and the Spirit enlighteneth every man through the world, that hearkeneth to the voice of the Spirit." (D&C 84:46.) The light of Christ enhances our ability to distinguish right from wrong and to know which doctrines come from Christ. (See Moro. 7:15-19; John 8:12.) This subtle inspiration can prompt our own conscience to tell us whether a decision we are pondering is good or bad. In order to make correct, inspired judgments, we need to live righteously and allow his light to lead us.

Why So Many Variations of Revelation?

God chooses to reveal his will at different times, through a variety of means, to meet various needs. Since every person is different, God can reveal his truths to each according to the timely needs of the individual. We do not need to see God or an angel in order to have our questions answered or to receive divine direction. If we remain ever worthy to receive his guidance, we may need only a gentle prompting to understand his will. It seems that Heavenly Father prefers to reveal quietly the knowledge that a person is seeking.

If stronger or more powerful means of communication are needed, he can use them in special circumstances. Especially when a revelation pertains to an entire body of people, such as the House of Israel or the membership of the Church, God often uses more direct means of communication and spiritual verification. Our responsibility is to seek counsel from God and allow him to lead us as he will. As we grow in the principles of revelation, our manifestations may become even more specific and distinct, according to both our worthiness and our need.

The Spirit of Personal Revelation

Since experiences of direct, personal revelation are so important to our ability to endure to the end, outlining some of the ways in which the Holy Ghost may manifest himself to each of us should be helpful. Through diligent prayer and spiritual experience, we may come to recognize which of these ways the Holy Ghost usually chooses to speak to us—for they vary from one person to another, according to their nature and receptivity. Some people feel a burning sensation in the body when the Spirit is present. (See D&C 9:8.) Some feel a sense of peace or joy, making them feel like praising or even singing God's glory and blessings. Others experience a tingling sensation or a quickening of the mind. Many people experience a variety of these feelings at different times when receiving special spiritual communication from God.

One common manifestation of the spirit of revelation is when a sudden idea or insight comes into our minds after we have been pondering over a question or problem. It is so common and universal that we see it illustrated even in comic strips as the light bulb suddenly clicking on to illuminate a difficult situation. The Prophet Joseph Smith described it in this way: "A person may profit by noticing the first intimation of the spirit of revelation; for instance, when you feel pure intelligence flowing into you, it may give you sudden strokes of ideas, . . . and thus by learning the Spirit of God and understanding it, you may grow into the principle of revelation, until you become perfect in Christ Jesus." [^10] Ideas presented to our minds are not only the primary form of revelation, they are also a foundation that we build upon to seek, accept, and understand further revelation.

The ideas and insights we receive from the Spirit are also confirmed by feelings of peace. When Oliver Cowdery desired a second witness that the translation of the Book of Mormon was divine, the Lord replied, "Did I not speak peace to your mind concerning the matter? What greater witness can you have than from God?" (D&C 6:23.) Shortly thereafter, God reminded him again how to recognize the manifestation of his Spirit: "I will tell you in your mind and in your heart, by the Holy Ghost, which shall come upon you and which shall dwell in your heart." (D&C 8:2.)

On the other hand, we can recognize that the spirit of truth is not with us when we feel confused, as if we are in a stupor of thought. (See D&C 9:9.) We might also feel a darkness of evil influence or a sense of despair, which "cometh because of iniquity." (Moro. 10:22.) Thus, any course of action we may decide upon that leaves us agitated or uncertain has not been confirmed by the Holy Ghost. It may even indicate that we need to strengthen ourselves spiritually before we will be ready and worthy to receive personal revelation.

The more a person lives the commandments, spends time with edifying people, and prayerfully searches for spiritual direction, the more he or she will come to recognize and depend upon God's revelatory powers. The gift of spiritual light is given to every mortal, which enables us to receive spiritual confirmation of true and significant gospel principles. (See D&C 84:45-47.) When the Holy Ghost comes to dwell in our hearts, the mental and spiritual peace we feel may be accompanied by a literal, physical sensation of warmth, or spiritual "fire" within our bodies. Again, the Lord's instructions to Oliver Cowdery apply to us as well: "I say unto you, that you must study it out in your mind; then you must ask me if it be right, and if it is right I will cause that your bosom shall burn within you; therefore, you shall feel that it is right." (D&C 9:8.)

A Testimony of Truth through the Spirit

The most important blessing we can seek through prayer is a testimony, a spiritual conviction concerning gospel truths. Although study and reasoning can assist truth seekers in laying a foundation of correct teachings and principles, only the spirit of truth, as manifested through the Holy Ghost, can confirm a person's testimony. The Apostle John taught that a testimony consists of knowledge that comes through revelation, "for the testimony of Jesus is the spirit of prophecy." (Rev. 19:10.) The late Elder Bruce R. McConkie instructed us in three key elements of a true testimony: "Three great truths must be included in every valid testimony: 1. That Jesus Christ is the Son of God and the Savior of the World (D&C 46:13); 2. That Joseph Smith is the Prophet of God through whom the gospel was restored in this dispensation; and 3. That The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is 'the only true and living church upon the face of the whole earth.' (D&C 1:30.)" [^11]

As we receive a spiritual witness concerning these three truths, we also by inference gain divine knowledge concerning other important concepts. As we receive a testimony of Jesus, we come to understand the gospel of Jesus Christ (which will be discussed in later sections of this book) and his relationship with the Godhead (the subject of the first section of this book). As we strengthen our testimony of Joseph Smith, we better understand God's work with prophets and apostles, both ancient and modern, and we better appreciate the scriptures that they have brought forth. As we receive a spiritual witness of the restored church of Jesus Christ, we will learn more about God's priesthood and saving ordinances, especially those performed in his holy temples.

The Book of Mormon provides a valuable pattern for seeking truth and testimony. At the end of the Book of Mormon, the prophet Moroni suggests at least five important steps: A person must have a desire to know the truth. He or she must search and study the scriptures to see what has been recorded concerning God's doings and counsel. (See John 5:39.) The person must remember what God has done and ponder the Lord's intentions and efforts with his children. And finally, he or she must ask God, in the name of Christ, with "a sincere heart, with real intent, having faith in Christ," and then God will manifest the truth to this individual by the power of the Holy Ghost. And through the power of the Holy Ghost, a person can then come to know the truth of all things. (Moro. 10:3-5.)

One receives such a testimony, or witness of truth, with a feeling of calm assurance and unwavering certainty. People know they have received a special witness through the Holy Spirit when they can say, as Alma did: "I testify unto you that I do know that these things whereof I have spoken are true. And how do ye suppose that I know of their surety? Behold, I say unto you they are made known unto me by the Holy Spirit of God. Behold, I have fasted and prayed many days that I might know these things of myself, and now I do know of myself that they are true; for the Lord God hath made them manifest unto me by his Holy Spirit." (Alma 5:45-46.)

A testimony is the beginning of significant spiritual growth in the life of any person. As will be seen in later chapters, a testimony is not, however, the end of an individual's spiritual development. For starters, one's simple testimony of the Godhead can and should be strengthened with additional testimony of the prophets, the Church, the scriptures, and other gospel truths. In addition, great spiritual values exist beyond simply gaining, maintaining, and building a testimony. Some "born again" Christians and other pentecostal followers in some religions may believe that a fervent declaration of faith is all they need to gain entrance into God's kingdom, but closer study reveals that further study, effort, commitment, and righteous service is required to enjoy eternal peace with God.

The Power of Personal Revelation

With all the sources of truth around us, there is still no substitute for personal, direct revelation through the Spirit. Joseph Smith taught, "Could we read and comprehend all that has been written from the days of Adam, on the relation of man to God, . . . we should know very little about it. Reading the experience of others, or the revelations given to them, can never give us a comprehensive view of our condition and true relation to God. . . . Could you gaze into heaven five minutes, you would know more than you would by reading all that ever was written on the subject." [^12] Personal revelation, besides being the most comprehensive channel of divine knowledge, is also essential to developing the faith and testimony needed to endure the tribulations of the last days. President Heber C. Kimball warned, "To meet the difficulties that are coming, it will be necessary for you to have a knowledge of the truth of this work for yourselves. . . . The time will come when no man nor woman will be able to endure on borrowed light. Each will have to be guided by the light within himself." [^13]

The only ways that a testimony or spiritual knowledge can be weakened is through neglect and transgression. If we fail to study the gospel and to seek new spiritual insights, we begin to lose our spiritual focus in life. If we disobey the commandments, we forfeit the spiritual inspiration that otherwise would lead and direct us. The knowledge of God and his sublime truths cannot remain in us when we are in a sinful state. Through disobedience, God's great truths have repeatedly been lost to mankind—within religious communities and not just within individuals. The Book of Mormon describes this process: the sinful dissenters "became more hardened and impenitent, . . . entirely forgetting the Lord their God." (Alma 47:36.)

Unfortunately, we probably recognize this pattern in others more easily than in ourselves. How painful it is to watch people close to us go against God's laws and the truths to which they once held closely. As they break the commandments, we can observe a forgetting that takes place as the spirit of revelation leaves them and they are left to their incomplete knowledge. This tragedy of spiritual forgetfulness is far more serious than forgetting the name of an old acquaintance. We can avoid this spiritual calamity by seeking further revealed light and truth, working to preserve God's truths through faith, repentance, obedience, and service.

We conclude this chapter with this summary: REVELATION encompasses a variety of means chosen by God to communicate divine truth and his will to his prophets and his children—without it, the true gospel and church could not exist on earth. TESTIMONY is our spiritual witness of divine truths. As the Spirit testifies to us, we can learn to recognize revelation in its many forms. We should be constantly seeking revelation in our lives by all the means at our disposal in order to learn divine truths, to benefit our testimonies, and to receive personal guidance from God. Sincere prayer along with studying and pondering will lead to personal inspiration, which will reveal and strengthen our testimony of Heavenly Father and his work. This spiritual insight and witness give us the guidelines and conviction to continue our spiritual journey toward God and his glorious presence.

For further study, refer to the following entries:

TG: BD: EM: Angels Angels Inspiration Dream Dreams Light of Christ God, Privilege of Seeing Light of Christ Revelation Holy Ghost, Source of Testimony Revelation Testimony Light of Christ Scripture Vision Revelation Urim and Thummim Urim and Thummim Testimony Visions Vision Visitation Voice Witness, Witnesses

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] The Hebrew root for prophet is nabi', meaning ''one who speaks by inspiration'' or ''one who speaks, announces, proclaims, or testifies'' for God. The root can also imply ''one who is called by God'' before he can qualify as ''one who calls out for God'' as his spokesman.
[^2] See EM, 3:1165.
[^3] TPJS, 365.
[^4] In these latter days, the Lord has said that his church will be like a judge by which false prophets will be known. (See D&C 64:37-39.)
[^5] See TPJS, 119, 312.
[^6] See pages 52-54 in this book.
[^7] TPJS, 269.
[^8] MD, 608.
[^9] TPJS, 12-13.
[^10] EM, 3:1292.
[^11] Ibid.
[^12] See also HC, 1:2, fn.
[^13] See DS, 3:225-26.
