Victor L. Ludlow, Principles and Practices of the Restored Gospel ( 1992)

Chapter 7

God's Spokesmen

Though the names and settings may change, the story is often told of a young hard-working American rising to the top of his field. He wanted to work for a major business but did not have any professional experience. He started out at the bottom of the corporate structure as a messenger boy, but he worked hard and productively, receiving more and more responsibility until some years later he became one of the chief executives in the firm. He effectively represented the company president as the corporation developed a new product and opened up a productive market in a new area of the world. His climb up the corporate ladder was not out of personal ambition or with a desire to become wealthy; he just wanted to do well and to enjoy a sense of success. He was then able to share his knowledge with others, both within and without the company. Eventually his expertise qualified him to be an international spokesperson for one of the world's most successful businesses. Imagine his feelings when he saw how his service not only benefited his company, but also helped make the world a better place. This man's feelings only begin to approximate those felt by a prophet as he is called to be the Lord's messenger on earth and God's spokesman to all mankind.

A Prophet Is God's Mouthpiece

Instead of personally administering to the children of men, the Lord has ordained prophets to act in his name. A prophet acts as God's messenger by declaring his divine will. While some forms of revelation are open to all who diligently seek heavenly communication, God has reserved certain manifestations for his special representatives. Throughout the ages these men testify of and for God as they teach divine truths by proclaiming the gospel to the ignorant and wise, the faithful and unbelieving. These special, divinely appointed witnesses are called "prophets," a title derived from the Greek word prophetes, which means "inspired teacher." The Greek root is prophanai, meaning literally, pro "for" + phanai "to speak." A prophet is simply one who speaks for God, one who is his inspired mouthpiece. [^1]

The challenging task of serving God as his prophet-spokesman has caused some prophets to hesitate when called to their office. For example, Enoch said, "Why is it that I have found favor in thy sight, and am but a lad, and all the people hate me; for I am slow of speech; wherefore am I thy servant?" (Moses 6:31.) Moses resisted his prophetic calling for a while and repeated some of the same uncertainties when he was chosen to prophesy to Israel: "O my Lord, I am not eloquent . . . but I am slow of speech, and of a slow tongue." (Ex. 4:10.) Despite, or perhaps because of their limitations, God chose both Enoch and Moses so that he could show forth his own great power and eloquence through them. To Enoch, he replied, "Open thy mouth, and it shall be filled, and I will give thee utterance," and to Moses, "I will be with thy mouth, and teach thee what thou shalt say." (Moses 6:32; Ex. 4:12.)

Speaking for God

As God's spokesman or mouthpiece to the world, the prophet reveals the mind and mysteries of God to an ignorant or searching people. Foreordained prophets have stood at the head of God's religious communities throughout the ages, from the day of Adam to the present. [^2] The Lord has declared that prophets are his primary means of communicating his will to the people. (See Amos 3:7.) Indeed, essential truths will be taught and testified to the world by two or more prophetic witnesses. (See 2 Cor. 13:1.) These multiple prophets often live during different times, even on different continents, suggesting the importance of the words they give us, as recorded in the scriptures.

Though prophets speak the word of the Lord as personally revealed to them, the message has always carried the same basic themes: repent and draw near unto the Lord, keep the commandments, and serve one another. The prophets' primary function, then, is not necessarily to reveal new truths, but to remind the people of what they should already have learned from the scriptures and earlier teachings. Thus the prophets speak more as forthtellers than as foretellers—men delivering God's will for his children more than declaring his plans for the future. As a prophet receives special revelations from above, he may also include the predictive element of prophecy in his teachings. He then serves as a seer and revelator. In the main, however, the prophet's most common and authentic role as God's spokesman is to interpret earlier laws and traditions and apply them as guides to unify and establish norms amid new problems and circumstances.

Each prophet naturally builds upon the foundation of truth laid by the prophets before him: the laws of God revealed to Moses in the first five books of the Old Testament (also know as the Torah or Pentateuch) became the reference point for later Old Testament prophets; Isaiah's teachings established an important theological foundation for later Bible and Book of Mormon prophets and apostles; the Brass Plates of Laban formed the basis of Nephi's teachings; and the Book of Mormon and the Bible revealed the gospel to Joseph Smith. Our modern prophets continue this pattern as they teach us from the ancient scriptures as well as from the translations and contemporary revelations of the Prophet Joseph recorded in the Book of Mormon and the Doctrine and Covenants.

The Test of a True Prophet

Our living prophets speak forth with spiritual power and conviction when they deliver God's word. They add their witness to the many who have preceded them, and they speak with the same prophetic authority as the ancient prophets. Indeed, when a living prophet closes his remarks "in the name of Jesus Christ," he bids us to obey the divine word just as the ancient prophets did when saying, "thus saith the Lord." Hence we receive the word of God through modern-day prophets as they build upon ancient prophetic traditions and authority.

Unfortunately, other individuals have come forth proclaiming to be prophets when they do not represent God. "Beware of false prophets," warned the Master. (Matt. 7:15.) Joseph Smith taught, "When a man goes about prophesying, and commands men to obey his teachings, he must either be a true or false prophet. False prophets always arise to oppose the true prophets." [^3] Jesus particularly warned of false prophets who would deceive many in the last days before his second coming. (See Matt. 24:11, 24.) Note that nowhere in his teachings did Jesus say there would be no prophets at all after him. However, he did admonish us to be aware of false, deceiving prophets—implying that there would also be true, edifying prophets in the last days.

Fortunately, Jesus also provided guidelines to measure the truthfulness and authority of a prophet. He first forewarned that false prophets come in deceit as "in sheep's clothing," while they are actually "ravening wolves." (Matt. 7:15.) His primary criteria was that "ye shall know them by their fruits." (V. 16.) He then gave two "fruits" by which to measure them: first, by the fruits they gather, and second, by the fruits they produce. (See vv. 17-20.) The Lord, through Moses, had earlier mentioned another way to recognize a false prophet—if they prophesy or promise something in the name of the Lord but "the thing follow not, nor come to pass," then it was not the word of the Lord. (Deut. 18:22.) The fruits that a false prophet (or preacher and minister) gathers include money, fame, political influence, and other worldly attractions and false promises inconsistent with a truly spiritual mission. The fruits that a false religious leader produces include corruption, dishonesty, loss of trust, infidelity, sorrow, confusion, and any form of wickedness or heresy, including false prophecies.

In comparison, a true prophet gathers fruits of righteousness, seeking for the glory of God (rather than his own self-aggrandizement), the edification of the saints (rather than control over his followers), the building of God's kingdom (rather than his own religious empire), and the verification of truth (rather than his vain rhetoric and verbose deceptions). The fruits that a true prophet produces include righteousness among his followers, virtue and honesty as standards of moral behavior, increased testimony and conviction, spiritual gifts and manifestations, clear gospel teachings and admonitions, and other manifestations of uplifting and spiritual leadership. Likewise, if a prophet prophesies something that comes to pass, it is a sign "that the Lord hath truly sent him." (Jer. 28:9.) [^4]

The Spirit of Prophecy

The critical fruit that a true prophet both seeks and produces is the spirit of prophecy. The spirit of prophecy is a testimony of Jesus the Messiah that a person receives by revelation through the Holy Ghost. (See Rev. 19:10.) [^5] The words of the prophets always bear record of the Lord and his commandments. Accordingly, every prophet testifies of Christ—"to him give all the prophets witness" (Acts 10:43; see also Jacob 4:4)—although they may call him by any of a number of titles. [^6] All true servants of God enjoy the spirit of prophecy, a gift that allows them to benefit others through words of "edification, and exhortation, and comfort." (1 Cor. 14:3.) On the other hand, anyone who "denies the spirit of prophecy, is a liar, and the truth is not in him; and by this key false teachers and impostors may be detected." [^7]

But how can one measure the sincerity of a person who claims to have the spirit of prophecy?

A person claiming to be a true spiritual leader might present such a good imitation of a true prophet as to deceive those who do not themselves have the guidance and inspiration of the Spirit. But in addition to giving lip service to the assertion that Jesus is the Christ, a true prophet must conform his life to the divine pattern; he must conform to the laws and ordinances that the Lord has revealed. 'He that speaketh,' the Lord says, 'whose spirit is contrite, whose language is meek and edifieth, the same is of God if he obey mine ordinances.' [D&C 52:16.] [^8]

Thus, the authenticity of the spirit of prophecy is demonstrated in the pattern of righteous obedience that these people exemplify. They not only speak what sounds to be right, but they also do what is known to be right. Such prophetic people not only teach and witness of the truth, they also serve as examples of godlike devotion—blessing themselves and those who will follow them. (See John 18:37; Eph. 4:13.) [^9] Studying the lives of the ancient prophets, we recognize courageous men who lived what they preached as they spoke out against the wickedness of the people and testified concerning Christ and his commandments.

The Gift of Prophecy Is Available for All People

During a meeting of ancient Israel's elders at the tabernacle in the wilderness, a young man ran to Moses in alarm, saying that two other men were prophesying outside the camp. "Joshua the son of Nun, the servant of Moses, . . . answered and said, My lord Moses, forbid them. And Moses said unto him, Enviest thou for my sake? Would God that all the Lord's people were prophets, and that the Lord would put his spirit upon them!" (Num. 11:28-29; italics added.) Moses did not want to reserve all the spiritual powers, especially the gift of prophecy, for himself, but he desired that all of Israel should be as prophets.

The Apostle Paul likewise told the early Christian church, "Ye may all prophesy one by one, that all may learn, and all may be comforted." (1 Cor. 14:31.) In a similar manner, any contemporary member of the Church of Jesus Christ who has received a testimony of Jesus Christ through the power of the Holy Ghost is authorized, indeed commanded, to bear witness of the same. (See Luke 22:32; Acts 22:15; D&C 14:8; 88:81.) As we testify of the truth, we are prophets, "for the testimony of Jesus is the spirit of prophecy." (Rev. 19:10). Like the prophets of old, we can know for ourselves the truths contained in the scriptures and add our testimony to theirs.

Furthermore, in our own stewardships and callings as parents, priesthood leaders, and fellow saints, we are entitled to revelations for ourselves and those for whom we are responsible. Thus, we can also become seers and revelators within our own sphere of jurisdiction and influence. We have prophets to guide us in our spiritual development and accountability. We can receive personal revelation to know the truthfulness and personal application of what the prophets have taught us. Then we can receive additional revelation for our stewardship responsibilities. All that the Father has is not promised to his prophets alone; all who seek him and do his will may receive the spirit of prophecy. (See D&C 20:26.) As we have strong prophets, seers, revelators, and apostles in close contact with the Lord, and as we fulfill our charge to receive and develop the gift of prophecy for ourselves and those in our charge, then all of us in Christ's kingdom are strengthened and blessed.

A Seer of New Truths

In the minds of most people, a prophet has had such significant personal experiences with God that he has developed an extraordinarily high level of the spirit of prophecy. The Lord has shared important truths with the prophet, who now has the responsibility to share his newly found insights with the people. Sometimes, these insights include visions into the future. Indeed, the term "prophet" is often associated with the capacity to prophesy into the future. True prophets in all ages have shared their prophetic insights about important future events. Before a prophet can share his insights into the future though, he must first gain a divine perspective through careful study of previous prophetic writings and through his own personal revelation. As he thus gains new insights and visionary perspectives, he becomes more than a prophet—he is also a seer, one who sees into new dimensions of truth.

As one LDS scholar noted, "A seer is a person endowed by God with a special gift for seeing spiritually." [^10] The membership of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints accept the president of the Church as more than a living prophet; they sustain him as a "prophet, seer, and revelator." In functioning as a seer—literally "one who sees"—the prophet possesses the gift of perceiving new truths, gaining new perspectives on known truths, or seeing again old truths that were known among previous prophets but that were later lost during periods of apostasy.

The office of a seer extends the prophetic calling "to a capacity for envisioning future and past." [^11] Marveling that King Mosiah could translate the twenty-four gold plates of Zeniff, King Limhi of Zarahemla declared that "a seer is greater than a prophet." Ammon replied that "a seer is a revelator and a prophet also; and a gift which is greater can no man have, except he should possess the power of God." (Mosiah 8:15-16.)

As an aid to some seers, like Mosiah, the Lord provided a visionary medium, a physical instrument, called a Urim and Thummim, consisting of two special stones called seerstones or interpreters. A Urim and Thummim is used both in receiving direct revelations and in translating ancient records from unknown languages. The earliest scriptural reference to a Urim and Thummim is found in the revelations of the brother of Jared. (See Ether 3:21-28.) Abraham possessed another set (see Abr. 3:1-4), as did Aaron and succeeding high priests in Israel (see Ex. 28:30; Lev. 8:8; Num. 27:21; Deut. 33:8; 1 Sam. 28:6; Ezra 2:63; Neh. 7:65). King Mosiah used his Urim and Thummim to translate the Jaredite record (Book of Ether) and handed it down to his prophetic successors until Moroni buried it with the gold plates. (See Omni 1:20; Mosiah 8:13-19; 21:26-28; 28:11-20; Alma 63:12; Ether 4:1-7; Moro. 10:2.)

Joseph Smith recovered Moroni's Urim and Thummim with the gold plates, used it to translate the Book of Mormon, and then returned it with the plates. (See JS-H 1:51-52.) [^12] Joseph also possessed another seerstone, with which he may have worked on his translation or inspired version of the Bible. [^13] In any case, for the Inspired Version of the Scriptures (now called the Joseph Smith Translation), the Prophet received an expanded revelation of Moses' Genesis accounts of the Creation and the Fall and more of the teachings of Enoch and Noah. Apparently, these portions and versions of the text were known anciently but were omitted by the time our Bible was compiled: "Now of this thing Moses bore record; but because of wickedness it is not had among the children of men." (Moses 1:23.) As a seer, Joseph was able to see and restore these ancient visions, along with important insights into the life and teachings of Abraham. (See the books of Moses and Abraham, which contain these revelations.)

A seer may sometimes see things in visions or dreams with symbolic imagery that he does not understand unless he is given the keys to the symbols. As a hypothetical example, a person might have a symbolic dream in which a bear and an eagle chase a groundhog carrying a valuable gold disk in and out of several holes. The person may recall the dream and know that he has seen something significant, but he must understand the symbolic imagery in order to recognize that he has seen the Russian and United States basketball teams in the pursuit of an Olympic gold medal.

The Book of Mormon presents an example of this principle early in its pages. Lehi has a dream of the tree of life and sees many things, but the immediate message he derives from it is that two of his sons will reject some spiritual blessings offered by God. Lehi's son, Nephi, after asking to know more, sees the same vision and receives specific keys to the meaning of many symbols and images in the dream. Both Lehi and Nephi were seers, but Nephi saw and understood more. (See 1 Ne. 8, 11.)

Joseph Smith describes the process of seership as a gift of special spiritual awareness. As he and Sidney Rigdon saw the great vision concerning the many kingdoms of God's creation, the prophet states that through "the power of the Spirit our eyes were opened and our understandings were enlightened, so as to see and understand the things of God." (D&C 76:11-12.) With or without a physical instrument, a seer's eyes are enhanced through the Spirit so he can see things and understand truths that are obscure or hidden to others. As he shares his insights with us, we are likewise blessed with greater understanding.

On the other hand, some manifestations to the ancient and modern seers were seen by them but never spoken of or written down, since the Lord forbid it. (See JS-H 1:20.) Truth being "knowledge of things as they are, and as they were, and as they are to come," seers have often had visions encompassing truths from the whole of human history, but have kept back part, particularly concerning the latter-days. After Nephi wrote about his vision of events up until the time of John the Revelator, he concluded: "I, Nephi, am forbidden that I should write the remainder of the things which I saw and heard . . . and I have written but a small part of the things which I saw." (1 Ne. 14:28.) We can be thankful that much of what the seers have seen they have revealed to us, because their revelations help us understand God's dealings with people on this earth, especially in the last days.

A Revelator of Relevant Truths

When a seer does make known the new truth he has received, he acts as a revelator. As first and second elders of the early restored church, Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon were assigned duties as revelator and spokesman, respectively. To Elder Rigdon, the Lord explained, "I will give unto thee power to . . . be a spokesman unto him [Joseph], and he shall be a revelator unto thee, that thou mayest know the certainty of all things pertaining to the things of my kingdom on the earth." (D&C 100:11.) In other words, the Prophet (acting as revelator) was to teach doctrine to Rigdon, and Rigdon (acting as the Prophet's spokesman) was to expound it to the Church, using the scriptures.

In many instances, a revelator is restricted in what he reveals. Initially, he may be limited in what he receives, because his knowledge is usually limited to those words of God meant for this earth's inhabitants at a particular time. (See Moses 1:35-36.) Secondarily, he is often restricted in what he is allowed to pass on to others. (See 3 Ne. 26:11.) This second limitation is usually based upon the worthiness and readiness of the people to receive what the prophet would reveal unto them. (See Moses 1:42.) In addition, some sublime truths and feelings are not revealed because mortals are sometimes incapable of expressing or writing what they have seen and felt. (See 3 Ne. 19:32.) Or, there might not be enough time to speak or enough space to write all that is known by a prophet. (See 3 Ne. 26:6.) The prophets have revealed much to us, and we know that if we will accept and obey what they have told us, greater truths will be given to us. (See 3 Ne. 26:9; D&C 76:7.) Those who continue in righteousness are promised that eventually the very mysteries of heaven will be revealed unto them. (See Alma 12:9; D&C 76:7.)

In summary, the duties and gifts of a prophet, seer, and revelator are somewhat distinct, yet obviously related. The prophet testifies of known truths; the seer sees new or hidden truths; the revelator declares some new truths or old ones previously hidden. Today, the title of "prophet, seer, and revelator" is applied to some members in the presiding councils of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, particularly the members of the First Presidency and the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles. They continue the ancient prophetic tradition into our contemporary times.

Apostles: Special Witnesses of Christ

In ancient times, prophets held the priesthood of God, just as they do today. Before the coming of Christ, several prophets often lived and ministered as contemporaries, though one was generally recognized as the preeminent prophet. This was the case, for example, with Isaiah and Jeremiah, who both left comprehensive accounts of their ministries and served also as the prophetic spokesmen in their day to Israel's kings and foreign heads of state. When the ancient prophets' promise of a Messiah became a reality, the priesthood prophetic structure changed somewhat. Christ established himself as the preeminent spokesman of his gospel and church, but also appointed apostles (forming an official Quorum of Twelve) to testify of him after his death and resurrection. After the Lord's ascension, the senior apostle, Peter, took Christ's place as leader and became spokesman for him to the Church members.

In one sense, an apostle is simply a New Testament version of an Old Testament prophet. For four thousand years, the ancient prophets testified of the coming of Christ, trying to prepare Israel to receive her own, but she would not. (See John 1:11.) As promised and prophesied, Jesus became the universal Savior and Messiah, having drunk the bitter cup, atoned for the sins of all mankind, and given and taken up his life again, thus fulfilling all righteousness. His primary work finished, he then needed special witnesses to proclaim his divine role and to administer the spreading of his gospel to all the world, not just Israel. (See Matt. 24:14; 28:19; Acts 1:8.) Thus, the apostles assumed one important role different from the prophets before them, testifying not that the Messiah would come, but that he had already come and redeemed mankind.

The apostles of the restored church today are called and sent forth to testify in the same way as were those personally called by the mortal Christ. Any worthy Melchizedek priesthood holder may be called to the office of apostle—a special witness for Christ. He usually becomes part of the Council or Quorum of the Twelve Apostles, all of whom (along with the members of the First Presidency) are also set apart as "prophets, seers, and revelators" to the Church. However, only the presiding apostle—our modern-day senior prophet and president of the Church—fully functions and directs all the keys in those offices, for he is Christ's mouthpiece. Members of the Quorum of the Twelve within their sphere of responsibility may very well testify of truth as prophets, receive visions and revelations as seers, and teach some of what they know as revelators, but they may not do so in a way that is binding on the Church as a whole. This duty pertains only to the presiding apostle—the prophet and president—of Christ's kingdom on earth. (See D&C 107:91-92.) [^14]

The Preparation of a Prophet

Like the young business executive who had worked up the corporate ladder until he found himself in a position of importance and influence, servants of the Lord usually spend years in service and spiritual maturation before they are called as prophets of God. Although there is no formal "school of the prophets," opportunities for religious learning and leadership training are provided as men work and serve in the religious community. A few prophets who were called in their youth, such as Samuel, Daniel, John the Baptist, Nephi, and Joseph Smith, gain this experience as they serve in their calling. Ancient and modern prophets have come from a variety of vocational and social backgrounds, including farmers, fishermen, shepherds, craftsmen, educators, business men, attorneys, and governmental officials. Some, such as Isaiah, have willingly accepted an opportunity to serve, while others, such as Jeremiah, have reluctantly taken on the responsibility. Regardless of their ages, backgrounds, and initial attitudes, they all seem to share a courageous faith, a sensitivity to the Spirit, and a sincere devotion to the Lord. They all have demonstrated years of faithful commitment in building the kingdom of God on earth.

One does not seek to become a prophet, as one might choose to become a farmer, accountant, or doctor. No true prophet ever calls himself; instead, one is called by God to this position. Indeed, "we believe that a man must be called of God, by prophecy." (A of F 5.) Often the prophetic call is accompanied with divine manifestations and supra-spiritual experiences, such as hearing the literal voice of God, seeing visions, receiving angels, and witnessing physical signs of the Lord's power. When these manifestations are sealed by the spirit of prophecy, they personally validate the calling for the prophet, who then goes forth to serve.

Men and women who heed the counsel of the prophets are sometimes called the "children of the prophets." Many faithful ancient Israelites, early Christians, and modern Latter-day Saints, as they follow the Lord's servants, share in edifying spiritual experiences similar to those of the prophets themselves. All workers in a successful business or enterprise cannot and should not sit on the executive board of that group. Likewise, the workers in building God's kingdom do not all belong in the leading councils of the Church. As the general membership of the Church works together under the leadership of the prophets, they help bring a mighty work along. [^15]

In conclusion, we can say that PROPHETS are called through divine authority and revelation to represent the Godhead, and they are often endowed as seers, revelators, and apostles as they speak for God and build Christ's kingdom on earth. As we follow the prophets, building upon their counsel and developing our own spiritual gifts, we are better able to assist them in strengthening Christ's kingdom and to help each other along our path back to Heavenly Father's presence.

For further study, refer to the following entries:

TG: BD: EM: Apostles Apostle Apostle Prophecy Prophet Prophecy Prophets, Mission of Seer Prophet Revelation Prophet, Seer, and Revelator Seer Seer

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] The Hebrew root for prophet is nabi', meaning ''one who speaks by inspiration'' or ''one who speaks, announces, proclaims, or testifies'' for God. The root can also imply ''one who is called by God'' before he can qualify as ''one who calls out for God'' as his spokesman.
[^2] See EM, 3:1165.
[^3] TPJS, 365.
[^4] In these latter days, the Lord has said that his church will be like a judge by which false prophets will be known. (See D&C 64:37-39.)
[^5] See TPJS, 119, 312.
[^6] See pages 52-54 in this book.
[^7] TPJS, 269.
[^8] MD, 608.
[^9] TPJS, 12-13.
[^10] EM, 3:1292.
[^11] Ibid.
[^12] See also HC, 1:2, fn.
[^13] See DS, 3:225-26.
[^14] More details on Church organization and leadership are found in chapter 33.
[^15] Chapter 33 reviews the role of prophets and others in the leading Church councils. Chapters 34 and 35 discuss the mission of the Church and the success that Latter-day Saints are helping to bring about under prophetic leadership.
