Victor L. Ludlow, Principles and Practices of the Restored Gospel ( 1992)

Scripture Part 2:

God's Plan of Salvation

Footnotes

Chapter 9

Our Intelligent Spirit Personality

Professors and researchers in the physical sciences often probe into the nature of matter and energy. They ask questions like "What are the mass, atomic structure, and chemical properties of this substance?" They may also want to study various physical forces, such as electricity, temperature, gravity, and so on, which affect the subject matter under investigation. In the end, they hope to understand the real world around us.

Professors and scholars in the social sciences usually probe into the nature and properties of humans. While it seems obvious that our physical bodies are real, along with all things that we can see, feel, hear, taste, and smell with our physical senses, social scientists want to evaluate the validity of our observations and the significance of our thought processes. They ask a different set of questions, for example, "What is reality and can we identify it?" and "How does one think and rationalize?" "Is there something else within us, like a spirit, psyche, intellect, or vital essence, and can we identify it?" and "How do humans establish moral values?"—questions often asked by philosophers and theologians. The answers to these questions are not as obvious as those dealing with the physical body. Thus there are many theories and explanations for the unseen rational and moral qualities that seem to distinguish humans from all other forms of life on earth.

After all truth is gathered into one great body of information, the questions of the physical and social scientists will be answered. Modern prophets, such as Joseph Smith and Joseph F. Smith, have declared that eventually all truth will be circumscribed into one great whole, with the laws of the universe and the gospel unified together. [^1] As one small but important example of this, in the twentieth century, Albert Einstein concluded scientifically what the Prophet Joseph Smith had taught doctrinally in the nineteenth century: matter can be neither created nor destroyed, but merely changed from one form to another. Einstein's discovery of relativity between matter and energy in the physical world revolutionized modern science, just as the Prophet's revelations on the eternal nature of elements in the human spirit transformed traditional Christian ideas about man's creation and progression. In this chapter, the restored doctrine of eternal identity and its implications for our immortal potential will be explored.

Created or Organized Man?

Since the time of the great apostasy, orthodox Christianity has alleged that the earth and man were created by God ex nihilo, or "out of nothing." Through the teachings of Joseph Smith and with careful study in the scriptures, we see that this Christian creed, which developed during the early Middle Ages, is inconsistent with other traditional beliefs like man's soul having some eternal elements and man's spirit living before the creation of this earth. To begin, the Prophet Joseph taught that the physical elements in the universe have always existed: "The elements are eternal. That which has a beginning will surely have an end; take a ring, it is without beginning or end—cut it for a beginning place and at the same time you have an ending. . . . If the soul of man had a beginning it will surely have an end. In the translation [concerning creation] . . . the word 'created' should be 'formed,' or 'organized.' " [^2]

God did not create the world out of nothing; it was organized out of existing materials and elements. The scriptures do not tell us what the nature and history of these elements were before they were organized as a part of this earth, but we do know that God was the power who formed the earth as it now is. Joseph Smith taught that although the elements are eternal, they can be reorganized: "The pure principles of element are principles [or component parts] which can never be destroyed; they may be organized and reorganized, but not destroyed. They had no beginning, and can have no end." [^3]

A simple study of the skin cells of our own body will illustrate the eternal nature but changing form of physical elements. The normal human body creates millions of new skin cells daily to replace those lost through abrasion, cleaning, and the normal functions of the body. The material to build these skin cells comes from the food we eat. In other words, a few hours before this material became a part of our body, it was in some form of food. The food could have been fresh vegetables from the garden or processed products that had been prepared weeks earlier, but it has now become a new, vital part of our body.

Even then, weeks and months before the food was available for our human consumption, its materials were parts of plants and animals living and growing somewhere on this planet. Sometime prior to that, this same material was part of the soil of the earth. Much of the soil consists of decomposed matter from earlier living organisms, particularly plants. In other words, the physical material that forms the fiber and body of plants, animals, and humans is constantly recycled and reorganized by various living entities developing, growing, and dying. Thus the physical elements that now comprise our skin cells have always existed, but only very recently in their long history did they exist as a part of our body. Matter is eternal, but its form and function may change through time—it might be a simple piece of soil or an essential part of the human brain.

Some material in the universe is so refined that we cannot see or observe it with our physical eyes. Most of the electromagnetic spectrum, such as cosmic radiation, X rays, microwaves, and electric current, falls into this category, although we now have equipment to measure much of it. Other forms of matter are not yet observable by human eyes or machinery. One such refined essence is the spirit found within each living person, "For man is spirit. The elements are eternal, and spirit and element, inseparably connected, receive a fulness of joy." (D&C 93:33.) The human spirit is composed of real, refined matter. As the Prophet Joseph taught, "all spirit is matter, but it is more fine or pure, and can only be discerned by purer eyes; we cannot see it; but when our bodies are purified we shall see that it is all matter." (D&C 131:7-8.)

Another unseen part of humans is their mind, that special capacity to think and decide. Joseph Smith taught that the "mind or the intelligence which man possesses is co-equal [co-eternal] with God. . . . The intelligence of spirits had no beginning, neither will it have an end. That is good logic." [^4] He also said, "Intelligence is eternal and exists upon a self-existent principle . . . from age to age, and there is no creation about it." [^5] As we will see later in this chapter, the element of eternal intelligence within our being is the essential ingredient that determines our personality. It is the guiding force behind our decision-making capacities and thus determines whether we are wise in our pursuit of truth and righteousness.

In summary, the Prophet Joseph Smith teaches that the principle ingredients of physical and spirit elements have existed and will continue to exist in some form of organization forever. The doctrine of the restored gospel, then, is that the elements of the body and spirit of each human have always existed. At some point in the distant past, God brought eternal intelligence and other spirit elements together in the form of a spirit body. Later, he placed that living spirit within an embryo or fetus made of the physical elements of this earth. As a new life was born, the infant body grew until it became the mature body we now possess. Although some may argue that God created the whole man (intelligence, spirit, and body) from nothing, God's own revealed word declares that God organized man from already existing material, both physical and spiritual.

The Nature of Intelligence

Of all the component parts of the human body, intelligence is the most valuable and enduring. Indeed, man's fundamental essence is referred to in modern scripture as intelligence. (See D&C 93:29-39.) [^6] The word intelligence can have a variety of meanings. In temporal or secular terms, intelligence is defined as "the rational ability to assimilate and apply knowledge." In eternal or spiritual terms, intelligence encompasses more than just thinking capacity; it is a rational faculty with moral priorities that understands and applies knowledge to righteous action. [^7] Both the secular and religious meanings draw from the Latin root intelligere, meaning "to perceive" or "to understand between choices." Switching the Latin components into an English sequence, legere + inter means "to gather or select" + "between." Mentally, one who gathers and understands many facts is one of high intelligence. In a spiritual context, a person with great intelligence is one who selects truth for goodly purposes. The Lord revealed this nature of intelligence to the Prophet Joseph Smith: "The glory of God is intelligence, or, in other words, light and truth. Light and truth forsake that evil one." (D&C 93:36-37.)

In what particular form or capacity our original intelligence existed, we cannot begin to say. For example, could unorganized intelligence move itself or communicate with any other form of intelligence or life? Was it something that could act for itself, or was it only acted upon by other powers and entities? We lack both scientific knowledge and divine revelation to answer these questions and fully understand precisely what eternal intelligence is. However, lacking a complete comprehension of the entity need not prohibit us from observing its influence and experiencing its effect in our own lives. This dilemma is similar to mankind's incomplete knowledge yet beneficial application of electrical power. Scientists do not always agree as to the exact nature of electricity or of the light that it generates, and engineers do not fully understand how these energy forces actually work, but they know enough to develop and harness electrical power to greatly bless mankind. Our best measurement of intelligence is not in studying its nature but in evaluating its influence.

As quoted earlier, the scriptures define intelligence as "light and truth." Light makes seeing and distinguishing things possible. Physical light aids us in seeing material objects, while spiritual light reveals more the inner workings of our lives and this world. Truth, as defined in chapter one, is a correct perception of physical, moral, and spiritual things. So to have light and truth means one both sees and understands things ranging from the physical to the spiritual realms. This refined intelligence encompasses and greatly expands our mental capacity. Indeed, the development of this intelligence is a sign that we are in the image of the great Creator.

Intelligence is both a necessary ingredient for a full human life and also a faculty that can strengthen and enrich the quality of eternal life. In this aspect, it might be compared to a more easily understood part of the body—muscles. Every viable human has to have some functioning muscles, particularly in the heart and lungs. However, people can also develop many muscles throughout the body, increasing their strength and capacity to do more things with their body.

Likewise, rational and accountable humans need some basic level of initial intelligence. One can usually recognize intelligence early in the life of an infant, although, as we will later see in this chapter, the capacity of one's intelligence to demonstrate itself might be severely handicapped by mental or physical impairments. People also have the capability to develop further intelligence as they receive light and truth from "grace to grace" until they come to a fullness of understanding. (See D&C 93:11-13, 27-30.) Intelligence increases as people choose to follow the Lord and keep his commandments. (See D&C 93:1-2, 28, 37.) Also, whatever principles of intelligence they gain in this life will continue with them into the postmortal existence. (See D&C 130:18-19.) On the other hand, intelligence is lost through disobedience, insensitive hearts, and adherence to false traditions. (See D&C 93:39; Mark 8:17-21.) As people with intelligence seek more light and truth, as they conduct themselves like true children of God, they rise above the animals and those of animal-like behavior.

Man's ability to communicate through the ages and to reason and make moral choices distinguishes him from the animals on earth. The righteous application and expansion of his intelligence will draw him and others nearer to God. Indeed, his unique and superior intelligence is what has defined him from eternity: "Man was also in the beginning with God. Intelligence, or the light of truth, was not created or made, neither indeed can be. All truth is independent in that sphere in which God has placed it, to act for itself, as all intelligence also; otherwise there is no existence." (D&C 93:29-30.) In brief, an intelligence is an independent entity capable of acting for itself. Every intelligence has an eternal existence and is free to act within the realms established by God. Greater intelligence can be acquired through added light and truth as a person chooses good and lives righteously.

The Individuality of Eternal Intelligence

Some teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith build upon the passages quoted above and maintain that in the primal state of intelligence, people were separate entities: "Intelligence is eternal and exists upon a self-existent principle. It is a spirit [individual entity] from age to age, and there is no creation about it." [^8] The prophet Lorenzo Snow also taught about the importance of our individuality: "We are immortal beings. That which dwells in this body of ours is immortal, and will always exist. Our individuality will always continue. . . . Our identity is insured. We will be ourselves, and nobody else. Whatever changes may arise, whatever worlds may be made or pass away, our identity will always remain the same; and we will continue on improving, advancing and increasing in wisdom, intelligence, power and dominion, worlds without end." [^9] There is something about our personality and individual identity that has always existed and that is forever ours alone.

An understanding of the eternal dimensions of our individual existence is hard to comprehend. The finite mind can hardly grasp the concept of eternity—a time without a beginning or an end. But neither can mortals understand the opposite—an end or a beginning to time. They would ask themselves, "What happened before time began?" or "What will happen the day after time ends?" The concept of "no time" is as incomprehensible as one of "all time," or eternity.

Nevertheless, the passage of time through eternity is marked off in periods of beginnings and ends as various events, epochs, dispensations, and cycles are recorded in the scriptures. For example, "in the beginning" of this earth's history as it is now organized, God took seven periods of creation to develop this world with all the forms of plant and animal life now found on it. (See Gen. 1.) After the fall of Adam and Eve, the earth entered a new stage of temporal, telestial existence, which will continue through seven cycles of dispensations, using one unit of measurement, or through seven periods of time, each a thousand years long, using another means of measurement. (See D&C 110:12-16; 77:6-7; 121:31.)

Our First Estate

In a similar fashion, our own passage through eternity is marked with periods of beginnings and ends as we experience birthdays and death dates—times of new starts and final conclusions. The scriptures identify such a major time period as an "estate," meaning a "dominion," a "stage of life," or a particular condition and state of existence. [^10] (See Jude 1:6; Abr. 3:26.) Our first estate was our eternal premortal existence, which continued until we were born on this earth; we are currently in our second estate, which continues after death into the postmortal spirit world; the third estate will begin with our resurrection and continue through eternity.

Our existence as unorganized intelligence comprised the major portion of our first estate. At some point, however, God the Father took what is called primal or unorganized intelligence, combined it with other spirit elements, and organized them into intelligent spirit personages—each unique, independent, and endowed with the power to think and act for itself as his spirit child. The process by which this spirit came into being is called a spirit birth, for "the Spirit itself beareth witness with our spirit, that we are the children of God" and joint heirs with our elder brother, Jesus Christ. (Rom. 8:16-18.) As with our natural birth, two parents were involved—our Father in Heaven and a lesser-known but vital Mother in Heaven. [^11] As one Mormon writer noted, "Latter-day Saints believe that all the people of the earth . . . are actual spiritual offspring of God the Eternal Father (Num. 16:22; Heb. 12:9). In this perspective, parenthood requires both father and mother, whether for the creation of spirits in the premortal life or of physical tabernacles on earth. A Heavenly Mother shares parenthood with the Heavenly Father. This concept leads Latter-day Saints to believe that she is like him in glory, perfection, compassion, wisdom, and holiness." [^12]

This understanding helps explain a puzzling passage in Genesis that describes God as creating mankind "male and female" in the image of the Divine. One modern translation of the key verse reads: "God created human beings in his own image; in the image of God he created them; male and female he created them." (Gen. 1:27, Revised English Bible.) A statement of the First Presidency of the Church clarifies that each spirit personage "was begotten and born of heavenly parents" as "offspring of celestial parentage." It also teaches that "all men and women are in the similitude of the universal Father and Mother, and are literally the sons and daughters of Deity." [^13] Thus, we are all the spirit children of God.

These spirit personages are also called organized intelligences. (See Abr. 3:22.) The late Elder Bruce R. McConkie wrote that "this name designates both the primal element from which the spirit offspring were created and also their inherited capacity to grow in grace, knowledge, power, and intelligence itself, until such intelligences, gaining the fullness of all things, become like their Father, the Supreme Intelligence." [^14] So it seems that, though independent and individual, unorganized intelligences in their earliest stage of existence could not act much for themselves until formed into spirit personages entering their next stage of existence. This creation of our spirit body was our first, or spiritual "birthday," the highlight of our first estate in the premortal world.

Our existence as an organized spirit being initiated a new stage of our pre-earthly life. This part of our first estate was a heavenly, celestial type of existence where we lived in the presence of our Heavenly Father. There he instructed us preparatory to our coming to earth. (See D&C 138:56.) Our spirit personages were as unique and different from one another as each of our bodies are in mortality. The scriptures even go so far as to suggest that we even looked different as spirits: "That which is temporal in the likeness of that which is spiritual; the spirit of man in the likeness of his person, as also . . . every other creature which God has created." (D&C 77:2.)

God's infinite number of spiritual offspring also developed varying levels of intelligence, or light and truth: "If there be two spirits, and one shall be more intelligent than the other, yet these two spirits . . . have no beginning; they existed before, they shall have no end." (Abr. 3:18.) The pre-earthly or antemortal spirit being of Jesus was the most intelligent of all spirit children of God, and the rest varied in their degree of intelligence and spirit improvement. (See Abr. 3:19.)

Some intelligences did worse than develop very slowly—they openly rebelled against God and were cast out of his presence. (See Jude 1:6; D&C 29:36.) In contrast, some had already greatly excelled in their intelligence: "Now the Lord had shown unto me, Abraham, the intelligences that were organized before the world was; and among all these there were many of the noble and great ones; and God saw these souls that they were good, and he stood in the midst of them, and he said: These I will make my rulers; for he stood among those that were spirits, and he saw that they were good; and he said unto me: Abraham, thou art one of them; thou wast chosen before thou wast born." (Abr. 3:22-23.) Though some, like Abraham, came to earth with more spiritual intelligence than most, all of us born on earth had gained enough light and truth to accept God's plan of salvation for us and to agree to its conditions. In the language of the scriptures, we "kept our first estate."

The Grand Council in Heaven

In addition to the growth and development that our intelligences experienced in the spirit world, we also had the opportunity to witness the planning of this earth and the circumstances that would later surround us here. At a council in heaven convened by God the Father, he presented his plan for the creation of this earth and the development of his children. (See Abr. 3:24-26.) We rejoiced with him when he presented his plan. (See Job 38:4-7.)

Crucial to our situation on the earth would be the freedom, also called agency, that God had already given us to act for ourselves. Earth life would be a time when we would be tried and tested. (See D&C 29:39.) We would have opportunities to learn good and evil and to choose our own path of righteousness or wickedness. (See D&C 101:78; Moses 5:11.) This agency carried with it a large risk, because as God's children should choose to sin and become impure, they could not return to the holy, pure state of celestial existence with God. Not knowing how we would conduct ourselves in an environment so foreign to our heavenly home, we undoubtedly wondered if we had the spiritual qualities to successfully pass through this time of probation. Heavenly Father counseled us that his plan would include the means by which we could overcome our imperfections and impurities and become qualified to return to his presence. (See Moses 7:32-40.)

Jesus became the primary advocate of Father's plan, and he and others like him encouraged us to support it. Other spirit children were not as ready to accept the whole plan. Lucifer, for example, wanted to modify our agency so that there would be no opportunity at all to sin, thus enabling all God's children to return to their celestial existence. [^15] Many wondered, however, how such restrictions on our freedom might adversely affect our moral growth and personal development. We were also hesitant in that Lucifer wanted the full control, glory, and credit for the implementation of God's plan. (See Isa. 14:13; D&C 29:36.)

After much discussion and debate, God moved his plan one step closer to implementation as he asked for a volunteer, a special person who would serve as the Redeemer and Savior of his plan. Jesus responded first and said: "Here am I, send me." (Abr. 3:27-28; see also 1 Pet. 1:19-20.) Lucifer answered second and said: "Here am I, send me." After God chose Jesus, Lucifer rebelled against the Father; as a result he and his followers were cast out of heaven while God and his angels wept at their departure. (See Moses 4:1-4; D&C 76:25-29.) The impact of this rebellion and the resulting expulsion of one-third of the hosts of heaven was so powerful that it, more than any other single event of the premortal existence, is highlighted in many scriptures. (See Luke 10:18; 2 Pet. 2:4; Rev. 12:7; 2 Ne. 2:17; D&C 29:36-38.)

We who chose not to rebel have since become the beneficiaries of God's plan. He has blessed us with the opportunity to come to earth, to receive a physical body, and to learn and grow in the physical, emotional, social, mental, moral, and spiritual dimensions of our lives. This earth life is our greatest reward for keeping our first estate. [^16]

Premortal Decisions Affecting Our Situation on Earth

We need to appreciate the fact that right now we are in the pivotal period of our own individual existence. We have already passed through the two important stages that constituted the first estate: primal or unorganized intelligence and premortal spirit world. There are also two important stages that follow this earth life in the flesh: the postmortal spirit world and the resurrected state thereafter. Although hard to conceive, just as the first stage of unorganized intelligence had no beginning, the last stage of resurrected glory will have no end—we are living the focal point of our eternal destiny.

Given the fact that our life here is so pivotal, one might ask, "Why are we all born into such diverse situations in the world?" Many in the English-speaking countries live in relatively comfortable, civilized surroundings, although some struggle in impoverished, crime-ridden neighborhoods. Most reading this book might ask, "Why are we not members of other families fighting tsetse flies or experiencing famines in Africa, or barely surviving in Afghanistan? Or why are we not among the hundreds of millions in China for whom Christianity is merely a vague concept? Why are we in the circumstances we are in today?"

There are at least three possible connections between who we are here on earth and who we were in our earlier antemortal existence. One possible explanation is that our pre-earthly behavior may have earned something, bad or good, that determined the circumstances of this life, to test or to stretch us where needed. A second plausible explanation is that we are here by need or by assignment. The need could be our own, or our families', or one of our associates' here on the planet. Maybe Heavenly Father placed us here because somebody else requires special help, and we can meet those needs. We may have received a service opportunity by special assignment from a loving Father. A third possibility is that we may have requested a certain time and circumstance on earth, and our request was honored. But, of course, we could receive the request only if it corresponded with the mind and will of our Heavenly Father.

We usually do not know why we were born into our individual circumstances. We may not particularly have deserved to be where we are, or we may not sense any particular needs that we are meeting, and we may not have really asked for our station in life. As we learn more about our real nature, enhance our sensitivity to others, and take advantage of service opportunities, we usually sense that this earth life is a natural continuation of our earlier life from the first estate.

Individuals who may be privileged to enjoy the more favorable circumstances of life should appreciate their blessings and take advantage of their opportunities. For example, some individuals in the scriptures, by virtue of their birth into the house of Israel, received an inheritance from the Lord. The Old Testament prophets, as they talked to these ancient Israelites, warned the descendants of Abraham that they were chosen to be a role model for the world and that if they failed this opportunity, they would have fared better not to have been born at all, because they would be cast out and become as orphans. (See Lam. 5:3.)

With citizenship in the house of Israel anciently, or with membership in Christ's church today, comes responsibility. Assuming that we knew what situation we could be born into, some of us in the premortal life may have thought, "That Israelite (or Christian) community has got to be the 'in group' and the choicest family on the earth. I want to be a part of their inheritance." If we appreciated the seriousness of that commitment, of being an Israelite or a Christian, and if we did not take advantage of the responsibility or opportunity in this life—instead of being a blessing, it would become a condemnation.

In another vein of thought, some people wonder why a loving Heavenly Father places spirit children in disjointed, even abusive, families. This does not seem fair to the young, tender children. One should not prejudge and assume the child is being cursed because of spiritual weaknesses in the premortal life. It could just as easily be an opportunity for an especially noble, choice spirit to help reform a wayward family and end the chain of abusiveness that might otherwise continue through future generations. [^17]

To highlight, it could be that some of us, in essence, were deliberately placed in our stations in life. Maybe we were among the more faithful, valiant ones in the premortal life, and God wants to use us as the spiritual catalysts and the stalwarts of the faith to build his kingdom here on the earth. He is going to take the best spirits and put them in the situations where they can serve the best and have the greatest influence for the greatest good. (See D&C 138:53.) He could put them in an organization that is to be the light of the world as well as provide a social order that will become the standard of existence for all the world during the Millennium. The Lord needs his choicest, most dependable followers in this organization. Although we may not know the particular reasons why we have an opportunity to become his servants, we probably sense that a primary reason for it lies in our actions and choices long before we were born.

Most of us, if not all of us, probably had much the same attitude in the premortal life that Jesus exhibited in the Garden of Gethsemane, where he prayed to the Father, "Not my will, but thine be done." (Luke 22:42.) We were willing to go wherever and whenever God would send us. Many of us exhibit this attitude now in earth life, and we likely had that attitude in our first estate since our personalities here reflect the personalities we developed there. One thing is certain—the decision was made with the Father's will because his wisdom is so much greater than ours.

Nurturing One's Intelligence

To what do we owe the difference, or inequality, in the faculty of intelligence among spirits? Speaking temporally of rational ability alone, some people are simply born smarter than others, some are reared in a more intellectually stimulating environment, and others receive a better education. Some of these varied circumstances could result from natural differences in heredity and the environment that we experience on earth. Other differences could come from the weaknesses that God sometimes places upon us. (See Ether 12:27.) Spiritual intelligence, however, was not doled out in random, unequal, or unfair amounts. Its expansion was based upon obedience to divine truth, and all spirit beings could progress in intelligence according to their diligence. (See Abr. 3:24-26.) Spiritual intelligence, then, may not be at the same level as one's mental or physical intelligence.

As in our premortal existence, although family and friends can influence our attitude toward spiritual light and truth, the potential of our spiritual progress during our earth life is determined wholly by individual choice, not predetermined by heredity or other external factors. This fact helps explain why we observe greatly varying degrees of spirituality among members of the same family or with people living in similar social and economic situations.

Despite the differences in the development of our intelligences in the first estate and our different spiritual and physical circumstances in this second estate, we are all still capable of infinite progress. The Prophet Joseph Smith confirmed that though some people are born more spiritually advanced than others, "all the minds and spirits that God ever sent into the world are susceptible of enlargement." [^18] We have made marvelous progress since our primal existence as unorganized intelligences. We continued to mature in the spirit world phase of our first estate, and we know that those who continue to progress in mortality and "keep their second estate shall have glory added upon their heads for ever and ever." (Abr. 3:26). [^19] Since we have already progressed so far, we need to view the magnificent possibilities ahead of us and continue our spiritual way of life until we reach our ultimate destiny.

The Lord teaches us that as we mature spiritually, we learn and grow "precept upon precept" and "here a little and there a little." As long as we are willing to receive from the Lord and hearken to his counsel, he will give us more wisdom so our spiritual growth can continue. (See 2 Ne. 28:30.) This process of spiritual growth is like the nurturing of our physical body. Nurturing our body takes effort on our part—we obtain and eat food, ingesting the nutrients that in turn provide health and energy. However, most of the work is done internally by our body organs without our active thought and direction.

In a similar manner, as we take in God's light and truth, our intelligence and spirituality are strengthened. We do this through such things as daily prayer, gospel study, and service to others. [^20] Nevertheless, the increased spirituality within us does not come about by our conscious control. God's Spirit works mysteriously and wonderfully with our own spirit to bring about this blessing. He is the giver of the great spiritual gifts that enlighten our understanding and increase our intelligence.

The following definitions and descriptions highlight the attributes of our intelligence:

Intelligence is the eternal essence of our being; therefore, it is the nucleus of our identity and individual personality.

Intelligence is our will, our capacity or power to make decisions; it is the part of our being with which we think; and it is our ability to reason and to form sound judgments.

Intelligence is the light of truth expanding our understanding, and it is our sensitivity to the reality and power of all truth.

Intelligence is an inclination to do right and to serve others; it motivates us to become more like God our Father, and it is our most valuable application of personal agency.

Human intelligence distinguishes us from all other life forms, and its essential influence in our lives characterizes us as true children of God.

Intelligence is an eternal gift of the universe, the essence of our reality. God has magnified our intelligence through his own light and truth and with the blessing of spirit bodies; otherwise, we would still be unorganized, weak, and primal intelligence. Now, in this life, we have constant opportunities to magnify our intelligences even more.

To summarize: In our first estate, we existed as primal INTELLIGENCES until our Heavenly Father provided us with spirit bodies, thus allowing us new dimensions of organization, experience, and progression. What we saw and experienced in our premortal existence with our Heavenly Father was a necessary and valuable foundation that prepared us for earth life. Heavenly Father has provided us this earth and the opportunity to receive a physical body so we can continue to expand and develop our intelligence and so we can help others to do the same. Christ has guaranteed us the promise to achieve our full potential destiny through the powers of the gospel, the priesthood, and the Atonement. If we are truly intelligent, we will thank God for these blessings and use our intelligence to bless ourselves and others.

For further study, refer to the following entries:

TG: BD: EM: Council in Heaven Spirit Council in Heaven Foreordination War in Heaven First Estate Intelligence Foreordination Man, Antemortal Existence of Intelligences Spirit Body Plan of Salvation Spirit, Creation Premortal Life

Spirit Body

War in Heaven

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] From the ex nihilo misconception arise the equally misguided doctrines for predestination and salvation srictly by grace.
[^2] Chapter 9 presents more insights on the nature of our eternal intelligence.
[^3] EM, 2:525; italics added.
[^4] Chapter 36 highlights further responsibilities that the Latter-day Saints have as citizens of the world.
[^5] See TG, Agency.
[^6] EM, 1:27.
[^7] Chapter 24 provides more important insights into the liberating and eternal values of God's lawa.
[^8] JD, 18:246.
[^9] Material in later chapters will examine how lost agency can be regained through the gifts of the gospel. See particularly chapters 13 (gifts of the Atonement), 18 (repentance), 20 (sources of spiritual strength), and 21 (personal growth).
[^10] These responisbilities are reviewed in greater detail in Chapter 34.
[^11] This will be discussed in the next chapter and in chapter 15.
[^12] See also HC, 1:2, fn.
[^13] See DS, 3:225-26.
[^14] More details on Church organization and leadership are found in chapter 33.
[^15] Chapter 33 reviews the role of prophets and others in the leading Church councils. Chapters 34 and 35 discuss the mission of the Church and the success that Latter-day Saints are helping to bring about under prophetic leadership.
[^16] 10. WNTCD, 625.
[^17] 11. See EM, ''God the Father'' (2:548ff); ''Mother in Heaven'' (2:961).
[^18] 12. EM, 2:961.
[^19] 13. Ibid.
[^20] 14. MD, 387.
