Victor L. Ludlow, Principles and Practices of the Restored Gospel ( 1992)

Chapter 10

It's Your Choice—the Nature of Agency

When people think of "freedom," their first thoughts usually center either on their political rights as citizens or on the appetites and liberties their physical bodies might have. These political and physical freedoms are, at best, only temporary, since we do not know how long we will have them. Social freedoms can be taken from us as others gain control of government or as physical abilities are lost through accidents or ill health. A third type of freedom is much more enduring and important—it relates to our moral and spiritual decisions. The situation (and opportunity) that allows us to make moral choices—to decide the type of person we want to become and then to develop a corresponding character—is called agency. Although influenced by our social and physical environment, this freedom of deciding our own attitudes, beliefs, and commitments remains within us and cannot be taken from us. Freedom in a gospel context provides us the possibility of choosing who we want to be and where and how we want to live in the eternities.

Agency to make moral and spiritual decisions can be present within any political system, although maintaining this freedom can be difficult. Historically, in spite of oppressive societies and malicious persecution, the followers of righteousness have been able to maintain their faith in God, sometimes at great sacrifice. In the extreme examples of the twentieth century, the human capacity to retain religious beliefs and a loving attitude toward others has been demonstrated by many survivors of the Nazi and Communist concentration camps. Ironically, the people who freely gave in to their emotions and appetites were not the ones who found lasting inner freedom; rather those with the greatest self-control and inward discipline retained the greatest freedom over their own personality and spirituality. To be free, one needs to learn how to act with self-control instead of simply responding to the forces acting upon him or her.

"To Act" or "To Be Acted Upon"

The most succinct and beautiful scriptural treatment of agency is found in the Book of Mormon, in the Prophet Lehi's deathbed sermon and blessing to his son Joseph. In his admonition, Lehi emphasizes that "opposition in all things" is necessary to existence, and that God has placed all creation into two major categories: "things to act and things to be acted upon." (2 Ne. 2:11, 14.)

Among all forms of animal life that God has created, humans have the fullest opportunity to act for themselves. (See Hel. 14:30-31.) Inanimate objects, such as rocks, dirt, and bodies of water, are devoid of agency and are always acted upon by external forces. Plants and most forms of lower animal life basically act under the governance and influence of the laws of nature—they have little freedom for independent action. Even higher intelligent animals are mostly governed, or acted upon, by natural instinct, and their ability to choose or act is limited. Though man shares many instincts with animals, he possesses a higher, rational capacity for moral choice to govern his life (if he chooses). This capacity, which in the gospel we call "agency," is the first and most fundamental gift given by God to man. (See Moses 7:32.) The meaning of agency, the choice of where and when to act, the consequences of our actions on others, and the reasons for agency are the subjects of this chapter.

The Essential Elements of Agency

Let's begin with a metaphor familiar to everyone—driving an automobile. First, a driver (the agent) is needed who knows how to maintain and drive a vehicle. Correspondingly, a car (the object acted upon) is needed, or the driver cannot fulfill his desires. Since automobiles are designed to operate according to laws of combustion, friction, motion, and so on, the driver must first learn how the car functions and then comply with those laws, supplying the necessary fluids and maintaining the machinery. He must also possess basic skills for maneuvering the car in traffic, skills that improve with experience. Now he is ready to drive. However, if he fails to comply with the preparatory steps or the rules of proper driving, the car will fail him or his driving privileges will be revoked. His freedom to drive will be suspended until the car is fixed or his license is restored.

Like the model of the driver and his car, certain elements are necessary in life before we make choices and engage in various activities. To act as an agent, a person must have an identity apart from the object of action. He then must acquire knowledge and the freedom and power to act. The things he acts upon—the choices he makes—are governed by law, and as his knowledge and experience increase, his efficacy or ability to achieve also expands. Finally, the preservation of his rights depends on his wisdom in prior choices and the privileges granted him by governing powers.

Let us discuss each of the seven essential elements of agency: identity, knowledge, freedom, action, law, efficacy, and preservation.

Individual Identity

Identity or intelligence is the unique characteristic of human personality—it is the core element that makes each person original, individual, and distinct. A person's capacity to think and decide is his will, which becomes the director of his soul. With "free will," a person can think, decide, and act. (See D&C 58:26-29.)

In modern scripture, the Lord revealed to Joseph Smith an indispensable truth about the identity (or personality, intelligence, and will) of man hitherto unknown in the religious world: "Man was also in the beginning with God. Intelligence, or the light of truth, was not created or made, neither indeed can be." (D&C 93:29.) If, as in traditional theology, God created man's spirit "ex nihilo" (out of nothing), man could not be a free agent since either his personality would have been programmed (like a computer) by God, or his choice of acts would be ultimately controlled (like a robot) by God. [^1] But since our prespirit essence—our intelligence—has always existed independently, we are each unique, autonomous, and free to choose the course of our own personality and destiny. [^2]

Knowledge

Although our primal intelligence (or will) has always existed, our capacity to experience life's different dimensions and to choose from a full range of options was not fully formed in the beginning. We, as spirit beings, came to earth to receive physical bodies, to develop our ability to choose good over evil, and to grow in knowledge. Like Adam and Eve, we all begin our lives in innocence and ignorance, making choices—often poor ones—without a full understanding of the consequences. Our knowledge expands rapidly as we satisfy curiosity, grow in experience, and learn from our errors. This expanded learning provides insight into our potential. Just as Adam and Eve first received knowledge of good and evil and then acquired greater freedom to experience a fuller range of growth, we too learn to act in light after we gain a vision of our opportunities. A knowledge of the truth makes us free to choose from more options. (See John 8:32.)

Knowledge not only multiplies our options, but it also affects our accountability before God. Because small children lack understanding, they are guiltless before God when they make wrong choices. Indeed, any person's justification or condemnation before the Lord is relative to his understanding of the eternal laws and commandments governing his choices: "Therefore to him that knoweth to do good, and doeth it not, to him it is sin." (James 4:17.) Besides children and the mentally incapacitated, people who have not been taught the commandments are not held fully accountable for disobeying them. (See 2 Ne. 9:25-26; Moro. 8:22.)

Freedom of Choice

In case anyone should think that ignorance of the commandments is bliss, we should quickly add that the greater our knowledge, the greater our range of choice. Not many people would really wish to return to the restrictions of childlike understanding and learn everything over again "the hard way." Freedom of action—freedom from the recurrent disappointment of harsh and unforeseen consequences—is a privilege well worth its price of understanding and obeying eternal laws. Agency involves the freedom to move to the left or right, forward or back, toward good or evil, or whatever the case may be. Opposition is a natural part of life as different forces work for and against each other and as various and sometimes opposing choices are placed before us. (See 2 Ne. 2, 9; esp. 2:11.)

Freedom of choice is a critical dimension in our religious lives. As one LDS scholar noted: "The gospel of Jesus Christ does not represent freedom merely as a philosophic concept or abstract possibility, but establishes it at the foundations of the creation of the world and as the fundamental condition of God's dealings with his children." [^3] Freedom of a greater range of choices places humanity at the top of all forms of life on this earth. As people are free to control their own paths of life and to influence others, they can live the law of the jungle and seek dominion, or they can live the golden rule and give service, or they can choose any number of options in-between. Those who choose to live the golden rule rise above the animal kingdom and live more like God.

A responsibility of Latter-day Saints is to help others to have full religious freedom so that all can enjoy the same privilege of worshipping "how, where, or what they may." (A of F 11.) Satan's followers seek to manipulate or even eliminate opportunities for full freedom of worship. The followers of God must be constantly vigilant in order to retain their rights as strong agents for good on the earth. [^4]

Exercising Our Agency through Action

In discussing "free agency," a phrase commonly used by Latter-day Saints, they sometimes emphasize the term free but neglect the word agency. Note that the two words in the phrase "free agency" do not appear side-by-side anywhere in scripture. Both ancient and modern prophets have often stressed the importance of the gift of agency. Agency is the active force or power by which something is done. It is the means by which hopes and expectations are made into reality. A knowledgeable agent with freedom of choice must initiate action and actually start to do something—otherwise, the freedom to exercise available options remains an unfulfilled opportunity. Indeed, the scriptures and the prophets stress active involvement in the concept of agency as much as they include the idea of freedom and choice when talking about the moral and spiritual dimensions of agency. [^5]

Agency refers to both the actions and the accountability for those actions. People with greater intelligence, knowledge, and freedom to act are more accountable in exercising their golden opportunities. Ideally, they should use their agency toward good, but in no case can they remain neutral or "lukewarm" (Rev. 3:16) because those who are not for the Lord are against him (see Matt. 12:30). When knowledgeable people do not work in God's behalf, they are not using their agency for good, thus they are condemned. Even if people do something wrong, if they are wise, they will learn from the errors of their ways, repent, and do better in the future. But no action whatsoever means no potential for learning or service. If we think that the object of our existence is to do nothing, we could just as well have remained as unorganized intelligence. At least then our undeveloped potential would not have required the wasted work and efforts of others, especially our Heavenly Father, in our behalf. Where much has been given to us, much is now expected.

Laws and Their Rewards

When we exercise our freedom to act, the results of our actions are based upon the eternal laws governing our existence. With the consequences of all actions based on unalterable and unbending law, we can confidently move forward with less fear of failure toward our chosen goals. Without fixed, unchanging laws rewarding our actions, we could not be agents; we would be subject to a random, disorderly universe and its whimsical god. Through the law, we know what the consequences of our actions will be and can make better choices. By law, the results of our actions are determined, and we can systematically work toward full achievement. (See D&C 29:34; 88:36-39, 42; 132:5.)

Subjecting ourselves to laws brings freedom not bondage. As one LDS philosopher noted: "Thus, in the LDS concept of agency, obedience and agency are not antithetical. On the one hand, Church leaders consistently stand against all coercion of conscience. . . . On the other hand, obedience—willing and energetic submission to the will of God even at personal sacrifice—is a central gospel tenet. Far from contradicting freedom, obedience is its highest expression." [^6] Indeed, the extent to which we keep the laws of God and master the laws of the universe will influence the degree to which we can find freedom. [^7] Brigham Young stated that obedience is the only way to truly become free. Such obedience does not contradict one's agency, because the person "who yields strict obedience to the requirements of Heaven, acts upon the volition of his own will and exercises his freedom." [^8] The freedom to be free depends upon our freewill obedience to eternal law.

Improving Our Efficacy

Since no one besides God is completely powerful and free, each of us must learn to do the best with our available opportunities. Efficacy is the power to produce intended results. Greater efficacy or effectiveness results in greater accomplishment. Developing patterns of personal growth will help us to become more perfect and effective in our use of agency. As we learn to strengthen and improve ourselves in one area of our lives, we learn a discipline that can be applied in other areas. For example, a person who develops self-discipline in controlling his thoughts and speech can apply the same principles to his physical and moral behavior. On the other hand, a person who has not maintained self-control in at least one area of his life will find it difficult to establish self-control in any area.

In a similar manner, as we improve our capacities in some areas of our lives, we find it easier to continue this growth pattern in other areas. As we evaluate the range of our freedoms and agency, we recognize many limitations, especially when compared to God. Rather than become discouraged, we should pause and appreciate the development we have already achieved. We have progressed from the spirit world to a physical one; we have mastered many simple tasks and can now learn more difficult skills; and we have accumulated wisdom, experience, gifts, and talents that we carry with us into the future. Although short of our ultimate goal, we have made great progress.

Since we are all born with limitations, the only way to overcome them is to recognize our weaknesses and to follow God's plan for redemption until we are born again of the Spirit and become new, more Christlike persons. Then, our agency can become more effective. Without the "mighty change in our hearts" (Alma 5:14), we "cannot see the kingdom of God," nor will we become like God (John 3:3). Unless we improve our efficacy to its full potential, we will be forever limited in how much of our agency we can apply. As we improve our range of choices by making good, correct decisions, we expand our agency and increase our effectiveness to pursue our course of personal destiny, to become perfect before God. (See Matt. 5:48.)

We are all aware, however, of certain circumstances in which a person's efficacy or effectiveness may be diminished or enhanced. But in these cases, according to eternal laws of justice and mercy, the judgment of God is likewise modified. For example, as briefly mentioned earlier, a mentally handicapped person who cannot develop a mature understanding of right and wrong will be judged for what he or she is—a little child. Also, modern psychology has greatly illuminated the lasting effect that each child's upbringing has on the ability to mature and act as an agent for him- or herself. In cases where normal people have been so maltreated or poorly taught as children that they can never accept full responsibility for their actions, God does not hold them fully accountable.

On the other hand, intelligent, capable people who possess a wide range of freedoms, powers, and even divine gifts are placed on a higher level of accountability before God. (See Ezek. 18:20-30.) Indeed, many factors, including mental and physical capacity, upbringing, education, economic status, culture, and nationality contribute to an individual's efficacy. On a larger scale, of all the people in the world, those in a few Western nations have a wide range of social, political, and religious choices. God has placed people in a myriad of different and difficult circumstances that affect their agency, so all individual and collective variables are weighed fairly by him. (See Mosiah 4:7-9; D&C 76:2-3.)

Why does God first grant us agency and then allow obstacles or even create challenges that seem to limit our effective freedom? The answer is found in the Book of Mormon: "I give unto men weakness that they may be humble; and my grace is sufficient for all men that humble themselves before me; for if they humble themselves before me, and have faith in me, then will I make weak things become strong unto them." (Ether 12:27.) In other words, God gives us weaknesses in the hope that, realizing our limitations without him, we will choose the path of repentance and self-improvement that he has given us.

Guaranteed Preservation

The last necessary element in agency is its preservation, a guarantee that the conditions and promises of agency will be maintained throughout the eternities. God himself acts as preserver, promising that the consequences of our actions will be fair, consistent, and eternal. He guarantees that the laws of the universe and the gospel, which are a part of our lives, will be preserved so that our hopes and plans for the future might be realized. (See D&C 88:34.)

As we exercise our agency, we must act in faith that the Eternal God recognizes and rewards all that we think, say, and do. His desire is that we should be completely free to choose good and live righteously so that we and others can enjoy many of his blessings while in mortality. He wants us to have the physical strength, emotional health, political freedom, and intellectual understanding to make good and proper moral and spiritual decisions. The more we gain power and freedom in each of these areas of our lives, the more we preserve and strengthen our agency in the other areas. The primary way that we begin to lose the capacities of agency is when we (or others) choose to disobey the laws of God and the universe. The negative results of such disobedience usually restrict someone's agency—at least temporarily. As we follow God's directions, particularly as recorded in the scriptures, we can regain lost freedoms and enhance others so that we can live as true, free children of God. [^9]

Developing the Gift of Agency

Each of the elements of agency we have discussed—identity, knowledge, freedom, action, law, efficacy, and preservation—are indispensable to our exercise of this heavenly gift. To help illustrate this, let us turn to something familiar to most of us—a simple game of basketball.

A basketball team, though it performs as a whole, is composed of five individuals with distinct identities and functions. To perform their roles, they must have a knowledge of the game in general and of their individual roles in particular. Then, of course, the players must have the freedom to play the game and must act to take advantage of their knowledge and opportunity. They are also bound by certain laws or rules of the game, which carry consequences when obeyed or disregarded. In addition, certain immutable physical laws—like the law of gravity—also govern the results of their actions. Granted, not all basketball players are created equal. Some are inherently better, or more effective, at the sport than others. For this reason, some allowance is made in the rules depending on whether the players are children or adults, men or women, amateurs or professionals. Without all these conditions, the game would either not be possible, or we would say it was unfair. Finally, officials and administrators supervise the game and preserve its integrity. The final outcome of the game depends on the applied agency of one team's players as opposed to the players on the other team.

Let us try to imagine another set of rules for agency. The scriptures tell us that when God presented to the hosts of heaven his plan of salvation, he met with opposition from Satan, who wanted to modify this plan. Satan wanted to eliminate our freedom to choose between right and wrong—we would have to follow him in his choice of what he thinks is right. (See Moses 4:3; D&C 29:36.) True, Satan proposed only one change, but (returning to the metaphor of driving) what use is a beautiful, powerful car without a steering mechanism? Without individual choice, we lose our identity; we become programmed robots without personal development and continuing efficacy in our actions. We are deprived of personal action in choosing between good and evil, which would otherwise increase our knowledge of opposing forces in the universe. Also, if we have no choice in our moral actions, eternal laws and their consequences serve no purpose, for they are made to preserve human agency and growth. The value of all existence would become meaningless, as Lehi stated, "having no life neither death, nor corruption nor incorruption, happiness nor misery, neither sense nor insensibility. . . . Wherefore, all things must have vanished away." (2 Ne. 2:11-13.)

Without full agency, Satan's alternate plan would have returned us to our Heavenly Father in almost the same condition as when we left: innocent, unrefined children like Adam and Eve in the Garden of Eden. We, with our new physical bodies, would be with God, but we would not be like him. Adam and Eve themselves understood this after they learned, through the Holy Ghost, the plan of salvation: "In that day Adam blessed God . . . saying: Blessed be the name of God, for because of my transgression my eyes are opened. . . . And Eve, his wife . . . was glad, saying: Were it not for our transgression we never should . . . have known good and evil, and the joy of our redemption, and the eternal life which God giveth unto all the obedient." (Moses 5:10-11.) Eternal life is life as God knows it, with unlimited knowledge and power to act with him in edifying his children as part of his eternal purposes.

Under his plan, God allows us opportunity to share his limitless power and glory if we can prove that we will use them for noble purposes. Under Satan's plan, we would have had no power, and the devil would have retained all glory, as he said: "Behold, here am I, send me, I will be thy son, and I will redeem all mankind, that one soul shall not be lost, and surely I will do it; wherefore give me thine honor." (Moses 4:1, italics added.)

For now, Satan wields considerable influence on earth among the wicked, but his reign here is limited. The irony of Satan's fate is that, instead of obtaining absolute rule over all inhabitants of the earth, the results of his choices will place him beneath the least of the children of men. Satan's works are "works of darkness" (Hel. 6:28; see 1 Ne. 8:23-24), and darkness equates with evil, disorganization, cold, and chaos—situations existing before this earth was organized. It also refers to outer darkness, perdition, or emptiness—the final abode of Satan and his followers. Although the devil desires to rule over all people and over everything, his final kingdom will literally be dark, cold, and disorganized nothingness. (See Alma 40:13-14.)

Sharing Freedom with God

God's own plan also has its irony. By giving us our agency, God gives himself more freedom. After we have proven ourselves through tribulation, we become trustworthy, faithful, valuable servants in God's kingdom on earth and in heaven. In this life we help him by spreading the gospel to his children; in the life to come we assist his work by creating new worlds with new generations of spirit children. We, as his fellow servants and as his kings and queens, his priests and priestesses, literally share the burden of his work and free him to pursue his goal more rapidly, which is "to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man." (Moses 1:39.)

Indeed, the kingdom of heaven expands as God shares all that he has with other righteous beings. We come to earth to exercise our agency, to be tested and refined until we become spiritually mature and independent. In particular, as members of God's church applying our agency, we are entrusted with important tasks: strengthening our families and fellow members, preaching the gospel throughout the world, and performing saving ordinances for the dead. [^10] We stand at the crossroad with the choice of following either Satan or God. Satan, by seeking to control us, not only loses his own rights and freedoms, but also brings us into his bondage; God, by giving us agency and responsibility, both gains exalted children, and also blesses us as we share his expanded power, glory, and freedom.

That God has no other purpose for his existence but to improve our potential for eternal life shows not only how much he loves us, but also how much trust and faith he has in that potential. Satan would reduce us to little more than mechanical animals, but God shows great faith in our abilities. First, he created our spirits from unorganized intelligences, then organized the world for our habitation. More important, he gave us dominion over the earth and granted us agency during our earth life—our training ground for celestial responsibilities. While many of us may not reach our full potential in the eternal scope of personal destiny, the exaltation of those who do achieve perfection is reward enough for God. Furthermore, most of God's children will live, learn, and grow during mortality, and they will eventually enjoy an eternal, resurrected state far superior to their earlier existence. [^11]

In conclusion, God is the prototype for all loving, wise parents. Loving parents do not overprotect their offspring or keep the children completely dependent on them. Wise parents let the children make choices—right and wrong—within their ability so that their capacities can grow. Otherwise, the child remains a child. Our Heavenly Father gives us our agency to foster this growth in us, his children. The divine gift of AGENCY is an eternal principle that permeates our relationship with the Almighty, and it requires identity, knowledge, freedom of choices, action, law, efficacy, and preservation to be in full operation.

Heavenly Father has guaranteed us our agency so that we can meet and overcome the challenges of this life, enabling us to grow to our full potential as celestial beings like himself. If we do not choose eternal life, we may be with God our Father, but we could never be like him. (See 2 Ne. 2:10, 13, 27-29.) Under his plan, God allows us opportunity to become independent, trustworthy children. He will then share his limitless power and glory with us since we have proven that we will use his gifts for noble purposes. Under such celestial conditions, we will enjoy freedom far beyond anything to be experienced in mortality. The wise choice of our limited freedoms now will determine the ultimate agency we will experience in the eternities.

For further study, refer to the following entries:

TG: BD: EM: Accountability Accountability Agency Agency Free Freedom Freedom Opposition

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Many specific suggestions about how we can develop our gifts and talents are found in chapter 35.
[^2] For a more detailed discussion on temple covenants, see chapter 23.
[^3] EM, 2:525; italics added.
[^4] Chapter 36 highlights further responsibilities that the Latter-day Saints have as citizens of the world.
[^5] See TG, Agency.
[^6] EM, 1:27.
[^7] Chapter 24 provides more important insights into the liberating and eternal values of God's lawa.
[^8] JD, 18:246.
[^9] Material in later chapters will examine how lost agency can be regained through the gifts of the gospel. See particularly chapters 13 (gifts of the Atonement), 18 (repentance), 20 (sources of spiritual strength), and 21 (personal growth).
[^10] These responisbilities are reviewed in greater detail in Chapter 34.
[^11] This will be discussed in the next chapter and in chapter 15.
