Victor L. Ludlow, Principles and Practices of the Restored Gospel ( 1992)

Chapter 11

Earth Life—Our Pivotal Stage of Existence

On almost any given morning, we might lie in bed and ask ourselves, "Why do I have to get up today?" This feeling is especially strong on days when we face unwelcome tasks. On the other hand, on mornings when we anticipate pleasant activities, we can hardly wait to get out of bed so we can start with our pursuits. Our approach to life in general reflects this same pattern: when we dread what lies ahead, we hesitate to do anything; when we foresee valuable opportunities, we accelerate our efforts. Heavenly Father recognizes these human tendencies, and he constantly reminds us of the valuable purposes and joyous experiences that should be the essence of our earth life. With these eternal values in mind, we can then approach life with determination and hope.

To find purpose in our life, we often ask ourselves, "Why are we here?" Prior to answering this question, we need to appreciate our present situation by first answering the questions, "Where did we come from?" and "Where are we going?" In chapter nine, we examined the two phases of our first estate in the premortal world: first, we existed without beginning as unorganized intelligence, and God then organized our intelligence at some point into a spirit body. In this antemortal existence, our spirit progressed in knowledge, understanding, faithfulness, and obedience until it was prepared to take on a physical body.

After entering our second estate through mortal birth, we now experience mortality in the flesh and continue to prepare ourselves for the future through learning, trials, and experiences. The future promises two further major stages of development, which will be explored in the next two chapters. First, we will experience death and enter postmortality as a spirit being in another spirit world. Eventually, we will exit the postmortal spirit world and be reunited with our physical bodies, judged, and assigned to our third and final estate.

The answer to our initial question is, in short, "We are here to build upon our past and to prepare for our future." Our past first estate had no beginning since our intelligences have always existed; and our future third estate will have no end because we will live forever as resurrected beings. However, our present stage of earth life, though temporary, sets the pattern for and determines the quality of our future destiny. It is critical, then, to understand the nature of our pivotal second estate, what it requires of us, and what it promises us concerning our future existence.

Mortality Unites Spirit with Flesh

We do not know exactly how long all the inhabitants of this earth existed as organized, intelligent spirit beings before entering their second estate. For those souls now living on the earth, they are at least six thousand years old, since all spirit children of God participated in the premortal council prior to his sending Adam and Eve to begin the human family. In any case, our spirits had more time to grow and develop in premortality than any of us have in mortality. What is it then—in this short, critical time of earth life—that our spirit, united with our flesh, needs to accomplish?

The answer lies in realizing that for the first time in our existence, we live—albeit temporarily and imperfectly—as a complete person, with intelligence, spirit, and body. These three elements will also comprise our future immortal beings as we exist forever after the resurrection. This life, then, is the best facsimile of eternity and provides the only total, intensive training ground in which we can harmonize all the elements of our being in preparation for our final estate: "Therefore this life became a probationary state; a time to prepare to meet God; a time to prepare for that endless state . . . which is after the resurrection of the dead." (Alma 12:24.)

Before we meet God and are judged by him, we must concentrate our efforts during mortality on training our mature spirits to develop, control, and utilize our relatively new and immature physical bodies. To complete this preparation and probationary period, we need to enrich ourselves in three dimensions, experiencing a new life through our physical bodies, building new families and social relations with our spirit brothers and sisters, and developing a renewed bond with our Heavenly Father, his Son, and the Holy Spirit.

Physical Life with a New Body

With a new physical body, we experience new sensations of the flesh—exciting appetites and feelings. Through our physical senses, we have new avenues for learning about the natural world and some laws of the universe. We also soon learn that our body and spirit can compete with each other for control of our being, but they can also work in harmony for the edification of the whole soul. In essence, we need a physical body and earth life as a time to discover ourselves, learn sensitivity, make choices, live a full life, develop self-control, and expand talents.

A Time to Discover Ourselves

Our first opportunity of earth life is to learn who we are—to come to an understanding of our basic self and our role in the eternities. To achieve this self identity, we had to leave our existence with God, where we lived as his spirit children. We were provided a new dimension in an entirely different framework of physical existence without an active remembrance of our earlier life. This situation provided us with an opportunity to foster new faith in our Heavenly Father.

Separated from our heavenly parents, we first became dependent upon physical parents, and later we also separated from them to become even more independent. As we grow, we usually choose some individuals as role models, and if we are fortunate, we can develop positive bonds with good people with whom we can have supportive, trusting, and loving relationships. As we carefully observe other people, we come to know ourselves better. With experience and insight we develop into mature adults and learn more concerning our true identities.

A Time to Learn Sensitivity

One of our constant priorities in life is to seek, learn, and apply truths in the physical, moral, and spiritual realms of existence. As we study the universe from a new perspective, earth life becomes a marvelous opportunity to develop both sensitivity and a special sense of awareness in these realms of truth.

Physical Sensitivity. Some things can be learned only through the experiences of the physical senses, which is one important reason why we are separated from our Heavenly Father. He, no doubt, told us many things about what we would experience here on earth, and we agreed to the conditions of our existence. However, we needed to move from a theoretical conception to practical experience; therefore, we came to earth to explore the physical world through learning and experience.

One way we learn is by study—reading books and journals, taking classes, attending lectures, and pursuing other areas of academic education. Intellectual study is helpful, but it becomes more interesting as we expand upon what we have learned by conducting experiments, making field trips, and personally getting involved in various aspects of the learning process. As we become active participants, we not only enjoy our studies more, but we also remember more. The more senses we use in the educational process, the more vivid the learning experience is.

We enrich our observation skills as we view sunrises and rainbows, as we study the colors in nature, and as we behold the beauty of flowers and human faces. Our noses smell flower fragrances, pine forests, freshly baked bread, and other aromas. Our ears hear the music of birds and instruments, the patter of rain and children's feet, and the tones of the wind and tender voices. We feel the morning dew on our bare feet, the fabric textures through our fingertips, and the sensations of temperature and pressure through our skin. We taste the freshness of sweet fruit, the savor of finely cooked foods, and the flavor of healthy herbs and vegetables.

We also develop our internal physical senses as we respond to feelings of hunger, thirst, fatigue, stress, and pain. By far the best way to enhance any of these senses is to use them regularly, with intensity and concentration. Imagine the challenge of describing the color green to a person who has been blind from birth. Or try, for example, to explain the difference in taste between salt and sugar without referring to your own experience with foods containing these two substances. Colors become clear only to those who see; bitter and sweet tastes must be experienced to be known. Without personal experience, developing these senses is extremely difficult.

Moral Sensitivity. Likewise, so it is with the moral sensitivities in life—they must be experienced and compared to be understood. Among its many attributes, moral sensitivity encompasses the abilities to make good decisions, judge others righteously, and discern right from wrong. Justice and injustice, evil and good, and their consequences can be recognized from experience and put in perspective through wisdom. As we become sensitive to the suffering and needs of others, we learn more about our attitudes toward others and the nature of God and ourselves.

We soon learn that we cannot easily explain why one sometimes suffers for no apparent reason. To understand why a person receives affliction and tribulations, we should automatically look not into their past but into their future. Instead of being punished for previous deeds, perhaps they are being refined for later excellence. If they become better people after their trials and sufferings, their adverse experiences have proven to be valuable developments in their earth life. The guidelines of not judging unfairly or without a full understanding also apply to many of our own unexplainable negative experiences. As we review our particular circumstances, we might identify opportunities that increase our learning and faith. As we expand our horizons in studying history, observing human behavior, and responding to the promptings of our conscience, we develop the moral sensitivity that will enrich our lives and will bless the lives of others.

Spiritual Sensitivity. Our highest priority should be to develop our spiritual sensitivity. To do so, we must first regain in the flesh the spiritual association we possessed as spirit children in God's presence. Our mortal bodies and their imperfect perceptions can act as barriers in communication between our spirit and the Holy Ghost. When divine Spirit communicates directly with our spirit, that communication is plain and pure. Through earnest prayer, we can gradually learn to distinguish between our own prejudices and desires and the pure revelation of the Spirit. Without spiritual sensitivity, God's desires for us will be constantly filtered and distorted by the predisposition of our physical nature.

A Time to Make Choices

Earth life is a unique time of testing. We are tested in mortality to determine the nature of our character. Our character is seen in the attitudes we develop, the thoughts we have, the priorities we establish, the words we utter, the habits we form, and the actions we perform. (See Alma 12:13-14; Rev. 3:21.) Life is a probationary period; we show whether we obey God and overcome evil, or we follow Satan and oppose righteousness. (See D&C 98:14-15.) The intent of our hearts is examined to see why we speak and act as we do. All of us are continually being so tested.

Different people experience their "tests of life" in vastly different circumstances: adversity challenges some, while others find it complicated to handle prosperity; some are tried in times of health, while others find their challenges in illness. Contrary to the attitudes of many, the circumstances of life that we face are not our major tests in mortality—our greatest test is in how we handle these situations. As examples, parenthood is a wonderful demonstration of selfless service for some, but a dreaded responsibility or an opportunity for selfish manipulation for others. On the other hand, being single or without children can be a great opportunity for personal improvement, community involvement, and church service for some, but an excuse for self-depredation, isolationism, and antagonism for others. Even two people of the same family can face the same set of circumstances, such as divorce or the death of a parent, and react quite differently. We must learn to endure and grow through our many trials rather than use them as excuses for ill-advised behavior.

Sometimes we learn that we can react very differently in the same situation, depending upon our mood or understanding at the moment. One simple story illustrates this point. Imagine being in the back of a crowded elevator when a large man steps heavily on your foot. You cry out, "Watch where you're stepping, you blind fool." The man turns around and you recognize that he is blind—what feelings do you have? Or compare the feelings you would have had if you had known from the beginning that he was blind. He may have still accidentally stepped on your foot, and the pressure and pain would have been the same, but you probably would have reacted much differently. Thus we see that the actual situation (such as a large man stepping on our foot) is not what determines our character but rather how we respond to the circumstances (with anger or patience).

Daily we face a variety of situations. How we handle each one contributes to the development of our personality. Our decisions carry us further on the paths of righteousness or wickedness, and our acts strengthen our patterns of selfishness or selflessness. Through the choices we make, we are forging our future in the postmortal life and our selves during this earth life.

A Time to Live Life's Tragedies

The trials of life are often experienced in the toughest of times, during tribulation, calamity, adversity, or frustration. (See 2 Tim. 3:12.) In a spiritual context, the righteous are promised that they will not be tempted or tried beyond their ability to endure. (See 1 Cor. 10:13; Alma 13:28-29.) In the physical and social context of life, we may experience obstacles that we are not able to overcome, such as ill health, old age, divorce, or wayward children. We have to learn how to adjust to these less favorable situations while maintaining our moral integrity and spiritual strength. We will grow spiritually and receive eternal rewards if we remain faithful during such times of adversity. We are also told that by experiencing the bitter, we are then better able to taste and appreciate the sweet experiences of life. (See 2 Ne. 2:1-11; D&C 29:39.)

In spite of tribulations, or (in the case of some people) because of tribulations, earth life becomes our opportunity to live by faith in God. (See Gal. 2:20.) As we reviewed in the earlier chapter on God, he allows calamities to exist on earth, and we must decide whether we will still believe in him. These trials also give us experience, try our souls, measure if and how we endure, and provide us opportunities not only to make the best of the situation, but also to improve the lot of others. (See D&C 90:24; Rom. 8:28.) In short, the true quality of our faith, hope, and charity is usually refined, improved, and measured through adverse situations.

If such tribulations enhance and strengthen these great spiritual gifts, then the positive, eternal rewards of these trials become far more valuable than the negative, temporary experiences of anguish and sorrow. (See 1 Cor. 13.) Peter, in fact, saw such tribulation as a time to rejoice because of the fruit it could yield: "Wherein ye greatly rejoice, though now for a season, if need be, ye are in heaviness through manifold temptations: that the trial of your faith, being much more precious than of gold that perisheth, though it be tried with fire, might be found unto praise and honour and glory at the appearing of Jesus Christ." (1 Pet. 1:6-7; see also 1 Pet. 2:19-23; 3:14-18; 4:12-19; D&C 122:7; Moses 5:10-11.) If we learn goodness in periods of adversity, times of earthly toil become stepping stones of personal and spiritual growth.

A Time to Enjoy Life's Triumphs

There exists another, more pleasant way to develop divine personal attributes—through righteous behavior. God rewards those who diligently seek him. The wise person learns to seek God at all times, not just when intense challenges must be faced. By learning to love and serve others in times of peace, prosperity, and health, we improve our character in a positive environment. Tasting the fruits of righteousness strengthens our character and encourages our resolve to continue on the gospel path. Constant searching and receiving positive reinforcement are much more valuable and lasting incentives toward learning and growth.

In addition, God desires that we would experience joy during our life here on earth because "men are, that they might have joy." (2 Ne. 2:25.) Like other emotions and spiritual gifts, joy usually comes to those who look for it. In an attitude of faith and hope, we should look for and enjoy the simple pleasures found during the journey through life. Although few of us achieve success to the degree that we may desire, we still have many accomplishments that we can feel good about. Rather than regret the times we are stuck in traffic or occupied with mundane tasks, we should look for something beautiful or seek a learning opportunity. Instead of being upset because we are separated from old friends, we should foster and enjoy new friendships. Although we do not experience constant happiness on earth, eventual, lasting happiness is God's object and design for our existence. In times of either accomplishment or adversity, we always have the comfort of God's promises, knowing that eternal joy and divine gifts will be our eventual reward as we inherit his kingdom. (See Matt. 25:21.)

A Time to Develop Self-Control

We must also learn to do good in the flesh according to our knowledge of what is right and good. This is often a difficult thing because our bodies are inherently weak and hard to tame. Thus, Paul wrote, "For what I would [do], that I do not; but what I hate, that do I." (Rom. 7:15.) Likewise, the disciples were overcome by fatigue when they should have been watching and praying with the Savior in Gethsemane. The Lord sadly, though understandingly, commented, "The spirit indeed is willing, but the flesh is weak." (Matt. 26:41.) Moroni wrote that we are given weaknesses in the flesh so that we may learn the discipline and humility of overcoming them with help from the Lord: "For if they humble themselves before me, and have faith in me, then will I make weak things become strong unto them." (Ether 12:27.)

Ideally, a person will be responsive to the counsel of others and the promptings of conscience in order to learn control over the whole self—mind, spirit, and body. We refine ourselves by working on the little tasks of self-control, many of which are reciprocal. For instance, we need to control our thoughts, which leads to better control over our words and actions. We need to learn how to love our friends, which enables us to better love our enemies. We need to say and mean "yes" when we have an opportunity to make a righteous commitment so we will have the courage to say and mean "no" when we are in a situation of temptation. We need to learn to accept victory and defeat with the same graciousness and humility. In essence, we need to keep the directions and commandments of our loving Father in Heaven, whose prophets, scriptures, and Spirit provide the necessary resources to learn true self-mastery.

All of us spend considerable effort in the first years of life simply learning to control bodily functions and coordinate basic motor skills. As we grow older, both social and religious constraints require that we also learn to defer physical gratification of our appetites and passions. In the restored church, the covenants we make bind us not only to control, but also to purify our physical bodies through obedience so that they can endure the glorious presence of God: "Who may abide the day of his coming? and who shall stand when he appeareth? for he is like a refiner's fire, and like fullers' soap." (Mal. 3:2.) Now, above all other times in our stages of existence, is the ideal time to learn self-control so that our whole being can be strengthened and purified.

A Time to Expand Talents

Earth life is an opportunity for us not only to receive a body, but also to enhance and improve it. According to the parable of the talents, if we develop the talents God has given us, they will be multiplied even more. (See Matt. 25:14-23.) Each of us has special gifts and talents that can not only bring us a sense of joy and fulfillment, but also provide enrichment and pleasure for others. Gifts of music, communication, compassion, service, and concern for community are just a few examples of gifts that bless both the person who possesses them and those who witness and experience them.

Even our weaknesses can be overcome and turned into strengths through expanding our talents. (See Ether 12:27, 35.) As we gain control over some weaknesses, we develop patterns of personal growth that allow us to strengthen other areas of imperfection. The ultimate goal of our personal development should be to become perfect as our Father in Heaven is perfect. (See Matt. 5:48.) With God's help and through the grace of the Atonement, we can achieve the full measure of our creation—godliness. (See Eph. 4:12-13.) [^1]

Life on earth with a physical body is meant to be a time of individual development whereby we experience physical growth, emotional pleasure, social enrichment, intellectual learning, moral refinement, and spiritual improvement. As we experience and recognize these opportunities, we feel good about ourselves, we relish life, and we thank God for the marvelous blessings of earth life.

Social Life with New Opportunities of Service

Earth life is more than a time to receive—it is also a time to give. Just as we receive life from heavenly and earthly parents, we can give physical life to other spirit children through parenthood, and we can strengthen the spiritual lives of others through righteous service. We, who have received an earth with great natural resources and beauty, can exercise wise stewardship and show concern for our natural environment to make it a more productive and pleasant place. Organized as families and joined in social contacts with many other people, we receive much emotional and social reinforcement. This interaction brings stability into our lives, so in turn we should help provide similar stability for others.

Almost everything we receive on earth, we can share with others. Physically, we can help provide better health and nutrition. Emotionally, we should support and uplift each other with genuine care and love. Socially, we strengthen one another through families, in Church settings, and within the community. Intellectually, we have a responsibility to improve and pass on the heritage of knowledge and understanding that we have received. Morally, we should go beyond setting a good example and politely but firmly encourage others to do the same. Spiritually, we teach gospel principles, bear fervent testimony, and exercise spiritual gifts to bless the lives of others. Any who have received blessings of earth life have a moral responsibility to share them with others.

As other chapters in this book outline the opportunities and blessings we receive through the grace of God, the work of Christ, and the companionship of the Holy Ghost, suggestions will also be given on how we can encourage others to seek for and attain the marvelous blessings God has provided his children. We need to remember, however, that not all people will have the desire or capacity to receive all the blessings that earth life can offer. Infants who die young, children raised in extremely adverse circumstances, and people with severe handicaps do not enjoy a full range of opportunities while in the flesh. Some people will experience severe adversities or calamities that afflict their physical and emotional health throughout mortality. In the hereafter, these negative circumstances will be counterbalanced, and the wounds that they inflicted will be remedied. A wise, loving Heavenly Father will measure how each person deals with such trials.

The Supreme Judge will also measure how each of us has added to or taken away from the suffering that his children experience. Sometimes people suffer because of their own mistakes; on other occasions their suffering comes through no fault of their own. We should not judge or condemn any who are sick, afflicted, or suffering. More than a trial of their capacity to endure, adversity might be a test of our willingness to help. Part of our responsibility on earth is to lessen the burdens of others. As God's children unitedly exercise such an attitude, the quality of life improves for all.

Spiritual Life with New Gifts and Powers

In the premortal existence, we needed a new setting without God's continuous physical presence in order to have the opportunity to foster new faith in our Heavenly Father. Now, as we faithfully seek God during mortality, his presence returns, and we enjoy a greater guidance and peace in our lives. As we enter into and keep sacred covenants with our Father in Heaven, the blessings and promises of the priesthood ordinances are granted us through the power of Christ's atonement. As we listen to the promptings of the Holy Spirit, we receive special spiritual gifts that prepare us for eternal service in God's celestial kingdom. Spiritual refinement and improvement is an important dimension of mortality.

A Time to Secure Blessings

One major purpose of earth life is to draw closer to God by participating in certain covenants and ordinances. Jesus himself set the proper example by being baptized, and he stated that no one can enjoy the blessed presence of God without being purified through the covenant ordinance of baptism by water and the Spirit. (See John 3:3-7.)

Besides covenanting to maintain a relationship with God, our covenants also take us one step further, making us at least partially responsible for the progression of our brothers and sisters here on earth. The first covenant we make, that of baptism, is also our initiation into the society of the church of Jesus Christ, and part of our commitment is to sustain and serve one another in the faith. (See Mosiah 18:8-10.) When receiving our temple endowment, we expand upon the baptismal covenant. It is significant that two of the four temple covenants specifically address the greatest temptations of the flesh: unlawful sex (which is controlled through obeying the law of chastity), and covetousness for material possessions (which is harnessed through obeying the law of consecration). These are the two primary earthly attractions we must overcome to subdue our physical bodies as we are tested and proven worthy for God's future blessings. [^2]

Finally, when we have children, we assume full responsibility to raise them in the covenants of the Church: "Inasmuch as parents have children in Zion . . . that teach them not to understand the doctrine of repentance, faith in Christ the Son of the living God, and of baptism and the gift of the Holy Ghost by the laying on of the hands, when eight years old, the sin be upon the heads of the parents." (D&C 68:25.) Bearing and rearing children in the light of the gospel is one of the most important and serious experiences of mortality because Heavenly Father desires that all his children should be reared in a strong gospel environment. Our service to family and ward members again benefits us in the future stages of existence because we will be doing similar work with later generations of spiritual offspring while we live as resurrected beings in the celestial realm.

Earth Life Is a Preparatory School—Not a Playground

As discussed previously, earth life is a marvelous opportunity to learn knowledge, grow with our physical body, and give and share as we serve others. As such, mortality serves as a school preparing us for the style and status of life that follows. However, too many of God's children either do not know or have forgotten why they are here, and they treat mortality as a time for personal gratification rather than as an opportunity for learning and training. They want to be in the playgrounds of the world enjoying the excitement and pleasures of the body with little thought for the long-range effects of their attitudes and behavior.

Mortal life is more than a learning period of our existence, it also serves as a probationary period—a time for us to prepare to meet God and to live thereafter in his presence. (See Alma 12:24; 34:32; 42:4, 10.) Thus, as in any preparatory school, if the student does not take advantage of the schooling, future opportunities are restricted. We are tested in mortality to show our obedience to God's directions and commandments in order to demonstrate whether we are ready for further light, truth, and service in his celestial realms. (See Rev. 3:21; D&C 98:14-15; 124:55; 136:31; Abr. 3:25-26.) The tests of earth life come to us through varied challenges and opportunities, trying us in the financial, physical, emotional, social, mental, moral, and spiritual dimensions of our existence. (See 2 Tim. 3:12; 1 Pet. 1:7; Rom. 5:3-5; D&C 101:2-4; 121:1.)

Note that God will give us spiritual direction and help us beyond our natural ability to bear the challenges and endure the sufferings so that we can learn and grow from life's experiences. (See 1 Cor. 10:13; Alma 13:28-30; 38:5.) Although we are separated from God's direct presence, we still have access to him through the promptings of the Spirit. Mortality becomes our opportunity to develop faith and to act in love. (See Gal. 2:20; 3:11; John 13:35; 14:15.) As we maintain faith in God through the temptations and trials of life, and as we seek for God's glory, our eternal character is strengthened. (See Rom. 8:28; D&C 58:2-4; 90:24; 121:7-8; 122:5-9.) God the Father and his Son, Jesus Christ, love us and realize that such challenges and trials provide a strengthening and purging effect in our lives. (See Titus 2:12; Ps. 65:3; Prov. 25:4-5.) As we taste the bitter experiences of life here on earth, with the help of God we can learn to relish the sweet blessings of our existence now and in the future. (See 2 Ne. 2:1-11; Moses 6:55; D&C 29:39.)

To summarize, earth life is a necessary step in the progression of God's children. One major purpose is to receive a physical body and to be tested in how we use this body. The whole person or soul of man is complete only when the intelligent spirit and the physical body are brought together in one being. (See D&C 88:15; Gen. 2:7.) A physical body enhances our learning capacity and is essential to our obtaining a fullness of joy. (See D&C 93:33.) Life with a physical body becomes a trial period in our existence, during which we should learn to properly use the natural bodily appetites and powers. We prove ourselves as we determine whether the spiritual and moral aspects of our nature will maintain control over the physical and selfish desires of the flesh. As we master ourselves and become more godlike, we can take better advantage of the full range of physical, social, and spiritual opportunities that earth life provides.

The experiences of earth life should expand beyond the personal learning experiences in the flesh. We should look beyond the small communities we live in to broader horizontal and vertical dimensions. Horizontally, we require involvement with other people on earth as we both gain and give: we gain a body, knowledge, assistance, talents, and much more from others; we give our lives, our time, and our talents as a blessing for others. Vertically, as we strengthen our relationship with Heavenly Father, we both receive and share blessings from God: children, gospel truths, covenants, revelation, saving ordinances, and joy. In all dimensions, we experience highs and lows as we journey through life's trials and triumphs, and through it all, we become more fully developed children of God.

In short, EARTH LIFE is a probationary state that separates us from God's presence and provides us with a physical body. Mortality provides an opportunity to discover the physical world, to serve others in new dimensions of unselfishness, and to increase our spiritual stature. Earth life gives us opportunities to learn truth and discipline, to experience life's tragedies and triumphs, to choose between good and evil, to develop faith and love, to receive heavenly gifts and ordinances, and to give time and service as we develop godlike attributes. Each new day should be anticipated as another opportunity to learn, serve, and become more refined. As our bodies become healthy tabernacles for our spirits, we perceive and experience life more fully, and we end up serving both ourselves and others. Through these processes, we become more like God as we draw ourselves and others closer to him. The ultimate measure of our creation and the fulfillment of our destiny are to achieve godliness through the grace of God, the power of Christ, and the sanctification of the Holy Ghost. (See Eph. 4:12-13.)

For further study, refer to the following entries:

TG: BD: EM: Body Adam Flesh and Blood Birth Man, Physical Creation of Creation, creation Accounts Mortality Earth

Eve Mankind

Mortality

Natural Man

Origin of Man Physical Body

Pupose of Earth Life

Second Estate

Suffering in the World

Trials

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Complacency—a Symptom of Laziness or a Sign of Pride DS, 1:111.
[^2] Making Personal Exceptions—Setting Oneself Up for a Fall Further insights and suggestions on developing spiritual health are in chapter 20.
