Victor L. Ludlow, Principles and Practices of the Restored Gospel ( 1992)

Chapter 12

Sin—Life's Spiritual Detours

Most travelers have been on trips when they want to get quickly to their destination. Looking at a map or at their surroundings, they see a shortcut that might save time. But soon after deviating off the main road, the traveling becomes more difficult and slow. The wise traveler soon recognizes the problem and immediately returns to the main road. Although he has lost some time, returning to the highway and continuing on it still provides the quickest way to his destination. However, some people do not appreciate the detour's difficulty or they stubbornly persist on the "shortcut," thinking the difficulty will soon end, even though the route seriously delays their travel. In fact, some shortcuts become so difficult and hazardous that a mechanical breakdown can stop the trip, or an accident in an isolated location can endanger the lives of the travelers.

Taking such a detour is very similar to experiences in life. Usually there are time-proven, well-traveled highways toward our goals in life. Instead, we look for shortcuts to health, wealth, social recognition, and success. We take diet pills instead of following a moderate diet and exercise program; we gamble or make risky investments instead of maintaining solid financial management; we buy the latest fashions or join an elite social club to enhance our community standing instead of consistently giving community service; and we try to run up the ladder of corporate success instead of continuing our education or providing steady, productive work. Almost always these shortcuts delay our progress, and many times they take us to places we really didn't want to go to. If we are wise, we will ignore such shortcuts and follow the trustworthy highways of life.

Likewise, one's spiritual life on this earth should be a journey—a return to Heavenly Father's realm. He wants his children to enjoy peace, love, and joy in his glorious presence. However, earth life offers enticements and apparent shortcuts disguised as excitement, power, or pleasure. These alternatives almost always lead toward sin as the traveler turns away from God's directions and commandments. Unfortunately, people usually do not recognize the sinful entanglements of this path until they have traveled some distance along it. How is it that anyone would even put him- or herself on such a detour of sin?

The Fall of Adam

Traditional Judaism and Christianity claim that our sinful behavior is simply the nature of humanity resulting from the fall of Adam. In contrast, the restored gospel provides an optimistic view of the Fall and, thereby, human nature. The ancient prophet Lehi best summarized this perspective: "Adam fell that men might be; and men are, that they might have joy." (2 Ne. 2:25.) Several important doctrines are implied in this brief passage and clarified in other scriptures. First, Adam's fall was not a result of chance or bad luck—it had a foreordained purpose: to populate the earth and spiritually develop humankind. Second, because of (and not in spite of) the Fall, people are able to experience joy both in this life and more fully in the life to come.

The New Testament confirms that the Fall was not an unfortunate accident by declaring that Jesus Christ was foreordained as our Redeemer: "Ye know that ye were not redeemed with corruptible things, as silver and gold . . . but with the precious blood of Christ, as of a lamb without blemish and without spot: who verily was foreordained before the foundation of the world." (1 Pet. 1:18-20.) Jesus would not have been set apart as Savior "before the foundation of the world" if the Fall had not also been an integral part of the plan of salvation from the beginning.

Opposition in All Things

The Fall was a prerequisite to mortal life because the opportunity for growth through choosing between a variety of opposites is the very foundation of our second estate. Lehi explained this principle beautifully: "For it must needs be, that there is an opposition in all things. If not so, . . . righteousness could not be brought to pass, neither wickedness, neither holiness nor misery, neither good nor bad." He went on to say that "all things must needs be a compound in one," or in other words, our existence "must needs remain as dead, having no life." (2 Ne. 2:11.)

Though Lehi was concerned primarily with moral and spiritual opposition, we find upon inspection that the physical world is based on opposites as well. For example, in physics, the atom is composed of a positively charged nucleus counterbalanced by negatively charged electrons. Among plants and animals, male and female elements must come together to propagate the species while competing with other life forms in an ecological niche. Opposition is also a natural part of the human world. The engineer designs a bridge based on balance and counterweight. The poet gives language its most potent form through the tension of conformity versus contradiction in meter, sound, and symbol.

Returning to spiritual things, the scriptures teach that to understand the purpose of life, we must experience the principle of opposition ourselves. Born into an already fallen world, we find that many opposing experiences await us: pleasure and pain, health and sickness, good and evil, happiness and misery. We experience the effects of opposing conflicts both as a result of others' actions (dating back to the Fall) and also through our own decisions. From our experiences, though, we gain the knowledge to make informed, responsible choices. In the Garden of Eden, there existed no consequences of prior actions. Thus, Adam and Eve were in a state of untutored innocence, unable to knowingly choose either good or evil. God himself walked and talked with our first parents, but they could not fully appreciate his goodness or understand why they should trust his word, since they knew nothing else. Therefore, God allowed Satan into the garden in opposition to his own glory.

God had warned Adam and Eve that if they ate of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil, they would die (first spiritually, being cast out of his presence, and later physically, returning to the dust from which they were created. [See Moses 4:25, 29.]) But having never been lied to before, Eve in her gullibility (for she was "beguiled") just as readily accepted Satan's side of the story: "Ye shall not surely die; for . . . your eyes shall be opened, and ye shall be as gods, knowing good and evil." (Moses 4:10-11.)

Since Adam and Eve were morally immature and a full explanation was beyond their comprehension, the Lord had warned them of the ill consequences of eating the forbidden fruit but not tried to explain everything. All parents of young children do the same thing. Children must grow up, though, and some things are best learned only through experience. Thus God added to his warning: "Nevertheless, thou mayest choose for thyself, for it is given unto thee." (Moses 3:17.) Learning through personal experience always means making some mistakes, but Satan tried to simplify the issue by lying about the pitfalls (spiritual and physical alienation) and emphasizing only the benefits (awareness and knowledge like the gods).

Because Eve partook of the fruit without fully understanding the commandment and its consequences, we say that she transgressed the law, not that she willfully sinned: "To him that knoweth to do good, and doeth it not, to him it is sin." (James 4:17; italics added.) Unlike Satan (who with full understanding openly rebelled in the presence of God), Eve lacked knowledge of good and evil and was not fully accountable. Even though Satan encouraged Adam and Eve to do what had to be done anyway to bring God's plan into place on earth, Satan's intent was selfish and evil. (See Moses 4:6.) Thus he was punished more severely than Adam and Eve.

To unknowingly break one of God's laws is a transgression, while to disobey knowledgeably and willfully is a sin. Unfortunately, just as innocent contact with fire still burns our flesh whether we know it will or not, our first parents had to face the consequences of their transgression. Thus, Adam and Eve were temporarily cut off from the presence of the Lord and had to experience the trials and tribulations of life, including physical death.

The Hard Lessons of Mortality

Although some negative consequences and risks entered the world with the Fall, more positive benefits and values began at the same time. President Joseph Fielding Smith taught that prior to the Fall, the immortal bodies of Adam and Eve were sustained by the Spirit, for they were in the presence of God. Once banished from his presence, blood became the life of their flesh, and they "were thus subject to the ills of the flesh which resulted in their gradual decline to old age and finally the separation of the spirit from the body." [^1] The introduction of death, however, was also the introduction of mortal life; Adam and Eve, now physically as well as spiritually prepared, could have children. Without the Fall, we could not be here. We would have remained innocent and inexperienced spirits in the presence of God, like our first parents in Eden. We would have been with him, but not like him, knowing and choosing "good from evil."

As the posterity of Adam and Eve, we follow a similar pattern of learning and accountability. As young children or "innocent" adults, we may make mistakes and even transgress some laws of God without knowing it. Like Adam and Eve after partaking of the fruit of the tree of knowledge of good and evil, we can become mature, knowledgeable, accountable children of God. In spite of our knowledge, however, we may still choose evil over good and commit sins even when we know they are wrong. Hopefully we will quickly learn the error of our ways and follow the path of our first parents.

Having gained knowledge by experience in the flesh through transgression and repentance, Adam and Eve were prepared again to receive the Spirit of the Lord and eventually return to his presence. Thus, when the Holy Ghost taught them about the redemption through Jesus Christ, Adam praised the Lord: "Blessed be the name of God, for because of my transgression my eyes are opened, and in this life I shall have joy, and again in the flesh I shall see God. And Eve, his wife, heard all these things and was glad, saying: Were it not for our transgression we never should have . . . known good and evil, and the joy of our redemption, and the eternal life which God giveth unto all the obedient." (Moses 5:10-11.) From this scripture, we see the blessings of the Fall given to Adam and Eve and ourselves: our "eyes are opened" to understanding good and evil; we have joy in this life in the hope of our redemption; we can dwell eternally with God again as resurrected beings; and we can have children in the flesh who can enjoy these same blessings. The potential of all these benefits far outweighs the risk—though very real—of failing to learn by our own experience and of remaining outside the presence of God. To help us avoid this possible failure, we need to recognize the difference between God's time-proven way of life and Satan's alluring shortcut of sin.

To stay on God's path, we should follow the Savior's pattern for spiritual success, seek after righteousness, establish testimonies of the truth, keep the commandments, and actively support and build Christ's kingdom. Though not perfect, we need to be aware of our personal spiritual deficiencies and try to overcome them, strengthening our spirituality while serving others and helping them to do the same. As long as we follow the Lord's example and continuously strive for spiritual growth and service, we will remain on the path of righteousness. If not, our spiritual commitment may weaken, and we may stray from the way leading to eternal life and wander onto the path of sin.

The Pattern of Personal Apostasy

The pattern of sin among individuals often follows a common trail marked by a few clear warning signals. By identifying these signs, we can avoid traveling the wrong path. Or, we can recognize when we have strayed onto a spiritual detour and quickly turn around before digressing any further. What, then, are these downward steps on the path of sin?

Sometimes people do not do anything really wrong; they just get spiritually lazy. They may commit small acts of omission by failing to do their home or visiting teaching or not diligently fulfilling their Church calling. Or, they may be going through the motions of Church activity, but their faith and testimony are not being strengthened. They are active in the Church, but not in the gospel. They are in danger of gradually slipping away as their faith and testimony weaken.

Nephi warns us of this first step toward apostasy: "Wo be unto him that is at ease in Zion! Wo be unto him that crieth: All is well!" (2 Ne. 28:24-25.) As soon as a righteous individual feels that "all is well," or "it is enough," he no longer feels the need to repent and progress, and he is in danger of falling into error. Being righteous does not imply freedom from sin, since "all have sinned, and come short of the glory of God." (Rom. 3:23.) Rather, being righteous suggests a willingness to repent and constantly correct or improve one's spiritual health, an attitude not found among the wicked.

This willingness to repent and conform to the truths we possess is also a necessary prerequisite to receiving more truth. Thus Nephi continues: "Wo be unto him that shall say: We have received the word of God, and we need no more of the word of God, for we have enough!" (2 Ne. 28:29.) Spirituality is a lot like physical health—it is something we need to consistently work on to improve and maintain. Just as we do not yet know the ultimate potential of the human body in such areas as running speed, lifting strength, or endurance, we also do not know the ultimate spiritual strength within us.

In spiritual terms, there is never such a thing as "having arrived." We are either progressing or regressing, adding or subtracting from the divine knowledge and power we possess. We can know the word of God only by doing it—by either growing in knowledge through obedience or weakening due to a lack of repentance or improvement. Nephi concludes the Lord's admonitions for eternal progression with both a promise and a warning: "Thus saith the Lord God: I will give unto the children of men line upon line, precept upon precept, here a little and there a little; and blessed are those who hearken unto my precepts . . . ; for unto him that receiveth I will give more; and from them that shall say, We have enough, from them shall be taken away even that which they have." (2 Ne. 28:30.)

Thus, the first step to personal apostasy begins with our attitude. If we are spiritually insensitive or think we are spiritually strong and we do not have to persist in righteousness anymore, then we are setting ourselves up to lose the spiritual health which we now enjoy. [^2] Complacency, the lack of zeal for spiritual things, is the warning signal that the first step has been taken. Theologians may argue whether this attitude of complacency is just a simple symptom of religious laziness or a subtle sign of spiritual pride, but the results remain the same—a person's spiritual growth stops.

With personal apostasy, we begin to weaken in our spiritual commitment. This may begin very subtly, as our religious duties and observances lose priority in our lives. It might begin with acts of omission as we consistently or deliberately neglect our Church calling, personal prayer, or gospel study. For example, schooling, work, or even family may be used as an excuse for not attending church on Sunday. Or, acts of commission may result in disobeying some of the commandments. A teenager might become too intimate during a date. A worker could "borrow" something from the job site. In an important social setting, an individual might go against Church and personal standards and drink an alcoholic beverage. The list of possibilities continues, but somewhere the person takes a spiritual detour by making an exception for him- or herself in one area of spiritual behavior. In short, this exception declares that the person has enough religion and needs no more, although the individual would never directly state such a blasphemy.

Granted, a variety of situations might lead to this "first sin." The person may have become neglectful or distracted by other priorities. The individual may have acted in ignorance or with spontaneous foolishness. He or she may have been falsely persuaded or unduly influenced by someone else. On the other hand, the individual may have thought over, discussed, and deliberately entered this course of action. In any case, one has deviated from the path of righteousness to the shortcut of sin. The clear warning signal of this detour is the loss of the companionship of the Holy Ghost. In essence, the person has stepped from light toward darkness, and his or her spiritual strength begins to weaken. To counteract this step, the person must remain spiritually sensitive and constantly strive to stay on the path of righteousness. Otherwise, persistent sin may develop.

Soon the exceptions made under unusual circumstances become the rule, and behavior that was once sporadic becomes periodic and then habitual. Not only does one lose the Holy Spirit as a constant companion, but the person rejects the promptings of a conscience calling one to repentance. Along with the warning sign of habitual disregard for one commandment, another danger signal often accompanies this third step—other commandments are broken as a pattern of disobedience is gradually established.

This step is sometimes difficult to recognize, either by the person or others. It takes a while to realize that the few, earlier, "justifiable" exceptions have now become the norm of one's behavior. Even family members, home teachers, or ecclesiastical leaders might not perceive that someone in their sphere of influence has slipped into a pattern of disobedience. This is when daily prayer, weekly sacrament covenant renewal, monthly fasting, and periodic interviews with priesthood leaders should help Church members evaluate their faithfulness and stop any problems before they become difficult habits to break.

Satan, on the other hand, tries to influence us toward entrenched wickedness. He will try to weaken us through our pride, selfishness, sensualness, and fear. Our pride might allow us to feel neglected or to take offense at others in the Church who make mistakes affecting us or our family members. Our selfishness may cause us to feel we are not benefiting enough from our Church association, especially in return for all the sacrifices we are asked to make. Our sensualness can entrap us in habits of drug abuse, inappropriate sexuality, or other weaknesses of the flesh. Our fear could lessen our tolerance against peer pressure or the mocking persecution of the world and even result in scorn for those striving to live righteous, pure lives. We need to recognize our vulnerability in these areas and quickly strengthen our spirituality before we slide into the next step of apostasy.

Having changed the patterns of our behavior for the worse, the fourth step is to free ourselves from guilt by justifying our behavior. The easiest way to do this is to blame someone else: thus, we might blame our parents for not rearing us properly, or we find offense with another Church member or complain of a "personality conflict" with the ward bishop or other Church leaders. This step is particularly dangerous because not only is the person moving further off the path of righteousness, but it also seems he or she does not want to return to it.

Former active members who have traveled some distance on the detour of sin almost always blame another person for their own dissatisfaction with the Church. Failure to pay tithing, or to come to church, or to keep some other commandment is usually linked to some event or altercation with a Church member. Furthermore, when this excuse is waved like a banner for all to see, we can be sure this person is proceeding further down the road to apostasy. This step of justification is often accompanied with a weakening knowledge of what is right and wrong. Some irrational behavior may also be exhibited. Either the person may encourage others in his family or circle of influence to disregard the commandments, or he or she may become very critical and judgmental of any who deviate even slightly from expected religious behavior. In any case, the responsibility for one's own behavior is cast upon or shared with other people.

Ironically, these same "other people" are often the ones who still have the greatest opportunity to help the sinful person turn his or her life around. They must remain patient and loving, without taking personal offense themselves, as they try to bridge the gaps growing between the sinful individual and themselves and also between the sinner and God. Tragically, at this critical stage, some people will turn against those who can help the most.

Once people blame their own transgressions on someone else, the next logical step is to belittle others as they transfer their dissatisfaction of the Church and the gospel as a whole. This fifth step reflects universal human nature: we try to bring others down to our own level when we do not live up to expected standards. Not bold enough to blame God for personal spiritual weaknesses, and not daring to chastise God, sinful people who have apostatized naturally turn against his representatives on the earth. So, they criticize Church leaders, considering their real or imagined weaknesses as legitimate reasons to deny their priesthood authority. They also dispute the revealed doctrines because they no longer live them. If such individuals look into the scriptures, they find fault with the teachings because of supposed awkwardness or ambiguity in the style of writing, irrelevancy, or some other historical or literary quirk. We are signaled that people have taken this step when their faith in God and his restored gospel is severely weakened and when they become hypercritical.

The obvious solution at this step is to humbly recognize God's power and to turn to his servants and the scriptures for counsel; otherwise, as Nephi warned: "Wo be unto him that hearkeneth unto the precepts of men, and denieth the power of God!" (2 Ne. 28:26.) When people reach this step, they are under the influence of those outside God's realm. Indeed, they are beginning to turn against God, his teachings, and his representatives.

After denying the fundamental authority of Church leaders and the power of God in the Church, the sixth step to apostasy is complete withdrawal from the Church and inactivity. Personal behavior and attitude make the individual feel awkward associating with other Latter-day Saints. Some apostates simply disassociate themselves from any kind of religion, while others seek out religions that may promise as much or more than the restored gospel but make fewer demands on their behavior.

Whether Church disciplinary action is sought or given, the inactive person feels alienated from the Church. At this stage, family and ward members also recognize the obvious signs that the person is outside the circle of Church association. Concerted efforts of fellowship and counseling are necessary to help the individual turn his or her life around. Fellowshipping must be undertaken with pure motives. A wave of disproportionate friendliness by the masses upon recognition of a person's inactivity will never substitute for the consistent encouragement of close friends. Such a turnabout, though very difficult, is not impossible.

By this stage, the critical attitude is sometimes accompanied with bitterness and frustration. Like the intense bitterness that sometimes develops between family members and former friends, backbiting, name-calling, slander, and open argumentation sometimes develop. Most often, the root of the bitterness is buried by this external anger. Long periods of hatred can fester unless the original source of antagonism is identified and resolved. With apostasy, the true root (usually sin) is often covered by murmuring against authorities, insinuations, and doctrinal denials; failure to get to this root can lead to years of misery.

The final stage of personal apostasy is reached when the person gives up and becomes despondent about ever finding peace and fellowship in the Church. This bitter despondency may turn to cynical attacks against the Church or its members, including relatives and former close friends. It is plain to see how accurately Nephi describes Satan's influence on the primrose pathway to apostasy: "Others will he pacify, and lull them away into carnal security, . . . and [he] leadeth them away carefully down to hell. And behold, others he flattereth away, and telleth them there is no hell; and he saith unto them: I am no devil, for there is none—and thus he whispereth in their ears, until he grasps them with his awful chains." (2 Ne. 28:21-22.) Not only will some people give themselves over to Satan's influence, but they may also go one step further and actively persecute and fight against the Church. In other words, they may leave the Church, but they cannot leave it alone.

How easy it is for even faithful followers of Christ to slip from making an occasional exception to the rule to habitual sinful behavior, from activity to inactivity within the Church, from affirming to rejecting authority, from obeying to disobeying the commandments, from maintaining a testimony to denying the faith, and from righteousness to wickedness. The final sad result is that one ends up at the opposite dimension from spirituality. The person has completely traversed the spiritual spectrum from light to darkness, from joy to misery.

Turning Back

To reclaim someone from apostasy is difficult, for he or she must go beyond blaming someone else for personal disaffection and instead admit individual errors and sins. If an active member can establish a relationship of trust, then love and a good example—rather than judgments and accusations—can help the inactive or less-active member admit his or her mistakes and regain the desire to have the gospel blessings. Somewhere and somehow, though, a person must recognize one's own spiritual condition and then develop the desire to turn back toward God and his people. Simply stated, one needs to repent—to return to the path from which one has detoured. [^3]

The climb back is often a reversal of the seven steps of apostasy: (7) finding a glimmer of hope for changing attitude and behavior; (6) seeking fellowship with the Saints; (5) criticizing one's own actions instead of others' misdeeds; (4) finding reasons for obedience; (3) keeping all the commandments; and (2) striving to overcome weaknesses while (1) increasing spirituality and service. Once back on the path of righteousness, the person continues on it, led by the promptings of the Spirit and one's conscience.

Before leaving the topic of sin and apostasy, it will be helpful to discuss both the role of our conscience as the enticements of sin are presented to us and also the possible dangers and values in our struggle against wickedness.

Our Conscience Helps Us Recognize Sin

Every child of God is born into the world freely endowed with the light of Christ as a gift. (See D&C 84:45-48.) By virtue of this endowment, people intuitively know right from wrong and are encouraged to do what is right. (See Moro. 7:16.) This gift, which enlightens the mind and prompts righteousness, is called conscience. "Conscience" literally means "knowing together," a process where our awareness corresponds with what God wants us to know. It is an inborn sense of right and wrong even in the absence of all the facts, an instinctive feeling to do right and to be good. It is a help toward appropriate thoughts, words, and actions.

Every person's conscience is pure and clean at birth. (See D&C 93:38.) However, after an individual arrives at an age of accountability (when he becomes mature and knowledgeable enough to bear responsibility for his choices), his conscience can be clouded by sin or strengthened by righteousness. Willful disobedience scars and weakens the conscience. (See 1 Tim. 4:2; 1 Cor. 8:7; Titus 1:15.) Spiritual integrity leads to the companionship of the Holy Ghost. (See Rom. 9:1.)

Wickedness invariably leads to a suppression of conscience, until a person could lose all influence of the Lord's Spirit. (See 2 Ne. 26:11; Ether 2:15.) However, a full awareness of sin will smite a person when in the presence of the Lord or his power. (See Alma 12:1; 29:5; 42:18.) Ideally, sinful people will recognize their spiritual shortages and repent so they can regain the Spirit that they enjoyed in their innocence. (See D&C 1:32-34.) Thus, even though a person has been evil, a change of attitude and behavior accompanied by a remission of sins can lead to a restoration of peace and conscience. (See Heb. 9:14; Mosiah 4:3.)

The Dangers of Confrontations with Sin

Throughout mortality, all of us succumb, at least temporarily, to some sin or another. We cannot assume that we or anyone else will repent, although turning back is possible at any of the stages of personal apostasy discussed earlier. Therefore, we should not step intentionally onto the path of sin while planning to repent later. There are many dangers surrounding the path into sin, any one of which may restrict us from turning back to God and thus result in a spiritual death for us. These dangers include destructive friends, behaviors, and attitudes.

As individuals separate themselves from religious, believing people, they tend to choose new friends whose life-styles and behavior reinforce a pattern of disobedience to God's commandments. A teenager who breaks the Word of Wisdom will often "hang out" with other kids with the same habits. A sexually promiscuous man may feel uncomfortable with other Church members and will seek friends with lower standards. The new associates make returning to a religious way of life more difficult.

Once we step onto the path of sin, becoming entrenched is easy because one type of improper or destructive behavior often leads to another. For example, we might not just do something bad, but we may also stop doing good. As we do acts of commission, such as being dishonest or immoral, we might also commit sins of omission, such as not praying or not going to church. President Spencer W. Kimball taught that "the effect of both types of sin can be serious, not only intrinsically but because each type leads naturally to and reinforces the other." He gave an example of an act of commission (fishing on Sunday) that involves an act of omission (neglecting sacrament meeting attendance). Or conversely, "simple non-attendance can, over a period, condition a person to spend Sunday in non-Sabbath pursuits like fishing. Either way Satan wins." [^4] As we get entangled in more and more types of spiritually destructive behavior, we are less likely to establish good religious habits.

Whenever we observe problems and catastrophes, it becomes easier to falsely condemn ourselves or to wrongly judge others. Like the friends of Job, we may assume that all disasters and illnesses are the result of wickedness. When the natural tragedies of life hit us or others, we may say, "It serves us (or them) right, and this must be a punishment from God." Such an attitude may bring fear into our lives, but it is not the best attitude to effectively motivate the healthy repentance process. Indeed, we may feel we are hopelessly lost because we fear God's judgments without any hope of redemption.

Other subtle and long-term dangers of sinful behavior exist, all leading to the same result—we give up on ourselves and remain enmeshed in wickedness. We are witnessing the destructive results of sin when our attitudes or actions draw us toward bad and away from good, and it becomes increasingly difficult to leave this path. As we persist in sin, these dangers increase and become more powerful.

Some Values of Confrontations with Sin

At times we can learn more from sin than the error of our ways. We learn that the more serious consequences of our improper choices are internal and spiritual rather than outward and physical. God may choose to send tragedies upon us as punishment, but usually the most serious punishment results from the loss of his guidance. But what else can we learn from the sinful behavior of others and ourselves?

As we travel the paths of wickedness, we learn the importance of outside influences, especially friends. Although we have independent spirits, associates and family members definitely affect our attitudes and behavior. Sometimes disturbing experiences with some people teach us about the negative direction our association is taking us. Developing a sense of discernment, we then learn to identify our true and valuable friends—those who uplift and edify us and whose companionship we will cherish throughout eternity. If a few negative experiences encourage us to develop this gift of discernment, then our future, long-term social relationships will be much stronger and more worthwhile.

As we observe our patterns of behavior and areas of weakness, we gain valuable tools that can help us overcome our faults. All of us have weaknesses in one area or another. Indeed, God gives us some weaknesses to humble us and to teach us how to overcome weak things. (See Ether 12:27, 35-41; D&C 50:16.) The scriptures teach us that with faith and endurance, we can turn our weaknesses into strengths. (See 2 Cor. 12:9-10.) With the Lord's help, we can change potential stumbling stones of trials and temptations into stepping stones of spiritual growth. As we learn to overcome, we prepare ourselves to receive God's glory and his eternal blessings. (See Abr. 3:25; D&C 136:31.)

Ironically, it is sometimes in darkness that we finally see ourselves as we really are. Through conflict, we sometimes get to know ourselves and our true nature. As we improve our behavior and come out of darkness, we recognize our capacity to change and appreciate the kind of person we want to become. We learn that we are children of God, drawing nearer to him and increasing our capacity to help others do the same. As we fight and conquer sin, we feel the strength and help we can receive from others, especially God. We witness his love and spiritual powers, along with the value of good, persistent friends. We sense the unity that should prevail in Christ's church on earth and that will permeate God's celestial realm. Sometimes a taste of the bitterness of Satan's hell not only helps us appreciate the sweetness of God's kingdom, but also gives us incentive to help bring it about on earth.

A wise traveler does not have to take the shortcut to realize the advantages of driving on the highway. Likewise, the wise, sensitive person does not have to taste sin to know its bitterness. Observation of others and empathy for their spiritual trials can help us avoid the pitfalls of wickedness. Whatever the taste or experience we may have had with sin and its results, if we have learned to turn back from them and avoid them, then we have gained from our exposure to the world of wickedness. Even better, if we have gained spiritual strength and commitment to build God's kingdom, then others may also benefit from our learning.

In conclusion, SIN develops when we pervert truth and goodness by disobeying God's commandments, rationalizing our wickedness, criticizing God's works and servants, then becoming despondent, even antagonistic. The sooner we learn the error of a sinful detour and turn back toward God, the sooner we gain spiritual strength through overcoming temptation, and we can then quickly progress on God's way of righteousness.

For further study, refer to the following entries:

TG: BD: EM: Apostasy of Individuals Devil Apostasy Darkness, Spiritual Fall of Adam Apostate Disobedience, Disobey Lucifer Buffetings of Satan Evil Devils

Rebellion, Rebel Fall of Adam Sin Opposition Transgress, Transgression Sin

Wickedness, Wicked Spiritual Death

Temptation

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Every law has both a punishment and a blessing attached to it. 2. Disobedience to law requires a punishment that results in misery. 3. Obedience to law provides a blessing that results in joy. 4. Without law there can be neither punishment nor blessing, neither sorrow nor happiness—only innocence. 5. Thus joy can exist only where the possibility of misery also exists. 6. In order to exercise agency, we must have freedom of choice; in a world without law, no choices between right and wrong could exist, and thus our freedom to choose and to exercise our agency would be nonfunctional. (See also Alma 12:31-32; 42:17-25.) Every law has both a punishment and a blessing attached to it. 2. Whenever the law is transgressed, a punishment must be inflicted. 3. Whenever a law is obeyed, a reward must be given. MD, 571.
[^2] See TG, Resurrection. Further details about the resurrection and our final judgement will be presented in chapter 15.
[^3] See EM, "Resurrection," 3:1222-23.
[^4] TPJS, 368.
