Victor L. Ludlow, Principles and Practices of the Restored Gospel ( 1992)

Chapter 13

Life's Perfect Way through Christ's Atonement

When embarking on a new and difficult task, we benefit greatly from having a guide or mentor. For example, in learning how to rock-climb, an experienced guide is a must. The guide teaches the principles of climbing before we begin the ascent; he leads the way while scaling the cliff, identifying the best handholds and footholds; additionally, he is capable of rescuing us in case of an accident. In short, a strong, qualified guide makes it possible to safely traverse treacherous terrain, resulting in an exciting and safe experience.

In a similar fashion, to whom do we turn when we need special help, such as after suffering an accident, when struggling with debt, while working through intense family problems? Ideally, we want to consult a wise, loving parent or a caring, capable older sibling or relative. Similarly, Jesus of Nazareth serves as our experienced guide and help through mortality. He has taught us the truths of salvation and lived perfectly, showing us the safest path through life. Finally, through his atonement, he has the power to rescue us. Thus, Jesus Christ is our teacher, role model, and redeemer.

Unfortunately, we do not always heed the Redeemer's gospel teachings or follow his perfect example. Since we all have sinned, we must turn to him, who can not only show us the way out of bondage, but also deliver us unto freedom. We must rely on our divine guide, Jesus Christ.

As discussed in chapters three and nine, Jesus (also known as Jehovah or Yahweh) attained spiritual perfection and power in premortality, thus qualifying and enabling him to act in his Father's name to create this world and to administer Elohim's plan of salvation. To carry out that plan, Jehovah himself came to earth to show all mankind the way back to our Heavenly Father's presence. He was born of a mortal woman so that he could experience life as a man and achieve his own salvation in the flesh. But the Messiah was also the only person on this earth to be physically born of the Immortal Father, empowering him both to lead a perfect life and also to ransom himself for the salvation of imperfect human beings.

By looking at some of Christ's own statements in the New Testament, we can grasp the essential reasons why Jesus is our Savior. He particularly made a variety of bold declarations about himself as recorded in the gospel account of John. Reflecting various dimensions of his life and mission, these pronouncements are all prefaced with "I AM." This emphatic form of speech is unusual in Greek, since the personal subject of the verb or the pronoun I is not normally expressed. However, this pattern is used in the Greek translation of the Old Testament, particularly when rendering words spoken by God. The phrase "I AM" echoes back to earlier Israelite history when Moses asked the name of the God who had sent him as a prophet to Israel; the Lord told him to say that "I AM hath sent me unto you." (Ex. 3:14.) This compares with modern prophetic references recorded in the Doctrine and Covenants to the "Great I AM," even Jesus Christ. (See D&C 29:1; 38:1; 39:1.)

Nine "I AM" declarations recorded by John provide a helpful outline and comprehensive foundation for our discussion about Jesus and why he is our Savior. The first four use temporal objects and physical terms (bread, light, door, shepherd) to symbolize various divine roles. As Elder McConkie stated: "Where ideas and attributes are concerned Deity is the embodiment and incarnation of them. Where inanimate objects are chosen as his names, they are chosen to teach that as they perform a certain temporal function, so the Lord of heaven performs a similar spiritual function which is symbolized by the temporal." [^1]

I AM the Bread of Life: Jesus as the Common Man

Jesus says he is the "bread of life," using an object of food to demonstrate that just as bread is a necessary staple of life for mortal beings, his life provides essential spiritual sustenance. (See John 6:35, 41, 48, 51.) As indicated in the sacrament prayers, the bread represents his body (see D&C 20:77), which went through physical life in humble circumstances. Like the bread of the earth, the body is a natural, physical object of the soil. Christ's body experienced the common encounters faced by humans, but unlike all other people of this earth who sin in the flesh, Jesus mastered all things material and spiritual in his physical tabernacle.

Simply to gain a mortal body, Jesus might have been born in any number of different physical, social, and economic circumstances. However, he came not just to receive a body, but to experience life in the flesh just like the ordinary masses. Thus, the extreme lowly circumstances of his life and death are no mere coincidence. Without even considering the suffering of the Atonement, the mortal life of Jesus was undoubtedly more difficult than any of ours and yet similar to each of them.

Examples of his common circumstances are found throughout his life. Jesus was not born in a hospital or even at home. His homeless birth was among livestock in a stable. His first few years were spent in humble conditions, first in Bethlehem and then with his refugee family in Egypt. He was not raised in upper-class high society but spent his youth as the stepson of a small-town carpenter in an unprogressive area of a minor Roman province. He received no formal education from any of the renowned Roman, Greek, or Jewish academies of the time, but gained a simple education from the local synagogue and learned the carpentry trade from his stepfather, Joseph. As for his physical appearance, Jesus was not exceptionally striking or handsome. (See Isa. 53:2.) At age thirty, he left his simple trade to become a homeless, itinerant preacher. Jesus endured many types of deprivation during his lifetime: hunger, thirst, fatigue, social ostracism, and public ridicule. He finally was executed as a common criminal and buried in a borrowed tomb. It is actually quite an understatement, then, to say that Jesus received no special privileges on earth, even as the Son of God.

Like the simple bread of the earth, which provides physical life, Jesus lived a humble earth life for a noble spiritual purpose, as recorded by Alma: "He shall go forth, suffering pains and afflictions and temptations of every kind; and this that the word might be fulfilled which saith he will take upon him the pains and the sicknesses of his people. And he will take upon him death . . . and he will take upon him their infirmities, that his bowels may be filled with mercy, according to the flesh, that he may know according to the flesh how to succor his people according to their infirmities." (Alma 7:11-12.) Jesus lived his life and died his death so that when we come to him with our mortal sufferings, he truly knows how we feel.

I AM the Light of the World: Jesus Overcomes Evil

The mission of Jesus was not, of course, just to empathize with our mortal miseries. Many people who have lived and died in poor circumstances could do the same. Christ can enlighten us on how we can overcome not merely the physical hardships, but also the moral and spiritual infirmities of the flesh. We need to know how to come out of the darkness of sin into the light of righteous living. Jesus called himself the "light of the world" and promised that his followers could walk a lighted path through life. (See John 8:12; 9:5.)

The youthful and early adult years of Jesus, the son of Mary, served as basic training for what he was to endure and overcome as the Son of God. His superhuman trials began with forty days in the wilderness prior to the formal beginning of his ministry. Preparing himself with a self-imposed, divinely inspired fast, Jesus squarely faced and conquered the three primary temptations of Satan: abuse of physical appetites, misuse of power, and lust for worldly wealth and glory.

The devil first tempted the physically weakened Christ to make a show of his divine power by turning stones into bread. Then, Satan asked for proof that angelic hosts would support the Son of God in times of danger. Finally, the tempter offered the Lord dominion over the kingdoms and riches of the world. (See Matt. 4:1-11.) The Joseph Smith translation of Matthew's account makes it plain that these were not just token challenges, but very real temptations for the Savior: "When he had fasted forty days and forty nights, and had communed with God, he was afterwards an hungered, and was left to be tempted of the devil." (Matt. 4:2, JST; italics added.) Though first strengthened by the Father, Christ was then left to resist the evils of the mortal world of which he was a part. When it was all over, Jesus needed more than bread and water to revive himself physically—"angels came and ministered unto him" as well. (Matt. 4:11.)

Shortly thereafter, Jesus began his public ministry and brought the light of his gospel teachings to the public. As the "light of the world," the example of his triumph over temptation encourages us to overcome the influences of the evil one. Jesus made it clear that he was the example that all should follow in life. When teaching the Nephites upon the American continent, he declared: "I have set an example for you. . . . I am the light which ye shall hold up—that which ye have seen me do." (3 Ne. 18:16, 24.) Later, Christ asked them: "Therefore, what manner of men ought ye to be? Verily I say unto you, even as I am." (3 Ne. 27:27.)

I AM the Door of the Sheepfold: Jesus Judges Obedience

In a short allegory, Jesus compared himself to the door of the sheepfold. (See John 10:7-9.) In Judea, the sheepfold was a cave, sheltered overhang, or four-sided structure with only one entranceway. At eventide, the shepherd would stand in the gateway of the sheep pen and check each sheep for bruises or cuts as it entered. Only by walking past the shepherd could the sheep enter. Thus, the shepherd literally became the door; there was no other way for the sheep to enter the fold. The shepherd was the evaluator; the door was the way. Through Christ alone are healing salvation and heavenly refuge obtained. Just as baptism is the gateway to eternal life, no one comes to the Father except they pass the judgments of the keeper of the gate, the Son of God. Jesus will allow past him only those who know his voice—his disciples.

The word disciple has the same root as discipline, meaning one who has learned or an obedient pupil. The source of Jesus' learning was Heavenly Father, and he had disciplined himself to obey all that the Father asked him to do and to become all that Elohim wanted him to be. As Christ's disciples, he expects us to do and become the same.

Jesus also set an example by being obedient to the covenants of the gospel. He was without sin, yet at the beginning of his ministry he went unto John the Baptist to be baptized. Matthew records that Jesus said he was baptized to fulfill all righteousness. (See Matt. 3:15.) The Book of Mormon adds that Christ "humbleth himself before the Father, and witnesseth unto the Father that he would be obedient unto him in keeping his commandments. . . . Again, it showeth unto the children of men the straitness of the path, and the narrowness of the gate, by which they should enter, he having set the example before them." (2 Ne. 31:7, 9.) As the door of the sheepfold, Jesus sets the standard by which his disciples will be measured. Christ's life clearly illustrated the significance and importance of obedience and exemplary living.

I AM the Good Shepherd: The Administrator of God's Covenants

In Old Testament and ancient Near Eastern tradition, the shepherd symbolized a royal caretaker of God's children on earth. The Lord himself is the "Shepherd of Israel." (Ps. 23:1; 80:1; Isa. 40:10-11; Ezek. 34:11-16, 23.) The shepherds had great responsibility and accountability. Thus, even worse than thieves were the false shepherds who led the flocks astray or did not protect them. (See Isa. 56:9-12.) God promised to send Israel the true shepherd. (See Ezek. 34:23.)

Heavenly Father appointed Jesus as the Good Shepherd because he knew that Jesus would faithfully tend God's precious sheep. Indeed, the shepherd would be willing to lay down his life for the sheep. (See John 10:11-18.) Also, as Jesus told the Nephites, his responsibility as a shepherd extended beyond his death and resurrection to teaching and ministering to the scattered remnants of Israel. (See 3 Ne. 15:11—16:3.) As the Good Shepherd, Christ works diligently, teaching his sheep to recognize his voice. Those belonging to Christ's flock should hear his voice and respond to his call. (See 3 Ne. 16:5, 11-12; 20:10-14.) His purpose is to fulfill the covenant promises made to the ancient patriarchs.

Unfortunately, even sheep of the best shepherd's flock wander off occasionally. However, Jesus has assured us that even if only one sheep is lost, he will go in search of it. When he finds that lost sheep, he rejoices greatly. (See Matt. 18:1-13.) As members of his flock, we can be assured that the Good Shepherd loves and serves us on an individual basis. When we stray in life, he will search for us, calling our name and reaching out a loving arm to bring us back into the fold.

Being the Good Shepherd and the appointed caretaker of God's children on earth, Christ is the administrator of God's covenants. He also tends the flock as he gathers the sheep from the four quarters of the earth, brings them the fullness of his gospel, and stewards them during the Millennium. (See 3 Ne. 16:5, 10; D&C 133:25.) Being a true and good shepherd requires more than just knowing the sheep of the fold; it also involves nourishing and caring for them. Jesus is the exemplary shepherd.

I AM the Resurrection: Jesus Guarantees Our Immortality

Moving from temporal symbols to eternal dimensions, John records Christ's declaration, "I AM the resurrection." (John 11:25; emphasis added.) Resurrection is a capstone of Christ's gospel because it contains the promise of living forever with an immortal body. Because of Jesus and his sacrifice, we all are assured of immortality, and if we live in a way conducive to his will, we can live eternally with him and the Father.

According to Webster, the word resurrect can be defined as, "to bring to view, attention, or use again." Because of Christ, we receive hope that immortality seems obtainable, and our attention is directed toward having the best eternal use of our renewed bodies. Shortly before bringing Lazarus back from death, and only a few weeks before his own death, Jesus promised that he was the source of regeneration and life. (See John 11:25.) This is an unconditional, universal promise that guarantees all people a release from physical death because eventually everyone's body and spirit will be reunited through the resurrection. [^2] While most mortals fear death, Jesus' promise of universal resurrection supplants fear with peace and hope.

As the firstfruits of the resurrection, Jesus proved the reality of this miracle by appearing to many groups of people throughout the world during the forty days after that first Easter Sunday. When he appeared to his disciples in Judea and Galilee, he ate with them and allowed them to touch him. Thus they finally understood the reality of the resurrection. During these same weeks, Jesus appeared on the American continent where he was seen and touched by great multitudes. The reality of the gift of resurrection was further reinforced as many others also arose from the grave with regenerated bodies. (See Matt. 27:52; 3 Ne. 23:9-10.) Christ's own resurrection had begun the fulfillment of his promise of universal resurrection. [^3]

Later, ancient witnesses such as Paul, Mormon, and Moroni also saw the resurrected Christ. In modern times, Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery have seen the resurrected Lord. Other resurrected beings have also appeared in this dispensation, including John the Baptist, Peter, and Moroni. Among his visions of the resurrection, the Prophet Joseph Smith records that when the spirits of people are joined with immortal physical bodies, "the same glorious spirit gives them the likeness of glory and bloom. . . . No man can describe it to you—no man can write it." [^4] Because of the appearance of Christ and other resurrected beings in ancient and modern times, we know that our Redeemer lives and that we can also obtain a renewed body. This knowledge of Jesus' gift to all brings new hope and understanding into our journey through life.

I AM the Truth: Jesus Teaches the Perfect Doctrine

In John 14, Jesus teaches his apostles on the night before his death about his imminent departure. He explains that he is leaving them but that they should not be troubled, for he is preparing a place for them. In verse four, he states, "Whither I go ye know, and the way ye know." Thomas, perhaps trying to understand this statement in a literal way, asks, "Lord, we know not whither thou goest; and how can we know the way?" (V. 5.) Jesus responds by saying, "I am the way, the truth, and the life: no man cometh unto the Father, but by me." (V. 6.)

What does Jesus' response mean? The key is found in the central element: "I am the truth." Jesus did not teach any falsehoods. He testified concerning the truth of God's existence and love. He taught truth concerning how we may come back into God's presence. His doctrine was pure. Matthew records that "the people were astonished at his doctrine: for he taught as one having authority, and not as the scribes." (Matt. 7:28-29.) Luke adds that "his word was with power." (Luke 4:32.) The people sensed that Jesus was not teaching his own ideas or interpretations—they could tell through his manner and the spiritual power with which he taught that he spoke the truths of God. Jesus himself declared, "My doctrine is not mine, but his that sent me." (John 7:16.) Jesus is thus the truth—his doctrine is the pure doctrine of the Father, untainted by the philosophies of men. We must know the truth as he taught and lived it.

Once we accept the truth, the Lord promises us that the truth shall make us free. (See John 8:32.) In view of the Savior's statement, "I am the truth," the meaning becomes clear. Freedom from the bonds of sin can come only through the doctrine of repentance and the power of Christ's atonement. Bruce R. McConkie also explains that the truth shall make us "free from the damning power of false doctrine; free from the bondage of appetite and lust; free from the shackles of sin; free from every evil and corrupt influence and from every restraining and curtailing power; free to go on to the unlimited freedom enjoyed in its fulness only by exalted beings." [^5] If we accept Christ and his gospel as truth, we will enjoy the priceless gift of freedom.

I AM the Way: Jesus Shows the Perfect Example

In addition to correct belief, Jesus teaches us correct practice. In religious studies, the technical term for "correct belief" is orthodoxy, and the term for "correct practice" is orthopraxy. Some religions, such as some modern Protestant movements, emphasize correct belief (orthodoxy) at the expense of practice. Other religions, such as Islam, stress correct practice (orthopraxy) without major emphasis upon beliefs. When Jesus said he was the way and the truth, he was teaching that both orthopraxy and orthodoxy are necessary to enter into God's kingdom.

After Jesus triumphed over Satan's three major temptations in their initial encounter, the Lord embarked upon his ministry to teach us how to do the same. For centuries prior to Christ, the wisest of the pagan philosophers instructed men how to judiciously use power and wealth to reward friends and punish enemies—the same tactics Satan uses. Jesus corrected such worldly wisdom with simple, revolutionary doctrines that comprise the core of his message on how to live.

First, Jesus taught that we should be the masters of our whole bodies and that we should control not only the appetites of the flesh, but also the thoughts of the heart. (See Matt. 5:27-30.) In addition, he instructed that emotions and feelings can be controlled and directed to positive, edifying means of expression. (See Matt. 5:21-26, 38-42.) He also taught both the power and importance of fasting and the weaknesses of gluttony and excess. (See Mark 9:29; Matt. 11:19; 23:25.) If we trust in the Lord and truly seek his kingdom, he will provide the food and clothing we need to sustain us and our families. (See Matt. 6:31-33.)

Second, Jesus was not distracted—as many honorable Gentiles were—with how one can quickly earn and spend money. Instead, he told his disciples not to place their priority upon worldly treasure, "for your heavenly Father knoweth that ye have need of all these things. But seek ye first the kingdom of God, and his righteousness; and all these things shall be added unto you." (Matt. 6:32-33.) To not even try to gain wealth is poor financial advice according to many world's economists, and to purge all desire for wealth would be heresy according to the gospel of Satan. Ironically, those who promise that anything in this world can be bought with money do not acknowledge the creative source and ultimate distributor of all material things—God.

Third, when his own disciples were arguing among themselves as to which of them would have supremacy in the kingdom of heaven, Jesus gently rebuked them for seeking power like the Gentiles, saying, "Whosoever will be chief among you, let him be your servant: even as the Son of man came not to be ministered unto, but to minister, and to give his life a ransom for many." (Matt. 20:27-28.) Loving service, not manipulative control, is the trademark of the Master and his disciples.

In summary, Jesus contrasts his ways to the ways of the Gentiles, and he supplants the basic worldly formula for personal benefit: "Ye have heard that it hath been said, Thou shalt love thy neighbor, and hate thine enemy. But I say unto you, Love your enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to them that hate you, and pray for them which despitefully use you, and persecute you; that ye may be the children of your Father which is in heaven." (Matt. 5:43-45.) Christ overcame the world by overcoming evil through love.

These doctrines, with an emphasis on love, prepare us to counter Satan's three major temptations. The Lord's sublime teachings become the truth and the way to ultimately live in the kingdom of heaven, and they also enable us to live peacefully and joyfully in the present world. The truths Jesus taught truly do make us free—free from dominating appetites, worldly materialism, selfish jealousy, and the corrupting lust for power and revenge.

Jesus' doctrines are simple to understand but sometimes difficult to live. How can we overcome the desire to gain power and glory? How can we be in the world but not be overly concerned with wealth, materialism, comfort, and security? And how can we sincerely seek good for those who attempt our destruction? The answer is that we cannot without the Savior's assistance. We must rely upon the godly power of Christ, remembering that his doctrine did not stop at "I will teach you the way," or even "I will show you the way." Rather, he says, "I am the way . . .: no man cometh unto the Father, but by me." (John 14:6; italics added.) Thus, proper conduct—patterned after Jesus—is the "way" to exaltation.

This is reflected in what Jesus taught elsewhere. Jesus also says, "For I have given you an example, that ye should do as I have done to you." (John 13:15.) To his disciples, Jesus states, "Whosoever will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his cross, and follow me." (Mark 8:34.) In the good-shepherd discourse, he adds, "My sheep hear my voice, and I know them, and they follow me." (John 10:27.) In his resurrected ministry in the Book of Mormon, he explains in a more direct manner, "Therefore, what manner of men ought ye to be? Verily I say unto you, even as I am." (3 Ne. 27:27.) Thus, when Jesus proclaims that he is the way, he means that if one desires salvation, one must follow the model of conduct he gave. Jesus is our role model. We must not only know his truth and do his will, but we need to become as he is.

Compared with great exemplary people who have lived on this earth, our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ is greater than all. In his life we can find every quality that will help us progress toward perfection. (See 3 Ne. 12:48.) President Ezra Taft Benson commented, "While many men have admirable qualities, there is only one man who ever walked the earth who was without sin, whose father of his physical body was God the Father, and who had the power to resurrect his own body. This Jesus is our exemplar and has commanded us to follow in his steps." [^6]

I AM the Life: Jesus' Enduring Gift

The third attribute of Christ listed in John 14:6 is that Jesus is the life. The meaning of this phrase is more apparent than the first two elements of truth and way because Christ is our Resurrector and Savior. Only through his atoning sacrifice may we return to live with the Father.

Latter-day Saints understand that the Atonement had a twofold purpose. First, Christ redeemed humanity from physical death: all shall be resurrected. (See 1 Cor. 15:20-22.) Second, Christ atoned for our sins so we could return to the presence of the Father if we would repent. (See 1 Pet. 2:24.) These two concepts were taught by the Book of Mormon prophet Jacob: "He [Christ] cometh into the world that he may save all men if they will hearken unto his voice; for behold, he suffereth . . . this that the resurrection might pass upon all men, that all might stand before him at the great and judgment day. And he commandeth all men that they must repent, and be baptized in his name, having perfect faith in the Holy One of Israel, or they cannot be saved in the kingdom of God." (2 Ne. 9:21-23.)

When Jesus says that he is the life, the doctrine goes beyond the promise of physical resurrection—he is speaking about the second sense of his atonement. This distinction appears in John 11:25, where Jesus seems to separate the promise of a general resurrection of all people and his atonement for the sins of the repentant: "I am the resurrection, and the life: he that believeth in me, though he were dead, yet shall he live." In other words, when Jesus teaches that he is the life, he means that only through him may we return to live with the Father. This is exactly what he says in John 14:6: "I am . . . the life: no man cometh unto the Father, but by me." We must accept Christ as our Savior and repent if we want eternal life with him and the Father.

Thus, we understand Jesus' teaching, "No man cometh unto the Father, but by me," as meaning, "In order to enter the Father's kingdom, you must do as I have done, you must know the truths of the gospel as I know them, and you must accept me as your Savior so that your sins may be cleansed from you." In this manner Jesus is the way, the truth, and the life.

I AM the True Vine: Our Source of Spirituality

The vine culture is well known in the Mediterranean area. The vine draws nutrients and moisture from the soil and air and then passes them on to the branches, which produce the fruit. Without the vine, the branches are dead kindling. Pruning is necessary to increase productivity. When a gardener prunes his vineyard, he cuts off the dead, withered sections and the less-productive branches. He also prunes the productive branches so they can produce bigger fruits. A good husbandman carefully tends the fruitful branches to insure a steady, good crop.

Christ likens us to the branches on a vine. He teaches, "I am the true vine, and my Father is the husbandman. . . . I am the vine, ye are the branches: he that abideth in me, and I in him, the same bringeth forth much fruit: for without me ye can do nothing." (John 15:1, 5.) This profound analogy contains many lessons. God the Father is the supreme supervisor, and Jesus is the direct source of strength by which we bring forth the fruits of the gospel. Our good fruits should be a godlike life (see Matt. 3:8; 7:16-20) and a noble character (see Gal. 5:22-23; Eph. 5:9; Philip. 1:11). However, just as the branch cannot bear fruit by itself, we cannot produce anything of value without or apart from Jesus.

Applying the abstract precepts and teachings of Christ in our daily lives prepares us to receive true salvation, just as the mere human experiences of Jesus prepared him to fulfill his duties as the transcendent Son of God. The mysterious, miraculous, but literal transformation of human beings into sons and daughters of God (the fruit) is made possible through the atonement of Christ (the vine). His atoning sacrifice is the real and only way we, who are imperfect, can follow the Perfect One in the perfect way.

Jesus the Just and the Merciful

Before we can fully appreciate Christ's atoning sacrifice, we must understand the relationship of the law of justice and the law of mercy. These two laws are best understood when we know about the necessity of "opposition in all things" and the choices placed before Christ before he took upon himself the sins of the world.

The clearest discussion about the necessity of opposition and choice is given by Lehi in 2 Nephi 2:11-27. He explains the interplay between law, punishment, blessings, and agency:

Lehi does not say that choosing evil is necessary to recognize good and evil, but he does make it clear that a choice between opposites is necessary for spiritual growth. Indeed, Christ's perfect life demonstrates that the most simple and sure way to attain eternal joy and celestial perfection is to never choose evil but to always follow the Father. (See D&C 130:20-21; 132:5.)

The divine law of justice is a natural manifestation of the principles both of opposition and of agency. It relates to the other divine laws, or commandments, and provides the means by which people receive their just reward. In essence, the law of justice might be summarized by these three points:

The choice between good and evil presupposes agency; the exercise of our agency activates the law of justice and its resulting blessings and punishments. On the other hand, without choices, we cannot exercise agency and thus experience the full range of blessings and punishments. [^7] Many passages in the Doctrine and Covenants indicate that blessings and punishments are predicated upon the laws and judgments of God. God is absolutely just in rewarding each individual according to his or her works, based upon individual levels of knowledge, accountability, motivation, and so on. (See, for example, D&C 82:10; 121:36-37; 130:20-21; see also Rom. 2:5-6; 2 Ne. 9:25; Mosiah 3:11; Alma 41:2-6; 3 Ne. 27:14.) The relationship of agency, laws, choices between good and evil, and the other elements of the law of justice may be diagramed as a flow chart like this:

Diagram: Law.

If we are free to choose between good and evil after the laws of God have been given to us, then we are free to receive either the blessings and joy for our obedience or the punishment and misery for our disobedience. Freedom of choice does not mean freedom from consequences.

Christ's atonement satisfies the law of justice. However, as Isaiah explains in 53:4-6, Jesus did not have to suffer for any of his own sins, because he lived a perfect life. God satisfied the demands of justice by allowing Christ to accept our punishment. At first thought, Christ's suffering for our sins does not seem just, since the law of justice requires that God be impartial. Indeed, as the Lord has said: "I, the Lord, am bound when ye do what I say; but when ye do not what I say, ye have no promise" (D&C 82:10); and, "When we obtain any blessing from God, it is by obedience to that law upon which it is predicated" (D&C 130:20-21). Rather, the reason Christ accepted our punishment has to do with mercy.

Why Is Jesus So Merciful and Kind?

The law of justice can make no allowances, and by it, everyone stands condemned because "all have sinned, and come short of the glory of God." (Rom. 3:23.) Our just yet loving Heavenly Father has thus allowed his Son to suffer for our sins, so justice is thereby satisfied and we are spared. This provision is called the law of mercy. In effect, this law becomes part of the law of justice for it introduces the possibility of vicarious payment for broken laws.

The law of mercy might be paraphrased as follows: whenever a person transgresses a law, a payment must be made; however, the person who transgressed the law does not need to make the payment if he or she will repent of this disobedience and if he or she can find someone else who is both able and willing to make the payment. The law of mercy expects that the demands of the law of justice will be fully met. Alma explained the relationship this way: "Justice exerciseth all his demands, and also mercy claimeth all which is her own; and thus, none but the truly penitent are saved. What, do ye suppose that mercy can rob justice? I say unto you, Nay; not one whit. If so, God would cease to be God." (Alma 42:24-25.)

Christ's atonement provides an essential element in both the law of justice and the law of mercy. The law of justice made the atonement of Jesus Christ necessary. When Adam fell, he transgressed a law that carried physical and spiritual death as its punishment. Thus, the law of justice demanded payment (or reparation, which is one meaning of atonement) for the broken law. The law of mercy made the atonement of Jesus Christ possible.

In order for Jesus Christ to pay fully for the law that Adam transgressed, the Savior had to be both able and willing to make reparation. He was willing to make payment because of his great love for mankind, and he was able to make payment because he lived a sinless life and, as the Son of God, he had the power and calling to atone for the spiritual and physical death introduced by the Fall. Because of his atoning sacrifice, he is rightfully referred to as the Savior and Redeemer of all mankind. [^8]

Interestingly, the word forgive does not appear in Isaiah 53, where Isaiah has written about the vicarious suffering of the Messiah, although the Hebrew root nasa, from which the word forgive is usually translated, does appear twice, as "borne" in verse four and "bare" in verse twelve. (See also Isa. 2:9; 33:24.) Christ "bore" or carried our sins so that we do not have to carry their burden. (See John 1:29; 1 Pet. 1:18-20.) Or, as we say, "He has forgiven us," meaning he "gave" the price "before." Indeed, almost two thousand years before our time, he gave the necessary payment in the Garden of Gethsemane. As we realize the benefits of his suffering and are cleansed, we can find the joy that God wants all of us to experience becoming worthy to live in his presence. (See 2 Ne. 2:25; 9:21.)

The relationship between the law of justice, the law of mercy, and Christ's atonement may be illustrated like this:

Diagram: Justice, mercy, and atonement relationship.

Before the law of mercy can apply in our lives, we must take advantage of Christ's atonement by repenting of our sins. [^9] The prophets have constantly reminded God's children of the necessity to repent and seek for the blessings of the Lord.

Some of the blessings promised Israel and other peoples are not conditional upon the people's repentance and righteousness. For example, every person benefits unconditionally from one major aspect of the Atonement—the resurrection and Christ's payment for the original transgression of Adam and Eve. The Atonement also unconditionally satisfies the demands of justice for sins committed by ignorant and unaccountable individuals. (See Mosiah 3:11; Moses 6:54.) However, there are also conditional aspects of the Atonement, and in order to benefit from these, we must repent of our sins. Otherwise, "mercy could have claim . . . no more" (Mosiah 3:26) upon the person because "none but the truly penitent are saved" (Alma 42:24). [^10]

How Imperfect Beings Are Purified through the Atonement

In the Sermon on the Mount, Christ gives the injunction, "Be ye therefore perfect." (Matt. 5:48.) The thought of being perfect in any dimension of our lives is overwhelming. Many think that being perfect in every aspect of life and character is impossible. But if Jesus was the only person on earth capable of achieving perfection, is his commandment legitimate? We know that with God, nothing is impossible. (See Luke 1:37.) What does he mean when he wants us to be perfect?

The answer becomes clear as we consider the definition of "perfection." Perfection can be defined as "setting out for a definite point or goal and achieving it." The Hebrew and Greek roots of the Bible terms translated as perfect or perfection refer to wholeness or completeness. In other words, "Be ye therefore whole (or complete) even as your Father in Heaven is whole (or complete)." [^11] This gives us some hope that we can obtain perfection in a step-by-step, gradual, and sure process.

Our Heavenly Father knew that all of us would sin during mortality; thus Jesus was foreordained to be our Savior. Since we cannot save our imperfect selves, we need Christ's help. Perfection is a process: when we sin, we need to follow through with all the steps of repentance and thereby take advantage of Christ's atonement. The Lord's admonition to Abraham gives us a pattern to follow: "Walk before me, and be thou perfect. And I will make my covenant between me and thee, and will multiply thee exceedingly." (Gen. 17:1-2.) There are a few keys in these verses that direct us in our perfection process.

First, the Lord says, "Walk before me." When we walk in the Lord's presence by the way we live, surely then we are on the path toward perfection. We walk before the Lord in our actions and thoughts, and we become one with him because our desires are united with his. Second, the Lord says, the covenant is "between me and thee." He wants us to succeed, and he promises to help us. Working toward perfection is not only a commandment, but a covenant into which we enter with the Lord. If we truly desire and strive to fulfill this commandment, the Lord will help us to obtain it. Third, the Lord promises, "I will multiply thee exceedingly." He can bless us with gifts, helps, and capacities untold—both in this life and especially in the life to come.

As we keep the commandments and repent of those we have transgressed, we gradually become righteous and perfect in more and more areas of our life. The state of being perfect is not necessarily a measure of all we have ever done; rather, it is a measure of our attitude and our pattern of spiritual growth and development. A person who continually strives to correct misdeeds through repentance and the Atonement can be cleansed of the past and be placed on the proper path toward perfection. President Spencer W. Kimball said, "Perfection really comes through overcoming." [^12] Patient, persistent people striving for perfection are described in the scriptures as "they who are just men made perfect through Jesus the mediator of the new covenant, who wrought out this perfect atonement through the shedding of his own blood." (D&C 76:69.) With Heavenly Father's spiritual treasures, gifts, and blessings, and through Christ's atonement, perfection can still be gained.

We must remember, however, that although individual repentance is a prerequisite for receiving God's greatest blessings, nothing we can or ever could do by ourselves is sufficient payment to satisfy all the demands of justice. Ultimately, redemption and salvation are Heavenly Father's gifts to us, "for we know that it is by grace that we are saved, after all we can do." (2 Ne. 25:23.) We do not earn God's mercy; he shares it with us as a freewill offering out of his infinite love.

In conclusion, we see that Jesus has not only shown us the way to live through his gospel teachings and perfect life, but he has also helped us by providing the means to overcome death and hell. In summary, JESUS of Nazareth lived a sinless life, taught eternal values, and became the PERFECT WAY—showing all people the path toward happiness, holiness, and exaltation; his ATONEMENT satisfied both the demands of justice and the expectations of mercy, bringing salvation to God's children. We should constantly thank our Heavenly Father for the life and mission of his Son, our Savior. As we follow Jesus in our thoughts and attitudes and in our words and deeds, we will be on the path of eternal life leading us back to God's presence. And as our being becomes more like his, filled with love and goodness, we will be united and perfected with him and our Heavenly Father.

For further study, refer to the following entries:

TG: BD: EM: Atonement Atonement Atonement of Jesus Christ Jesus Christ, Atonement through Blood Jesus Christ Jesus Christ, Redeemer Justice and Mercy Jesus Christ, Savior Justification Justice Perfection Mercy, Merciful Sanctification Perfection, Perfect, Perfectly

Salvation

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] More details about the fall of Adam and Eve are provided in chapters 11 and 12. The effects of the Atonement are discussed in chapter 13.
[^2] JD, 17:142.
[^3] Reflections on Life after Life (New York: Bantam/Mockingbird Press, June 1977), 18.
[^4] See JD, 8:10.
[^5] DBY, 380.
[^6] The state of nonglorious resurrection in outer darkness is briefly discussed in chapter 15.
[^7] See Reflections, 18.
[^8] Further teachings and details about ordinance work for the spirits in the postmortal spirit world are presented in chapter 23.
[^9] In the following chapter, we will discuss the varying degrees of salvation and exaltation awaiting God's children after their resurrection.
[^10] See TPJS, 310.
[^11] See JD, 378.
[^12] MF, 209; cf. Revelation 2:7, 11, 17, 26-28; 3:5, 12, 21.
