Victor L. Ludlow, Principles and Practices of the Restored Gospel ( 1992)

Chapter 14

Death's New Beginnings

Life frequently presents favorable times for new beginnings. Children move from school to school as they advance through the educational system, adults change jobs, and families move to different homes or apartments. New starts may produce some anxiety and stress as people are forced to leave loved ones and adapt to new settings. New beginnings also provide opportunities for new friends and service while adjustments to new environments and sets of activities are made. Before long, the new locations become "home." However, there is one final move that all people dread because of the many unknowns surrounding it. This transition is more than a change of location; it is a change of existence, an exit from the land of the living through the gateway of death.

From our limited perspective as mortals on earth, death appears to be the end of our existence. However, from the perspective of the scriptures, the prophets, and many people who have closely faced death, it is just a new beginning. Death is not the end of life but a transition to a different sphere of existence, a passageway into a new dimension—the postmortal spirit world. The promise of life after death and the eventual resurrection of the physical body is a cornerstone of Christian faith.

What Is Death?

Death is a benchmark in the continuation of our lives as spirit beings, marking the date when our physical shells are laid to rest. At death, body and spirit separate for a time. (See James 2:26; Eccl. 12:7.) Though we may be upset that the fall of Adam and Eve eventually brings death to every one of us, we should also remember that the results of death are temporary because Christ's atonement and resurrection will rescue us all from death. (See 1 Cor. 15:21-22.) [^1]

The scriptural promises of a spirit life after physical death are complemented with the accounts of people who have had "near-death" or brief "after-death" experiences; they often no longer fear death because they see life in a new context. In the best-selling book Life after Life, and in its sequel Reflections on Life after Life, Raymond A. Moody, Jr., M.D., compiled and analyzed "out-of-the-body" experiences of people who were revived from clinical death. Dr. Moody and others talked about individuals who have had "after-death" experiences and who have gone through a different dimension of space until they realized they were in a different existence in the presence of a glorious being.

This being radiated extreme dignity, power, light, and love. They knew, by looking at this person, that this being knew all there was to know about them. They sensed that there was a partial judgment about to take place. They were given the option of having their spirit return into the physical body and living for another number of years. Almost all of these individuals no longer fear death but rather live under a more noble, eternal set of priorities in which service to others and love are more important than honors and material possessions. Death was an actual experience they had "lived through," and they no longer dreaded it. More importantly, they developed a new set of more eternal priorities.

From these combined sources, we learn that we need not fear death. (See D&C 101:36.) As we grow in faith and knowledge, our fears about the natural experience of death will be calmed.

Nevertheless, we are often curious about the conditions of life we will experience after our physical body dies and our soul still lives. When we die, we leave behind the physical body and its sensations of hunger, thirst, pain, and weariness. Although all material and earthly things are left behind, we carry many possessions of greater worth with us into the future spirit world, such as our accumulated knowledge, the memories of our experiences, our social and family relationships, our eternal intelligence, and other spiritual gifts. Our spirit is free to move and communicate and remains full of life and vigor. Brigham Young stated that when we have moved through the veil of death, we "have passed from a state of sorrow, grief, mourning, woe, misery, pain, anguish and disappointment into a state of existence, where [we] can enjoy life to the fullest extent as far as that can be done without a body." [^2]

A Spirit World with Natural Contrasts

Although we shed our physical body at death, the memories of the flesh remain with us. The influences of a physical body also remain with us to the extent that we have allowed them power over our spirit. If we have successfully conquered the attractions and appetites of the flesh, our disciplined spirits are freed from the temptations and pains of earth life and enter into a spirit bliss, a tranquil heaven. On the other hand, if our bodies have sinfully ruled our souls in mortality, our spirits remain in bondage to the cravings of the flesh, which cannot be satisfied in a spirit world—thus, we are consigned to a spirit torment, a terrible hell. Recognizing how this life affects the next, an ancient prophet, Alma, wisely warned us: "If we do not improve our time while in this life, then cometh the night of darkness wherein there can be no labor performed. . . . For that same spirit which doth possess your bodies at the time that ye go out of this life, that same spirit will have power to possess . . . [you] in that eternal world." (Alma 34:33-34.) Spirit beings are influenced by the yearnings of the physical world even though they are no longer a part of it. No longer able to manipulate or control a physical body, their relative tranquility or torment depends upon how independent their spirit was of the flesh before death separated the body and spirit.

The teachings of the ancient prophets coincide with some modern findings in the medical profession. The studies of Dr. Moody describe various aspects of the realm of spirits, including a portrayal of those still bound to the desires of the flesh:

Several people have reported to me that at some point they glimpsed other beings who seemed to be "trapped" in an apparently most unfortunate state of existence. Those who described seeing these confused beings are in agreement on several points. First, they state that these beings seemed to be, in effect, unable to surrender their attachments to the physical world. One man recounted that the spirits he saw apparently "couldn't progress on the other side because their God is still living here." That is, they seemed bound to some particular object, person, or habit. Secondly, all have remarked that these beings appeared "dulled," that their consciousness seemed somehow limited in contrast with that of others. Thirdly, they say it appeared that these "dulled spirits" were to be there only until they solved whatever problem or difficulty was keeping them in that perplexed state." [^3]

Note how this description concurs with that of Alma. First, they cannot change the desires or attitude of their spirit "because their god [or physical habit] is still living here [as a part of the earth]." Second, their "dulled" or restricted spirits are in a "night of darkness wherein there can be no labor performed."

When an angel visited and taught him, Alma received later insights about the period directly after death. He recorded: "The spirits of those who are righteous are received into a state of happiness, which is called paradise, a state of rest, a state of peace, where they shall rest from all their troubles and from all care, and sorrow. . . . The spirits of the wicked . . . shall be cast into outer darkness; there shall be weeping, and wailing, and gnashing of teeth, and this . . . [is] a state of awful, fearful looking for the fiery indignation of the wrath of God upon them; thus they remain in this state, as well as the righteous in paradise, until the time of their resurrection." (Alma 40:12-14.)

Thus a partial judgment occurs after death as people enter the world of spirits—the righteous to a state of rest and peace; the wicked to a state of darkness and fear. These two states are called paradise and prison, and we remain in this spirit world in either state until our resurrection. (See Luke 23:43; 1 Pet. 3:19; D&C 138:16.) Eventually, each of us will enter one of these two postmortal existences. Since the state we find ourselves in is dependent upon the way we live, a preview of both states may help us decide how to conduct our lives.

Spirit Paradise

The spirits of those who are righteous are received into a state of happiness called paradise, where they enjoy respite from earthly cares, expand in wisdom, increase their gospel understanding, serve the Lord, and prepare for a resurrected state of eternal glory. In short, they continue their progression as eternal intelligences.

And who will enter the state of paradise? It will be peopled by the spirits of just, good, and pure people: innocent children who die before the age of eight, followers of God who are faithful in their testimony, people who are humble and selfless, and individuals who sacrifice for the Lord and suffer for righteousness' sake. (See Alma 40:12, 14; D&C 138:12-13.) What is life like in paradise? For innocent children and the severely handicapped, who die before reaching an age or stage of accountability and who thus have not sinned before God, paradise is a place of enlightened learning and social companionship. For those righteous older mortals who have struggled with and prevailed against the enemies of God, paradise is a peaceful spiritual haven. But more than a place separated from the trauma and temptations of earthlife, paradise is a state of tranquility, rest, and peace; a time of joyful reunion with family and friends; an experience of joy, gladness, and happiness; and an opportunity to learn, grow, and progress.

Spirit paradise is more than a resting stage removed from physical and moral obstacles, it is an enhanced preparation period for the eternities. Not only do we build upon the learning and understanding we gained in the flesh, but we also gain spiritual growth and learning much faster in this spirit realm for a variety of reasons.

First, since the physical demands of our bodies will have vanished, the necessity of working for daily bread and of sleeping to rejuvenate our bodies will disappear, and other limitations of the flesh will be left behind. As spirit beings with new dimensions of time and energy, we can concentrate on acquiring spiritual knowledge faster and more fully than now. Second, physical restraints on our spiritual understanding will have disappeared, making our learning time much more effective. As Brigham Young taught, all things will be easily understood because we will understand natural things, and our ability to learn will be greatly facilitated. [^4] Third, the dimensions of the world will open as the barriers of time and space fall away: "If we want to behold Jerusalem as it was in the days of the Savior; or if we want to see the Garden of Eden as it was when created, there we are, and we see it as it existed spiritually, for it was created first spiritually and then temporally, and spiritually it still remains." [^5] In addition, we will gain a remembrance of our premortal spirit existence and will be able to observe and understand things from a more eternal perspective.

So, though frustrated in some ways without the normal, pleasurable sensations of the physical body, God's spirit children in paradise are freed from earthly demands and are liberated in other ways to pursue knowledge and do the work of the Lord while awaiting resurrection.

Spirit Prison

The spirits of those who are evil and wicked are cast into a state of misery called prison, where they experience darkness and uncertainty while suffering for sins and transgressions. For the duration of their time there, they suffer the punishing presence of Satan and dread the future judgment of God.

Who will be cast into this spirit prison, which is also commonly called hell? It will be occupied by the spirits of the wicked and ungodly, individuals who reject the promptings of moral conscience or spiritual testimony, people who are unrepentant and selfish, those who give themselves over to Satan's power, and those who cause others to suffer. (See Alma 40:13-14; D&C 76:103-6; 138:20, 29.) What is life like in prison? It is a state of turmoil, chaos, and confusion; a place of darkness, weeping, and wailing; an experience of guilt, anguish, and sorrow; and a period to suffer the wrath of Almighty God by being turned over to the buffetings of Satan, as the devil torments, taunts, and harasses those under his subjection. This spiritual state is a hellish environment because of the contentions of Satan, fears for the future, and the inhabitants' awareness that they are suffering this anguish because of their transgressions on earth. They will see where they are in contrast to what they might have obtained through righteous living.

Spirit prison is more than just a punishment for the past; it is also a purging for the future. Recognizing the evil designs, hatred, and torment of Satan in spirit prison will convince telestial people that, in contrast, God is indeed good, loving, and fair. The manifestation of opposites helps them appreciate the true nature of God and the devil. Their hatred of Satan also encourages a hatred of evil. Thus their suffering in hell not only punishes for their past but turns them away from wickedness. Through such a bitter experience, they learn to never sin again. Some, however, though they have left behind evil and wickedness, may still not want to serve God and others with full, genuine love. This may be like a reformed drug or substance abuser who leaves the negative, destructive past behind but does not choose to be a strong, supportive member of the family or community.

A variety of attitudes will be manifest in spirit prison. Some people will persist in their wickedness, a few will simply turn aside from bad behavior, and others will not only give up the bad but also strive to do good. Most spirits in prison will eventually pay the full price for their wickedness, and at the end of this earth's temporal history, they will be called up in the resurrection of the unjust, ready for their less glorious eternal state. For a very few of the most evil spirits, however, spirit prison is just the beginning taste of a hell they will experience forever. [^6] (This spirit prison is but a temporary station until they are cast out with Satan and his other followers into the final and eternal hell of outer darkness.) On the other hand, many spirits will learn of their past ignorance and mistakes and will seek more righteous attitudes. For these, the experience in prison will convince them to change their behavior.

Dr. Moody observed this aspect of the spirit world when his patients said that it appeared that those "dulled spirits" in bondage were to be there only until they solved whatever problem or difficulty was keeping them in that perplexed state. [^7] This concept agrees with New Testament teachings and LDS doctrine, for when the spirits in prison repent, they can leave their hell and join the righteous in spirit paradise as they await their resurrection. It is important to outline, however, what is required for this release from spirit prison.

Release from Prison

Before the time of Christ, the spirits held in prison were unable to gain paradise, because the Savior had not yet atoned for mankind's sins in the flesh. Thus, as Nephi saw in vision, there was "an awful gulf, which separated the wicked from the tree of life, and also from the saints of God." (1 Ne. 15:28; see also Luke 16:19-26.) This gulf was bridged, however, after the Atonement was completed. Writing an account of his vision of the spirit world, Joseph F. Smith states that between the crucifixion and resurrection, the Savior visited spirit paradise, "declaring liberty to the captives [of death and the spirit world] who had been faithful," for even the righteous "had looked upon the long absence of their spirits from their bodies as a bondage." (D&C 138:18, 50.) Jesus instructed and commissioned the righteous spirits, then sent them from paradise to preach the gospel to the spirits in prison, both "those who had died in their sins, without a knowledge of the truth," and those "in transgression, having rejected the prophets." (D&C 138:32.)

Why didn't the Lord himself go to declare liberty among the unjust? First, aside from the fact that he was in the spirit world for only a brief time, Christ withheld his presence and direct influence from the wicked so they might legitimately receive a chance at salvation under conditions similar to those on earth. Spirit beings in prison needed to learn the principles of faith and testimony. They had to prove that they would accept the prophets' words, which they either had not known or had disregarded in mortality. This gives them the chance to respond to the Lord's messengers when gospel truths are clearly presented to them.

Second, because of their unrighteous acts in the flesh, they had to suffer for their own sins (to the degree of their accountability) in the spirit before they could be released. (See D&C 19:15-20.) While in the flesh, all men have potential superiority over Satan and his hosts, who have only bodies of spirit. But if the flesh and spirit together are not redeemed through the Atonement and the ordinances of salvation, Satan can and does have dominion over the wicked after death. Having had bodies, however, spirits in prison can repent for deeds done in the flesh and seek for Christ's deliverance and for the companionship of the righteous in spirit paradise.

Third, spirit beings must receive earthly ordinances performed vicariously for them in holy temples by the living. Many of the dead have waited literally for centuries for this work to be done, but only in the last hundred years have the Saints performed vicarious ordinances on a large scale. Unfortunately, too, for spirits in the spirit world, "the last shall be first and the first shall be last," since more recent genealogy must necessarily be completed first and then traced backward. [^8]

To liberate themselves, then, the unrighteous must accept the gospel preached to them by the Lord's spirit missionaries. Then, they must repent and accept responsibility for their sins and take advantage of Christ's atoning sacrifice. And finally, since they no longer possess physical bodies, they must wait for others to perform vicarious ordinances for them on earth. Thus, President Smith concluded the record of his vision with these terms: "The dead who repent will be redeemed, through obedience to the ordinances of the house of God, and after they have paid the penalty of their transgressions, and are washed clean, shall receive a reward according to their works, for they are heirs of salvation." (D&C 138:58-59; italics added.)

Apparently there are at least four primary paths by which humans pass through the postmortal spirit world: (1) They are righteous during mortality and thus qualify to enter paradise in preparation for a celestial resurrection. (2) They commit transgressions but live without the gospel light during mortality, and thus they are sent to spirit prison where they accept the gospel and later join the company of the righteous in paradise. (3) They are wicked in this life and reject the gospel when it is presented and witnessed to them, and thus they go to spirit prison, where they suffer until their sins are paid for. Then, depending upon the nature of their attitudes and past behavior, they are eventually resurrected on a terrestrial or telestial level. (4) They are grossly wicked in this life, sinning against light and truth, and they refuse to accept that God's judgments are just, continuously rebelling against him. Thus they are sent to hell where their suffering begins and continues beyond the time when they are finally resurrected and sent into outer darkness.

Though all who have possessed physical bodies may overcome the temptations of Satan and become heirs of salvation, those who remain unrepentant and unwilling to follow God, even after gospel truths are witnessed to them, will not achieve glory in the celestial kingdom with those who are faithful in accepting the Lord and Savior. Those who could have lived righteously on earth but chose not to may still in spirit prison learn from their past mistakes. They may yet turn aside from wickedness and qualify for the lesser glories of the terrestrial or telestial kingdoms. Ideally, all of God's children would quickly learn to love and follow him in righteousness. For those who learn this later, even in the postmortal spirit world, there are still marvelous blessings awaiting them. [^9]

A Continuation of Our Second Estate

The postmortal spirit world is a natural continuation of earth life. It comprises the other vital portion of our second estate. The second estate began with our birth as our spirit and physical body were joined together, and it continues until they are reunited again in a resurrected state. Since the world currently exists on an incomplete, telestial type of existence, the postmortal spirit phase is necessary to complete the full range of development that the second estate should provide.

This spirit world after death is quite different from the spirit world we experienced before birth. For one, the postmortal spirit world of paradise and prison remains here on earth, separated from Heavenly Father's celestial presence. [^10] That is, the postmortal spirit world is here but in a different dimension of existence than our own mortal existence. We generally coexist without being aware of each other and without knowing what is happening in the other realm. Quite possibly, the inhabitants of the spirit world may be much more aware of us and our doings than we are of them. We understand that the veil between us will be removed during the Millennium when open and cooperative association between mortals and spirit beings will be possible. [^11]

We also know that the experiences of mortality greatly enrich the learning dimensions of the later spirit world as we build upon what we learned in the flesh. Furthermore, the premortal spirit world was the major beginning of our personal growth and spiritual development, while the postmortal spirit world will conclude our preparation opportunities for improving and perfecting ourselves.

Opportunities missed here on earth, as well as injustices not balanced out, will be taken care of in the postmortal world before we as individuals can reach our final eternal destiny. Both phases of the second estate are probationary periods where we learn, develop, and test our spiritual commitments. Our priorities must be developed and refined before we can exit from the postmortal spirit world.

As we compare the opportunities of earth life with those of the postmortal existence, we note the main difference is that in the former we gain a body and in the latter we lose it. However, the possibilities of gaining experiences, developing talents and abilities, and increasing knowledge and understanding remain with us. Although one may not gain the ability when separated from the physical body to throw a javelin or run a personal best time in a mile race, new experiences will be available for many people. For example, people born blind in mortality will enjoy vision as spirit beings. Their memories will not bring back visual images from earth life, but they will have keen remembrances of sounds, tastes, and other sensations that will come to mind and enrich their studies and development in the spirit world.

We mentioned earlier that after Christ's visit in the spirit world, the gulf between spirit paradise and spirit prison was finally bridged. Individuals from paradise visit people in prison and may convert some of them and prepare them to go to paradise. The option of developing faith and making a religious commitment is available, but people still retain their agency. The bridge was open for movement back and forth, much as in this earth life where individuals can share gospel truths and people can change their behavior and come into a new religious community. Life in the postmortal spirit world will reflect many of the same patterns of religious movement as seen here on earth.

Satan seems to rule in many parts of earth as well as in spirit prison. In reality, however, Heavenly Father governs over all. Part of the purpose of this second stage of existence is to allow Satan to influence us. Those who follow him and refuse to repent, especially after they have known the gospel light and truth, are turned over to the buffetings of Satan. Sinful people carry their attitudes with them from mortality into spirit prison until they finally learn to reject Satan's temptations and go to paradise. Both phases of the second estate encourage, on the one hand, our recognition of God and his loving justice and, on the other, our recognition of Satan and his evil designs. Eventually all will recognize both God and Satan for who they are. (See Isa. 45:23; D&C 88:104.)

To conclude, AFTER DEATH, we continue learning truth, deciding moral and spiritual issues, and serving others in a postmortal spirit world, where we either enjoy peace with the righteous in restful paradise or suffer torment with the wicked in the hell of spirit prison. This spirit world becomes the final stage in our spiritual development for the eternities.

For further study, refer to the following entries:

TG: BD: EM: Death Death Afterlife Heaven Heaven Buffetings of Satan Hell Hell Death and Dying Paradise, Paradisiacal Paradise Heaven Prison Hell Spirits, Disembodied Paradise Spirits in Prison Spirit Prison Spirit World

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] More details about the fall of Adam and Eve are provided in chapters 11 and 12. The effects of the Atonement are discussed in chapter 13.
[^2] JD, 17:142.
[^3] Reflections on Life after Life (New York: Bantam/Mockingbird Press, June 1977), 18.
[^4] See JD, 8:10.
[^5] DBY, 380.
[^6] The state of nonglorious resurrection in outer darkness is briefly discussed in chapter 15.
[^7] See Reflections, 18.
[^8] Further teachings and details about ordinance work for the spirits in the postmortal spirit world are presented in chapter 23.
[^9] In the following chapter, we will discuss the varying degrees of salvation and exaltation awaiting God's children after their resurrection.
[^10] See TPJS, 310.
[^11] See JD, 378.
