Victor L. Ludlow, Principles and Practices of the Restored Gospel ( 1992)

Chapter 15

Life Everlasting

A wise teacher desired to identify the most penetrating issues that his students wanted to discuss. He presented the following hypothetical situation to the students in his university philosophy class: "Suppose instead of being granted three wishes by a genie, you would be given three keys of knowledge through the following opportunity: You are granted a complete and truthful answer to any three questions you have in your heart! What would your three questions be?" Based upon the common, probing topics presented by many philosophy and religion students, a set of three burning questions lies in the hearts of many people. First, they ask, "Is there life outside or after our life on this earth?" If the response is positive, they often ask, "What type and quality of existence will this afterlife be?" And the next, natural question is "What, if anything, can I do to affect the nature of this afterlife?"

Mankind's study of religion over the ages has often resulted from a preoccupation with these questions concerning life after death. Regardless of their station or situation in life, most people want to know if and how life exists beyond death. The previous chapter of this book taught that our spirit lives after our physical body dies. This spirit existence has been briefly seen by many who have experienced "near-death" or "after-death" episodes. Life after death is not to be feared; this idea is supported by many prophetic teachings as found in the scriptures and witnessed by the Spirit. The belief in a postmortal life forms a doctrinal basis for many religions. However, the sequential stages or the physical nature of our bodies within this afterlife are less well known. The scriptures present a limited look into this future life—they witness the reality of a physical resurrection, and they highlight some available options and the varied dimensions of life for these people. Some of what is known about the physical resurrection and the quality of postmortal life will be the topic of this chapter.

Resurrection

The testimonies of apostles and the promises of scriptures reveal that the grave is not the end of existence, for all people will receive their bodies again in a resurrected state. Paul, a special witness of the resurrected Jesus, so promised: "Now is Christ risen from the dead, and become the firstfruits of them that slept. . . . For as in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive." (1 Cor. 15:20, 22.) God has promised, as a basic element of his eternal plan, a resurrection for every one of his children who has lived on this earth. (See Alma 11:41; D&C 29:26.)

Just as death is the separation of the spirit from the physical body, resurrection is the reuniting of the spirit with the physical body. (See D&C 88:14-17.) As discussed in the previous chapter, the spirit lives an active life during the period between death and resurrection. However, the person lacks a fullness of joy without the physical body and yearns to be reunited with it. (See D&C 93:33-34.) The gift of resurrection comes from God and is made effective through Christ's atonement. (See 1 Cor. 6:14; 15:20; 2 Ne. 2:8; 9:12.) The act of resurrection, or new life with our physical bodies, is just as miraculous and natural as the earlier gift of life that we received when our bodies first came into physical, material existence.

Both the physical body that we now have and our future resurrected body are comprised of physical elements. These elements constitute the individual cells of the body and are made of finite material that is eternal. The minute particles in this physical material, however, have gone through different stages of existence or organization. Each of our physical bodies started with just two cells—one from each of our parents. These primal cells divided and multiplied, and our bodies grew with the additional nutrients provided by our mother before our birth and by our own eating and ingestion during our lifetime. The actual building blocks or elements of our new cells came from the food—plants and animals—that we ate. Earlier, in turn, the physical material of the plant and animal life existed as part of the minerals, moisture, and soil of the earth.

At death, our body cells disintegrate and revert to the basic elements of the earth, such as they were before they became part of the plants or animals we consumed. Thus the physical matter of our body is not eliminated; it is merely disorganized. The power of the resurrection is to gather disorganized elements and material back into an organized body structure, complete with all parts so that not even one hair of the head will be lost. (See Luke 21:18; Alma 40:23; 41:2.) Apparently, the resurrection is similar to the constant regeneration provided by the genetic pattern of our DNA. Just as the physical elements in our bodies are constantly changing as old cells die and new ones are made, the genetic structure remains the same and gives instructions for the type and function of the new cells.

Although we do not yet understand the precise method of physical restoration, we know that the source for the power of the resurrection comes from God through Jesus Christ. [^1] The instrumentation of the resurrection is provided by the human spirit, which, endowed with power and knowledge, will be able to gather dormant, disorganized physical elements back together into an organized, living body of resurrected glory. (See 2 Ne. 9:12; D&C 88:12-17, 27-32.) The prophet Joseph F. Smith taught about the important role of the spirit in giving the body life. Without spirit, the physical material is just lifeless clay. Eventually, it is the spirit now within us that "will redeem these tabernacles and bring them forth out of the graves." [^2]

The teachings of the prophets and the scriptures provide further insights into various dimensions of the resurrection. One prophet's vision of the redemption of the dead records that those in the spirit world eagerly awaited the coming of the Son of God after his crucifixion so he could redeem them from the bands of death. President Joseph F. Smith knew much about life after death because he had received his own great visions into the afterworld, one of which culminated several divine communications and is now recorded as the last section of the Doctrine and Covenants. He saw Christ's ministry in paradise among the righteous dead and the way they were preparing for their day of resurrection: "Their sleeping dust was to be restored unto its perfect frame, bone to bone, and the sinews and the flesh upon them, . . . that they might receive a fullness of joy." (D&C 138:17.)

In a sermon to the wicked Zeezrom, Alma the younger suggested that in the resurrection we will appear physically just as we are when we die: "This restoration shall come to all, both old and young . . . ; and even there shall not so much as a hair of their heads be lost; but everything shall be restored to its perfect frame, as it is now, or in the body." (Alma 11:44; italics added.) The Prophet Joseph Smith concurred with this idea, saying: "They must rise just as they died; we can there hail our lovely infants with the same glory. . . . They differ in stature, in size, the same glorious spirit gives them the likeness of glory and bloom; the old man with his silvery hairs will glory in bloom and beauty." [^3] The Prophet also taught that after resurrection, the bodies of children will grow to the full maturity and stature of the adult spirits that possess them. [^4]

At the moment of resurrection, people will have the same stature and appearance as when they died. Infants and children will resurrect at the stage of development they were in when they died. Adults and the aged will also resurrect, appearing as they did at their death, for, as the Prophet Joseph Smith taught, "all men will come from the grave as they lie down, whether old or young." [^5] Joseph F. Smith also taught: "The body will come forth as it is laid to rest, for there is no growth or development in the grave. As it is laid down, so will it arise, and changes to perfection will come by the law of restitution." [^6] In the natural course of time as resurrected beings, children will grow to maturity since "the body, after the resurrection will develop to the full stature of man." [^7]

Adults and the aged will quickly achieve the full measure of their creation as their bodies "will be restored to their proper, perfect frame immediately." [^8] President Smith taught about the state of resurrected beings who go through this transformation: "We will meet the same identical being that we associated with here in the flesh—not some other soul, some other being, or the same being in some other form, but the same identity and the same form and likeness, the same person we knew and were associated with in our mortal existence. . . . Deformity will be removed; defects will be eliminated, and men and women shall attain to the perfection of their spirits, to the perfection that God designed in the beginning." [^9] The exact timing required for this transformation is not recorded, but it is assumed that the power of the priesthood and the spirit will be able to quickly bring it about. The time for an infant to be raised by its mother or some other loving person to full maturity will probably take longer, but possibly not more than the almost twenty years as now required in mortal existence.

President Smith's teachings about the complete effects of this transformation were expressed beautifully in the remarks he delivered at the funeral services of Rachel Grant, the mother of the later prophet Heber J. Grant. In this sermon, he gave poignant examples of two people to illustrate how the resurrection will affect individuals:

Therefore, I look for the time when our dear Brother William C. Staines . . . will not remain the crippled and deformed William C. Staines that we knew, but he will be restored to his perfect frame—every limb, every joint, every part of his physical being will be restored to its perfect frame. . . . Aunt Rachel . . . will not always remain just as she will appear when she is restored again to life, but she will go on to perfection. Under that law of restoration that God has provided, she will regain her perfection, the perfection of her youth, the perfection of her glory and of her being, until her resurrected body shall assume the exact stature of the spirit that possessed it here in its perfection, and thus we shall see the glorified, redeemed, exalted, perfected Aunt Rachel. [^10]

Literally, the word resurrection means "to rise again." Our ultimate goal in resurrection is to rise again to a glory that can withstand God's presence, so that we may enjoy eternal life with him. As we rise again, we add a refined physical body to our mature spirit so that we may go on to achieve the full measure of our creation. The precise timing and the absolute quality of resurrected life for any individual will be determined by the Lord as a part of his final judgment.

Judgment

As we pass from one stage or estate of our eternal existence to the next, we also experience a judgment of our performance in the former estate, which largely determines the condition of our next stage. As reviewed in chapters nine and eleven, the spirits who kept their first estate were rewarded with physical bodies and mortal life on earth. The judgment passed upon us as we enter this life, however, is far from complete. All children of God on earth have the opportunity to seek varied degrees of glorious everlasting life, even to gain eternal life with God in the highest degree of glory, the celestial kingdom.

As we pass from mortality, however, our future options are limited by our previous actions. For example, if people have developed attributes of love, service, and spiritual commitment on earth, these qualities will continue after death with further enrichment and reward. On the other hand, people entrenched in attitudes of selfishness and abuse will have a difficult time changing their behavior, which will bring them further conflict and anguish in the postmortal spirit life. In the words of Nephi, "they who are righteous shall be righteous still, and they who are filthy shall be filthy still." (2 Ne. 9:16.)

As an example, if people had ample opportunity to embrace the gospel in the flesh but failed to do so, they will not suddenly become righteous as they enter the postmortal realm and thereafter seek the highest degree of heavenly glory. People with a lack of interest or effort in the pursuit of truth and righteousness in mortality will probably continue that pattern. Additionally, individuals will not have the opportunity in the afterlife to qualify for all the Father has if they have rejected the Spirit of the Lord in mortality. (See Alma 40:13-14.) In the postmortal spirit world, though, others who were not exposed to gospel truths and were thus less accountable in the flesh may yet qualify for all the Father possesses. Opportunities for growth and change continue until we reach our ultimate resurrected state. Finally, at the close of our second estate, as we are resurrected into the last stage of our existence, the time to repent is past, and all men receive their final judgment and assignment to a kingdom of glory.

Final Judgment Made by Christ Alone

The pathway between each of our three estates has been blazed by the Savior himself. Through the eternal principle of what we have called "divine investiture" (see chapter 3), God the Father gave his Son, Jesus Christ, the power to undertake the creation and salvation of this earth and its inhabitants. In our first estate, Christ was the advocate of the Father's plan through his appointment as Redeemer. Without Christ's prior agreement to take upon himself the sins of the world in the flesh, the plan of salvation could not have become effective, and we, as spirits, would all have remained in our premortal state, limited in our progression as spirit entities.

Fortunately, Christ did agree to fulfill the terms of the plan of salvation and so prepared the way for us to enter our second estate. Having helped create men in the flesh, the Savior then inspired the ancient prophets to direct God's children toward higher moral and spiritual plateaus. Later, he took upon himself a mortal body, so that he could lead the way to salvation. He showed us how to live and how to give even our lives, if necessary, to building God's kingdom. Without his direction and leadership, our spiritual growth would have been meager at best.

But mortals who had died and entered either spirit paradise or spirit prison before Christ's life and atonement were stopped, or "damned" and delayed in their progression—they were restricted in their development as postmortal spirit beings. Again, the Author of Salvation took the lead. When he died and passed into the spirit world, he miraculously unlocked the gates of hell and set the captive spirits free. (See D&C 138:18, 29-31.) Thus, Christ's own resurrection broke "the bands of death that the grave should have no victory," causing that all men might be resurrected and attain their third estate. (Mosiah 16:7.) As he promised, "in my Father's house are many mansions: . . . I go to prepare a place for you." (John 14:2.)

Having personally marked the way in every phase of mankind's existence, Christ fully earned the authority he possesses to determine our final station in eternity. Thus, while we may be instructed and judged by surrogate priesthood leaders in mortality and even in the spirit world, we must all eventually face the Lord for final judgment: "O then, my beloved brethren, come unto the Lord, the Holy One. Remember that his paths are righteous. Behold, the way for man is narrow, but it lieth in a straight course before him, and the keeper of the gate is the Holy One of Israel; and he employeth no servant there; and there is none other way save it be by the gate; for he cannot be deceived, for the Lord God is his name." (2 Ne. 9:41.) The Lord cannot be deceived or swayed in his judgment, for he intimately knows the pains and pitfalls of eternal progression. At the last day, "when all men shall stand to be judged of him," even the wicked will "confess, who live without God in the world, that the judgment of an everlasting punishment is just upon them." (Mosiah 27:31.)

Witnesses at Our Judgment Scene

To guarantee that a just judgment is given and to assure the person being judged that he or she has been fairly and accurately evaluated, various witnesses, records, and other forms of evidence can be brought forth. We do not know whether the witnesses can include family members, friends, and associates who can testify concerning a person's circumstances and behavior. The scriptures do indicate that certain ecclesiastical leaders, particularly apostles (who have callings as "judges in Israel"), can bear witness concerning members of Christ's church and kingdom. The Lord's apostles have a notable role as they help judge the covenant members of the house of Israel: the New Testament apostles will particularly judge from all the tribes of Israel, while the twelve Nephite disciples will assist in judging the Nephite-Lamanite descendants of Joseph's tribe. (See Matt. 19:28; D&C 29:12; 1 Ne. 12:9-10; 3 Ne. 27:27.) In a similar fashion, the Lord's living apostles can participate in our future judgment, testifying concerning the gospel teachings and spiritual directives they have given us through general conference talks, writings, and their special testimonies. In addition to "judges in Israel" and people who have lived with us on earth, heavenly witnesses or angelic beings can add their corroborating evidence.

Since each of us is to be judged according to our own level of knowledge, accountability, and opportunity, various records on earth and in heaven have been maintained from which we can be judged. (See Rev. 20:12; 2 Ne. 29:11; D&C 128:6-7.) As the Prophet Joseph instructed early priesthood leaders in the Church, "Our acts are recorded, and at a future day they will be laid before us, . . . they may there, perhaps, condemn us; there they are of great consequence." [^11] The Church has consistently pursued accurate record keeping and historical departments. Also, Latter-day Saints have been admonished to keep complete, accurate personal and family records, particularly of gospel ordinances and priesthood offices. [^12] All of these records will be part of our judgment, although their greatest value appears to be mostly for us. God already knows us and the level of our righteousness and goodness. These records and witnesses will help us better understand the opportunities we have had and how we have taken advantage of them.

Perhaps the most important witness or record that will be brought forth at our judgment will be the record of our soul. All the desires, thoughts, words, and deeds of our previous existence will come into clear remembrance, and by them we will be judged. (See Alma 12:14; 41:3; D&C 33:1; 137:9.) As God's Spirit touches our memory core, we will remember all the acts and ordinances in which we have participated. [^13] Standing in the presence of supreme truth, we will know ourselves and the true nature of our being. Unable to resort to evasion or hypocrisy, we will be able to evaluate our attitudes and actions, and we will know how they have been in or out of accordance with God's will. (See Matt. 7:21-23; D&C 4:3; 82:2-3.) As the Savior then pronounces final judgment, we will know that his reward is both just and loving. (See 2 Ne. 9:46; Mosiah 16:1; 27:31; 29:12-13.) Until then, one key question remains unanswered—what are we doing now to prepare ourselves for that day when Jesus will call us before his judgment bar?

Resurrection and Restoration of the Just and Unjust

Some of our earliest ancestors on this earth have already been resurrected and received their judgment from the Lord. As will be explained later in this chapter, resurrected beings will experience a variety of levels of resurrected life. Jesus promised to his disciples that he was preparing many mansions for them as a part of his Father's kingdom. (See John 14:2.) Paul also indicated that there would be at least three major, different degrees of resurrected glory, comparable to the differences of the sun, the moon, and the stars. (See 1 Cor. 15:40-44.) Joseph Smith used the terms celestial, terrestrial, and telestial to distinguish these three levels of resurrected life. (See D&C 76.) In addition, a certain order of resurrection will be followed where the righteous and just individuals will be resurrected prior to the wicked and selfish people on the earth.

When the Lord himself was resurrected on earth, he ushered in what is called the "morning" of the first resurrection as a part of the resurrection of the just: "The graves were opened; and many bodies of the saints which slept arose, and came out of the graves after his resurrection, and went into the holy city, and appeared unto many." (Matt. 27:52-53.) Note that only the righteous "saints" came forth at this time, and among them we assume were the ancient prophets, such as Abraham, for the Lord revealed to Joseph Smith in 1843 that Abraham "hath entered into his exaltation and sitteth upon his throne." (D&C 132:29.) Whether all the righteous dead arose at this time or even sometime afterward we do not know. We do know, however, that the morning of the first resurrection will continue to the beginning of the second coming of Christ. At the sound of the first trumpet, those then living or those who have previously died and lived in paradise under a heavenly or celestial [^14] law will be "caught up to meet him in the midst of the pillar of heaven—they are Christ's, the first fruits." (D&C 88:97-98.)

At the sound of the second trump, the "afternoon" or "evening" of the first resurrection will ensue, bringing forth for the first time the dead who lived an honorable earthly or terrestrial [^15] law. This resurrection also ushers in the millennial reign of Christ and will continue throughout the thousand years of peace on earth. In fact, the earth itself will be elevated from a lesser worldly or telestial [^16] state to its original terrestrial, or paradisiacal order, which it enjoyed before the fall of Adam. This is why wicked, or telestial, beings alive on earth must be destroyed and the dead "sinners stay and sleep until I [the Lord] shall call again." (D&C 43:18.) Telestial beings simply cannot participate in or even physically endure the glory of a terrestrial world. (See D&C 88:23.)

All terrestrial beings still alive during the Millennium, however, may continue to progress toward a celestial existence, if they choose, for agency will still be in force. (See D&C 29:22.) [^17] Any who live and die during the Millennium will experience an immediate resurrection as the time of separation between death and restoration will be in the "twinkling of an eye." (D&C 63:51.)

At the end of the Millennium, the Lord will finally call forth the wicked in the second and last resurrection, or "the resurrection of the unjust." It will include the spirits of all those beings still in spirit prison who did not repent, "and are found under condemnation. . . . There are found among those who are to remain until that great and last day, even the end, who shall remain filthy still." (D&C 88:100, 102.)

Every person, then, will be resurrected to that glory whose law he lived during mortality and, in some cases, attained during postmortality in the spirit world. The spirit of each individual will have lived God's law at different levels of righteousness, and thus each individual will be resurrected at his or her level of spiritual maturation. For these reasons, Alma the younger instructed his wayward son, Corianton: "If their works are evil they shall be restored unto them for evil. Therefore all things shall be restored to their proper order, everything to its natural frame. . . . The one raised to happiness according to his desires of happiness, or good according to his desires of good; and the other to evil according to his desires of evil. . . . Do not suppose, because it has been spoken concerning restoration, that ye shall be restored from sin to happiness." (Alma 41:4-5, 10.)

The Differing Levels of Resurrected Bodies

Much more important than physical maturity or appearance in the resurrection will be the degree of righteousness our spirits have obtained by that day, for that will determine our final assignment to a kingdom of glory. All persons who kept their first estate (premortality) and received a body of flesh in their second estate (mortality) will inherit some degree of glory as their reward, "except those sons of perdition who deny the Son after the Father has revealed him." (D&C 76:43.)

The Most Wicked in Outer Darkness

Sons of perdition, instead of accepting Christ and his authority, continue their rebellion against God with bodies in a resurrected state of nonglory. They are consigned to outer darkness with Satan, who is also called Perdition, and his devilish angels who were cast out of heaven in the beginning. (See D&C 76:26.) Let us clarify, therefore, exactly what type of rebellion against the Father qualifies a person to become a son of perdition, one who denies the sure witness of divine truth.

The first basic requirement is for individuals who have experienced a sure manifestation of absolute truth through a great, personal manifestation of the Holy Ghost to then lie about and rebel against that knowledge. Since most people have felt at least some spiritual promptings and may have even rejected or acted contrary to them, some may wonder if they have sinned so seriously against the promptings of the Holy Spirit that they might be sent to outer darkness. It is safe to say that any person who has to ask whether he or she has received such a sure witness does not qualify for eternal damnation, for we are not talking about manifestations of the Holy Ghost alone, however dramatic they may be. [^18]

To commit this level of spiritual rebellion, a person "must receive the Holy Ghost, have the heavens opened unto him, and know God, and then sin against Him." [^19] For example, when the witness of the Holy Ghost is accompanied by the presence of the Father and/or the Son as well, then the individual knows he or she has received such a sure witness. This is the type of manifestation that the Prophet Joseph Smith received in the Sacred Grove, which he "could not deny . . . , neither dared . . . do it." (JS-H 1:25.)

The Prophet wrote that to deny a sure witness of the Savior after a direct manifestation of his glory is to commit "the unpardonable sin": "What must a man do to commit the unpardonable sin? . . . He has got to say that the sun does not shine while he sees it; he has got to deny Jesus Christ when the heavens have been opened unto him, and to deny the plan of salvation with his eyes open to the truth of it; and from that time he begins to be an enemy." [^20]

The Father and the Son can give few greater gifts to people than to reveal themselves to them and show them the glory they may someday share with the Godhead. So, if a person denies this great witness and rebels against God, there is no hope for his or her salvation. Having rebelled and turned away from the brightest light, sons of perdition inherit instead the darkest chaos and torment for their eternal reward: "They shall go away into everlasting punishment . . . to reign with the devil and his angels in eternity, where their worm dieth not, and the fire is not quenched, which is their torment—and the end thereof, neither the place thereof, nor their torment, no man knows." (D&C 76:44-45.) Sons of perdition join Satan and his devilish angels, who likewise rebelled against God and Christ even as they dwelt in their glorious presence.

If it seems difficult to understand how anyone could rebel against God after knowing him so intimately, consider that the scriptures specifically name very few individuals who, after having kept their first estate, became sons of perdition. Cain, the murderous son of Adam and Eve, is the classic example of a person who will be consigned to outer darkness. His eternal miserable fate comes not because he murdered his brother, Abel, but because, knowing both God and Satan, he "rejected the greater counsel which was had from God" and "loved Satan more than God." (Moses 5:18, 25.) Outer darkness is reserved for those who love themselves beyond all others and love Satan more than God.

Telestial Glory for the Wicked

Aside from sons of perdition, even the most wicked people of this earth will eventually recognize the reality, power, and goodness of God. They will obtain a kingdom of glory, but only after they have suffered during a long sojourn in spirit prison for their sins of the flesh. The unrepentant among them who continue their perversions in the face of truth and goodness reject the redemption that Christ has already purchased through his own bitter suffering. Their anguish must also complete the demands of eternal justice, and they are thus warned: "Repent, lest I smite you . . . and your sufferings be sore—how sore you know not, how exquisite you know not, yea, how hard to bear you know not. For behold, I, God, have suffered these things for all, that they might not suffer if they would repent; but if they would not repent they must suffer even as I; which suffering caused myself, even God, the greatest of all, to tremble because of pain, and to bleed at every pore, and to suffer both body and spirit." (D&C 19:15-18.) Indeed, the scriptural descriptions of spirit prison, or hell, and outer darkness are strikingly similar, with the important exception that spirit prison is, however long, still only temporary.

Among those who, after their sufferings, will inherit the telestial kingdom are "they who are liars, and sorcerers, and adulterers, and whoremongers, and whosoever loves and make a lie." (D&C 76:103.) During mortality, these individuals have given themselves over to bodily appetites and physical passions; they seek for emotional dominion and monetary power as they yearn for personal glory and influence. In other words, telestial people are selfish, self-indulgent people who do not care for others and think only of themselves. They truly live the "law of the jungle" and believe in the "survival of the fittest." Nonetheless, after they are purged of their sins in the hell of spirit prison, they will be judged according to their works, and "these all shall bow the knee, and every tongue shall confess to him who sits upon the throne forever and ever." (D&C 76:110; see also vv. 81-85, 98-106.)

Living in the telestial kingdom, people of a telestial glory will be governed by the Holy Ghost, with rulers and administrators gathered from the terrestrial worlds. (See D&C 76:86, 88.) Although living in the least of the resurrected states of glory, they will enjoy an existence of far greater comfort and enjoyment than is now experienced by any mortal on this earth. In fact, the glory of a telestial existence surpasses all understanding for us mortals. (See D&C 76:89.) Telestial beings need not fear death, disease, or infirmity ever again. They are also freed from the social banes of taxes, wars, bills, and menial labor. They apparently will be free to socialize, travel, learn, observe, and enjoy life with a great variety of options on a variety of worlds, differing from one another as the stars in the heavens. (See 1 Cor. 15:40-42; D&C 76:98.) In their own way, they will be "servants of the Most High; but where God and Christ dwell they cannot come." (D&C 76:112.) The range of their experiences, however, while much better than anything on earth, will pale in comparison to the quality of life enjoyed by beings of a terrestrial order. (See D&C 76:91.)

Terrestrial Glory for the Honorable People

In contrast to people living a telestial law, terrestrial beings are "they who are the honorable men of the earth." (D&C 76:75.) They are just, good people who live a moral law above that of the jungle, caring for the needs of others and trying to improve the condition of this world. But because these "honorable" people are "blinded by the craftiness [or philosophies] of men" they remain—however just, good, and ethical they may be—uncommitted to becoming Christ's disciples and progressing toward saintliness or godhood. (D&C 76:75.)

In order to qualify for the celestial kingdom, one must accept and live the gospel when it is first presented to him or her, especially while in mortality. The person needs an opportunity to hear enough of the gospel to make a sound judgment, along with a possibility to live the gospel principles. Terrestrial beings, on the other hand, reject their initial opportunity to learn and live God's law, for they "received not the testimony of Jesus in the flesh, but afterwards received it" after death. Others, having died without the gospel law, did not accept it even when taught in the postmortal spirit world. (See D&C 76:72-74.) They also include those who, having accepted the gospel, were "not valiant in the testimony of Jesus." (D&C 76:79; see also v. 74.) So whether good, decent people refuse to enter into the gospel ordinances, or whether they fail to keep the covenants they have made, their neglect causes them to "obtain not the crown over the kingdom of our God." (D&C 76:79.)

Living in the terrestrial mansions and worlds prepared for them, terrestrial people are governed by Christ with assistance from the Holy Ghost and other celestial beings. (See D&C 76:77, 87.) In every dimension of glory, power, might, and dominion, they enjoy a life far more glorious than the telestial one. (See D&C 76:91.) In addition to the range of social and learning experiences available to telestial people, terrestrial beings enjoy the association with more pleasant, honorable, decent people. So they will be of service in administering God's kingdoms, they can also assist in governing telestial worlds. (See D&C 76:88.) But the glory of their existence and the intensity of their service appear dim and weak in comparison to what is enjoyed by celestial beings residing in God's presence.

Celestial Glory for God's True Children

While heirs to the terrestrial kingdom may be "nice people," heirs to celestial glory are "just men made perfect through Jesus the mediator of the new covenant." (D&C 76:69.) Having completely reconciled themselves with God by accepting Christ and the saving ordinances, they are true in their faith and endure in righteousness to the end. (See D&C 76:51-53.) Because of their faithfulness, celestial people "are they into whose hands the Father has given all things." (D&C 76:55.) They inherit "thrones, kingdoms, principalities, and powers" (D&C 132:19) from Heavenly Father in part because they assisted in bringing to pass the immortality and eternal life of other individuals (see D&C 76:54-70; 132:19-20; Moses 1:39). They are literally transformed into "new creatures" and angels on high, some becoming as their heavenly parent, fulfilling their ultimate destiny as gods and goddesses. (See 2 Cor. 5:17; D&C 76:58.)

Celestial beings enjoy association directly with Heavenly Father. (See D&C 76:92.) They are governed by God himself and assisted by Jesus Christ and the Holy Ghost, as they bask in the Father's celestial glory, within his heavenly mansions. (See John 14:2.) While free to serve God as kings and queens, priests and priestesses, and ministering angels of the Most High in his kingdom, celestial people also assist Jesus in his administration of the terrestrial worlds. (See D&C 76:56-60, 87.) They alone will be able to abide with the Father and the Son on this earth after it becomes a celestial sphere. (See D&C 88:19-20; 130:9.) This celestial glory is the promised, prepared destiny for those who are truly the children of God.

After having reviewed much that has been revealed about the promised resurrection and our eventual entrance into one of the three kingdoms of glory, we can summarize with the following statement: RESURRECTION and the FINAL JUDGMENT are gateways into eternity whereby God's children enter into one of his many kingdoms, the joy and glory of which depend upon how they have lived and proven faithful. To evaluate how our own personality best matches a particular eternal state, we need to measure where we are and, more important, in which direction we are moving. To assist in this evaluation, we should study the essential gospel principles and then determine whether we are participating in the eternal ordinances that God expects of us. The next section of chapters provides these perspectives.

For further study, refer to the following entries:

TG: BD: EM: Celestial Glory Degrees of Glory Celestial Kingdom Eternal Life Heaven Degrees of Glory Judgment, the Last Hell Eternal Life Outer Darkness Resurrection Exaltation Resurrection Immortality Telestial Glory Immortality and Eternal Life Terrestrial Glory Judgement

Judgement Day, Final Resurrection Sons of Perdition

Telestial Kingdom

Terrestrial Kingdom

---
Notas:
[^1] More details about the fall of Adam and Eve are provided in chapters 11 and 12. The effects of the Atonement are discussed in chapter 13.
[^2] JD, 17:142.
[^3] Reflections on Life after Life (New York: Bantam/Mockingbird Press, June 1977), 18.
[^4] See JD, 8:10.
[^5] DBY, 380.
[^6] The state of nonglorious resurrection in outer darkness is briefly discussed in chapter 15.
[^7] See Reflections, 18.
[^8] Further teachings and details about ordinance work for the spirits in the postmortal spirit world are presented in chapter 23.
[^9] In the following chapter, we will discuss the varying degrees of salvation and exaltation awaiting God's children after their resurrection.
[^10] See TPJS, 310.
[^11] See JD, 378.
[^12] MF, 209; cf. Revelation 2:7, 11, 17, 26-28; 3:5, 12, 21.
[^13] See DS, 3:225-26.
[^14] More details on Church organization and leadership are found in chapter 33.
[^15] Chapter 33 reviews the role of prophets and others in the leading Church councils. Chapters 34 and 35 discuss the mission of the Church and the success that Latter-day Saints are helping to bring about under prophetic leadership.
[^16] 10. WNTCD, 625.
[^17] 11. See EM, ''God the Father'' (2:548ff); ''Mother in Heaven'' (2:961).
[^18] 12. EM, 2:961.
[^19] 13. Ibid.
[^20] 14. MD, 387.
