Victor L. Ludlow, Principles and Practices of the Restored Gospel ( 1992)

Part 3:

Basic Principles, Ordinances, and Blessings of the Gospel

Footnotes

Chapter 16

Cultivating Faith

Have you heard of someone described as a "con man"? The term derives from "confidence man," meaning one who swindles through misplaced trust. It is often used in irony because instead of having confidence in someone, the term means we have lost all confidence in that person. Unfortunately, most of us have been betrayed or deceived by someone. After experiencing sour business deals, disreputable service repairs, or false promises, we naturally begin to question our faith in other humans. Because of uncertainty within the human character, many people have more trust in animals or machines than in people.

However, we can learn to be more discerning as we deal with different people. After experience, we generally realize that we should not judge someone too quickly on outward appearances or after a limited relationship. Likewise, we should not believe everything everyone says. Through time and interaction, we come to know the nature and truthfulness of most people. If we could gain these insights upon first meetings, however, we could choose better friends and trustworthy associates.

As we learn to carefully select the people we trust, we are refining a process that can also enhance our spiritual perspective of God and his nature. To most people, the concept of having "faith in God" simply means to believe that God actually exists. But beyond knowing that God exists, we need to understand his character and essence. As we pursue this quest, we go beyond naive belief and dutiful obedience; our faith and understanding of God increase and we come to feel his great love for us. Jesus promises eternal life to those who come to know the only true God. (John 17:3.) Eventually we learn that to "know God" requires more than simple study or scripture reading. It goes beyond believing in his existence; it develops only as we become more and more like him. As we obey his commandments and serve others with love, we understand the nature of deity because it is reflected in our souls. The spiritual ingredient that encourages us to understand God and become more like him is faith.

What Is Faith?

The most widely known definition of faith in Christendom was given by the apostle Paul to the early Hebrew saints: "Now faith is the substance of things hoped for, the evidence of things not seen." (Heb. 11:1.) "From this," the Prophet Joseph Smith said, "we learn that faith is the assurance which men have of the existence of things which they have not seen, and the principle of action in all intelligent beings." [^1] That is, faith is not just an airy hope in something we would like to believe. It is the substance (Greek = assurance) and evidence on which we pattern our lives, thus motivating us to action.

In general terms, faith is the force behind action in temporal as well as spiritual pursuits. The farmer plants his seeds in faith that he will reap a harvest; the university student studies in faith that he will obtain a degree; the physician performs an operation in faith that his patient will be healed. The list could go on and on—all human action is done in the faith that it will yield certain desired results. In spiritual terms too, true faith is always followed by righteous action: "He that believeth and is baptized shall be saved." (Mark 16:16; italics added.) Naturally, "faith without works is dead," having not borne the attending fruit of obedience. (See James 2:20.)

Finally, beyond both belief and the motivation to do good, the Prophet Joseph taught, "Faith is not only the principle of action, but of power also, in all intelligent beings, whether in heaven or on earth." [^2] Thus, as Paul wrote, "Through faith we understand that the worlds were framed by the word of God." (Heb. 11:3.) In its totality, then, faith is an attribute of godly character—like justice, mercy, or love—from which springs God's omnipotent power over all temporal and spiritual things. "Faith, then," Joseph concludes, "is the first great governing principle which has power, dominion, and authority over all things; by it they exist, by it they are upheld, by it they are changed, or by it they remain, agreeable to the will of God." [^3] Thus, we see that faith can have great power and influence in our lives.

There are three key dimensions of our faith: principles of truth, relationships with others (especially God), and effect upon our own behavior. Faith is first of all an assurance of unseen truths that we have developed since our first experiences in childhood. We may not understand all the laws of mathematics, energy, nuclear physics, and the universe, but we are comfortable in our belief about some of the principles and truths in these fields. We have an assurance that the sun will rise tomorrow, bringing life-giving light to this earth, even if we do not know all the laws and powers that effectuate this daily phenomenon. Believing in things we cannot see, we use electricity even if we do not know the absolute structure and influence of an electron. Thus, we have faith in certain truths. In a gospel context, as we develop faith in the saving principles of truth contained in the words of God and his Son, we look forward to receiving the blessings promised by God. As we kindle this hope of divine promises, we gain a better understanding of not only who we are, but also what our destiny might be.

Second, we develop faith in living entities, primarily in God but also in others. LDS scholars describe faith as having "confidence in something or someone." [^4] As we develop a feeling of confidence in God, we want to learn not only who he is, but also how we can please him. Thus faith influences our attitudes and provides us a motivation toward righteous living.

Third, beyond influencing our beliefs and attitudes, faith also generates activities that affect our behavior. True and noble faith stimulates us to live good, godlike, and Christian lives. As a principle of action centered in Christ, its greatest power is demonstrated as we seek to obey his words. [^5] Faith thus becomes a powerful catalyst that generates spiritual life when we attempt to do all that God has asked of us. Ultimately, we begin to fulfill the Savior's most difficult commandment: "Be ye therefore perfect, even as your Father which is in heaven is perfect." (Matt. 5:48.)

How Do We Develop Faith?

So we see that there are several levels of faith: our initial belief and hope develop into the motivating force behind righteousness and culminate as a divine attribute of godly character and eternal power. Naturally, we do not experience all these levels at once. We seem to progress through six major steps as our faith matures.

Since all God's creations ultimately owe their existence to the power of faith, it follows that we, as eternal, intelligent spirits, have always possessed some degree of faith. In speaking of the premortal existence as compared to mortality, Latter-day Saints often say that we previously walked by sight, but now by faith. (See 2 Cor. 5:7.) True, as spirits living in the presence of God, we did not have to exercise faith in his existence. However, in order to accept the plan of salvation, we did have to exercise faith in God's ability and willingness to save our souls and bring us back into his presence. In contrast, Satan and his hosts were also in the presence of God and they knew him, but they chose not to exercise faith in God's wisdom and goodness or in man's eternal potential, thus rejecting the plan of salvation.

To continue exercising faith in God's power and mercy while on earth, we must first regain at least some of our premortal knowledge of his existence and character. Thus, the Prophet Joseph Smith taught: "The real design which the God of heaven had in view in making the human family acquainted with his attributes, was, that they . . . might be enabled to exercise faith in him." [^6] But where do we gain this knowledge of God?

If you do not know what or where something is, you will have difficulty finding it. Human beings have naturally searched for answers to the great questions of life, and they tend to look first toward those who seem to have found the answers. Accepting and building upon others' beliefs then takes a certain amount of faith.

The Prophet Joseph repeatedly taught that "faith comes by hearing the word of God." [^7] Thus, the first step for engendering faith in any person is to preach to him the true and living God; false teachings about the nature of God cannot produce true faith, only misplaced belief. Engendering faith is what Alma had in mind when he taught the Zoramites, who held a perverted concept of God. He said, "Faith is not to have a perfect knowledge of things; therefore if ye have faith ye hope for things which are not seen, which are true." (Alma 32:21; italics added.) As people hear new truth, witness a person's devout act of faith, or feel the power of a true believer's testimony, they sense the genuineness of the experience, and they may recognize that new spiritual dimensions are available for them. (See D&C 46:13-14; 50:17-24.) They should then seek out that new spirituality for themselves.

When we perceive someone with tremendous faith, we may temporarily lean on that person's testimony. But eventually, like children growing up, there comes a time when one must learn these things for oneself. A modern scientist and apostle, John A. Widtsoe, said, "A conviction of the truth of the gospel, a testimony, must be sought if it is to be found. It does not come as the dew from heaven. It is the result of man's eagerness to know truth. Often it requires battle with traditions, former opinions and appetites, and a long testing of the gospel by every available fact and standard." [^8] In his continued preaching to the Zoramites, Alma explained, "If ye will awake and arouse your faculties, even to an experiment upon my words, and exercise a particle of faith, yea, even if ye can no more than desire to believe, let this desire work in you, even until ye believe in a manner that ye can give place for a portion of my words." (Alma 32:27; italics added.)

At various points in our lives, we are exposed to new ideas and opportunities. At those moments, we may have a burning desire to find the truth in them and to incorporate them in our lives. Whether this is ever accomplished depends upon our level of desire. (See Alma 29:4.) We must sincerely desire to have faith if we are to obtain it. Regardless of our current level of faith, we need to maintain a desire to increase it. Another modern apostle, Bruce R. McConkie, stated, "All faithful people have the desire, born of the Spirit, to grow in faith and be more like [Jesus]. All the saints desire to increase in faith and godliness." [^9] An ancient prophet expressed a similar admonition when he said, "Thus saith the Lord God: I will give unto the children of men line upon line, precept upon precept, here a little and there a little; and blessed are those who hearken unto my precepts, and lend an ear unto my counsel, for they shall learn wisdom; for unto him that receiveth I will give more." (2 Ne. 28:30; italics added.)

To receive faith in God and the gospel truths, we must turn to him who knows and gives all. We must seek to obey all the Master has asked of us, and we must tune in our spirits to the gentle promptings of the Holy Spirit. Elder McConkie also stated, "Working by faith [is not] merely a mental desire, however strong, that some eventuality should occur. There may be those whose mental powers and thought processes are greater than any of the saints, but only persons who are in tune with the Infinite can exercise the spiritual forces and powers that come from him." [^10] Moroni also expressed the fact that this desire to develop in faith is more than a mental wish and must include sincere, sensitive petitions to God: "I would exhort you that ye would ask God, the Eternal Father, in the name of Christ, if these things are not true; and if ye shall ask with a sincere heart, with real intent, having faith in Christ, he will manifest the truth of it unto you, by the power of the Holy Ghost . . . [by which] ye may know the truth of all things." (Moro. 10:4-5.)

The second step then is to awaken a desire within us to receive our own witness of faith. If we lack faith, we must go to our Heavenly Father for inspiration and strength. We must search for this gift from God, who can reveal all truths to us. To recognize his spiritual promptings, we must set our lives in spiritual harmony with the promptings of his Holy Spirit and then petition him through prayer with a sincere heart and real intent.

God not only allows us to make this petition to him, he desires this of us. Indeed, the most repeated constructive injunction in the scriptures is to "ask"—to seek, to knock, to inquire, to petition, to search, and to pray. [^11] (See, for examples, Matt. 7:7-8; D&C 88:63.) After we have heard a new truth or witnessed a sincere testimony, the first responsibility of gaining faith rests with us, and we must resolve to ask God for our own spiritual witness.

After a person desires to gain a true knowledge of God's nature, faith usually develops along a pattern identified by the prophet Alma: "Now, we will compare the word unto a seed. Now, if ye give place, that a seed may be planted in your heart, behold, if it be a true seed, or a good seed, if ye do not cast it out by your unbelief, that ye will resist the Spirit of the Lord, behold, it will begin to swell within your breasts; and . . . ye will begin to say within yourselves—It must needs be that this is a good seed, or that the word is good, for it beginneth to enlarge my soul; yea, it beginneth to enlighten my understanding." (Alma 32:28.) Thus, knowing just a portion of the word, we can develop faith that, in turn, leads us to further knowledge by "enlightening our understanding."

Notice that the planter of the seed needs to act and hope as he plants the seed. Also, he should not discard the truth from the beginning through unbelief or resistance to the Spirit of the Lord. The only way to gain faith and understanding of any gospel principle is to plant the seed. Desire is not enough since action must build upon the thought.

Please note that the germination of the seed (the first real sign of spiritual awakening in a person's soul) is beyond our control. The actual germination of truth and the budding forth of faith requires a special witness of the Spirit. Just as a physical miracle causes the dead seed to burst forth with new life, a divine gift quickens our weak, numb spirit to radiate with new life. The Apostle Paul told the Ephesians, "By grace are ye saved through faith; and that not of yourselves: it is the gift of God." (Eph. 2:8.)

This gift comes at a time and place determined by God. We may plead for a spiritual witness or a confirming answer to our prayers for days and weeks before we recognize God's spiritual response to our petitions. The Apostle James tells us that if we patiently petition God, he will give us an answer. (See James 1:3-5.) Alma indicates that eventually, if it is a "good seed" or if the word is good, we will recognize a feeling of peace and comfort within us—the first signs of faith. (See Alma 32:29-31.) Alma also tells us that we can know the reality of the spiritual experience we are having. It will be discernible, and we will recognize it for the light and goodness it brings into our souls—further signs of faith. We can no longer deny the reality of our spiritual witness; therefore, we "know that it is good." (Alma 32:35.) This sweet spiritual feeling not only removes our doubts about the validity of the seed, but it also impels us to cultivate and nourish the seedling.

In Christ's parable of the sower, he indicates that the eventual fruitfulness of seeds is often dependent upon the type of earth in which they sprout. Seeds cast upon hard or rocky soil could not produce mature plants at all. Seeds growing in different fields produced according to the soil's fertility—some thirtyfold, some sixty, some a hundred. (See Matt. 13:3-8.) Just as a gardener should prepare the soil and enrich its nutrient base before planting seeds, we must prepare our souls to receive divine truths. The personal nutrients we need are humility, a sensitive spirit, diligence, and a willingness to sacrifice.

Humility. We must be teachable if we wish to be taught the things of God. An attitude of humility softens our soul for the planting of God's word. Humility, either compelled by external circumstances or developed through internal attitudes, is a vital prerequisite to faith. Alma indicates that those who are humble before they are introduced to the gospel will be blessed as they come to know and believe in the word of God. (See Alma 32:13-16.) Christ admonishes us to humble ourselves as little children, and he provides a perfect example. (See Matt. 18:2; 20:27; John 13:3-10.) The Prophet Joseph also revealed that humility is an important condition for Latter-day Saints receiving the blessings of God's kingdom. (See D&C 61:37.)

One cannot receive and develop faith without humility; thus, these two qualities are often linked together in the scriptures. (See Mosiah 4:11; Alma 37:33; Ether 12:27; D&C 5:24; 104:79. [^12]) Indeed, as Mormon indicated, the development of humility corresponds with a growing faith. (See Hel. 3:35.) Humility should be carefully cultivated into the fertile ground in which our seeds of truth may be planted and nurtured.

As we strive to develop humility, we might ask, "What attitudes help a person become humble and teachable?" One dual answer would probably suffice: "Sincerity and gratitude." The ancient prophets stressed the importance of sincerity in our prayers to God. (See Hel. 3:27; Moro. 10:4.) Gratitude for the things we have already received from God can also help develop our humility. (See Alma 34:38; 3 Ne. 10:10.) With a sincere, grateful attitude, our hearts are softened and ready to receive spiritual guidance. On the other hand, when we are vain and arrogant, the Spirit cannot reach us. Pride and faith are mutually exclusive: the proud feel no need to seek God's help, whereas the humble receive it and are strengthened. (See Hel. 6:35; 2 Ne. 9:28.) As sincerity and gratitude enrich our humility, we are prepared to receive God's spiritual knowledge. (See 1 Pet. 5:5-11; 2 Ne. 9:42; D&C 1:28.)

Sensitivity. The story is often told of a man in a loud, bustling city who heard the chirping of a bird over the city noises. As he looked around him, he noted that no one else heard the beautiful sounds of nature in the urban environment. As a test of the citizens' hearing ability, he dropped a large coin on the pavement. Immediately many people looked in his direction. The sound of money, not the bird, caught their attention. In a like manner, the whisperings of the Spirit may be echoing around us, but our attention may be centered on the mundane, material things of life. Sensitivity to the Spirit should be like a warm, moist climate within our souls that will allow our seeds of truth to germinate into new, vibrant seedlings.

In order to feel the Spirit, one must listen. As Jesus said, "Who hath ears to hear, let him hear." (Matt. 13:9.) We must tune our spiritual ears to personal revelation from God. Pondering and feeling are the attributes that cultivate this spiritual sensitivity. We need to separate ourselves from the distractions around us and ponder our own relationship with Heavenly Father. (See Moro. 10:3.) We also need to arouse the faculties of our souls and recognize with our inner spirits the feelings of truth, love, warmth, and goodness that the Spirit of God might manifest within us. (See Jacob 3:11; Alma 32:27-28; Moro. 7:16; D&C 9:8.)

Diligence. The ancient Hebrews were told of the diligence necessary to gain the full assurance or faith they needed to keep their hope strong and to gain their promised blessings. (See Heb. 6:10-15.) Latter-day Saints have also been admonished to seek diligently to increase their learning and faith. (See D&C 88:118.) A farmer's diligent work plows and tills the ground so the roots can grow in the loose, oxygenated soil. Our study and work cultivate the soil of our faith so our seedlings of faith can take root and grow.

Two key attributes will strengthen our diligence—patience and persistence. We need patience because the Lord's timetable for our spiritual development may not coincide with our own. Like spiritual teenagers, we may think we are mature and ready for new, profound revelations when actually we first need to master the basic necessities of simple faith. (See D&C 19:22.) Persistence is required because spiritual growth, like our physical health and fitness, is gained in gradual steps over long periods of time. (See 2 Ne. 28:30.) With patient, persistent diligence, our faith will grow stronger and stronger. (See Alma 32:42.)

Sacrifice. The Prophet Joseph taught "that a religion that does not require the sacrifice of all things never has power sufficient to produce the faith necessary unto life and salvation." He continued by saying that through the ages, "the faith necessary unto the enjoyment of life and salvation never could be obtained without the sacrifice of all earthly things." [^13] Like the farmer who forfeits his easy chair and spends much time in his fields to increase their productivity, true sacrifice means a willingness to place religious concerns over material pursuits. Some of the easier pleasantries of life must be set aside to concentrate on more important spiritual questions. (See Matt. 6:19-24; D&C 97:8.)

We fulfill the expectations of sacrifice as we give of our time and means to build God's kingdom. We do this in two basic ways: first, we build and strengthen ourselves through righteous devotion, and second, we help others through missionary work and Christian service. Sacrifice and faith are intertwined to lead a person toward eternal life. We must sacrifice to gain faith, and we must have faith to gain eternal life. If we are willing to sacrifice all, as our Savior did, our faith in him and his plan of salvation will help reunite us with him and our Heavenly Father for the eternities. Such is the ultimate fruit of faith.

After the soil is prepared, the seedling must be nourished and cultivated. Alma's teachings and the Savior's parables in the New Testament warn us how easily the seedling's growth can be hindered. Alma taught that the young plant needs to be nourished "with much care" so it can take root, grow, and bear fruit. But he warned that even a good plant can die if the ground of our personal spiritual environment is barren, for "if [we] neglect the tree, and take no thought for its nourishment," it will not take root and the sun's heat will cause it to wither and die. He applied this process to our spiritual growth when he said, "If ye will not nourish the word, looking forward with an eye of faith to the fruit thereof, ye can never pluck of the fruit of the tree of life." (Alma 32:40.)

In the parable of the sower, the Savior warned us about the influences of Satan and the natural difficulties of nurturing a seed until it bears fruit. (See Matt. 13:3-9, 18-23.) In fact, we might not even receive great spiritual witnesses until after our faith has been tried and tested. (See Ether 12:6.) But he that nurtures the seed in the good ground hears and understands the word until it bears fruit, even a hundredfold. (See Matt. 13:23.)

The parable of the talents also shows us how easily the spiritual gifts can be hindered if we do not develop them. The servant with one talent did not invest it but rather hid it for safekeeping. When he presented his master with the same talent, the master took the talent away and chastised him, saying, "For unto every one that hath shall be given, and he shall have abundance: but from him that hath not shall be taken away even that which he hath." (Matt. 25:29; see vv. 14-30.) We will have our spiritual talents or seeds taken away from us if we do not plant and cultivate them. As we learn obedience, we will know the truths of God's doctrines. (See John 7:17.) Desire is not enough; we must nurture the seed of truth if we want the fruits of faith and righteousness.

Just as the successful cultivation of a plant requires light, water, and food, three areas of spiritual nurturing will bring about a stronger, more fruitful faith: study, prayer, and obedience.

Study. Anyone seeking faith in a gospel principle must first study and learn about that teaching. Our primary resource for gospel learning should be the scriptures. Jesus admonished his followers to "search the scriptures" for help in understanding eternal life and his special calling. (John 5:39.) [^14] As we feast upon the scriptures (see 2 Ne. 32:3), study the words of the modern prophets, and ponder the inspired messages we hear at church meetings and classes, gospel ideals and eternal truths will enrich our understanding and stimulate our quest for further insights. Just as garden plants need light for survival, we need the light of the gospel to strengthen our testimonies. [^15] When our gospel study reveals new precious seeds of truth, we must foster a desire to understand their underlying principles and to develop faith in their worth.

Prayer. Prayer is a primary means by which eternal truths are communicated from God. [^16] In order to cultivate our faith, we must communicate daily with our Heavenly Father. In contrast, anyone neglecting regular spiritual contact with the Almighty will inevitably find their faith and commitment wavering. Prayer, like water for a plant, is a constant need. If neglected, signs of distress (thirst) will appear; if maintained, a healthy relationship (growth) is encouraged.

As we regularly study the gospel and daily petition God for direction, the Holy Spirit maintains our faith and strengthens our spirituality. The prophets and apostles have promised that through the Holy Ghost we can eventually "know the truth of all things." (Moro. 10:3-5; see also 2 Cor. 2:5-12.) New truths are revealed to us while we are cultivating our faith.

Obedience. Though knowledge of God is the foundation of faith, we can see from Satan's example that knowledge alone will not produce faith. As one of the most intelligent spirits in premortality, Satan was also the most proud. He thought his plan was better than Heavenly Father's. When his plan was rejected by God and the great majority of the premortal spirits, he rebelled. For his disobedience, he was cast out and left to his own devices, not knowing the things of God. (See Moses 4:3-6.) Obviously, knowledge alone did not cultivate his faith.

Obedience to the laws of God is a necessary catalyst that stimulates an increase of godly knowledge and a growth of spiritual faith. Elder Bruce R. McConkie wrote, "Faith is a gift of God bestowed as a reward for personal righteousness. It is always given when righteousness is present, and the greater the measure of obedience to God's laws the greater will be the endowment of faith." [^17] As mentioned earlier, God and Jesus Christ should be the first objects of our faith. Therefore, if we wish to receive the full fruits of our budding faith, we must nurture it by patterning our lives after Christ, who embodies the divine principle of faith in our Heavenly Father. Our faith and obedience should be like his. Thus he counsels us, "Therefore, what manner of men ought ye to be? . . . Even as I am." (3 Ne. 27:27.)

To know what God knows, to possess the faith he possesses, [^18] we must become as he is. Our seeds of knowledge and faith, when compared to the eventual full fruits of these attributes, are like the genetic material contained in a human embryo compared to a full-grown human being. All human potential is contained in the embryo, but it must be properly nourished to fully mature. Any seed or form of life requires food for growth. In spiritual terms, righteousness through obedience is the nutrient necessary for transforming our attributes from the natural into the divine.

The apostle John wrote: "Beloved, now are we the sons of God, and it doth not yet appear what we shall be: but we know that, when he shall appear, we shall be like him; for we shall see him as he is. And every man that hath this hope in him purifieth himself, even as he [God] is pure." (1 Jn. 3:2-3; italics added.) Those who will again enjoy God's presence will have become righteous and loving like him. In summary, like the necessary sun, water, and nutrients in a plant's growth, these catalysts—study, prayer, and obedience—produce a spiritual reaction that develops our faith. We must incorporate these three ingredients in order for our seeds of truth to produce sweet fruit.

A cyclical process—truth begetting faith begetting good works begetting truth begetting faith, etc.—continues in a spiral pattern as the seed of knowledge takes root in us, the tender plant of faith grows within us, and eventually the tree of righteousness bears the fruit of spirituality: "Ye shall feast upon this fruit even until ye are filled, that ye hunger not, neither shall ye thirst." (Alma 32:42; cf. Heb. 12:9-11; D&C 52:34.) If we nurture the seedling until it bears fruit, we will no longer lack for truth, faith, or spiritual gifts because we will possess them as attributes of our character, as does God himself. (See Gal. 5:22-25; Eph. 5:9.)

On the other hand, though Satan was one of the most innately intelligent of God's spirit children, "a son of the morning," his chance to develop eternally was cut off through disobedience and a lack of faith. He rejected the pattern of spirituality and brought spiritual death and damnation into his own life. He now desires to bring the same catastrophes into the lives of others. Ironically, while trying to subvert the plan of salvation after his expulsion from heaven, "he sought also to beguile Eve, for he knew not the mind of God, wherefore he sought to destroy the world." (Moses 4:6.) But instead of destroying the world by deceiving Eve and Adam, Satan thereby brought the plan of redemption into force. We are now able to come to the earth and develop our spirituality.

As a true saint of Christ takes advantage of the plan of redemption and tastes the fruits of increased faith, a spiral pattern of expanding spirituality is developed. If we can maintain this pattern despite worldly and personal challenges, then we are following a path that leads to life eternal with the Father and the Son. (See John 17:20-23.)

In premortality, we were not called upon to exercise our faith in God until we agreed both to leave behind our intimate knowledge of his existence and also to develop faith in his power to bring us back to him. The bulk of our development of faith must then take place here on earth, away from him. If we regain his presence, our knowledge will be perfect, supplanting faith; the eternal cycle will be complete for us as our faith is transformed into divine power. Therefore, faith remains throughout our progression as "the first great governing principle which has power, dominion, and authority over all things." [^19] Once we transform our faith into power, we can assist in beginning a new cycle by organizing intelligences into spirits and creating worlds on which they can develop their faith.

The Companions of Faith

Before we leave this chapter on faith, we need to make comparisons between faith and some principles closely associated with it: faith and belief, faith and knowledge, and faith and works.

Faith and Belief

For many people today, faith seems to mean little more than belief. Belief is a mental conviction that a person has of something, whether it is real or imagined. Faith adds a spiritual context or confirmation to the mental conviction, which usually leads to some action. For example, belief is defined as a "mental act . . . of placing trust or confidence in a person or thing" or as the "mental acceptance or conviction in the truth or existence of something." [^20] Faith is defined as "a confident belief in the truth, value, or trustworthiness of a person, idea, or thing," as a "belief that does not rest on logical proof or material evidence," and as a "belief and trust in God and in the doctrines expressed in the Scriptures." [^21] Notice that belief is mostly a mental act while faith seems to be a step beyond that. The LDS Bible Dictionary supports this relationship and indicates that faith is more than belief "since true faith always moves its possessor to some kind of physical and mental action." [^22]

However, the ancient prophets and apostles did not distinguish between the terms faith and belief. In the writings of the scriptures, especially the Bible, the two concepts were synonymous. Indeed, the basic terms believe and faith come from the same Hebrew and Greek roots. The Old Testament Hebrew root is 'aman, meaning "to build up or support," "to render (or be) firm or faithful," or "to trust or believe." [^23] The New Testament Greek root is pistis, meaning "credence, conviction, assurance, belief, faith, or fidelity." [^24] Thus, while some people may feel that faith is a step above belief, the scriptural sources will not have that same distinction. [^25]

Faith and Knowledge

Some skeptics consider faith and knowledge to be mutually exclusive, that faith simply explains some voids that knowledge has not yet filled. The prophets indicate, however, that they mutually complement each other. Moses and Joseph Smith taught that a knowledge of God's existence has been on the earth since the days of Adam, and this knowledge has helped Adam's posterity in the development of their faith. [^26] Faith in God and gospel principles cannot exist without a knowledge of some basic facts. We must know something about a concept or person before we can develop faith or understanding about it. [^27] Or as Paul asked, "How shall they believe in him of whom they have not heard?" (Rom. 10:14.) Thus a certain amount of knowledge must precede faith.

The prophets also taught that our knowledge continues to grow as our faith develops. Alma taught that "faith is not to have a perfect knowledge of things" (Alma 32:21), but we can at least know when the object of our faith is good and true. (See Alma 32:28, 33-36.) The amount of knowledge, especially in spiritual matters, that we receive seems to be dependent upon our faith, spiritual maturity, and God's desires. (See 2 Ne. 28:30; Alma 18:35.) A greater knowledge and understanding of God cannot be obtained without an adequate amount of faith and spiritual help. (See D&C 121:26-28.) Eventually, when we see Christ and know all truth, our faith will be replaced with a "perfect knowledge." (Alma 32:26; see also Ether 3:19-20; D&C 93:1, 26-28.) Therefore, the two are intertwined with each other like spiritual cords within a rope—we must have knowledge upon which to build our faith, which in turn increases our knowledge—until both are fulfilled.

Faith and Works

One last term often associated with faith is works. The ancient Apostle James taught that faith and works go together: faith without works is dead, and by works faith is made perfect. (See James 2:14-26.) We must not only express to God our faith in him, but we also need to live as he would have us live—obedient to all the commandments and full of love. (See 1 Jn. 2.) Jesus also taught that we can recognize the nature of someone by his or her fruits—a good tree will bring forth good fruits. (See Matt. 7:15-20.)

As discussed earlier, a growing faith will naturally motivate us to bring forth good works of Christian service. Our faith and love should be evidenced in our works. Alma states clearly that real faith will bring forth abundant good works. (See Alma 7:24.) Beyond the natural Christian service that we might give, we may also benefit from special spiritual works resulting from true faith, such as "miracles, visions, dreams, healings, and all the gifts of God that he gives to his saints." [^28] Thus, the greater our faith—the greater our works.

As a final comparison, knowledge, faith, and works are like three cords woven together in a strong spiritual rope. Each cord is necessary; without one of them, the rope weakens and eventually breaks. As they reinforce each other and are strengthened and enlarged through the Spirit of God, they become a mighty cable of spirituality in our lives.

In conclusion, we can say that FAITH is an assurance of unseen truths, a feeling of confidence in God, and a principle of action centered in Christ, which provides us a hope of divine promises, a motivation toward righteous living, and a catalyst that generates spiritual life. We must cultivate this gift of God and share its transforming power with others as we grow toward more complete spirituality. As we develop faith in Heavenly Father, we come to know someone we can trust, a divine being who loves us. As he nurtures our faith in his truths, his Son, and ourselves, we receive a more perfect knowledge and perform more righteous works. As we encourage others to develop faith on their way of spiritual life, we also come to recognize that faith is indeed the first eternal principle of Christ's gospel.

For further study, refer to the following entries:

TG: BD: EM: Assurance Faith Faith in Jesus Christ

Believe First Principles of the Gospel Faith Lectures on Faith Trust in God

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] See Theodore M. Burton, ''The Meaning of Repentance,'' in Repentance (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1990), 9-14.
[^2] ''BP,'' 297.
[^3] ''Our Lord and Savior,'' Ensign, May 1988, p. 23.
[^4] Sanctification through the Holy Ghost is discussed in chapter 19.
[^5] NWAF, 235.
[^6] A Series of Pamphlets by Orson Pratt (Liverpool: Franklin D. Richards, 1852), reprinted in Orson Pratt Works, vol. 2 of Important Works in Mormon History (Orem, Utah: Grandin Book Co., 1990), 32.
[^7] MF, 179. A detailed discussion of the law of chastity and the reasons why confession to ecclesiastical leaders is required for serious sexual sins is found in chapter 26.
[^8] MF, 86.
[^9] Men and Women of Christ (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1991), 27.
[^10] NWAF, 237.
[^11] See chapter 25 for a discussion on the important role of the sacrament.
[^12] See also TG, Reconciliation.
[^13] The Greek word can mean debts, offenses, faults, or sins.
[^14] The sanctifying cleansing of the Holy Ghost is discussed in chapter 19.
[^15] See also TG, Punish, Punishment.
[^16] Baptism is discussed in the next chapter.
[^17] Some details on the millennial era and the final celestial status of the earth and its inhabitants are included in chapter 38.
[^18] For details on types of revelation through the Spirit, see chapter 6.
[^19] TPJS, 358.
[^20] Ibid.
[^21] 15. The necessary elements, values, and risks of agency are discussed in the next chapter.
[^22] 16. One valuable dimension of our earlier existence that carried over into our mortal life here is the essential element of agency, which is discussed in the next chapter. Other elements of our earth life and the promises of the future are discussed in chapters 11-15.
[^23] 17. Chapter 12 contains more insights into the nature of sin and the dangers of judging others.
[^24] 18. TPJS, 354.
[^25] 19. The blessings, opportunities, and probationary nature of mortality are discussed in more detail in chapter 11.
[^26] 20. Chapter 20 provides more details on how to develop strong, regular spiritual growth.
[^27] 7. HC, 3:379; 5:355; LF, 3:1.
[^28] 8. Evidences and Reconciliations (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1987), 15.
