Victor L. Ludlow, Principles and Practices of the Restored Gospel ( 1992)

Chapter 17

Turning Back: The Process of Repentance

Have you ever been in a dirty, cluttered home or messy apartment and felt it reflected the personality of its occupant? Think of the task of cleaning and organizing everything in that dwelling. Even more challenging, imagine assuming the responsibility of helping the occupant to develop a whole new life-style of cleanliness and tidiness. When a dwelling is filthy and messy, it is less attractive and habitable. Besides being more difficult to maintain tidiness and a healthy environment, it may even foster antisocial behavior. Although housecleaning may be a major project, it is necessary to break out of unhealthy patterns and maintain a neat and functional residence.

Even greater difficulties arise when one tries to cleanse filthiness from a person's soul that the wickedness of the world has corrupted. When our spirit is sinful, we offend others and disturb ourselves, which leads to frustration and straying from God's path. Repenting is like cleaning a dirty house and establishing new habits—we may not look forward to cleansing and changing our life, but we must do it if we are to achieve spiritual purity and harmony.

What Is Repentance?

The New Testament terms translated into repent and repentance come from a Greek root, metamorphoo, meaning "to transform, change, or transfigure." This same root has evolved into the term metamorphosis. In biology, metamorphosis is the natural change in the structure and habits of an animal during normal growth—such as when a caterpillar transforms into a butterfly or a tadpole transfigures into a frog. In our spiritual life, when we reverse our negative behavior and enhance our spirituality, we initiate a process of transformation called repentance.

The word repent shows up relatively few times in the Old Testament. When it does, it is usually derived from the Hebrew word nacham, meaning "to sigh heavily" or "to be sorry." However, the Hebrew term used much more often to describe the repentance process in the Old Testament is shuv, usually translated as "to return" or "to turn back." The idea is to simply turn away (from sin) and to return (to goodness). To turn back or return to a state of goodness implies that though once good and righteous in the sight of God, we have detoured off that path of righteousness in our journey through earth life. The sorrow (or "heavy sighing") results from our feelings of disappointment.

As discussed in chapter twelve, we all have experienced physical and spiritual detours during our lives. We neither wanted nor planned them, but they have occurred anyway. Our spiritual detours resulted from associating with the wrong people, exploring foolish ambitions, or behaving improperly. Repentance is simply to return as soon as possible to where we should be—to get back on the right path. The emphasis may at first weigh on the negative, turning away from sin, but it should quickly shift to the positive, turning back to God as we begin new, more faithful lives.

Unfortunately, our image of repentance often carries heavy, dark, negative undertones dating back to early Catholic Christianity. The English term repent inherited a major flaw from its Latin origins, repoenitere, meaning "to experience pain, grief, or distress." Apostate medieval Christianity emphasized grief rather than the original dominant concept of a change of direction. Exhortations of ancient prophets, the Savior, and the apostles demonstrate that "change," especially a change of mind, was the primary focus behind the original terms, while grief, behavior modification, and other characteristics were secondary elements of the repentance process. [^1]

How does repentance relate to the earlier example of a filthy room? Every newlywed couple probably plan to have a neat, clean dwelling. But despite expectations, they may find that their residence has instead become dirty and disorganized. They have detoured from their expectations, and they see a need to change, or repent, to get their house back in order. Obviously, they first must recognize that present conditions are unsuitable. They then need to feel some sense of embarrassment over the sorry state of things and decide to change their behavior, giving up previous habits and committing to new patterns. They probably could use the help and support of others during this important time of readjustment. Eventually, they will be able to harmonize their expectations with their behavior, and cleanliness and peace will dwell in their home.

Similarly, remedying the spiritual imperfections of our lives goes through a process. For ease in classifying and remembering the process, it has been broken down into six steps, each of which has been "tagged" with the beginning letter R: recognition, remorse, renunciation, resolution, restitution, and reconciliation. As one goes through the repentance process, these steps often overlap, but they are all necessary before the process can be completed.

Recognition

Words like sin, wickedness, and repentance are almost never heard in public discourse nowadays—in an age when personal accountability has been undermined by popular psychology, they are considered at best old-fashioned and at worst offensive. Fittingly, LDS scholar Hugh Nibley writes: "The fatal symptom of our day is not that men do wrong—they always have—and commit crimes, and even recognize their wrongdoing as foolish and unfortunate, but that they have no intention of repenting, while God has told us that the first rule that he has given the human race is that all men everywhere must repent." [^2] Although a tendency to blame personal faults on someone else or something beyond our control is prevalent in today's society, a willingness to accept responsibility for one's actions is the first requisite for repentance.

Before we can undertake the steps of repentance, we must feel that our present life is unsatisfactory, probably as a result of our own actions. In short, we must desire to change. If we value our spiritual well-being, we will want to rid ourselves of sin. This inner feeling motivates us to seek something better in life. A modern apostle, David B. Haight, has said, "If we could feel or were sensitive even in the slightest to the matchless love of our Savior and his willingness to suffer for our individual sins, we would cease procrastination and 'clean the slate,' and repent of all our transgressions." [^3]

As discussed in chapter ten on agency, we are all influenced in some degree by circumstances outside our control. But within all people lies their conscience, the light of Christ, which prompts them to recognize the right and repent of their wrongs. Furthermore, the light of Christ leads people to the Holy Ghost, through whose power they may overcome faults and inhibitions. [^4] Thus, the Lord promises, "My grace is sufficient for all men that humble themselves before me; for if they humble themselves before me, and have faith in me, then will I make weak things become strong unto them." (Ether 12:27.)

This desire to change must be fed by a hope that lasting results will occur. Here, a friend or family member who is strong in the faith can be of inestimable value—for the nonmember seeking a new Christian life-style, the less-active member wanting to return to the fold, and the member struggling to overcome weaknesses. A trusted confidant can gently encourage and help the repentant one to recognize the promptings of the Holy Ghost, which brings both hope and power to change. Trust in a friend and a realization of the power of the Holy Ghost leads the repentant to faith in God—faith that God can be approached and that he will forgive.

Now the purification process of repentance can begin. In fact, the first step has already been accomplished. This step—as all children raised in the Church learn at an early age—is to recognize our errors and sins. Despite how we may have been originally deceived or coerced into sin, the recognition of sin through the light of Christ and the Holy Ghost places the burden of repentance squarely on our shoulders. If we argue that our guilt is unfair, we are not yet ready to repent. Thus Alma the younger counseled his son Corianton, who had committed fornication while serving a mission to the Zoramites, "Do not endeavor to excuse yourself in the least point because of your sins, by denying the justice of God; but do let the justice of God, and his mercy, and his long-suffering have full sway in your heart; and let it bring you down to the dust in humility." (Alma 42:30.)

Remorse

When we cease to rationalize our behavior and are willing to humble ourselves before God, we are then prepared for the second step of repentance. This is genuine remorse, which Paul referred to as "godly sorrow" for sin when he addressed the repentant Corinthians: "Now I rejoice, not that ye were made sorry, but that ye sorrowed to repentance: for ye were made sorry after a godly manner, . . . for godly sorrow worketh repentance to salvation . . . but the sorrow of the world worketh death." (2 Cor. 7:9-10; italics added.)

The step of remorse is closely associated with the original Latin meaning of repent, meaning "in response to sorrow." However, there are different types of sorrow. Godly sorrow is abhorrence of sin because it is inherently wrong and harmful. Worldly sorrow, on the other hand, is like the sorrow felt by a thief who doesn't regret that he stole, only that he was caught and is going to jail. Godly sorrow implies action and a determination to turn one's life around with God's help. Worldly sorrow is to feel self-pity and a sense of helplessness. Bruce R. McConkie expressed it well by saying, "Godly sorrow is born of the Spirit; it is a gift of God that comes to those who have a broken heart and a contrite spirit. It includes an honest, heartfelt contrition, a frank recognition of sins committed, and a firm determination to go and sin no more." [^5] Thus, remorse for the past must be sincere and come from within for it to truly affect future attitudes and behavior.

One may ask, "How can we help someone else through this step of remorse?" It is not the responsibility of other people, even Church or family members, to "make the person feel guilty." If they are aware of the sinful behavior of a person, their most helpful service is to encourage the person to pray to God and to go to proper Church leaders so the repentance process can begin in the errant person's life. With an attitude of trying to help the person rather than one of not trying to punish him or her, they can inform the person of the immediate harmful effects and the possible future consequences of sinful acts. They can also remind the person of the blessings and peace that can come as a change for the better is made.

Unsought, self-righteous counsel and condemnation, however, must be strictly avoided; rather than helping someone along, these actions usually promote bitterness and resentment. If the sinful person has already recognized the error, and he or she is experiencing remorse, then family members and friends should strengthen, encourage, and hold out hope for the individual to continue through the other steps of repentance. Their primary goal should be to help individuals to help themselves, not to alienate or belittle them.

Renunciation (Including Confession)

Recognizing and feeling sorry for sins is not enough. Third, the sinner must renounce and confess the transgression to the Lord and, in many cases, to others as well. In this step the one seeking change actually turns away from improper behavior. This is a pivotal step, where the person actually begins to leave the sin behind. As he forsakes negative behavior, he needs to admit his errors to those affected by his acts.

Only through confession are private feelings of remorse transformed into a tangible commitment to change: "For with the heart man believeth unto righteousness; and with the mouth confession is made unto salvation." (Rom. 10:10.) The confession is more than just an admission that a mistake was made—it should also indicate a total separation from that negative behavior. As Orson Pratt stated, "A confession of sins, unaccompanied with the resolution to forsake, is a solemn mockery before Him, and will add to our guilt, and increase the displeasure of heaven against us." [^6]

With any sin, we offend God and often others. In most cases, a confession of sin need take place only to God and to those persons directly wronged by it. With a few more serious sins, we may have so misrepresented the behavior expected of Christ's disciples that our fellowship in his church may be affected. "Major" sins (defined by the late President Spencer W. Kimball as sexual sins and "other sins of comparable seriousness," such as felony crimes, family and drug abuse, and so on) must also be confessed to proper Church authorities. "This procedure," President Kimball continues, "assures proper controls and protection for the Church and its people and sets the feet of the transgressor on the path of true repentance." [^7]

Going to proper Church authorities is not easy, but it is occasionally necessary. Latter-day Saints should remember that bishops, stake and mission presidents, and General Authorities are set apart as special judges in Israel. As such, they have the right and responsibility to receive special inspiration in counseling the repentant Saint. They can also help the person recognize the true seriousness of his or her transgressions and the ways one's fellowship in the Church is affected. As the Lord told an ancient prophet and judge, "Go; and whosoever transgresseth against me, him shall ye judge according to the sins which he has committed; and if he confess his sins before thee and me, and repenteth in the sincerity of his heart, him shall ye forgive, and I will forgive him also." (Mosiah 26:29.)

The Church leader has four basic courses of action that he can follow: First, he may feel the member has genuinely repented and should be so informed, as well as comforted and strengthened in the resolve to continue on the path of righteousness. Second, he may feel the repentance process is under way but not yet complete, and so the member is placed in a state of probation with certain restrictions and expectations as defined by the leader. Third, the sin may be serious enough to require the disfellowshipment of the member, with certain prescribed restrictions (such as no Church callings or public talks and prayers) placed upon the person. Finally, the sins may be so serious that the person is beyond the behavior even closely resembling that of a true Christian and thus the person is excommunicated from the Church.

The last two courses of action are very serious and require a formal procedure of Church discipline (formerly called a "Church court") with the sustaining support of both counselors (for a bishop's action) as well as of the local high council (for a stake president's action). Ironically, such serious disciplinary actions often help wayward members recognize the seriousness of their behavior, serving as a spiritual catalyst and motivating many to reform their lives. Probationary and disfellowshipped members may be brought back into full, active fellowship within a short period of time, as determined by the Church leader. Excommunicated members generally need to wait at least a year, during which they must demonstrate the fruits of repentance and righteous devotion. Then they can reapply for Church membership and the restoration of former priesthood and temple blessings. (Note that any case of Church discipline may be appealed through Church channels. That is, a bishop's action may be appealed to the stake president, or a stake president's action may be appealed to Church headquarters. Thus the member is insured a fair hearing with both his interests and those of the Church being justly evaluated.)

This step of renunciation is more than just privately or publicly recognizing the wrong; it also involves making a clean break and leaving that wrong behind while beginning to change for the better. For this step to take effect, especially with serious sins, the help of loved ones, family members, and Church leaders is vitally important. They can encourage the repentant one in removing the burden of sin from the soul so the person can move forward on a path of righteousness.

Resolution

President Kimball has said, "It is imperative that when one has once put his feet on the path to recovery and mastery there must be no turning back." [^8] Once a sin has been cast off, the repentant transgressor must make a firm resolve or commitment to forsake that weakness and to live righteously. "By this ye may know if a man repenteth of his sins—behold, he will confess them and forsake them." (D&C 58:43.) At this fourth step or stage, the person has turned the corner of repentance. Elder Neal A. Maxwell said, "Real repentance consists of turning away from that which is wrong and also turning to God. A full revolution! This is the most lasting and beneficial of all revolutions!" [^9] This pivot point is where we turn to God with a promise to obey him.

Without a firm commitment to both forsake our sin and live righteously, recognition, remorse, and renunciation of earlier misdeeds will bring only empty bitterness to the soul. (Remember the Latin root of repentance, with its emphasis upon sorrow.) Instead of looking back and regretting the problems we have caused, we must resolve to look forward to the blessings our Father in Heaven can now give us. (Remember the Hebrew root of repentance, meaning to turn back or return to the Lord.)

We cannot look in two directions at once with clear vision, especially backward and forward. Indeed, we are told to "look forward with steadfastness unto Christ." (2 Ne. 25:24.) Elder Bruce R. McConkie elaborated on this point, saying that ceasing from sin is the commencement of repentance; "To turn to righteousness and keep the commandments is a greater and more ennobling course, as when the immoral sinner not only forsakes his unchaste ways, but keeps the commandments in general, thus assuring himself of forgiveness." [^10] We must have faith that the Lord and the Holy Spirit will give us strength as we begin the uphill course of repentance. Again, this commitment should be made with God, Church authorities (if necessary), and even those who have been wronged by the sin.

Bishops are often intensely involved with these steps of repentance, especially concerning repentance of sexual sins among young people. Once the transgressors and the bishop have assessed, through confession, how much deviation from the strait and narrow path has occurred, a discussion of the repentance process and a renewal of personal goals help the members to unify themselves again with the Church and God. Oftentimes, a bishop who has won the confidence of the repentant person can be a great strength in sharing the burdens and challenges of the repentance process. The transgressor who genuinely wants to overcome sin will work hard to do what is right, not only to avoid disappointing himself and the Lord, but also to keep the confidence of his ally, the bishop, as well.

Usually, the repentant set their goals and timetable around partaking of the sacrament [^11] on Sunday. As a bishop clears repentant individuals to partake of the sacrament, they know that they have reached an important milestone in renewing their baptismal commitment to the Lord. For both "minor" transgressions between individuals and the Lord and "major" ones where the bishop has been involved, the sacrament is provided weekly for forgiveness and spiritual renewal. The fact that it is available weekly should remind us of our continuous need for repentance and recommitment. It is significant, too, that we do not partake of the sacrament privately but together, as a public admission that we "all have sinned, and come short of the glory of God." (Rom. 3:23.)

The serious sins of others do not permit us to pass judgment or feel superior to them. Rather, let us act as saviors on Mount Zion by empathizing, listening, and encouraging. This positive environment will help the sinner return to a state of happiness.

Restitution

Whenever possible, the repentant transgressor must try to make restitution for his sins. With this fifth step, the person leaves the last burdens behind and continues up the path of spiritual progression. Currently, this portion of the sinner's reformation is often neglected in the secular courts. However, just restitution remains critical in religious matters. In fact, because repairing or returning exactly what was lost, especially moral and spiritual damage, is difficult, the person should do as much as possible to balance the scales of justice.

Anciently, the law of Moses required not just equal restoration of defrauded property but additional punitive damages as well. For example, "if a man shall steal an ox, or a sheep, and kill it, or sell it; he shall restore five oxen for an ox, and four sheep for a sheep." (Ex. 22:1.) In other words, sin holds so many unforeseen consequences that a higher quality product should replace what has been lost. It is like a debt whose interest rapidly accrues. One should try to give back more than what was taken so that justice will be more than satisfied.

For example, if a person borrows a neighbor's lawn mower and severely damages it, he should at least have it repaired in even better condition than when he borrowed it. If the damage cannot be repaired, he would probably need to purchase a new machine, or at least a good used one. If the neighbor gets a better machine back, he may be upset that his lawn mower was damaged, but he should feel good about the other person who went the second mile in restoring his equipment. Thus no hard feelings should develop between the two people, and a relationship of respect and trust can be built.

This step heals the sinner as well as the victim. Rather than forgetting about the other people involved, it helps prepare for forgiveness and reconciliation, especially with the Lord. By restoring more than what was taken, the offender not only clears his or her debt, but also, to a certain degree, brings the other person into a forgiving, loving mood. This step is even more difficult when one is trying to provide restitution for spiritual, moral, and emotional offenses. One must demonstrate to Heavenly Father and others that he or she is diligently striving to bring much more good into the world than the evil the individual has caused. As powerful examples in the scriptures, note how Paul in the New Testament and the sons of Mosiah and Alma the Younger in the Book of Mormon spent the rest of their lives trying to provide restitution for the serious sins and acts of their earlier lives. (See Acts 9:4-19; 22:7; 26:14; Gal. 1:15-16; Mosiah 27:32—28:8; Alma 5:3-61; 36:3-21.)

Reconciliation through Forgiveness

The sixth and last step of repentance is reconciliation between the sinner and the offended parties. Now that the transgressor has broken from the past by renouncing and compensating for his past errors, he is ready to ask God and others for forgiveness. Reconcilement with those we have wronged will hasten the cleansing process within our souls and bring a feeling of peace and harmony with family and friends. This rapprochement will only occur when the past is forgotten and all parties are willing to forgive and forget.

Harmony with God is the most important reconciliation. He and his Spirit cannot abide with us unless we are free of sin. Reconciliation occurs when we conform ourselves to God's will, remembering that salvation comes through his grace. (See 2 Ne. 10:24. [^12]) The prophets and apostles have taught that we receive this harmony through the atonement of Jesus Christ. (See 2 Cor. 5:17-20.) It is necessary before we can be in full fellowship with Christ's saints. (See D&C 46:4.)

The act of forgiveness is the crucial element in this step. Forgiveness has three stages: (1) we ask others to forgive us, (2) we express willingness to forgive others, and (3) we receive forgiveness from others. The model petition for forgiveness is in the Lord's prayer where he instructs us to ask Heavenly Father to "forgive us our debts, [^13] as we forgive our debtors." (Matt. 6:12; see also Mosiah 26:31; D&C 42:88.) This is a classic example that illustrates that one cannot simply ask for a gift but must first give before receiving.

Separating the prefix from the root of "fore-give," we can see that the literal meaning of the word is "given in advance." The Old English term (forgiefan) is a translation of the Medieval Latin word for pardon (perdonare), meaning "to give wholeheartedly." The Greek root means "to send forth." The Hebrew root means "to carry away" or "to pardon or spare." So when we forgive someone, we carry away, send forth, or spare their burden of transgression. This is a gift we should give wholeheartedly, not begrudgingly. Similarly, when we receive the gift of forgiveness, we should accept it with sincere appreciation. True forgiveness heals the wounds of both the transgressor and the person who was wronged.

Unfortunately the act of forgiveness is sometimes one directional. That is, only one party is willing to forgive. Either the repentant person requests but does not receive forgiveness from the offended one, or the offended person offers a pardon but the transgressor does not feel that he or she is worthy to receive forgiveness. Also, there are cases where both parties have offended, but only one is willing to extend forgiveness. The one not receiving forgiveness should not hold it over the other, demanding or expecting forgiveness. Sadly, people unable to forgive are usually hurting themselves more than others, although all suffer to a certain extent until reconcilement is achieved. Instead, turning to the Lord, who forgives all freely, will bring the peace and blessings that come from harmonizing our love with his. (See Mosiah 26:22-24.)

Remission of sins

After completing these six steps of repentance, culminating with reconciliation and forgiveness, we are ready to receive a full remission of or release from our sins. This occurs when we enter the waters of baptism or renew the baptismal covenant through the sacrament. Like a glorious Sabbath day of rest after a week of soul-searching labor, one could call this the seventh and most wonderful capstone step of repentance. Remission gives us a new, free beginning to the rest of our lives. Guilt flees as we know that God not only has forgiven us, but also has chosen to forget our transgressions—thus the burden of the past is gone. (See Jer. 31:34; Heb. 8:12; 10:17.) The sweet companionship of his Holy Spirit comes into our lives and confirms the cleansing process. [^14] The peace that comes into our lives results from the greatest blessing of repentance—a release of our sins through Christ's atonement.

The peace that accompanies a remission of our sins will come only if we have faith. Faith unto repentance leads us through the steps of repentance because we trust in the power of Christ's atonement, leaving our sins with him, letting go of our guilt, and seeking for a new purity. One clear example of faith unto repentance is in the book of Enos. After "wrestling" before God for a remission of his sins, Enos recorded, "There came a voice unto me, saying: Enos, thy sins are forgiven thee, . . . thy faith hath made thee whole." (Enos 1:5-8.)

In a simple comparison, repentance is like updating a computer file. Once it replaces the old file, only the new one needs to remain in the memory bank. The cleansing, sanctifying power of the Atonement allows us the opportunity to remove the imperfections from our soul and to come forth clean and pure. Thereafter, our record of recollection will be the final, polished edition. Until that day of final cleansing, we will retain some recollection of earlier transgressions. This remembrance keeps us humble and helps us avoid repeating similar mistakes. In addition, we can better empathize with others and their weaknesses. We can also wisely counsel others on the pitfalls of sin and the struggles of repentance. And if we have truly repented and been forgiven, this recollection should not renew the bitter anguish of guilt.

If We Don't Repent, Then What?

Of course, we have the agency to choose whether or not to repent. Although we may escape the consequences and punishment for our wicked deeds temporarily, eventually we will have to fully pay for them ourselves. (See Matt 5:26. [^15]) Suffering for sin is so severe that Jesus admonishes us to avoid it by partaking of his atoning sacrifice. If not, we must suffer as he did in the Garden of Gethsemane, "which suffering caused [him]self, even God, the greatest of all, to tremble because of pain, and to bleed at every pore, and to suffer both body and spirit." (D&C 19:18.)

The prophets use graphic language in trying to describe this suffering, comparing it to a lake of fire and brimstone, a place of endless torment, and a burning in the lowest depths of hell. (See Rev. 20:14; Mosiah 3:25; Luke 16:28; Deut. 32:22.) No one will know how bitter it is until they suffer it themselves. Jesus warned us, saying, "Repent, lest I smite you . . . by my wrath, and by my anger, and your sufferings be sore—how sore you know not, how exquisite you know not, yea, how hard to bear you know not." (D&C 19:15.)

Although all of us make mistakes during our probationary state on earth, surely we are not so foolish as to turn aside the promises of repentance so that we will have to suffer ourselves for all of our sins. We should choose now, today, to begin our repentance process instead of procrastinating the day of our repentance until it is too late. (See Alma 12:37; 34:33.) Death may, at any time, cut off our chances for repentance in the flesh. Or we may not have enough time to work through the process of repentance and forgiveness. Or we may simply lose our desire to repent. Any of these will leave us in the awful state the prophets have often described.

In conclusion, REPENTANCE means both feeling genuine sorrow for our sins and turning our hearts toward God. It is a process involving recognition of our transgressions, sincere remorse, renunciation of wickedness, a firm resolve to become more godlike, restitution to those we have wronged, and reconciliation through forgiveness (and a willingness to forgive)—qualifying us for a release from our burdens through Christ's atonement. The act by which we formally receive a remission of our sins is initially through baptism [^16] and thereafter through renewal of our baptismal covenant by partaking of the Lord's sacrament. Once we are free from sin, we are then worthy to have God's Spirit with us. The light of his love will then shine upon us as we learn and live the truths of salvation.

For further study, refer to the following entries:

TG: BD: EM: Confession Confession Confession of Sin Forgive, Forgiveness Repentance Disciplinary Procedures Punish, Punishment Restitution; Restoration Remission of Sins Reconciliation, Reconcile Repentance Remission of Sins Repent, Repentance

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Message of the Joseph Smith Papyri: An Egyptian Endowment (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1975), 94. Baptism originally occurred in running water (i.e., a river or stream), symbolic for washing sins away (downstream). The Jewish ritual of washing or immersion in the Mikveh of the synagogue also stipulates running or flowing fresh water, whenever possible.
[^2] MD, 548-49.
[^3] The gift of the Holy Ghost is discussed in the next chapter; the temple ordinances are explained in chapter 23.
[^4] These ordinances are discussed in more detail in chapter 22.
[^5] Chapter 25 contains further details about the sacrament ordinance.
[^6] WNTCD, Baptism
[^7] This promise of freedom was also given in the Book of Mormon as King Benjamin spoke to his covenant Israelites in Mosiah 5.
[^8] Chapter 23 contains further insights into the steps and requirements of making covenants.
[^9] TETB, 75.
[^10] See BD, Baptism. More details about the priesthood and the necessary keys for performing such ordinances are presented in chapters 22 and 32.
[^11] See EM, 1:92-95.
[^12] MD, 72.
[^13] The Greek word can mean debts, offenses, faults, or sins.
[^14] The sanctifying cleansing of the Holy Ghost is discussed in chapter 19.
[^15] See also TG, Punish, Punishment.
[^16] Baptism is discussed in the next chapter.
