Victor L. Ludlow, Principles and Practices of the Restored Gospel ( 1992)

Chapter 18

The Cleansing Covenant of Baptism

Few people today take the foolish risk of major financial commitment based only on good feelings and a verbal agreement. Instead, to protect themselves and their property, most people draw up written contracts in precise legal form. In contrast to this strict legalistic approach to temporal affairs, however, modern people are generally quite lax concerning the formalities of religious observances. This is most evident in the ordinance of baptism—once the foundation of all Christian religions—which is no longer even performed in some denominations professing Jesus Christ. In these cases, philosophic sentiment has supplanted symbolic ritual.

Just as in legal matters in which people are judged by their actions as manifestations of their intents and feelings, religious beliefs must manifest themselves in acts, including symbolic ones, to have saving power. Legally, a contract is a necessary indication of a person's intention; likewise, religious commitment is demonstrated by symbolic ordinances. The gospel of Jesus Christ requires baptism as its first and primary symbolic ordinance. Baptism not only marks one's entrance into Christianity, it also opens the way for spiritual regeneration.

The Fourfold Purpose of Baptism

Before discussing how a symbolic ritual creates actual, literal changes in our being, we should first study the purpose of baptism. As revealed through ancient and modern scripture, baptism has four main functions. First, baptism in water is a symbol of cleansing and rebirth preparatory to the baptism of fire by the Holy Ghost. Second, it is an ordinance that culminates the last step of repentance for those seeking a remission of sins. Third, baptism is a covenant in which one takes the name of Christ upon oneself and vows to keep his commandments. Finally, baptism is a gateway admitting the person first to membership in Christ's church on earth and later into the celestial kingdom. Thus, baptism starts the disciple on the strait and narrow path leading to eternal life.

Baptism as a Symbol of New Life

Symbolic rituals among foreign, primitive cultures are quickly identified but rarely understood by visiting strangers. Although some study these rituals out of curiosity and others try to imitate them, most people from "civilized" nations consider any such rituals to be out of place in modern society. But as materialistic, straightforward, and modern as our culture may appear, all types of symbols and representations permeate it.

Even simple, common acts can be loaded with symbolic importance, even though we often do not think of the meanings behind the acts. A simple handshake, for example, has symbolic meanings of friendship and trust. In medieval times, a handshake in which armed men extended bare hands was a token of trust that meant they were not bringing forth their weapons. "Let's shake on it" can still mean the honored end of a negotiated contract between people. These symbolic meanings rarely come to mind when two people grasp hands as a quick gesture of greeting or parting.

Other symbols in our society obviously represent something, though people disagree as to their meanings. For example, in contemporary society, men and women argue over the implied messages of a man opening the door for a woman, or a woman asking a man out to lunch. Objects can also represent status in society, such as cars, houses, clothing, and so on, though status symbols do not mean the same thing to different people. Symbolic acts and objects are thus a natural part of modern life, though their meanings are not always understood or remembered.

To understand the ramifications of a symbolic ordinance such as baptism, we must first understand what a symbol is. Our English word is transliterated from the Greek word symbolon, which means "something brought together." The original symbolons were coins or potsherds (small pieces of pottery) broken into two pieces to identify the parties in a legal agreement. Each fragment became a symbol representing the agreement, and the two were brought together again when the conditions of the bargain were fulfilled. In simplest terms, then, a symbol is a concrete representation of something abstract and greater than itself, which leads us to comprehend or obtain something of value. Likewise, baptism is a physical act that symbolizes the union of spirit and flesh, cleansing, and rebirth.

A Symbolic Ritual Uniting Spirit and Flesh. In baptism, the concrete symbol is a physical act of bodily immersion in water, representing a subjection of our will to God, which, in turn, can transform a person's soul. By virtue of the ritual act, we achieve for a brief moment in mortality what can only be sustained in eternity: complete unity between the flesh and the spirit (like two Greek symbolons brought together). "For man is spirit. The elements are eternal, and spirit and element, inseparably connected, receive a fulness of joy; and when separated, man cannot receive a fulness of joy." (D&C 93:33-34.)

Most of the time on earth, the spirit and elements (flesh) are at variance with one another, harboring conflicting desires. Thus, our joy is not full. Symbolic ritual brings body and spirit into harmony by elevating the flesh to the level of the spirit in order to transform the soul, for "the spirit and the body are the soul of man." (D&C 88:15.) Perhaps this explains why many adult converts to the Church, who have previously not felt this binding of body and spirit, report such a joyous experience as they come out of the waters of baptism. The human spirit must learn to subdue its flesh so that the entire soul may become divine. Baptism is a symbol of such submission and unity.

A Symbolic Cleansing of Body and Spirit. The specific form of baptism, by immersion, also has symbolic richness. It illustrates better than any other ordinance the symbolic power of ritual. Since a major purpose of baptism is the remission of sins, this washing away of guilt is represented by water. But why water? Hugh Nibley explains that "water is not only a symbol of cleansing, cooling, refreshing, and reviving: it actually does all those things, at one and the same time." [^1] Thus the associations between the concrete actions of water and the abstract quality of purity it represents correspond exactly. Equally important is the total immersion in water to achieve a complete cleansing from impure to pure. (Note that something not completely pure is impure. There is no such thing as partially pure.)

Having cleansed the flesh from sin by water, the soul is ready for a second baptism—the sanctification of the flesh and spirit together by fire, the Holy Ghost. Fire is an apt symbol for the Holy Ghost, since it consumes earthly matter and dissipates it invisibly heavenward. Temporal elements are literally changed in their chemical makeup by flames, just as the carnal flesh is elevated to a spiritual level through the Holy Ghost. With body and spirit thus united and transformed, the symbolic rebirth of the soul is complete. Without it, there is no salvation. Thus, Jesus explained, "Except a man be born of water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God. That which is born of the flesh is flesh; and that which is born [transformed] of the Spirit is spirit." (John 3:5-6.)

A Symbolic Rebirth Foreshadowing the Resurrection. The baptismal ritual further expands the age-old symbolic association between birth and death by adding atonement and resurrection. In ancient pagan cultures, birth and death were passages in the life cycle, first from a premortal (spiritual) to mortal (physical) life, and then from the mortal to postmortal (again, spiritual) existence. This cycle of spiritual-{birth}-physical-{death}-spiritual would continue throughout eternity. It remains a basis for some contemporary religions, such as those teaching reincarnation. Through the resurrection and glorification of the flesh through Christ, on the other hand, the phases of life build upon one another in linear rather than in cyclical form. Thus, the soul, spirit and body, may progress eternally.

Associating the image of death with baptism, the apostle Paul wrote that "we are buried with him [Christ] by baptism into death." (Rom. 6:4.) The important difference, of course, is that pagans believed only the spirit is eternal, while Paul affirmed that the flesh is also: "For if we have been planted together in the likeness of his death, we shall be also in the likeness of his resurrection." (Rom. 6:5.)

Water is a dominant symbol in pagan death myths, just as it is in Christian baptisms. In Egyptian and Grecian lore, for example, the spirits of the dead were ferried across rivers of water to the underworld. Though various traditions share water as a symbol of passage unto death, the uniquely Christian symbol for redemption from death unto resurrection is blood. In a revelation to Moses, the Lord explained how the symbols of water, spirit, and blood relate to birth, baptism, and resurrection: "By reason of transgression cometh the fall, which fall bringeth death, and inasmuch as ye were born into the world by water, and blood, and the spirit, which I have made, and so became of dust a living soul, even so ye must be born again into the kingdom of heaven, of water, and of the Spirit, and be cleansed by blood, even the blood of mine Only Begotten; that ye might be sanctified from all sin, and enjoy . . . eternal life in the world to come, even immortal glory." (Moses 6:59; italics added.)

Every unborn spirit is sustained in its mother's womb and aided in its passage into mortality by her water and blood surrounding it. Likewise, Christ was baptized in the waters of Jordan to fulfill all righteousness as confirmed by the Holy Spirit in the form of a dove, and he shed his blood both in Gethsemane and on the cross to bring us a new eternal life with him. Appreciation of these symbolic elements of baptism helps us better understand its nature as an essential Christian ordinance.

Baptism as an Ordinance of Salvation

Imagine walking down a city street and observing two people in a heated discussion in front of a store. Suddenly the conversation ceases, they bend over, and each of them takes off one shoe and gives it to the other person. "What a strange act!" you say to yourself. But if you later found out that the shoe exchange was deliberately done in public as the symbol of a special contract between these two people, it might make a little more sense, especially if this were a frequent act within the community. (See Ruth 4:7-8.)

Baptism is an unusual act or ceremony. It is not often that people will, fully clothed, immerse themselves completely into a body of water, especially in front of others. However, baptism is readily recognized worldwide as a Christian ordinance. Although various forms of the ritual might take place, its nature as a religious ceremony is easily identifiable. Thus it becomes a visible, public declaration of allegiance to the Christian faith. Christians also view the ordinance as the culmination of a repentance process, as discussed in the previous chapter. Whether viewed as the last step of repentance or as the first step, or threshold, of Christian commitment, it is an extraordinary act of fellowship.

Joseph Smith identified baptism as the foundation ordinance of the Church, an act done "by immersion for the remission of sins." (A of F 4.) Because of their sacred nature, LDS baptisms are conducted in meetinghouse baptismal fonts where private religious services can be held. When such fonts are unavailable, secluded open bodies of water are used. Family members and friends customarily attend, and the presence of two priesthood holders is required for the act to be considered binding. The unusualness of the act provides additional impact to the ordinance; the person being baptized must have genuine intentions before participating in such a unique act. This is one reason why children under the age of accountability, eight years old, are not baptized. (See D&C 68:25-27.) Since the act is at least semipublic, it indicates the humility of the older child or adult being baptized. But baptism is meant to be more than an unusual public act of humility; it is also a sacred ordinance.

An ordinance can be either a law (teaching, directive, or commandment) or an act (ritual, rite, or ceremony). Ordinance acts are just one important subcategory within the ordinance laws of the gospel. [^2] In general LDS practice, however, the term ordinance usually refers to the act, such as baptism, laying on of hands, sealing, and so on.

Baptism, as an ordinance, is both a law and an act. As a law of the gospel, baptism is a commandment to all who wish to return to Heavenly Father's celestial presence. (See John 3:5.) As an act of the gospel, baptism is essential to our salvation in God's kingdom. Few divine laws have such specific rituals to symbolize their fulfillment. For example, there is no specific religious ceremony accompanying the commandments to love the Lord our God or to honor parents, although social customs may indicate accepted ways that obedience to these commandments is recognized.

Ordinance-acts of the gospel are divided into two categories: ordinances of salvation and ordinances of blessing. The ordinances of salvation include baptism, confirmation (the gift of the Holy Ghost), and temple ordinances, especially the endowment and marriage sealings. [^3] These ordinances are necessary for exaltation in the highest realms of God's celestial kingdom.

The blessing ordinances give us comfort, strength, and direction while in our probationary estate. Although not necessary, they include, among others, blessing children, healing the sick, receiving patriarchal blessings, dedicating graves of the deceased, and so on. [^4] The blessing ordinance that comes closest to being a salvation ordinance is the sacrament. Though not mandatory, the sacrament ordinance is expected of faithful Latter-day Saints as they constantly strive to bring their lives into spiritual harmony with Christ and his commandments. [^5]

Because the soul is spirit and body united, ordinances of salvation must be performed by people in the flesh to achieve their purpose. But just as Christ suffered and atoned vicariously for our sins in the flesh, his ordinances may be performed by one person on behalf of another, provided that the ordinances are performed by people in the flesh and that the recipient of the proxy ordinances has him- or herself experienced mortal life. The third of the hosts of heaven who refused the opportunity to come to earth and gain a mortal body are excluded from salvation—at least in part—because their complete souls were never formed.

Through the baptismal ordinance, the participant incorporates theoretic and symbolic meanings of the commandments and demonstrates obedience to divine law through an actual, prescribed ritual. By being baptized and uniting our body and spirit with God's will, we actually experience with our own flesh the symbolic values of the ritual. When the ordinance of baptism is properly performed, body and spirit are both cleansed and then transformed in a manner similar to the resurrection. Thus, the symbolic becomes a reality.

Baptism as a Covenant of Commitment

By participating in the burial and resurrection of Christ through our own baptism, we are prepared to receive the gift of the Holy Ghost, which empowers us to follow him in our daily lives, gradually conforming to the symbolic perfection achieved in ritual. A strong personal commitment must be associated with the ceremony, or it will remain nothing more than an empty, hypocritical gesture. We demonstrate our sincerity through entering and keeping covenant promises with the Lord. Since covenants include solemn promises to God, we need to understand the nature and purpose of covenants in order to appreciate the covenant promises of baptism.

The Nature of Covenants. The first two definitions of the word covenant in Webster's dictionary are both appropriate to the covenant context of baptism. First, Webster defines the word as "a binding or solemn agreement by two or more persons, parties, etc." The second dictionary definition amplifies the meaning of baptism, explaining covenants to be "the promises of God to man, usually carrying with them conditions to be fulfilled by man, as recorded in the Bible." [^6] From these definitions, we learn that covenants are binding agreements with conditional promises.

The language roots of the Old Testament provide helpful ancient meanings of covenant and covenant making. As a noun, covenant derives from the Hebrew word b'rith, which has roots in the Semitic languages of the ancient Near East. According to which language etymology one follows, the term b'rith has three possible meanings, each applicable to Latter-day Saint covenant tradition:

First, one meaning comes from the Hebrew root bara, meaning "to select" or "to choose." This root conveys the analogy of a woodcutter going into the forest to select or mark certain trees to harvest with his ax. God does not arbitrarily enter into a covenant relationship with each and all of his children. He selects those with faith and commitment and enters into a covenant relationship with them after they have chosen to come unto and obey him, as witnessed in the waters of baptism. Thus, a covenant is a selective choice, carefully entered into by both parties.

This definition of covenant also matches a common verb used to describe the process of "entering into a covenant." The technical phrase for "making a covenant" most frequently used in the Old Testament is karat b'rith, meaning literally to "cut a covenant," similar to the phrase heard today, "to cut a deal." The origin of this expression may lie in the ancient covenant ceremony of sacrificing animals by cutting their throats, which symbolized a point of finalization and personal commitment in the contractual process. In other words, when the two parties came to an agreement, they would indicate it through an unusual act—such as cutting the throat of an animal to be used as a sacrificial offering or as the main dish for their feast of celebration. Today, we participate in the unusual act of bodily immersion as a symbol of our covenant contract.

Second, covenant means a "bond" or "joining together." Many scholars believe b'rith in this context is derived from the Akkadian root biritu, which means "fetter" or "chain." We may feel uncomfortable with such strong language of being fettered or chained; for us, covenants are voluntary, not obligatory. However, once a mutual commitment has been made, the two parties are linked or "chained together." Biritu can thus represent an absolute, binding compact between God and his children, as symbolized in the baptismal covenant. This binding dimension of covenants is also evident when Latter-day Saints talk about sealings as a part of the "new and everlasting covenant" in LDS temple ordinances.

Indeed, when one looks at covenant making and the meaning of "cutting" a b'rith in this second context, the symbolism of the cutting motion represents a penalty if one breaks a solemn oath. Ancient Near Eastern contracts often went so far as to list the penalties for breaking the agreements. So to "cut a bond" can mean to commit yourself to dire consequences if you break your promise. However, when we think of "cutting a bond," there is also a positive dimension and the implication of a liberation if one maintains the vow. In a gospel context, as we cut ourselves from the chains of sin by entering into a baptismal covenant relationship with Christ, we free ourselves to achieve our ultimate, eternal destiny. [^7]

Third, the root of covenant also has a more unusual meaning. According to some scholars, the Hebrew root bara really means "to eat bread" with someone. This concept is probably best understood in the Semitic tradition of hospitality and guest protection. According to the Arabian and Bedouin customs, even if someone is your fierce enemy or a complete stranger, when you invite that person into your home or tent and share bread with him, you are duty-bound to defend and protect this guest—even at peril of your own life. This external, physical act of breaking bread together symbolizes an internal, moral commitment that obligates the host to protect his guest.

Although many might find this act of eating bread a bit unusual as a covenant process, Latter-day Saints see it as a natural part of making covenants because they renew covenants on a weekly basis by partaking of the bread of the sacrament. The cutting or breaking and eating of bread may be much closer to covenant making in the ritual sense than we generally think. Among the direct parallels between the performances of sacrifice in the Old Testament and sacrament in the New Testament, we remember that, as a part of their covenant-making and covenant-renewal process, the levitical priesthood holders and the Israelites together ritually cut or divided and then ate the important and common peace offering. Today, we follow an ancient procedure as our priests separate or break the bread, representing Christ's sacrifice, and we all eat it together in a renewal of our baptismal covenant.

In review, a covenant is a binding, solemn agreement between God and man, conditional upon certain scriptural stipulations. Entering into a covenant requires a voluntary binding between the covenant parties, often symbolized by some special act, such as baptism or eating bread together. [^8]

The Purpose of Covenants. Knowing what covenants are, it is helpful to appreciate why God uses covenants to bind our relationship with him. God's work and glory is to "bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man." (Moses 1:39.) For us to achieve this divine purpose, we need help and direction. Our covenants with God provide the directives and motivate us past important measuring posts in our path back to Heavenly Father's presence, helping us establish a pattern of faithful obedience. Let us review four ways that covenants help us by providing important teachings, incentives, gateways, and patterns.

Covenants help us first as gospel teachings by informing us of God's expectations for achieving eternal life. A major part of the temple endowment, for example, instructs us about ourselves and God's plan and eternal purposes. The laws and commandments attached to the covenants teach us how to draw nearer to God and how to become more like him.

Second, covenant oaths and blessings provide helpful incentives to stay on the path toward the celestial kingdom. For example, the seriousness of any oath with God prompts us more toward obedience in moments of temptation or weakness than a simple knowledge of right and wrong. Also, the enticement of promised blessings encourages us to obey when we feel discouraged or lost. Covenants promise us divine help and assistance in reaching our eternal goals. The Lord says he is obligated to bless us as we obey his laws, and this gives us courage and incentive to remain faithful to our covenants.

Third and most important, covenants serve as necessary gateways through which we must pass if we are to return to God's presence. After passing through the gates of water and spirit baptism, we then prepare to enter into higher temple covenants that draw us closer to God's highest glory. The major covenant teachings of the temple provide the measurements by which we determine where we are in our path toward perfection and which gateways we still have to go through. When we are found ready and worthy to enter into higher covenants, we sense we are getting closer to our highest potential—the gateway to eternal life with our families.

Finally, when we maintain covenant oaths, we establish patterns of obedience that become a part of our eternal nature. We gradually become the type of person who remains faithful to God and dedicated to goodness, love, and righteousness. We are then ready to help the next generation establish a pattern of celestial life.

Thus we see that God's covenant ordinances—along with their accompanying laws, commandments, and promises—give us help and hope in reaching toward eternal life. The scriptures not only provide details about the specific covenants, but they also give the eternal context of our covenant relationship with God. As stated on the title page of the Book of Mormon, scriptures provide both the past historical context for these covenants and also the future prophetic promises for their blessings. Baptism in particular has many commandments and promises attached. To receive the full benefit of baptism, we must understand the promises made during the ordinance.

The Covenant Promises of Baptism. The baptismal covenant is an external act indicating our internal commitment to God. When we are "desirous to come into the fold of God," we make certain promises with him, best summarized by Alma in his discourse at the waters of Mormon. Our initial covenant of baptism includes a willingness (1) "to be called his people," that is, to take upon us the name of Christ; (2) "to bear one another's burdens, that they may be light"; (3) "to mourn with those that mourn; yea, and comfort those that stand in need of comfort"; (4) "to stand as witnesses of God at all times and in all things, and in all places . . . even until death"; and (5) to "serve him and keep his commandments." (Mosiah 18:8-10.)

In return, the Lord promises those who honor their baptismal covenant that he will (1) "pour out his Spirit more abundantly upon" them; (2) they will be "redeemed of God, and be numbered with those of the first resurrection"; and (3) they will "have eternal life." (Mosiah 18:9-10.) These three blessings, when combined with the valuable one mentioned earlier of receiving a remission of sins, promise us not only deliverance from sin, but also the companionship of the Holy Ghost throughout our life. This baptismal covenant is renewed weekly through the sacrament of the Lord's supper, wherein we promise (1) to remember Christ, (2) to take his name upon us, and (3) to keep his commandments. In turn, the Lord promises us one great blessing—that we "may always have his Spirit" to be with us. (D&C 20:77.)

Finally, baptism prepares us for our eventual resurrection with the righteous. Along with the baptism of fire, it continues a sanctifying process that continues until the symbolic resurrection with Christ through the waters of baptism becomes literal. The symbolic again becomes actual.

Baptism as a Gateway to Righteous Living

To further help us in our journey toward perfection, baptism grants us membership into Christ's church, his kingdom on earth. Baptism is the one required gateway through which all must pass. It also grants symbolic citizenship into the celestial kingdom, which gradually becomes reality as one continues on the strait and narrow path leading to that kingdom of glory. One must be in a state of absolute purity to actually enter into Heavenly Father's realm, for "there cannot any unclean thing enter into the kingdom of God." (1 Ne. 15:34.) Since we have become impure through sin, we must be cleansed in order to meet God's heavenly environmental expectations. (See Mark 16:16; 3 Ne. 11:33; D&C 112:29.)

The Lord himself showed us the gate by which we enter the kingdom of God. Nephi, referring to the Lord's example, wrote: "Do the things which I have told you I have seen that your Lord and your Redeemer should do; for, for this cause have they been shown unto me, that ye might know the gate by which ye should enter. For the gate by which ye should enter is repentance and baptism by water." (2 Ne. 31:17.) Later emphasis in this book will show how much remains to be done once one has gone through this critical portal. Initially, though, we must prepare ourselves to go through this gateway if we want to return to Heavenly Father's presence. Once through the entrance, God will help us, primarily through the Holy Ghost, to continue on the path toward eternal life. Eventually, all these baptismal symbols will become actualized in our very lives, as we follow the example of our Savior.

Uniting the Symbolic and Actual in the Savior's Life

Though Jesus himself was sinless and did not need baptism for remission of sins, he prepared himself for this ordinance as he matured and "increased in wisdom and stature, and in favour with God and man" (Luke 2:52) and "learned obedience by the things which he suffered" (Heb. 5:8). The experiences of his youth gradually refined and prepared him for his own baptism. His compliance with this initial eternal ordinance "fulfilled all righteousness" (Matt. 3:15), enabling him to receive the baptism of fire by the Holy Ghost, which John the Baptist described, saying, "I saw the Spirit descending from heaven like a dove, and it abode upon him. And . . . he that sent me to baptize with water, the same said unto me, Upon whom thou shalt see the Spirit descending, and remaining on him, the same is he which baptizeth with the Holy Ghost. And I saw, and bare record that this is the Son of God." (John 1:32-34; italics added.)

This passage written by John the Beloved indicates a second difference in the baptism of Christ as compared to the rest of us. Because he was sinless, because his flesh and spirit were not at odds with one another, the Spirit that descended upon him remained with him thereafter, and he became the one "which baptizeth with the Holy Ghost." (See also John 14:16-18.) Baptism was not an empty formality, then, even for the Savior. The reception of the Holy Ghost both prepared him for and prompted him to seek out his forty-day trial in the wilderness, which immediately followed his baptism. (See Matt. 4:1-11.) The ritual also foreshadowed and forearmed the Savior for his actual atoning sacrifice when the symbolic meaning of baptism became literal in Gethsemane and on the cross.

Requisites for Baptism

When John the Baptist began his ministry, preaching repentance and baptizing in the wilderness, people sought him out from all Judea "and were baptized of him in Jordan, confessing their sins." (Matt. 3:6.) Thus, the first requirement for baptism was and still is confession and promise of commitment in an interview with an authorized priesthood holder.

Christ also sought baptism by water from John because the Baptist was a bearer of the Aaronic Priesthood. Likewise, today, a priest in the Aaronic Priesthood may perform baptism by immersion, though only Melchizedek Priesthood holders may confer the gift of the Holy Ghost. (See D&C 20:41; 55:3.) In the case of the Lord's own baptism, the Father himself was the one who conferred his Spirit, saying "This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased." (Matt. 3:17.)

God the Father was a witness to his Son's baptism, along with John the Baptist, just as two priesthood witnesses are required today to ensure that the baptized person is fully immersed and the baptismal prayer is properly recited. (See D&C 20:72-74.) Furthermore, the presence of witnesses binds the agreement and makes it impossible for the recipient of baptism to deny the covenant's validity and return with impunity to his or her former way of life. Thus, the spirituality of the person seeking baptism, the authority of the one who performs it, and the proper formality of the ordinance must all be observed before the legality of the ritual can be effectual and binding.

Personal Preparation (Spirituality)

Before a race, the runner prepares for the event. Before an exam, the student prepares for the test. Before a job interview, the prospective employee prepares for the vocation. Before many stages of life, we make important personal preparations. With the responsibility associated with the sacred covenant of baptism, one naturally would want to prepare properly and fully.

The Lord gave the Prophet Joseph some guidelines on preparations for baptism. After humbling ourselves before God and desiring to be baptized, we should "come forth with broken hearts and contrite spirits," witnessing before the church that we "have truly repented of all . . . [our] sins." We must also be willing to take upon us the name of Jesus Christ, "having a determination to serve him to the end." Our works should already demonstrate that we "have received of the Spirit of Christ" unto the remission of our sins. When these steps are completed, we "shall be received by baptism into his church." (D&C 20:37.) Each of these important preparations helps the person about to be baptized turn from worldly influences toward the kingdom of God. (See 3 Ne. 12:19; Moro. 6:2.)

President Ezra Taft Benson has given additional insight on preparing for baptism. He said, "Before investigators are baptized they should commit themselves to each of the principles of the gospel. An investigator who will not commit to praying, going to Church, or living the Word of Wisdom is certainly not prepared for the serious baptismal covenant." [^9] These steps of personal preparation, spirituality, and commitment are essential before a person is baptized.

Official Administrator (Authority)

After humility, faith, and a repentant attitude have brought the individual to the waters of baptism, that person needs to be baptized by one having authority. In any major social order, corporation, or government, unless the legal head of the body has either personally signed certain documents or authorized others by legal power of attorney to do so, any contract or agreement with that entity is not valid. So it is with the covenant contract of baptism.

To be received of God, baptism must be performed by one with the proper power and authority. If priesthood authority was not important, why did Jesus go to John to be baptized? John held the Aaronic Priesthood, which contains the authority from God to properly baptize a person. (See D&C 13:1.) Joseph Smith received this priesthood from John the Baptist, and he and his successors have transmitted to the priesthood holders of the Church the power, keys, and directions to perform this saving ordinance. [^10] Proper priesthood authority is necessary so that a true, divinely accepted baptism can be performed.

Correct Procedures (Formality)

Paul taught the Ephesian Saints the importance of unity in Christ's church. He indicated that just as there is one Lord (Jesus) and one God and Father of all, there is also "one faith, one baptism." (Eph. 4:3-6.) There is only one type of proper baptism—by immersion. The word "baptism" itself has a Greek root meaning "dipping" or "immersing" in the water. In Greek, to say "baptism by immersion" is redundant; like saying "immersing by immersion." This proper form of baptism was practiced in the New Testament, as witnessed in the account of Jesus being baptized when he came "straightway out of the water." (Matt. 3:16.) Also John baptized in areas where there was "much water" (John 3:23), as did Philip when he and the Ethiopian "went down both into the water." (Acts 8:36-38.) As discussed earlier, only through immersion does the full, rich symbolism of the ritual become actualized.

Ritual Correctness (Legality)

In different countries, depending on the time of year, location, and cultural traditions of an area, the physical setting of LDS baptisms may vary. However, the basic act will be the same because certain steps are required. The absolute essential elements of a baptism are (1) recommendation by an authorized priesthood leader who carefully interviews the baptismal candidate (age eight or older) according to the guidelines of Doctrine and Covenants 20:37, (2) a body of water large enough for the immersion, (3) a priesthood holder to perform the baptism—either a priest of the Aaronic Priesthood or a Melchizedek Priesthood holder, (4) modest, clean, white clothing, (5) two Melchizedek Priesthood holders to serve as witnesses, (6) the proper prayer according to Doctrine and Covenants 20:73, and (7) full immersion of the whole body in the water. In addition, three necessary steps are completed immediately or soon after the baptism: (1) ordinance of confirmation, which includes bestowal of the gift of the Holy Ghost, (2) baptismal data entered into the records of the Church, and (3) sustaining of the person in a sacrament meeting as a Church member. [^11]

Besides the required elements of a proper baptism, other features can also enhance a baptismal service. Additional complementary aspects of a baptism can include a quiet, worshipful environment and physical setting, including privacy, dressing rooms, warm water, and so forth. A preliminary program with prayers, hymns, talks, or videos about baptism and the Holy Ghost, and testimonies can enhance the reverence of the meeting and the understanding of the ordinance. The presence of family, friends, and ward or branch members shows support and encouragement; these people are especially helpful whether the prospective Church member is a child or an older convert. A personal historical record of the event, including pictures, journal entries, simple program, and notes will help the convert remember this pivotal day in his or her life.

Any other form or method of baptism is a counterfeit act. Satan constantly tries to substitute different types of baptism or membership rites for the genuine ordinance. As Elder Bruce R. McConkie commented, "Apostate substitutes . . . are found both among pagans and supposed Christians. Perverted forms of baptism were common among the mystery religions of the old world." He also indicated that "some . . . churches of modern Christendom deny the necessity of baptism and talk in terms of salvation coming by the mere act of confessing Christ with one's lips. Others . . . enlarge the doctrine to include children who have not arrived at the years of accountability [eight]." [^12]

The Lord has designated one baptism, however, that is correct and approved in his sight—baptism by immersion with the proper form and authority. (See D&C 20:73-74.) God is "the same yesterday, to-day, and forever" (1 Ne. 10:18), and he will not change his doctrines to fit the desires of men (see Isa. 55:8). Starting with Adam, the children of God have been baptized by immersion, and the practice continues in this dispensation. (See Moses 6:64.) Thus, the way one is baptized enriches the symbolic meaning of the ordinance as well as fulfills the purposes and ways of God.

To summarize, we can say that BAPTISM is a symbolic ordinance of cleansing and new life, and it is also the covenant gateway into Christ's church and God's celestial kingdom. A baptism that is properly performed by an authorized priesthood holder will bring the genuine disciple a remission of sins and prepare him or her for the reception of the Holy Ghost. Baptism is an essential ordinance of salvation and a blessing of peace for God's children on their pathway back toward his presence.

For further study, refer to the following entries:

TG: BD: EM: Baptism Baptism Baptism Baptism, Essential Baptismal Covenant Baptism, Immersion Baptismal Prayer Baptism, Qualifications for Joining the Church Covenants

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Further details on these basic roles and functions of the Holy Ghost are in chap
[^2] TPJS, 199.
[^3] MD, 313.
[^4] GD, 61.
[^5] S. Dilworth Young, ''Gift of the Holy Ghost,'' IE, Nov. 1968, 75-76.
[^6] ''The Gift of the Holy Ghost-A Sure Compass,'' Ensign, May 1989, 32-33.
[^7] The nature of God the Father was discussed in chapter 2.
[^8] NWAF, 372.
[^9] See TG, Knowledge. Chapter 1 discusses truth and man's search for truth.
[^10] MD, 197; see also NWAF, 374.
[^11] The roles and purposes of prophets and prophecy were discussed in chapters 6 and 7.
[^12] The ordinances of anointing the sick and blessing the sick are presented in greater detail in chapter 22.
