Victor L. Ludlow, Principles and Practices of the Restored Gospel ( 1992)

Chapter 19

The Gift and Companionship of the Holy Ghost

The story is told of the Viking chieftain who wanted to reward his warriors after a particularly successful trading voyage. He announced that each man could take whatever he wanted from the chieftain's storehouse—as long as he could carry it home by himself. The storehouse was filled with furs, clothes, tools, furniture, and many other precious objects. Like children in a toy store, all the men but one quickly selected large loads of goods to carry home. The exception—one of the biggest, strongest warriors—selected the smallest, least costly item: the one and only key to the treasure vault. Through this, he accumulated abundant wealth, which he used to build his community. Not surprisingly, the elders elected this man a few years later to be their next chieftain. Sometimes a seemingly small, simple gift can be the key to many blessings.

In a similar manner, if the Lord were to grant every new convert into his church the spiritual gift of their choice, people would likely choose impressive spiritual powers, like the ability to heal, speak in tongues, see into the future, and so on. However, the most precious gift is so simple that it might be overlooked; yet it could, in turn, bring forth any and all of the other spiritual gifts. This key gift is the constant companionship of the Holy Ghost.

In the previous chapter on baptism, we touched on how the gift of the Holy Ghost helps us fulfill our baptismal covenants, gradually elevating our behavior to match the symbolic purity achieved in the baptismal ritual. Our baptism of water is a one-time occurrence, instantly washing away all our previous sins. Although the actual confirmation of the Holy Ghost is also a singular ordinance, internal purging by the fire of the Holy Ghost is a sustained effort that influences future actions and leads to greater spiritual manifestations. Our spiritual refinement must continue over time through repentance and spiritual persistence.

In order to regularly sharpen our spiritual focus, the corollary ordinance of the weekly sacrament was instituted. The emblems of bread and water direct our minds to the physical elements of Christ's atonement—his flesh and blood. In partaking of the emblems, we remember the Atonement and renew our baptismal covenants so that we may continuously have the Holy Ghost to be with us. (See Moro. 4:3; 5:2.)

The relationship between our continuous spiritual refinement and the ordinances of baptism and confirmation can also be compared to mortal birth and subsequent physical development. The newborn infant has received a body containing all the genetic material it needs to become a full-grown man or woman. The physical potential of the infant's body is like the spiritual potential embodied in the ordinance of confirmation. The process of the infant becoming an adult, however, requires time for the cells to develop and multiply. Even after reaching maturity, new cells in the body continue to replace old, worn-out ones. In a sense, then, the infant's physical rebirth continues with new growth throughout his or her lifetime, just as our spiritual rebirth continues beyond the confirmation ordinance until we reach perfection.

A Mighty Change of Heart

Our spiritual rebirth begins in our hearts. Before his death, King Benjamin delivered a rousing sermon to his people, exhorting them to fulfill their covenant relationship with the Lord. His words moved the people to seek forgiveness; as a result, they received a witness through the Spirit that their sins had been remitted. (See Mosiah 4:1-3.) After further instruction, they felt the influence of the Spirit upon them, "and they all cried with one voice, saying: Yea, we believe all the words which thou hast spoken unto us; and also, we know of their surety and truth, because of the Spirit of the Lord Omnipotent, which has wrought a mighty change in us, or in our hearts, that we have no more disposition to do evil, but to do good continually." (Mosiah 5:2; italics added.)

The change of heart that accompanies spiritual rebirth does not mean that we will never sin again but that we are now inclined to do good. To paraphrase an earlier portion of King Benjamin's sermon, we have put off "the natural man" and yielded to the enticing of the Holy Spirit. (Mosiah 3:19.) Though we may still have human weaknesses, our fundamental natural preference is changed from carnal to spiritual.

This change in our hearts through the fire of the Holy Ghost is as literal as the chemical change in physical elements exposed to natural flame. Just as chemical change can be verified through scientific analysis, a spiritual transformation is evidenced by our belief in the words of Christ, our desires for righteousness, our good works, and even our very appearance. Thus, Alma the younger asked Church members who had become lax in keeping the commandments: "Have ye spiritually been born of God? Have ye received his image in your countenances? Have ye experienced this mighty change in your hearts?" (Alma 5:14.) Though Alma's people had been baptized and had received the confirmation and gift of the Holy Ghost, the spiritual transformation of the ordinance had not remained in effect because of their unrighteousness.

In contrast, Alma the younger relates how his own father, who had been among the wicked priests of King Noah, was spiritually born again: "Did not my father Alma believe in the words which were delivered by the mouth of Abinadi? . . . And according to his faith there was a mighty change wrought in his heart." (Alma 5:11-12.) With a change of heart, the Holy Ghost assists us in becoming new men and women in Christ.

Latter-day Saints who have been brought up in the Church, led righteous lives, and enjoyed the gift of the Holy Ghost from their childhood may relate to the Spirit's subtle influence as they do to the sun's constant light and warmth—something that has always worked in them to gradually transform them into "new creatures" in Christ. (2 Cor. 5:17.) They may even take for granted the Spirit's presence and only appreciate the Spirit were they to experience its prolonged absence, after which they would need a mighty change of heart, like a convert. For many converts coming from the spiritual darkness of the world, however, the sudden presence of the Holy Ghost may seem more like a brilliant, raging fire.

Various Manifestations of the Spirit

Generally, manifestations of the Holy Ghost follow a gradual, progressive pattern as we reject worldly influences and seek spiritual enlightenment. Our relationship with the Holy Spirit seems to go through at least four stages. We first experience the influence or power of the Holy Ghost; this prompts us to accept the truth and be baptized. We then receive the gift and companionship of the Holy Ghost, helping us to remain faithful. As we continue in righteousness, our spirituality brings forth various gifts of the Spirit. Finally, perhaps in this world but probably in the postmortal paradise, our soul and righteous works are sealed by the Holy Spirit of Promise.

Most of these steps are recognizable in the New Testament account of Cornelius, the Roman centurion. This humble, pious man feared God, did much good, and was influenced by the Spirit. As Peter the Apostle taught him and his household, the gift of the Holy Ghost poured upon them and they spoke in tongues, partially as a witness to the early Jewish-Christian Saints that the Gentiles were worthy for these greater spiritual manifestations. (See Acts 10:30-31, 44-48.) Like Cornelius, we may experience these four stages in our lives: spiritual influence, spiritual companionship, spiritual gifts, and spiritual sealings.

Spiritual Influence

When any person—Church member or nonmember, Christian or otherwise—receives spiritual knowledge or guidance, he receives it through the power of the Holy Ghost. The Spirit may manifest himself to that person in any of his capacities as messenger, revelator, testifier, or comforter. [^1] Thus, an investigator of the Church receives a spiritual witness that the Book of Mormon is true "by the power of the Holy Ghost." (Moro. 10:4.) But unless the investigator acts upon this revelation through repentance, baptism, and confirmation, the testimony of the Spirit will not remain with him.

Expounding upon the New Testament account of the conversion of Cornelius, the Prophet Joseph Smith clarified the difference between the influence of the Holy Ghost and the gift of the Holy Ghost: "Cornelius received the Holy Ghost before he was baptized, which was the convincing power of God unto him of the truth of the Gospel, but he could not receive the gift of the Holy Ghost until after he was baptized. Had he not taken this sign or ordinance upon him, the Holy Ghost which convinced him of the truth of God, would have left him." [^2] As a member of the Godhead, he can expand our intelligence, witness to gospel truths, and provide comfort to our souls. However, these influences will be irregular and fleeting without a confirmation of the gift of the Holy Ghost. We should all desire the companionship of this member of the Godhead so we can have his constant help in developing our godly qualities.

Spiritual Companionship

When the gift of the Holy Ghost is "confirmed" (Latin com, together, or con [intensive!] + firmare, to make firm) or "firmly bonded together" with us, we have the right to his strength and companionship whenever we desire and need it. Like the constant light of the sun, the Spirit will light the paths of our lives if we are worthy members of the Church. The key to making the ordinance of confirmation effectual in daily living is our personal righteousness. Thus, Elder Bruce R. McConkie wrote, "The gift of the Holy Ghost is the right to have the constant companionship of the Spirit; the actual enjoyment of the gift . . . is based on personal righteousness. . . . The Spirit will not dwell in an unclean tabernacle." [^3]

Even righteous people, however, are sometimes left without the companionship of the Spirit (as was the Lord himself during the crucifixion) so they can develop their ability to discern light from darkness. Thus, President Joseph F. Smith taught, "It does not follow that a man who has received the presentation or gift of the Holy Ghost shall always receive the recognition and witness and presence of the Holy Ghost himself, or he may receive all these, and yet the Holy Ghost [might] not tarry with him, but visit him from time to time." [^4] (See D&C 130:23.)

The importance of striving for the spiritual companionship of the Holy Ghost was stressed early in Church history in a fascinating episode between the first two presidents of the Church, Joseph Smith and Brigham Young. Some time after the Prophet Joseph's death, he appeared to President Young in a dream and gave him the following instructions: "Tell the people to be humble and faithful, and be sure to keep the spirit of the Lord and it will lead them right. Be careful and not turn away the small still voice; it will teach them what to do and where to go; it will yield the fruits of the kingdom." Brigham was also told to admonish the Church leaders "to keep their hearts open, . . . so that when the Holy Ghost comes to them their hearts will be ready to receive it." After further, similar admonitions, Joseph repeated again, "Tell the people to be sure to keep the spirit of the Lord and follow it, and it will lead them just right." [^5] Brigham Young obeyed this counsel and emphasized these spiritual priorities for the early Saints.

Following the Holy Ghost's direction continues to be of utmost importance to Latter-day Saints, especially in the trying times of contemporary society. As a modern apostle, James E. Faust, has counseled us, "The comforting Spirit of the Holy Ghost can abide with us twenty-four hours a day: when we work, when we play, when we rest. . . . That sustaining influence can be with us in joy and sorrow, when we rejoice as well as when we grieve. . . . The Holy Ghost will also help us solve crises of faith. The Spirit of the Holy Ghost can be a confirming witness, testifying of heavenly things. Through that Spirit, a strong knowledge distills in one's mind, and one feels all doubt or questions disappear." [^6]

Spiritual Gifts

Having received the gift of the Holy Ghost, members of the Church are also entitled to seek and receive particular spiritual gifts to further help themselves and others progress on the strait and narrow path to the celestial kingdom. In Section 46 of the Doctrine and Covenants, the Lord counsels the Saints on the purpose and use of spiritual gifts: "Beware lest ye are deceived; and that ye may not be deceived seek ye earnestly the best gifts, always remembering for what they are given; for verily I say unto you, they are given for the benefit of those who love me and keep all my commandments." (Vv. 46:8-9.) The Lord adds that "all have not every gift given unto them. . . . To some is given one, and to some is given another, that all may be profited thereby." (Vv. 11-12.) This revelation echoes 1 Corinthians 12, in which Paul describes how each member of the body of Christ (the Church) is necessary to the functioning of the whole. Thus, the purpose of spiritual gifts is to unite the Saints in faith and give them greater powers to strengthen one another.

The scriptures exhort us to "covet," "seek," "lay hold upon," and "exercise" these gifts. (See, as examples, 1 Cor. 12:31; D&C 46:8; Moro. 7:19; D&C 6:11.) Like the gifts of faith, testimony, and other spiritual blessings, we are to earnestly seek after these things. And as in the parable of the talents, if these gifts are used, they will be added upon; if they are neglected, they will be lost. As different gifts are received and developed by the saints, the full range of gifts will be found in the Church so "that all may be profited thereby."

A great variety of gifts are mentioned throughout the scriptures. In Doctrine and Covenants 46, 1 Corinthians 12, and Moroni 10, we find three valuable lists of the primary gifts of the Holy Spirit. These gifts seem to be either gifts of spiritual learning and knowledge or gifts of spiritual powers and manifestations, sometimes called "miracles." The first tend to be more internal and personal while the second are external and public. Among the gifts of "spiritual learning," we find the following:

Â knowing that Jesus is the Christ Â knowing that God lives Â having faith in Christ through the witness of others Â receiving the word of knowledge Â receiving the word (gift) of wisdom Â teaching others knowledge and wisdom Â discerning various spirits and influences

Among the gifts of "spiritual powers," we find these:

Â prophesying Â speaking in tongues Â interpreting tongues Â working miracles Â healing Â receiving the faith to be healed

Since the gifts of "spiritual learning" are obviously influenced by the Holy Ghost, we will discuss them in more detail.

Knowing That Jesus Is the Christ. One of the first gifts we should seek is knowledge that Jesus is the Christ. In section 46 of the Doctrine and Covenants is stated, "To some it is given by the Holy Ghost to know that Jesus Christ is the Son of God, and that he was crucified for the sins of the world." (V. 13.) A person does not need to see the resurrected Christ to have a testimony of his life and mission. This we can know through the manifestations of the Spirit.

Several different ways in which we may know of the sacred Sonship of Christ include some that are direct and profound and others that are indirect and subtle. Direct knowledge could come from a personal appearance or manifestation of the Savior himself or through the special testimony of God the Father (such as, "This is my beloved Son . . . "), but such examples of direct witnesses are extremely rare. More common sources of knowledge include receiving personal revelation through the Holy Ghost and sensing the validity of a testimony borne by individuals who have already gained a personal witness of his divinity. To have the knowledge that Jesus is the Christ is truly a great gift.

Knowing That God Lives. Similar to knowing that Christ lives, this gift relates to the testimony we receive concerning the reality and nature of our Heavenly Father. This knowledge is especially valuable when we first develop our faith. Some rudiments of this gift seem to be present among most peoples and religions of the world, for they have an innate belief about the reality of a supreme being. Although God rarely appears to mortals, evidence of his existence and works is found in nature, the scriptures, and the words and acts of godly people. As people search for God and respond to the whisperings of the Spirit, they accept the reality of a powerful, loving divine being whom they have not seen. [^7]

Having Faith in Christ through the Witness of Others. Those who do not yet know that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God, can temporarily rely on someone who does have that knowledge. Missionaries recognize this fact in their teaching of nonmembers. Bruce R. McConkie elaborates on this gift by saying, "Individuals who have not yet advanced in spiritual things to the point of gaining for themselves personal and direct revelation from the Holy Ghost may yet have power to believe what others, speaking by the power of the Spirit, both teach and testify. They have power to recognize the truth of the words of others who do speak by the power of the Spirit, even though they cannot attune themselves to the Infinite so as to receive the divine word direct from heaven." [^8]

Modern-day revelation explains this spiritual gift by stating, "To others it is given to believe on their words [that Jesus Christ is the Son of God], that they also might have eternal life if they continue faithful." (D&C 46:14.) This gift is dependent upon the strong testimonies of others, but it still has the power to encourage one onward in the path towards eternal life.

Receiving the Word of Knowledge. Knowledge is something we seek throughout our lives. It gives us understanding and helps us reason things out. Many times, as we start to piece things together, we desire to gain more knowledge and additional understanding. Godly knowledge includes understanding the Father and the ways we can be like him. The Doctrine and Covenants tells us the importance of knowledge: "If thou shalt ask, thou shalt receive revelation upon revelation, knowledge upon knowledge, that thou mayest know the mysteries and peaceable things—that which bringeth joy, that which bringeth life eternal." (D&C 42:61.) Joseph Smith tells us that "it is impossible for a man to be saved in ignorance" (D&C 131:6), indicating the eternal importance of learning. Knowledge is a broad gift, so we should first seek for important truths: we can gain knowledge of God and his plans for mankind, knowledge of good and evil, and eventually a knowledge of all truth. [^9]

Receiving the Word (Gift) of Wisdom. To some is given the gift to understand wisdom, something different and perhaps greater than knowledge since it denotes practical or applied knowledge. One can have knowledge and be able to expound the gospel doctrines, but the one who truly understands the ways that knowledge fits into daily life and who wisely uses it will be greatly blessed. Paul illustrates the role of the Holy Ghost in receiving wisdom, saying, "We have received, not the spirit of the world, but the spirit which is of God; that we might know the things that are freely given to us of God. Which things also we speak, not in the words which man's wisdom teacheth, but which the Holy Ghost teacheth." (1 Cor. 2:12-13.)

The process of learning wisdom should be started early, as Alma noted while giving some fatherly advice to Helaman, "Remember, my son, and learn wisdom in thy youth; yea, learn in thy youth to keep the commandments of God." (Alma 37:35.) He indicates that by keeping the commandments and acting upon knowledge, one can distinguish between knowledge and wisdom. Thus, wisdom is active, not passive. The Lord revealed to Joseph Smith some rewards of gaining wisdom, "Thou shalt observe all these things, and great shall be thy reward; for unto you it is given to know the mysteries of the kingdom, but unto the world it is not given to know them." (D&C 42:65.) Through the gift of wisdom, we receive insight into the mysteries of the kingdom, which, in turn, helps our progression on the path to eternal life.

Teaching Others Knowledge and Wisdom. As we attain knowledge, we have the responsibility of teaching and helping others gain understanding. As we instruct others by word and example, both the teacher and the learner are blessed since they both move to higher levels of knowledge strengthen and enrich their understanding. The ability to teach words of knowledge and wisdom is another of the gifts of the Spirit. (See Moro. 10:9-10.) For example, as missionaries teach investigators new truths, the investigators build upon their previous understanding, and the missionaries learn new applications of their previous learning.

In teaching and receiving knowledge, those who are humble and want to learn more will receive knowledge and understanding "precept upon precept; line upon line." (Isa. 28:10.) Their learning will come through other people, the scriptures, conference talks, church meetings, and innumerable other sources. As we pursue truth, teaching others is one of the best ways to increase our spiritual gifts and understanding.

Discerning Various Spirits and Influences. We can be influenced by many spirits sharing this earth with us. Some, like ours, are in bodies of flesh and bone; others can be spirits without a body. Bruce R. McConkie tells us, "To all men in some degree and to the faithful saints in particular is given the spirit, gift, and power of discernment." He also states, "If a man has power to part the veil and converse with angels and with the ministering spirits who dwell in the realms of light, surely this is a gift of the Spirit." [^10] We can discern good from evil spirits with the help of the Holy Ghost and we receive this gift and the right to heavenly ministering angels if we live worthily.

The Apostle John gives us advice on how to develop this gift of discernment: "Believe not every spirit, but try the spirits whether they are of God: because many false prophets are gone out into the world. Hereby know ye the Spirit of God: Every Spirit that confesseth that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh is of God: and every spirit that confesseth not that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh is not of God: and this is that spirit of antichrist, whereof ye have heard that it should come; and even now already is it in the world." (1 Jn. 4:1-3.) As John tells us, a testimony of Christ quickly distinguishes between the spirits of truth and error. The gift of discernment insures that we will recognize the proper sources of truth and goodness. This gift includes knowing how spiritual gifts are administered and recognizing the various operations of the Spirit. With it, we can fully develop all the spiritual gifts of learning.

Spiritual Gifts of Power. Occasionally God will empower his servants with special spiritual gifts that both assist his work and demonstrate his power. We usually call these spiritual manifestations miracles because we do not yet understand the laws and powers by which they are actualized. Among them are the gifts of prophesying, healing, speaking and interpreting in tongues, and so forth. The gift of prophecy begins with a testimony of Christ and can culminate in marvelous visions for one who is endowed as a prophet, seer, and revelator. [^11] The gift of healing is the most common miracle recorded in the scriptures and during Christ's ministry. [^12]

The gift of tongues and their interpretation includes spiritual assistance both in learning foreign languages and in speaking and understanding unknown languages without premeditation. Although the first type is more common, the second is more dramatic. Primarily given to assist in preaching the gospel, the gift of tongues usually magnifies one's efforts in studying and communicating in a foreign tongue, and Paul emphasizes its value over the more dramatic manifestation. (See 1 Cor. 14:19.) However, as special circumstances may require, the Holy Spirit may miraculously assist with special communication abilities. (See Acts 2:1-12.) Since this gift can be easily imitated by Satan's followers, the gift of discernment and proper interpreters are required factors. [^13]

Other gifts of power include such mighty miracles as the parting of seas and rivers, producing water from desert rocks, walking on the water, bringing people back from death, moving mountains and rivers, and changing the weather. These are extremely rare and are manifest by the Son of God and his prophetic servants. Normal mortals are not given these spiritual powers over the earth and its elements. (See Matt. 17:20; Ether 12:30; Jacob 4:6; Hel. 10:9.) Although we are commanded to seek after spiritual gifts, we are warned against seeking after miraculous signs. (See D&C 63:9-12.)

Most Latter-day Saints will develop the gifts of learning long before, if ever, they will demonstrate the gifts of power. Different people, even in the same family, have their own unique gifts. Notice, for example, that the ability to speak in tongues and to interpret tongues are separate gifts and might not be possessed by the same person. This reminds us that members of the body of Christ are all dependent upon each other and that these gifts are given not to be "consumed upon their lusts" but "in order that every member may be profited thereby." (D&C 46:9, 29.)

Furthermore, a careful look at the list of spiritual gifts reveals that these endowments are attributes of God himself, which he uses solely for the benefit of his children. He desires that we receive and develop these gifts. As we perfect our unselfish use of whatever spiritual gifts God sees fit to give us here on earth, we will receive further gifts in preparation to obtain all divine attributes of godliness in our eventual exalted state. [^14]

Spiritual Sealings

As a final manifestation of the Holy Ghost in our lives, all ordinances performed in the flesh—such as baptism, temple endowment, or celestial marriage—must be approved by the Holy Ghost to be effectual when the body and the spirit are reunited in the resurrection. Acting in this capacity, the Holy Ghost is known as the Holy Spirit of Promise. As the Lord revealed to the Prophet Joseph, "All covenants, contracts, bonds, obligations, oaths, vows, performances, connections, associations, or expectations, that are not made and entered into and sealed by the Holy Spirit of promise . . . are of no efficacy, virtue, or force in and after the resurrection of the dead; for all contracts that are not made unto this end have an end when men are dead." (D&C 132:7.)

The Holy Spirit of Promise verifies that "ordinances and other righteous acts performed on this earth . . . are ratified, validated, and sealed in heaven as well as on earth." [^15] The Holy Spirit seals our covenants upon us by testifying before the Lord that we have entered into them in righteousness and that we have been "just and true" in fulfilling them. (D&C 76:53.) The Spirit also promises, or confirms, to us that the Lord has accepted our acts. We may thus pursue our eternal course with confidence, knowing that Heavenly Father has accepted our righteous acts.

If we enter into a covenant unrighteously, or if we are not faithful in keeping that covenant, the act will not be spiritually ratified. However, if we repent and make ourselves worthy, we can still receive the promise. Similarly, an ordinance originally sealed by the Spirit can be later rendered ineffectual if we break our covenant. [^16] As with all other manifestations and workings of the Holy Ghost, the seal of promise is contingent upon our righteousness.

The Sanctifying Power of the Holy Ghost

The greatest blessing of the Holy Ghost in our lives is the spiritual refinement of our souls. The baptism of water may cleanse us, but his baptism of fire purges us until no sign of the former blemishes exists. The scriptures sometimes refer to the Lord's cleansing as a "refiner's fire." (Mal. 3:2; 3 Ne. 24:2; D&C 128:24.) A refinery uses extreme heat to purify metal. By burning away the dross and impure particles, a piece of metal is strengthened. Each one of God's children needs to pass through a spiritual refiner's fire in order to enter his presence. This refiner's fire is defined as a purification or sanctification process.

Sanctification means that a person becomes pure and spotless through the process of time. Paul states, "If any man be in Christ, he is a new creature: old things are passed away; behold, all things are become new." (2 Cor. 5:17.) The scriptures teach us that the Holy Ghost assists in this transformation process. Bruce R. McConkie adds, "Sanctification is a state of saintliness, a state attained only by conformity to the laws and ordinances of the gospel." [^17] We need to understand the purpose of sanctification before we can see how we can become sanctified.

Sanctification means "to consecrate" or "to make holy." It is a prerequisite to return to Heavenly Father's presence. The Lord taught that no unclean thing can enter the kingdom of heaven. (See 1 Ne. 15:34; Eph. 5:5.) Since all but Jesus Christ have sinned and have become unclean and unworthy before God (see Rom. 3:23), no one qualifies for the kingdom. However, the atoning blood of Jesus Christ, upon the conditions of repentance, is what prepares the way for our purification so we can be led back to our Father's presence.

One LDS scholar, Robert L. Millet, clarifies this by saying, "Jesus Christ is the means by which men and women are sanctified, made holy and clean, and his is the only name through which fallen creatures may be renewed and renovated and lifted spiritually to that plane which characterizes him who is the embodiment of holiness." [^18] After Christ has opened the gates of redemption for us, we must go through them to receive the potential blessings. These thoughts are echoed in the well-known words of the "Battle Hymn of the Republic," "As he died to make men holy, let us live to make men free."

The Holy Ghost is the means by which sanctification is accomplished within us individually. The process of purifying the soul comes after the cleansing of baptism, and it requires a baptism of fire through the Holy Ghost to be completed. As Elder McConkie stated, "It is the Holy Spirit . . . that erases carnality and brings us into a state of righteousness. We become clean when we actually receive the . . . companionship of the Holy Ghost. It is then that sin and dross and evil are burned out of our souls as though by fire. The baptism of the Holy Ghost is the baptism of fire." [^19] Heavenly Father controls the power and conditions for sanctification; the atonement of his Son provides the means by which a holy consecration can occur, and the purging of the Holy Ghost completes the sanctifying process within our souls.

Sanctification is a process that occurs in gradual steps. It comes to those who yield their hearts to God, who are personally righteous, and who endure faithfully and valiantly in the gospel of Jesus Christ. (See Hel. 3:35.) Bruce R. McConkie highlights the importance of enduring to the end by emphasizing, "Nobody is sanctified in an instant, suddenly. But if we keep the commandments and press forward with steadfastness after baptism, then degree by degree and step by step we sanctify our souls until that glorious day when we're qualified to go where God and angels are." [^20] Sanctification is the personal perfection process.

When we are sanctified by the Holy Ghost, we become a new person. Our habits, personality, desires, and passions are changed. We view ourselves and others around us differently. This change is accomplished because of the refining powers of the Holy Ghost. We become like the people during King Benjamin's time when we witness "a mighty change in us, or in our hearts, that we have no more disposition to do evil, but to do good continually." (Mosiah 5:2.) As we are purged from the effects of sin, all the desires and temptations of sin are rooted out of our hearts, and we become more like Christ.

Indeed, we are not actual members of Christ's true church without the gift of the Holy Ghost. When Joseph Smith was asked what primary factor separated The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints from the other religions of the day, he responded that it was in "the gift of the Holy Ghost by the laying-on of hands, . . . [and] that all other considerations were contained in the gift of the Holy Ghost." [^21] Thus, Christ commissioned the Nephites, "Now this is the commandment: Repent, all ye ends of the earth, and come unto me and be baptized in my name, that ye may be sanctified by the reception of the Holy Ghost, that ye may stand spotless before me at the last day." (3 Ne. 27:20.) Since the gift of the Holy Ghost is the great distinctive factor separating the true church of Jesus Christ from all other churches and religions, experiencing the constant companionship and sanctifying power of this member of the Godhead should be our primary goal in life.

In conclusion, the GIFT OF THE HOLY GHOST is shared among God's children as the Holy Ghost confirms our membership in Christ's church, as his power and gifts transform us spiritually, and, as a God, he sanctifies our souls preparatory to receiving celestial glory. The reception of the Holy Ghost, like the little iron key to the Viking chieftain's treasure vault, can open the door to further gifts. These blessings of the Spirit are designed to help us achieve our divine potential. As we spiritually progress from receiving the subtle promptings of the Holy Spirit to experiencing more of his constant companionship and gifts, his power will seal the ordinances of God that we have received. We may not have every gift yet, but by sharing those we do have, we can experience joy and obtain eternal life.

Ultimately, not only is the Holy Ghost a witness to us of God the Father and Jesus Christ, but, through the Holy Spirit of Promise, he can also testify to them of our worthiness to be in their presence. The Lord revealed the value of this celestial goal when he spoke through the Prophet Joseph Smith to the Latter-day Saints, "If you keep my commandments and endure to the end you shall have eternal life, which gift is the greatest of all the gifts of God." (D&C 14:7.) To prepare us for eternal life, the gift and influence of the Holy Ghost is the greatest gift God has given us in mortality. (See D&C 121:46.) The companionship of the Holy Ghost is God's valuable gift to enlighten us so that we are able to return to his celestial presence and receive his greatest endowment—the gift of eternal life.

For further study, refer to the following entries:

TG: BD: EM: Confirm Confirmation Baptism of Fire and of the Holy Ghost Holy Ghost, Baptism of Holy Ghost Confirmation Holy Ghost, Gift of Gift of the Holy Ghost Sanctification, Sanctify Gifts of the Spirit

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Plan ahead. A few days before you fast, review these ten steps and start thinking about a purpose for your fast. Since most of our fasting involves a major portion of a Sunday, prepare your schedule so that you can start the fast properly on Saturday, thus making yourself spiritually ready for the fasting experience throughout the Sabbath. See chapter 5 for further discussion on prayer.
[^2] Have a particular purpose or goal in mind as you begin the fast. Perhaps you desire personal enlightenment or strength, such as an answer to a doctrinal question, help in solving a problem, or inspiration in strengthening your testimony. Or, you may desire help and direction in counseling sensitively with a troubled family member, aiding a neighbor, sharing the gospel with a nonmember, or in performing some other form of service. Fasting can also be a time of thanksgiving or appreciation. Select a primary goal and perhaps one corollary goal on which to concentrate during your fast. See chapter 28 for further information on the use of Church financial resources.
[^3] Start the fast with a private prayer—preferably vocal—while you are alone and on your knees. Remember, fasting without prayer is simple starvation. The Lord has never commanded us to abstain from eating except for spiritual purposes. Although voluntary abstinence may strengthen self-discipline, it will not have spiritual value without prayer. Include thanks to the Almighty for your blessings, especially for the bounty of food you may have enjoyed, and express your desires concerning your fasting purposes. See chapter 13 for further insights about the scriptures.
[^4] Direct your thoughts, words, and actions toward keeping the Spirit with you. Set a spiritual tone for the whole fasting period by rising above the normal physical plane. Keep Saturday evening activities uplifting, especially those of a social nature, in order to set the proper mood for the fast and the Sabbath. This includes the two Official Declarations of the Church.
[^5] Abstain from two meals. Since most Mormons conclude their fast sometime Sunday in the late afternoon or during the evening, ideally you should start your fast following your evening meal on Saturday. Thus, you would be fasting for twenty to twenty-four hours, refraining from all food and drink, if possible. In case of health problems, fast and restrict your intake according to your limitations. Sick individuals, pregnant women, and nursing mothers are advised not to fast. As you discipline yourself physically, you prepare yourself spiritually to fulfill your fasting purpose. ''Gifts,'' paper delivered March 13, 1979, Brigham Young University.
[^6] Study possible means toward your purpose or goals while you fast. For example, look up possible answers to your gospel question or problem by reading the scriptures, draft some possible solutions to personal or family problems, talk with someone in whom you have confidence to get ideas before counseling a troubled friend, write in your journal to solidify feelings and valuable learning experiences, and so on. (Depending upon your Sunday meeting schedule, this step and the next one may be reversed.) ''Small Acts of Service,'' Ensign, Dec. 1974, p. 5.
[^7] Attend all your church meetings on Sunday. By this time you should be fifteen to twenty hours into your fast—a period, studies have demonstrated, when most people can think more clearly, concentrate more deeply, and (in a religious setting) listen to the Spirit more intensely. Listen to the speakers, teachers, and the Spirit for ideas concerning your fasting purpose. Ibid., 2. Further suggestions for Christian service are found in chapters 34 and 35.
[^8] Pay a full fast offering as determined by the cost of the two meals you have missed and your ability to give. Church leaders have counseled us to be generous in our fast offerings, multiplying them as we desire in order to assist the poor and needy (which is the only purpose for which these funds are used). [^2] ''The Celestial Nature of Self-reliance,'' Ensign, June 1984, p.6.
[^9] Ponder and meditate. Before concluding your fast, set aside some time, preferably twenty to thirty minutes, to meditate, pondering the possible solutions to the problem or answers to the question you have been considering. Read Moroni 10, especially verses one through five, for helpful counsel. ''President Heber J. Grant,'' Relief Society Magazine, 1932, p. 302.
[^10] End the fast with a private prayer, taking time to listen to spiritual promptings and to receive an answer from our Heavenly Father. Finally, break the fast by eating a simple meal "prepared with singleness of heart that thy fasting may be perfect, or, in other words, that thy joy may be full." (D&C 59:13.) Spencer W. Kimball, ''Follow the Fundamentals,'' Ensign, May 1981, p. 80.
[^11] The importance of work and vocational preparation is emphasized in chapter 29. The same chapter also talks about the proper care and use of material goods, such as food, clothing, housing, appliances, automobiles, and so on. Chapter 28 discusses means by which our financial resources can assist the Lord and help our families and others.
[^12] Further insights on the Lord's commandments concerning physical health are found in chapter 27.
[^13] Christ's role and his expectations for us in this personal perfection process were presented in chapter 13.
[^14] Further insights on the significant role of families in both earthly and heavenly society are discussed in chapter 30.
[^15] DBY, 256, 332. See also chapters 1 (truth), 8 (scriptures), and 16 (cultivating faith) for further insights about how knowledge and study can enrich our spirituality.
[^16] God's primary moral expectations for his children are found in the Ten Commandments, which are discussed in chapter 24. The sexual laws concerning moral purity are presented in chapter 26. Issues surrounding our work ethics are evaluated in chapter 29.
[^17] CR, Oct. 1969, 8.
[^18] By Grace Are We Saved (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1989), 52.
[^19] NWAF, 290; see also TPJS, 314.
[^20] Doctrines of the Restoration: Sermons and Writings of Bruce R. McConkie (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1989), 53.
[^21] HC, 4:42.
