Victor L. Ludlow, Principles and Practices of the Restored Gospel ( 1992)

Chapter 20

Spiritual Health

The daily need for food to sustain physical life is so pressing that few people purposely neglect or inadvertently forget it. Consider the hypothetical example of a superathlete who, after winning a major championship, claims he will keep his high state of physical fitness intact. But afterward, he refuses to eat, drink, or rest. Severe health problems, even death, would result within days if such a foolish course were taken. After only a few hours without food, the body reminds us of its need for nourishment through numerous physical symptoms—hunger pain, stomachache, headache, fatigue, and so on.

The daily need for spiritual nourishment to the human soul is equally important, yet individuals are more inclined to ignore its symptoms, which are subtle but real. They include unhappiness, irritability, insensitivity, abuse, selfishness, hard-heartedness, and even some types of depression. People easily neglect these symptoms and thus mistreat their spiritual selves far more than their physical bodies. In addition, they may also seek diversion from spiritual weaknesses through materialistic pursuits, frivolous distractions, physical gratification, and drug abuse. Needless to say, such diversions as these only intensify the dearth of their spiritual condition.

Proper physical nutrition includes daily intake from the four basic food groups: grains and cereals, fruits and vegetables, proteins and dairy products (including beans, meats, and eggs), and fats and oils. Similarly, four minimum daily requirements for sound spiritual health are necessary: prayer (along with pondering and occasional fasting), scripture and gospel study, service to family and others, and personal development and well-being. If we nourish ourselves daily in each of these areas, we enrich our eternal spiritual welfare while tending to our temporary physical needs.

Prayer (along with Pondering and Fasting)

Before entering mortality through birth, we all dwelt in the presence of God. Communicating with him required little effort: we spoke to him, heard his voice, and received direct counsel and instruction. Like little children under the tutelage of earthly parents, we were closely directed in our spiritual growth by our Heavenly Father. Now, like young adults away from home and parents, we no longer enjoy the immediate presence of God. To continue receiving his direction for our spiritual progress, we must pray.

For this reason, Adam and Eve, upon being driven from the Garden of Eden, "called upon the name of the Lord, and they heard the voice of the Lord from the way toward the Garden of Eden, speaking unto them, and they saw him not; for they were shut out from his presence." (Moses 5:4.) By the Lord's voice within the garden, Adam and Eve received commandments, the first of which was to pray, calling upon God in the name of the Son for forgiveness of sins. Having done this, Adam and Eve then received the Holy Ghost, which brought them knowledge of their mortal condition and joy in their eventual redemption. (See Moses 5:5, 8-11.)

We, likewise, should pray for forgiveness of our sins and for the companionship of the Holy Ghost to help us overcome the power of Satan, whose presence seems all too strong in this world. (See Moses 5:13.) As children of God, we are free to approach our Heavenly Father on any subject and for any of our spiritual or temporal needs. Following the Savior's example, we should also remember others and pray for their needs. The Book of Mormon disciple Amulek made a representative list of the things for which we should pray, including not only divine mercy, eternal salvation, and other spiritual concerns, but also material possessions such as our fields and flocks, our houses and households. Further, we should also pray for others, both our enemies and neighbors. (See Alma 34:17-27.) In short, our prayers should involve all our activities, responsibilities, and aspirations.

Amulek also counsels concerning when we should pray: "Cry unto him . . . morning, mid-day, and

evening . . . and when you do not cry unto the Lord, let your hearts be full, drawn out in prayer unto him continually." (Alma 34:21, 27.) It is significant that we should pray at least as often as we eat. If we feed our spirits as often as our bodies, we will live fuller lives on earth and obtain eternal life in the world to come. [^1]

We receive subtle spiritual help through daily moments of quiet pondering and introspection. As we meditate on personal concerns we have opportunity to search for meaning and purpose in our existence. Gentle whisperings of the Spirit assist us in the many decisions and acts we must do daily. As we listen and respond to these promptings, we learn that a loving Heavenly Father is guiding us in paths leading to spiritual growth.

Strengthening Our Prayers and Spirituality through Fasting

Occasional fasting strengthens the effectiveness of our prayers and enriches our sensitivity to God's spiritual promptings. Both prayer and fasting are admonished in the scriptures. Interestingly, prayer is often mentioned in the scriptures without any link to fasting, but fasting is rarely mentioned without a reference to prayer in the adjoining verses. A major purpose of fasting is to make our prayers more effective; but fasting without prayer is merely depriving oneself of food and will not lead to spiritual strength. Prayer is a necessary element throughout fasting, and more rewarding prayers are a noticeable result of diligent fasting.

The spiritual nourishment we can receive through fasting cannot be overestimated. In fact, many of the greatest miracles and revelations recorded in the scriptures were brought about through fasting and prayer. Alma the younger and the sons of Mosiah found success in converting the formerly unrepentant Lamanites because of their knowledge of the scriptures and because they "had given themselves to much prayer, and fasting; therefore they had the spirit of prophecy, and the spirit of revelation, and when they taught, they taught with power and authority of God." (Alma 17:3.)

Significantly, three spiritual giants of the Bible—Moses, Elijah, and the Lord Jesus Christ—all retreated to the wilderness in fasting and prayer for forty days and nights to prepare themselves to serve their people. Through willingness to subdue the flesh, they received marvelous revelations and were physically and spiritually sustained through communion with heaven. (See Ex. 34:28-29; 1 Kgs. 19:8-18; Matt. 4:2, 11.)

These three servants also exemplify three notable purposes for fasting: to strengthen ourselves, to serve others, and to draw nearer to God. Through Moses, the Lord instituted the first required fast among the children of Israel on the annual Day of Atonement. On this fall day all the congregation fasted, while the high priest, dressed in white linen, made sin offerings and burnt offerings for himself, his household, and the people: "For on that day shall the priest make an atonement for you, to cleanse you, that ye may be clean from all your sins before the Lord." (Lev. 16:30.)

The ritual Day of Atonement was also a symbolic representation of the actual atonement of Christ, who offered his own sinless flesh as a sacrifice so that we might be purified and thereby enter with him into the presence of God. (See Heb. 9:24.) Thus, one major purpose of our fasting is to strengthen ourselves spiritually as we purge ourselves of weaknesses and shortcomings. Furthermore, as the priest assisted others in the time of fasting, we can aid others through intensive fasting commitments. Elijah learned this value of fasting late in his ministry.

Elijah was in extreme despair when he began his forty-day fast. He felt he had failed in his calling to bring the Israelites closer to God, even after his miraculous confrontation with the priests of Baal. Frustrated and disappointed, he wanted to die. But after his fasting, he felt spiritually rejuvenated and ready for further callings from God. He was a better, more enlightened person after this fasting experience, and he spent many more years among the people as their servant. Elijah also came to recognize the gentle spiritual whisperings that allow us more complete communion with God, and thus grew closer to him. (See 1 Kgs. 19.) After a sincere fast, we likewise are spiritually strengthened, we receive new understanding and commitment toward serving others, and we find we have drawn nearer to our Heavenly Father.

Jesus' atoning sacrifice symbolizes the potential value of a fulfilling fast. His fast was a valuable preparation for his mortal ministry, culminating in his atoning sacrifice. When we fast, we symbolically reenact the sacrifice of Christ in our own flesh: we deny ourselves the things that sustain our physical being so as to bring our spirits into communion with God, and this makes us better Saints. We also pay a fast offering for the poor when we fast, not only for the good it does them, but also to remind ourselves that Christ sacrificed himself for others. In fasting we reconcile ourselves spiritually to God and sacrifice our physical means for our fellowman in a truly Christlike manner.

Ten Steps to a Fulfilling Fast

In modern scripture, the Lord equates genuine fasting and prayer with a time of rejoicing. (See D&C 59:14.) How many Church members, however, anticipate fast Sunday with dread rather than joy? The following outline, if used as a guideline for fasting, can help transform what might normally be a day of mere physical deprivation into a spiritual feast.

Aside from the spiritual benefits of fasting, physiological studies in recent years have confirmed that periodic fasting helps purify the body. Furthermore, during a fast, blood circulation normally devoted to digesting food is available to the brain, enabling fasting individuals to react faster and think more clearly. Twelve to twenty hours into the fast, heightened physical and mental capacity help put us in a proper spiritual state to receive the direction and revelation we desire. Having disciplined ourselves, focused on a purpose, assisted the needy, and enriched our spirituality, a proper fast will be a time of rejoicing!

Scripture and Gospel Study

Just as Amulek counseled us to pray as often as we eat—morning, noon, and night—so the prophet Nephi admonished us to "feast upon the words of Christ; for behold, the words of Christ will tell [us] all things what [we] should do." (2 Ne. 32:3.) The words of Christ, which are revealed by the Holy Ghost, are available to us primarily through the scriptures and our personal study and pondering.

The scriptures do not answer every individual question or problem; they alone cannot tell us everything we should do—for this, pondering and praying are necessary. What the scriptures do give, however, are the eternal truths and commandments on which to base deliberations, judgments, and decisions. They also give examples, or "case studies," of how other men and women have dealt with similar difficulties of life throughout the ages. They furthermore demonstrate God's constant love for his children—a comfort and promise for today.

Daily prayer and scripture study should, therefore, go hand in hand. The scriptures help prepare our minds and hearts for meditation and prayer as they raise questions to consider that we might not have thought of and as they expand our understanding of God's work. In return, our prayers help us better understand the written word of God as we "liken all scriptures unto us, that it might be for our profit and learning." [^3] (1 Ne. 19:23.)

A helpful way to read the scriptures is to organize a systematic, regular reading program. Some people set aside a regular period each day for scripture reading, such as fifteen to thirty minutes. Other individuals set a goal to read a certain number of pages or chapters daily or weekly until their objective is met. Orienting the goal toward chapters is usually more practical, since they present more logical breaks. Sometimes, a person will decide to read a work of scripture during a short vacation or other selected period. Usually, the reading is spread out in smaller portions throughout the year. For the reader's information, the following chart indicates the number of chapters in each of the Standard Works:

Old Testament 929 New Testament 260 Bible (total) 1189 Book of Mormon 239 Doctrine and Covenants 140 [^4] Pearl of Great Price 16 Total 1584 chapters (2480 pages)

Adult Latter-day Saints usually orient their scripture-reading program around the subject matter of the Gospel Doctrine classes in the Sunday School, which are currently on a four-year rotating schedule in this order: Old Testament (and the Moses and Abraham portions of the Pearl of Great Price), New Testament, Book of Mormon, and Doctrine and Covenants (with the rest of the Pearl of Great Price). Additionally, many Latter-day Saints have a yearly goal of reading the Book of Mormon.

Scripture reading can be a fun, positive experience for individuals and families, especially if appropriate incentives or rewards are a part of the program. For example, a special ice-cream treat may reward the completion of a book (such as Matthew or First Nephi) or the end of a reading period (such as a month or a set number of weeks of daily reading). Recognition of intermediate goals reinforces our resolve to complete our annual goals. In addition, while reading the scriptures, family members should learn the importance of discussing important passages and of using various scripture aids, such as footnotes, the Topical Guide and Bible Dictionary entries, maps, and so on. Scripture-reading programs, even if they are not daily successes, will help establish spiritual priorities for the family. They also instill good reading and gospel study habits for all involved, especially children.

Service to Family and Others

LDS scholar Hugh Nibley once said, "If you pray for an angel to visit you, you know what he'll do when he comes. He'll just quote the scriptures to you—so you know you're wasting your time waiting for what we already have." [^5] In a similar vein, President Spencer W. Kimball wrote, "God does notice us, and he watches over us. But it is usually through another person that he meets our needs." [^6] In other words, if we look for miraculous intervention in our lives, we usually anticipate too much. Most of the needed knowledge and understanding can be found in the scriptures, and most of the desired blessings and assistance can be received through service from and to others. Our primary duty as Saints of God, then, is to love and serve others, following the Savior's example. We then can become his messengers in performing miracles of service to others.

The Pharisees, who seemed more concerned with law than love, asked the Savior which was the greatest commandment in the law. Christ responded with two: "Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind. This is the first and great commandment. And the second is like unto it, Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself. On these two commandments hang all the law and the prophets." (Matt. 22:37-40; italics added.) The two great commandments are inseparable, and the second is "like unto" the first because through the second we fulfill the first commandment. We demonstrate our love for others by caring for their temporal and spiritual needs. Jesus set such an example when he provided the five thousand with a meal along with a spiritual feast. (See John 6.) He also admonished us to care for the needy as a witness of our service and love for him. (See Matt. 25:31-46.) In other words, God is not present with us here on earth; we can serve him only by serving others. (See Mosiah 2:17.)

If, on the other hand, we spend all our energies serving ourselves, we ultimately become servants of Satan. He encourages men to pile up goods for their own material security, without regard for the needs of their neighbors. Because of this practice, the Lord says, "the world lieth in sin." (D&C 49:20.) Christ also warns, "No man can serve two masters: for either he will hate the one, and love the other; or else he will hold to the one, and despise the other. Ye cannot serve God and mammon." (Matt. 6:24.) Mammon is transliterated from a Greek word (derived from Aramaic) meaning personal riches. The true Saint realizes that there is no such thing as personal riches: the fullness of the earth and all its riches belong to God and should be used to provide equally for all.

Instead of allowing material wealth to be our means of public recognition, perhaps we should follow the Semitic example where internal virtues rather than exterior possessions are the basis of public honor. For example, the story is told of a distinguished traveler coming to an Arab village and being invited to a special feast. Only the most honored members of the community were invited to the dinner, and they came in their finest robes. But the traveler was surprised when the person seated next to him was dressed in beggar's rags. He asked the host if this was not the same poor man he had seen begging at the village entrance just a few hours earlier. The host replied that he was, and sensing the traveler's next question, he explained:

"This man is the poorest person in our village, yet he is our most honored and esteemed citizen. His knowledge and wisdom are legendary, and his literary and musical talents are without equal. And until a few months ago, he was the wealthiest man in the valley, noted for his generosity to the poor. But after a devastating scourge destroyed most of the townspeople's flocks, he used all his wealth to buy food for the people and distributed all of his livestock, except for one camel, among them. He was journeying with his camel to a far land, where he had earlier traded and gained much wealth, when a starving family crossed his path. Without hesitation, he slaughtered his last camel and provided abundant food for the famished strangers who were guests in his tent. Poor and penniless, but rich in honor and dignity, he now lives with us in our village. He is the most distinguished citizen we could seat next to you." If more societies recognized such generosity, the destitute would truly find all of their basic needs fulfilled.

Besides harboring a selfish attitude towards material goods—"After all, I earned it myself"—many people today are also caught up in popular movements promoting "personal priorities" and "self-fulfillment." But instead of enlarging and refining character, constant focus on self produces gross egoism, which clouds the mind and hinders spiritual growth. The paradoxical truth about abstract ideals such as fulfillment and happiness is that they can be obtained only when we do not consciously seek them: "He that findeth his life shall lose it: and he that loseth his life for my sake shall find it." (Matt. 10:39.) President Kimball expounded on this paradox when he said concerning service, "The more we serve our fellowmen in appropriate ways, the more substance there is to our souls. . . . Indeed, it is easier to 'find' ourselves because there is so much more of us to find!" [^7]

Personal Development and Well-being

In order to better serve others, we usually need both temporal resources and spiritual strength. Indeed, it is difficult to assist others when we are weak and destitute ourselves. President Marion G. Romney of the First Presidency encouraged us to develop our means and our talents so that we can be more profitable servants: "Without self-reliance one cannot exercise these innate desires to serve. How can we give if there is nothing there? Food for the hungry cannot come from empty shelves. Money to assist the needy cannot come from an empty purse. Support and understanding cannot come from the emotionally starved. Teaching cannot come from the unlearned. And most important of all, spiritual guidance cannot come from the spiritually weak." [^8]

Caring for Our Basic Needs

To enable ourselves to serve others well, we should be mindful of all temporal and spiritual areas of personal welfare. A helpful checklist might include the financial and vocational, physical, emotional, social, intellectual, moral, and spiritual aspects of our lives.

Most people have daily work to provide for the financial needs of themselves and their families. Within many families, however, financial and vocational instability is a major cause of marital stress and is often listed as a major cause for divorce. As President Heber J. Grant counseled, "If there is . . . one thing that will bring peace and contentment into the human heart, and into the family, it is to live within our means, and if there is any one thing that is grinding, and discouraging and disheartening it is to have debts and obligations that one cannot meet." [^9] Latter-day Saints are therefore counseled by one of the Lord's prophets to stay out of debt and to "plan and work in a way that will permit you to be happy even as you do without certain things that in times of affluence may have been available to you. Live within your means and not beyond them. . . . Strive to save a portion of that which you earn. . . .Teach your children these basic principles in your family councils." [^10]

Solid educational and vocational training along with modest monetary expectations, spending discipline, and careful budgeting will lead to financial independence and material security. On the other hand, if we constantly live beyond our means and always worry over our daily maintenance, we feel in bondage to financial necessities. In addition, our minds and hearts are not free to seek higher things or to think of others' needs. Furthermore, we feel we have no surplus material goods to share with others in their times of need. [^11]

The second item on our personal-welfare checklist involves our physical body. As discussed earlier, when we fast, we subdue physical needs to gain spiritual blessings. When we are not fasting, however, we should remember that the physical body is a temple that houses the spirit, and we should care for it accordingly. (See 1 Cor. 3:16.) Some Church members may not recognize the correlation between spiritual and physical health. Our physical well-being cannot be neglected without suffering ill consequences spiritually, for "the spirit and the body are the soul of man" (D&C 88:15) and "when separated, man cannot receive a fulness of joy" (D&C 93:34). Regular exercise and a wise diet, as advised by the Word of Wisdom, will bring us not only physical strength and endurance, but also spiritual revelation: "Wisdom and great treasures of knowledge, even hidden treasures." [^12] (D&C 89:19.)

The third area we need to work on is our emotions. The prophet Lehi provides valuable insight into the strongest emotional feeling we should experience in mortality: "Men are, that they might have joy." (2 Ne. 2:25.) Note that Lehi did not say something like, "Men are that they will have joy," indicating that joy is reserved only for future celestial life. On the other hand, he did not guarantee complete, constant joy by saying "Men are that they have joy." Instead, men are that they might have joy—hopefully a good share of it now and a complete measure of it in the eternities.

In other words, we do not have to wait for our final destination to experience joy—it can be part of our earth life now. If our attitude is one of faith in Christ, of hope in our future with God, and of charity for others as prompted by the Holy Spirit, then we will daily look for the best in life, in others, and in ourselves. Ultimate joy comes through exaltation, and exaltation results from full personal growth. Such joy and emotional contentment will come only as we fulfill Heavenly Father's planned destiny for us. Thus, as we grow and progress, we will generally retain a positive, peaceful spirit about us that brings us joy. [^13]

The fourth item on our personal development checklist involves our social habits. In modern scripture, the Lord chastened early leaders of the Church, including Joseph Smith, and commanded them to "set in order" their homes and families. (See D&C 90:18; 93:43, 50.) Without love and harmony as the social patterns in our own families, we are ill-equipped to share the gospel and set a Christlike example for others. For both parents and children, sound family relationships foster a secure environment that enables family members to succeed in social relationships outside the home. Our role as unique individuals in the family largely determine how we will function in society. It influences whether we will love only ourselves or learn to love our neighbors as ourselves. We need to learn how to build upon our family foundation so we can expand into other social relationships. [^14]

A fifth area for development is our mind. Besides needing to set his family in order, Joseph Smith was commanded to "set in order the churches, and study and learn, and become acquainted with all good books, and with languages, tongues, and people." (D&C 90:15.) The Latter-day Saints are committed to intellectual progress throughout life and even beyond the grave, since the glory of God is intelligence (see D&C 93:36) and since the degree of intelligence and knowledge we acquire in this life will accompany us into the spirit world (see D&C 130:18-19). President Brigham Young counseled that, while the fundamental truths of salvation are contained in the holy scriptures, these should not be the end of our study, or we will overlook much beneficial knowledge and many inspired truths: " 'Shall I sit down and read the Bible, the Book of Mormon, and the Book of Covenants all the time?' says one. Yes, if you please, and when you have done, you may be nothing but a sectarian after all. It is your duty to study to know everything upon the face of the earth in addition to reading those books. . . . The truth that is in all the arts and sciences forms a part of our religion." [^15]

In addition to enriching our minds, we need to constantly strengthen ourselves in a sixth area: our moral integrity. As we maintain and strengthen our moral values, we demonstrate social responsibility and an attitude of fairness and justice. And when we speak of morality, we mean more than the moral-sexual relationship between men and women—for morality also refers to honesty, ethical values, and all interpersonal relationships. [^16]

Finally, as we evaluate our checklist for personal well-being, we must appreciate that spirituality is the most important ingredient. Spiritual progress—like happiness and fulfillment—cannot be sought after directly. Rather, it is a by-product of daily prayer, fasting, scripture reading, study, service, and personal development and refinement in many areas. A spiritual person is one who cares not for the wealth and honor of this world, but who loves truth and patterns his life upon noble, eternal principles. As President David O. McKay so succinctly expressed: "Spirituality, our true aim, is the consciousness of victory over self and of communion with the Infinite." [^17]

Our personal well-being requires constant attention in all the seven areas we just discussed. As we strengthen ourselves, we are better able to help others. In addition, as we feel good about ourselves, we should want to assist others in feeling good about themselves. We can accomplish this through genuine service. Some of the best means and values of service are illuminated in the scriptures. Regular scripture reading and gospel study keep our personal and service priorities in line. To insure that our priorities correspond with Heavenly Father's will, we need to pray to him many times each day. An occasional fast accentuates our communication with God as we augment our religious commitment. All of these actions enhance our spiritual health.

Although the signs of spiritual weakness are not as obvious as symptoms of illness, they are just as sure if we do not tend to our spiritual health. Champion athletes at their peak would be foolish to claim no need for proper nourishment, exercise, and rest. They would quickly lose their health and could even endanger their lives. Similarly, people cannot become complacent and claim they no longer need to pray, keep the commandments, or strengthen themselves spiritually.

We need to regularly strengthen our SPIRITUAL HEALTH through daily activities like prayer (along with occasional fasting), scripture and gospel study, service to others, and personal development in one or more of the financial and vocational, physical, emotional, social, intellectual, moral, and spiritual areas of our lives. As we maintain our spiritual health, we will find peace and purpose in life while preparing ourselves for the joy and contentment of eternity.

For further study, refer to the following entries:

TG: BD: EM: Fast, Fasting Fasts Church Educational System Prayer, Pray Prayer Education Scriptures, Study of Fasting Service Institutes of Religion

Physical Fitness and Restoration

Prayer

Scripture Study

Seminaries

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Strive for true, noble, and eternal purposes. However much we value industriousness, we need to look at the purpose behind our work. Sometimes we can get so caught up in busywork that we lose the vision of our grand, divine purpose on earth, which is ultimately the same purpose of God in heaven: "This is my work and my glory—to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man." (Moses 1:39.) All that we do should be done with an eye focused on the eternal life of ourselves and others. If what we desire has a negative bearing or no bearing at all on our eternal progression, how can it possibly be worth our time? Identify and state the problem. 2. Study the problem, along with its sources, attributes, and challenges. 3. Propose a tentative solution. 4. Preview the possible effects of that solution, review how it fits within one's stated mission and goals, and see if any better alternative is available. 5. Decide what to do, referring to one's applicable goals and the relevant timetables and taking inventory of helpful resources. 6. Confirm the decision and proposed program through the Holy Spirit so that you can know that it is right and good—and then do it! Chapter 13 contains furhter insight into how Christ can help us to come closer to being perfect.
[^3] Establish a plan of action with meaningful, challenging goals. After reviewing our mission-based roles and resources, we are ready to map a course of action where we select our most important goals. We must schedule our priorities toward productive activities so we can improve the quality of both our performance and our life-style. Our plan should include balanced, systematic, and timely goals in the appropriate areas of our life. Hyrum W. smith, "Life's Many Demands Create 'Time Traps,' " CN, Dec 30, 1989, p. 13.
[^4] Getting started—do it now! At some time, we have to move from theory into practice. We need to commit ourselves and to start working hard to achieve our best. Our personal commitment to our projects or goals is vitally important because success or failure depends more upon attitude than upon aptitude. Making a commitment to others as well as ourselves is extremely helpful in reinforcing our desires to improve. We should confide our goals to a trusted parent, spouse, or friend. Through their acceptance of us as we are, they can best encourage and help us to improve amid obstacles and setbacks. A private commitment can easily be ignored or hedged upon, but when we include others in our goals, we can combine their strength with ours to help us succeed. This is one reason why all saving ordinances in the Church must be publicly witnessed and recorded. It is also why part of every Church member's baptismal covenant is to be "willing to bear one another's burdens, that they may be light." (Mosiah 18:8.) See note 1 above.
[^5] We increase our effectiveness through beneficial teamwork. When people work well together, they often enjoy the benefits of synergy. Synergy is a process where the whole end product is greater than the sum of the individual parts. Edifying cooperation becomes a catalytic, empowering, and unifying force leading to far greater success than any individual could produce by him- or herself. Teamwork improves effectiveness and productivity as people synergize their efforts. The Treasure Chest (New York: Harper and Row, 1965), 17.
[^6] We overcome obstacles and achieve success in gradual steps. Certainly godhood would exceed every person's grasp if it had to be attained all at once. Yet it is not impossible to find, or even be, a person who is perfect in one or more ways—absolutely honest, completely dependable, fully chaste, and so on. The key is to perfect those areas of our lives where we are nearly perfect already, while applying the discipline and spiritual strength we have acquired to more difficult areas. Thus, we will reach our ultimate goal—and any long-range goal we set for ourselves—one step at a time. "For precept must be upon precept, precept upon precept; line upon line, line upon line; here a little, and there a little." (Isa. 28:10.) Quotable Quotations (Wheaton, Illinois: Victor Books, 1985), 310.
[^7] We should continue our progress by reviewing and renewing the previous six steps. By establishing a regular habit of evaluation and reevaluation, we establish a cycle of growth that spirals upward. No matter how we may fail at times, the review and renewal sends us upward again. As we learn from our mistakes and successes and continue on in our efforts, we develop patterns of perfection that carry over into other areas of our lives. We gradually become the type of people we truly desire to be. Chapter 17 contains further insights about the power of change and repentance in our lives.
[^8] Chapter 34 discusses the Church's threefold mission: proclaim the gospel, perfect the Saints, and redeem the dead.
[^9] From personal notes and conversations with President Monson while the author was a mission president in Frankfurt, Germany.
[^10] End the fast with a private prayer, taking time to listen to spiritual promptings and to receive an answer from our Heavenly Father. Finally, break the fast by eating a simple meal "prepared with singleness of heart that thy fasting may be perfect, or, in other words, that thy joy may be full." (D&C 59:13.) Spencer W. Kimball, ''Follow the Fundamentals,'' Ensign, May 1981, p. 80.
[^11] The importance of work and vocational preparation is emphasized in chapter 29. The same chapter also talks about the proper care and use of material goods, such as food, clothing, housing, appliances, automobiles, and so on. Chapter 28 discusses means by which our financial resources can assist the Lord and help our families and others.
[^12] Further insights on the Lord's commandments concerning physical health are found in chapter 27.
[^13] Christ's role and his expectations for us in this personal perfection process were presented in chapter 13.
[^14] Further insights on the significant role of families in both earthly and heavenly society are discussed in chapter 30.
[^15] DBY, 256, 332. See also chapters 1 (truth), 8 (scriptures), and 16 (cultivating faith) for further insights about how knowledge and study can enrich our spirituality.
[^16] God's primary moral expectations for his children are found in the Ten Commandments, which are discussed in chapter 24. The sexual laws concerning moral purity are presented in chapter 26. Issues surrounding our work ethics are evaluated in chapter 29.
[^17] CR, Oct. 1969, 8.
