Victor L. Ludlow, Principles and Practices of the Restored Gospel ( 1992)

Chapter 21

Personal Growth—Obeying the Commandment to Be Perfect

There are times when each of us wishes for something more than what we have—be it health, wealth, beauty, skills, or possessions. We wonder how we can improve our life-styles and the lives of others. As a barometer of these desires, think of how often we have said or heard sentences beginning with these phrases: "I wish I had . . . ," "I wish I could . . . ," or "I wish you would . . . "? Most often we look outside ourselves for the fulfillment of these dreams.

We wish we could be like the servants in the parable of the talents who received money from their master, doubled it, and then received a generous reward from their lord. In the parable, Jesus said simply that the wealthy man "called his own servants, and delivered unto them his goods. And unto one he gave five talents, to another two, and to another one; to every man according to his several ability." (Matt. 25:14-15.) He then related that two of the servants benefited from the wise increase of their talents. Because they had been "faithful over a few things," the master would make them a "ruler over many things." However, Jesus did not share with us how the servants were wise and faithful in multiplying their talents, other than to say they were traders. (See Matt. 25:16; Luke 19:15.) What did they trade, and why were some more successful than others? We are not told the details of their success. We wish we knew some special secret, not only to multiply our wealth, but also to increase our gifts, talents, skills, and successes.

Most people, regardless of their social status, financial condition, or spiritual strength, would like to improve their station of life. For example, a variety of interesting surveys have found that most people feel they need just a little more income than what they now have. They believe if they had just 10 percent more, they could easily get by. This was true across the whole economic spectrum, whether the people already had very limited or seemingly large sources of income. Most people believe that just a little bit more will make them happy. Likewise in a spiritual dimension, many people sense that their spiritual level is below their expectation and potential. They feel they need just a little more spirituality, sensitivity toward others, understanding of the scriptures, and other spiritual attributes. And although they naturally look elsewhere for the satisfaction of these desires, most often their achievement comes from within.

The Quest for Perfection

Mormons often share these same material and spiritual expectations. Sometimes, they confuse the relationship between the two types of success. They are often a pragmatic people who believe that solid effort produces results. Some assume that material increase and social growth reflect greater spirituality, believing that the Lord materially blesses those who are righteous and that his tangible blessings are easy to see. Wiser Latter-day Saints recognize, however, that God's blessings are usually spiritual and less obvious. Wanting to receive these spiritual blessings, many might place especially rigorous demands upon themselves. Their ultimate goal is to fulfill the Savior's admonition, "Be ye therefore perfect, even as your Father which is in Heaven is perfect." (Matt. 5:48.) Thus many strive for personal excellence or perfection in the various areas of their lives.

To outsiders, Mormons may be grouped together with Jews, Orientals, and others who have a reputation for high academic performance and business aggressiveness. Within the LDS community, some members sense that very high expectations can place some people under a great amount of stress—so much so that it can be damaging. Latter-day Saints are challenged to maintain a wise balance between academic and professional expectations and other priorities in life. On the one hand, they are promised that if they are obedient, they can "run and not be weary." (D&C 89:20; see also Isa. 40:31.) On the other hand, the Lord admonishes them through the Prophet Joseph Smith to not run faster than they have strength. (See D&C 10:4; Mosiah 4:27.) Thus, Latter-day Saints need to thoughtfully develop individualized approaches to personal perfection as they seek to follow Christ's example and receive divine help through his atoning sacrifice. [^1]

Developing Gifts and Talents

People first face the challenge of discovering how self-improvement or success is achieved. Some feel that just plain hard work is required to succeed in life, yet history is full of people who worked busily but accomplished little of consequence. Too often, people are so involved in busywork that they do not accomplish things of greater, lasting value. Their efforts can be like the energy within lightning or the wind that is wasted because it is not directed or controlled.

Some other people believe that luck or circumstance leads to wealth or success. They wish that they were related to some rich ancestor or that the next lottery would bring them riches. They wait for good fortune to drop into their laps. Their circumstances vary little from those who simply wait for whatever life brings them, without trying to take control of their destiny. For these people, the elements of chance rather than the principles of control govern their lives.

Ultimately, mature people recognize that although just plain work or chance may lead to some success, the most dependable means toward personal fulfillment comes when we try to direct our own progress. In the previous chapter, we talked about areas in which we should all be striving to gain control in our lives. We learned that both physical and spiritual fitness come through inspired, diligent effort. Daily, we physically need to eat, exercise, and rest. Likewise, we should spiritually improve ourselves through prayer, gospel study, service, and personal development. This chapter will share guidelines on how we can improve ourselves and our life-styles through principles of proper preparation and effective achievement.

Amid the pressures of modern living, it is difficult—in fact, impossible—to give equal attention to all areas of personal development every day of our lives. The range of our financial, physical, emotional, social, intellectual, moral, and spiritual problems and potentials boggles the mind. To try to rigidly adhere to a fixed routine of personal development is to set oneself up for frustration and failure, for life will stubbornly refuse to conform itself to our desires. On the other hand, if a person sets no goals or priorities, his or her life will become completely governed by outside pressures and circumstances.

Seven Steps for Personal Development

To realistically improve our lives, we must not try to do it all at once. Instead, we must identify our objectives and available resources, establish priorities, commit ourselves to reach attainable goals, and use our efforts wisely to attain those goals. We need to ask ourselves three key questions: (1) "What are we supposed to do?" (2) "How do we accomplish our objectives?" and (3) "How do we maintain our growth pattern?" As we answer these three questions, seven key steps become apparent.

What Are We Supposed to Do?

To begin, we need to decide where we are going and how we plan to get there. We prepare various guidelines as we go through the first three steps:

A declaration of purpose, a personal mission statement, or an organizational theme focuses attention upon the central objectives of the person or group. Such objectives encompass many areas of influence and should contain long-range perspective. A mission statement declares both what we want to do and what we want to become, and it will also probably suggest why we want to do it. Such a creed states the principles or values that motivate and give purpose to our activities. We do not need to be a company or a group to prepare a declaration of purpose or a personal mission statement for ourselves.

To assist us in this search for purpose and value in our efforts, we need to seek and follow the Holy Spirit. The prophet Jacob counseled that the revealed word of Jesus Christ through the Holy Ghost will "tell [us] all things what [we] should do." (2 Ne. 32:3.) We cannot help the Lord promote the immortality and eternal life of man without the aid of his Spirit. If we fix our minds on priorities and goals without the Spirit, we tend to cut ourselves off from his subtle whisperings, and we will most likely pursue the wrong things: "For my thoughts are not your thoughts, neither are your ways my ways, saith the Lord." (Isa. 55:8.) Like the Liahona given to Lehi, the Spirit should be our compass in life, not only pointing us in the right direction, but also giving us specific instructions along the way. Without the Spirit, we are truly lost. After identifying our mission in life, we can study how we can move toward our objectives.

An analogy will help us understand this process. Imagine remodeling a house for a family in need of larger living quarters. First, we need a set of blueprints (a mission statement) so we can know what the end product is supposed to be. We then need to identify our work skills so we can see which tasks we can accomplish (identifying our roles). We must also be sure we have the proper tools (resources) to get the job done.

To assist us in building our own lives, we need our own tools—the aids and helps that will allow us to get the job done. Two types of resources can be used: (1) those personal abilities within ourselves or those working with us, such as individual capacities, attitudes, skills, perspectives, experiences, and strengths; and (2) those physical assets outside ourselves, such as material possessions, tools, written works, financial means, Church programs, community services, and so forth. As we appreciate the resources available to us, we gain a better understanding of our potential achievement.

As we pursue the noble, eternal purposes of life, we should also remember that God will help us. President Abraham Lincoln believed that "God is the silent partner in all great enterprises." [^2] As in the parable of the talents, God will reward those who work faithfully in his service, blessing them with additional gifts, strengths, and abilities to achieve their righteous desires, for those "which hath shall be given" more. (Luke 19:26; cf. JST.)

Mottos and programs abound that encourage us to set goals. We are told that hopes and desires without plans to achieve them will always remain unfulfilled wishes, and those who fail to plan should plan to fail. In office-supply stores and bookstores, we find various time-management systems that provide guidelines, forms, and planner notebooks so we can organize our time more effectively. They give motivation and a structured framework for planning and accomplishing what matters most in our lives. As one LDS leader counseled, "successfully balancing life's demands requires careful long- and short-term planning and prioritizing, as well as constant review of one's values." [^3]

As we plan, we should not be afraid to set difficult goals if they are what we truly desire and what the Lord would have us do. The ultimate goal of all believing Latter-day Saints is to become like God himself, which is humanly impossible, but attainable through the aid of the Atonement and the Holy Ghost. [^4] We will reach only what we aim for, so we must aim high. Or as the British poet Robert Browning so elegantly stated, "Ah, but a man's reach should exceed his grasp, or what's a heaven for." [^5]

How Do We Accomplish Our Objectives?

We are now ready to translate our values, resources, and plans into action. We do it through personal involvement with three further steps:

Change almost always becomes harder and rarely becomes easier when it is postponed. If the saying, Nothing of lasting value is achieved without hard work, is true, then it is better to err in initiative and effort than in inactivity. We need to begin now. This concept is embodied in President Spencer W. Kimball's oft-repeated admonition, "Do it!" But given our human nature, we tend to procrastinate and delay. Although many motivating forces may get us going, five of them seem to be common: desperation, dissatisfaction, obligation, idealism, and faith.

Desperation catches up with us as deadlines arrive, crises arise, and pressing matters demand our attention. Things just finally have to get done, and so we go out and do them. Stress and frustration almost always accompany this compelling motivation, but at least we get the burdens off our back so we can go on with more pleasant activities.

Dissatisfaction is a more subtle but powerful motivating force. As we are dissatisfied with imperfections, incompleteness, and mundane efforts, we desire to improve things. Failure itself is not the problem; rather, our view of failure can make it a problem. Babies fail countless times before they learn to walk—in this, is a simple principle: success does not come with the first try. If we are satisfied or content with our failure, then our failure becomes permanent. The inventor Thomas Edison, who failed hundreds of times before perfecting the electric light bulb, said, "Discontent is the first necessity of progress." [^6]

In striving to perfect ourselves, we will fall short of our own expectations many times. Whether we give up or keep trying, though, is the measure of our inward resolve strengthened by the Spirit. Sins and imperfections can be fully overcome only as man "yields to the enticings of the Holy Spirit, and putteth off the natural man and becometh a saint through the atonement of Christ." (Mosiah 3:19.) Unless through the Spirit we catch a glimpse of what we can become, we will likely be content with what we are. The Lord is not content with us the way we are, either, and for this reason he says, "Whom I love I also chasten that their sins may be forgiven, for with the chastisement I prepare a way for their deliverance in all things out of temptation." (D&C 95:1.) [^7]

Obligation motivates us when we feel a sense of responsibility to get a job done. A work assignment, Church calling, or community commitment may provide this feeling. We are not always doing the task because we have to or because we want to. Sometimes, we just feel that someone ought to do it, and so we acquiesce. This incentive is usually not as frustrating as the motives discussed above, but it does not always provide the sense of fulfillment we would desire.

Idealism generates out of a positive desire to help others. It is the other side of the coin from the element of dissatisfaction discussed earlier. A negative incentive, such as discontent, will not always motivate us long enough to really solve the problem unless we also have some positive, lasting reasons that propel us forward. The gospel of Jesus Christ, the plan of salvation, and the threefold mission of the Church [^8] provide a valuable positive framework for our actions. Likewise, some political philosophies and social programs give us positive incentive to extend our reach and help ourselves and others.

Faith is the sublime spiritual motivator in our lives. With this working as a spiritual catalyst, we want to actively participate in righteously living and helping others. Instead of negative, frustrating motives prompting us to action, and even nobler than dutiful or idealist motivations, this incentive brings love and spirituality into our behavior. We truly want to help ourselves and others for the best good of all; all this we do for God's work and glory. Faith, coupled with love and righteousness, guarantees that our motives are pure and our results will be optimal.

Whatever our incentive for getting started, we need to remember that no formula for success will work if we do nothing. With maturity and understanding, our motives will become more noble and will reflect more and more the long-range, charitable desires of our hearts. As our incentives for action generate out of higher motives, we will find that our efforts in these activities will be more rewarding and fulfilling.

Working with others provides valuable experience in observing and learning their strengths and skills. As we emulate the positive attributes of others, we become better people more rapidly than if we tried to develop the same characteristics independently through trial and error. A progressive family or organization encourages the sharing of ideas and the mutual development of abilities. A weak group, on the other hand, often settles to low standards of performance, with members tolerating and reflecting each others' weaknesses. It can also foster unhealthy competition as members seek to bring down each other. As we emulate the good rather than emphasize the bad in each other, our relationships will edify ourselves and others.

Obvious examples of synergetic effort are found in the sports world and in business. Effective teamwork often allows a group of less-talented players to excel over a collection of gifted but selfish athletes. A company united from top to bottom toward quality production and genuine service will outperform far larger corporations. Likewise, LDS families, wards, stakes, and missions working together in love and harmony will find strength, success, and fulfillment in great abundance.

In our search to enlist the cooperation of others, or in our insistence to do things ourselves, we often overlook the assistance that the members of the Godhead can provide. As declared in the scriptures, "with God all things are possible." (Matt. 19:26; Mark 10:27.) Heavenly Father's help, along with Christ's direction and the Holy Ghost's inspiration, will give us great power to succeed in all our noble endeavors. In fact, all divine goals are impossible without their help.

When the Lord came to young Solomon in a dream, saying, "Ask what I shall give thee," the new king did not desire the luxuries of courtly life but rather the wisdom to solve the problems of his kingdom: "Give therefore thy servant an understanding heart to judge thy people, that I may discern between good and bad." (1 Kgs. 3:5, 9.) Discernment between good and bad and, even more challenging, between good and better is an essential gift in making our many daily decisions.

These many little decisions and the resultant acts combine over the years to formulate our character. We need spiritual guidance and courage to conquer the many little obstacles in life. We should pray not for a life of ease, but for the capacity and strength to face and overcome life's challenges. As any wise mariner would agree, "A ship in harbor is safe, but that is not what ships are built for." Just as ships are built for sailing out on the seas, human beings are created to experience the challenges of life and to learn to "subdue all things" like our example, Jesus Christ. (Philip. 3:21.)

To ensure personal growth, we need to measure our performance. As President Thomas S. Monson has often said, "Performance measured and reported will consistently improve." [^9] By doing little things well and measuring our increased capacities, we become more capable of doing big things better until we find success in all the important areas of our lives. As Jesus said, those who are faithful in little things will be given power over many things. (See Matt. 25:21; Luke 19:17.)

How Do We Maintain Our Growth Pattern?

Once we witness personal development and improvement, we want to expand and maintain it. We need to establish a lasting pattern of personal development through one important step:

To keep ourselves on track, we should periodically review our goals in light of our eternal goal of immortality and exaltation. Then, with the help of the Spirit, we should reevaluate our priorities and adjust our goals accordingly. Through prayer, self-discipline, and the help of others, we will find ourselves progressing step by step. Eventually, we will know all that we need to know, we will do all that should be done, and we will fulfill our divine potential.

Obstacles to Personal Development

Challenges, obstacles, and stress are a natural part of life and personal development. But just as muscles need physical resistance to develop, meeting challenges straight on can actually become a positive character-building opportunity. As the scriptures record, we learn and grow line upon line and here a little and there a little—just as in muscle and body building—but when we say we have enough, we begin to lose the strength and testimony that we had. (See 2 Ne. 28:30.) When challenges present themselves in our lives, we can either avoid them as we separate ourselves from them, or we can meet them head-on and try to overcome them.

Two key obstacles represent the different challenges we face—handling stress and solving problems. Stress can be an emotionally disruptive influence in our lives; it is usually an internal battle we face, although others can influence it. Problems become difficult situations that impede our progress, conflicts that may involve others, or problems within ourselves. If we can master these hindrances, we will develop the technique and strength to overcome life's obstacles.

Handling Stress

Stress or tension usually affects the emotional dimension of our life, but it can also influence our physical and social well-being. Some tension is a natural part of earth life. Almost everything around us causes some pressure—the air we breathe, the food we eat, every motion we undertake. All of it generates some form of strain. Stress is not only natural but valuable. For example, without tension in a rubber band, muscle, watch spring, violin or guitar string, the instrument would not function. However, too much tension can be destructive, as witnessed by a guitar string that snaps, or a muscle that suffers a sprain. Our challenge is to maintain a healthy balance of moderate stress.

The amount of stress we experience is usually divided into three levels: low, medium, and high. Low (or no) stress frequently results in immediate low productivity, while high stress usually results in long-term low productivity. Medium stress consistently results in a high productivity level. Therefore, we should strive to maintain a constant, moderate level of stress.

A look at the major physical, emotional, and social stresses in our lives will help us appreciate their values and dangers. Physical stress causes a person's energy and strength to temporarily increase, often resulting in keener physical sensitivity through the body senses. Recognized by the presence of adrenalin and other hormones, physical stress assists the body to access all available energy resources. It can also help the body increase its defenses against disease. Prolonged, heavy stress leads to fatigue, high blood pressure, and weakness in fighting disease. Signs of too much physical stress include ulcers, headaches, and eating disorders.

Emotional stress sharpens a person's attitude and helps him or her become more sensitive. Moderate stress develops an attentive, positive, steady disposition as witnessed by a calm, steady demeanor and a patient but persistent behavior. Increased stress naturally results as we experience change—such as when we move, take on a new job, alter our family structure, suffer illness, face dangers, and the like.

The three usual sources of emotional stress are fear, guilt, and pressure. Fear includes phobias and dangers, both real and imagined. Guilt is sometimes called "fear inside out," and it comes from knowing we are not living up to God's expectations and being afraid of what the possible consequences might be. Pressure is the most common source of emotional stress. Pressure comes from both within and without ourselves, and it usually results from a gap between expectations and performance. Healthy pressure motivates us to do better, while severe pressure can burden us as others sometimes expect too much of us, or we may place unrealistic demands upon ourselves. Prolonged, heavy stress causes a person to become nervous, agitated, anxious, worried, fearful, or lethargic. Signs of too much emotional stress include depression, moodiness, frustration, and tenseness.

Social stress occurs as we strive for success and work harder to enhance our relations with others. A person under moderate social stress wants to be an involved, committed citizen, and he or she earnestly attempts to become more outgoing, concerned, and friendly. Prolonged, heavy stress leads to high anxiety levels and aggressive, selfish, or "driven" behavior, which often disrupts one's relations with others. Signs of too much social stress include either withdrawal and escapism on the one hand, or conflict and power struggles on the other hand.

To maximize our time under healthy, moderate stress, we need to work in all three areas. Physically, we should exercise regularly, maintain healthy diets and sleep habits, and learn to relax and enjoy life. Sometimes just a few deep breaths or a short walk can release physical stress. A balanced, healthy life-style is the best guarantee for handling physical stress. Emotionally, we should focus on feelings and problems we can influence, learn not to be so categorical or emphatic, and develop positive images and attitudes. For short-term effects, a quick question to oneself, such as, "Why am I acting this way?" helps us get our emotional perspective into balance. A sense of humor and an appreciation of our eternal self-worth provide long-term help in handling emotional stress. Socially, we should be active with others, take advantage of service opportunities, and develop love and patience. A simple kind word or deed can quickly bring friendliness into a relationship. Personal integrity and a genuine concern for others will usually foster harmony and help us handle the social stress in our lives.

Stress is like the wind of life that moves us over the seas of existence. Whether it moves us toward or away from our objectives depends upon the set of our sails (our physical conditions), the direction of our rudders (our hopes and attitude), and the stability of our keels (our strength or "weight" received from others, especially God). Since our Heavenly Father knows us and our circumstances so well, his Spirit is the best guideline for monitoring our stress level. He knows when we need a little more tension and push in our lives and when we are weakening through too much strain. He will help us handle a healthy level of stress. With appropriate, moderate stress in our lives, we can accomplish much in God's service, both for ourselves and for others.

Solving Problems

Problem solving is a natural part of life, starting as toddlers who must learn how to stand, walk, and run in spite of the forces of gravity and the awkwardness and weakness of developing bodies. The process of learning and growing continues in school as students learn to write and communicate and to analyze and solve many types of problems. This problem-solving pattern continues as we face and overcome a variety of life's challenges. Learning how to turn potential obstacles into personal strengths leads to a stable growth pattern that a person can apply in many areas of his or her life.

Most of us want to help God and serve others, but sometimes we make mistakes and cause problems for others. Or, we may be aware of problems facing us and others, but we feel weak and ineffective in overcoming them. Although we may not be "problem creators" (in that we willingly cause problems), many of us tend to be "problem observers" (people who resist getting involved) rather than "problem solvers" (people who courageously seek solutions). One characteristic of a successful life is becoming a problem solver. There are some basic steps to solving problems:

The reason many people fail to overcome their problems or obstacles is that they ignore at least some of the above steps. Often they will do the odd-numbered steps without taking the time and effort to do the work involved in the even-numbered steps. All of the steps are valuable in overcoming most problems.

If we are frustrated in our lack of success or spirituality, we might want to look at the above steps so that we can identify and remove any obstacles. Sometimes our initial efforts fail, and we need to start over again with steps one and two. Repeated attempts are usually necessary to overcome difficult or habitual problems, especially if we do not have a lot of outside help. As we transform obstacles from stumbling stones into building blocks, we develop patterns of growth that we can then carry over into all areas of our life.

In conclusion, we can say that PERSONAL GROWTH through wise, consistent patterns of character development, preparation of value-oriented goals, and commitment to cooperative success will lead to self-fulfillment and individual perfection and help us progress toward our personal destiny. Our value-oriented plan of action will develop more effectively through evaluating our purposes and needs, deciding our strengths and weaknesses, anticipating our obstacles and successes, and setting our priorities and goals.

We begin to accomplish our objectives as we commit ourselves to steady, cooperative work, and we begin to realize success as we use our time, talents, resources, and energy wisely. Often, we must review and repeat any necessary steps until we overcome our obstacles and achieve our goals. Ultimately, our efforts coupled with the Lord's assistance will help us achieve our personal destiny. No longer will we need to wish we had done or become something better—we will have reached our personal quest for perfection.

For further study, refer to the following entries:

TG: BD: EM: Perfection, Perfect, Perfectly Education Enduring to the End

Self-mastery Eternal Progression

Skill Perfection

Talents Purpose of Earth Life

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] See chapter 16 for an examination of faith.
[^2] See BD, Faith.
[^3] BD, Charity.
[^4] These ordinances are discussed at length in chapters 18 (baptism), 19 (gift of the Holy Ghost), 23 (temple covenants), and 32 (priesthood).
[^5] See Chapter 32 for a more detailed discussion of the priesthood.
[^6] MD, 549.
[^7] The nature and purposes of the temple are discussed in the next chapter.
[^8] A guideline for performing the priesthood blessings and ordinances is usually printed in the back of each year's Melchizedek Priesthood manual.
[^9] See chapter 19 for a discussion of spiritual gifts.
