Victor L. Ludlow, Principles and Practices of the Restored Gospel ( 1992)

Chapter 22

Church Blessings and Priesthood Ordinances

Before joining a new social club, aerobics class, or fraternal organization, a person usually asks, "What's in it for me?" Prior to joining a service club or supporting a charitable organization, one should ask, "What does it provide for others?" As a prospective member of a new church or religious denomination, one might combine both of these questions and ask, "Will this church really provide me the salvation it promises, and will it help me assist my family and friends to fulfill their spiritual and personal needs?"

Similarly, longtime members of a group or church should periodically ask themselves if they are receiving acceptable benefits from their association and if the organization is fulfilling its purposes. If both personal and group expectations are being met, then justifying a move to another group would be difficult. If the response is weak or mixed, then they need to study the situation to determine whether the weakness lies in themselves or the organization. If people have not really applied themselves, they should be careful about criticizing the group, but if the organization is deficient, they should either seek to improve it or search out a more compatible association. This type of review should bring positive results—at the very least, a new appreciation of the group.

A study of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints highlights a variety of blessings and benefits available to its members. For example, peace and joy are often mentioned in the scriptures along with other blessings as rewards for righteous living. Many blessings and spiritual strengths are available to Church members through their faithfulness and by the power of the priesthood. Some blessings, such as faith, hope, and charity, are received through righteous living, through disciples gaining gospel knowledge, receiving spiritual gifts, and serving. In addition, other blessings may be received through specific ordinances performed by the power and authority of the priesthood of God.

The Blessings of Faith, Hope, and Charity

The prophet Mormon and the apostle Paul both wrote about three important attributes of a true Christian—faith, hope, and charity. (See Moro. 7; 1 Cor. 13.) These three qualities are among the ultimate aspirations of a faithful follower of Christ.

Faith is a gift of God received after one has sincerely petitioned Heavenly Father for an understanding of him and his Son and our relationship to them. [^1] Our faith in Jesus Christ grows as we pray regularly, study the scriptures, and strive to keep the commandments. As we strengthen ourselves spiritually, we become more sensitive to the promptings of the Holy Ghost and enjoy more often and for longer periods the companionship of this special member of the Godhead. Receiving comfort, guidance, and powerful, personal, and spiritual knowledge direct from these divine beings is a marvelous blessing. Faith is a pivotal blessing promised to righteous members of Christ's church. [^2]

Jesus also promised his followers the blessing of peace, not in the worldly, political sense, but as an abiding, spiritual response within their souls. (See Matt. 11:28-30; John 14:27.) This special peace is likewise a gift from God, bearing its own fruits of joy and hope within us. Because we are doing what the Master desires, we have the assurance that we are on the path of righteousness. Having received the saving ordinances of Christ's gospel, we also anticipate with great hope the time when we can be reunited with him and our Heavenly Father. Hope is another blessing enjoyed by God's obedient children.

The third blessing, charity, is a gift from God and something we can also develop within ourselves. Charity is defined as the "highest, noblest, strongest kind of love" a person can have. [^3] It is also called the "pure love of Christ." (Moro. 7:47.) But as we experience the pure love of Christ, we find that love flows both ways—we sense his love emanating from him, and we feel our love increasing toward him. As we receive his love, we find our own love developing and growing until we can no longer contain it within us, and we desire to share our love with him and others. Indeed, the best way to develop love is to be sensitive of the love others have for us and to reciprocate by giving of ourselves. By doing so, we will experience and receive more in our lives than we have ever given! Basking in the warmth of this pure love, our charity toward others naturally increases, and we find ourselves encircled with eternal friends. Charity is one of the greatest blessings of the restored gospel of Christ.

In addition to the three blessings of faith, hope, and charity, membership in Christ's church provides access to a variety of blessings through the priesthood. We receive these blessings through certain acts or prayers known as ordinances. Sometimes ordinances are also called rites or ceremonies, especially when they are performed in the temple. The root of the words ordain and ordinance is order. Hence, the purpose of priesthood ordinations and ordinances is to put in order the affairs of God's kingdom on earth: "Mine house is a house of order, saith the Lord God, and not a house of confusion." (D&C 132:8.) There are two general types of ordinances: those essential to our salvation in God's kingdom, and those that edify and strengthen us during mortality.

Ordinances of Salvation

Of all the priesthood ordinances, only four (five for men) are rightly called ordinances of salvation, meaning that they are required for passage into the celestial kingdom and for exaltation within that kingdom. These essential ordinances are baptism, confirmation (laying on of hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost), priesthood ordination for men, personal endowment in the temple, and celestial marriage in the temple. [^4]

Baptism and Confirmation

The major ordinances in a member's life as a child, and the first ones for converts to the Church, are baptism and confirmation. These ordinances are the passageways of water and spirit required of all responsible persons who want to enter into God's kingdom. (See John 3:5.) The confirmation ordinance is also valuable because the priesthood holder conferring the gift of the Holy Ghost has the opportunity to give an inspired personal blessing to the individual being confirmed.

Full-time missionaries for the Church are naturally excited and anxious to baptize new converts, but the greater responsibility actually rests with the Melchizedek Priesthood holder who confirms the new member. The words of the prayer for the baptism (an Aaronic Priesthood function) are set and must be given word perfect, but the confirmation prayer allows for personal inspiration and spiritual communication. The newly baptized child has reached an age where he can understand and appreciate a personal blessing; the new convert yearns for spiritual guidance to help remove himself from the world and into the kingdom of God. The priesthood holder needs to be in tune with the Spirit in providing guidance that will assist the newly baptized person to honor the covenant commitment and to make the transition into full Church fellowship as quickly and completely as possible. Thus, baptism and confirmation are a double blessing, fulfilling the requirements for salvation into God's kingdom and providing inspired encouragement for new members.

Priesthood Ordinations

A priesthood ordination is not a single act received only once in the life of most priesthood holders. Since there are different offices in the priesthood and different callings within any priesthood quorum, an active Latter-day Saint man will receive a number of priesthood ordinances. In particular, he will have either the Aaronic Priesthood or Melchizedek Priesthood conferred upon him and be ordained to an office within that priesthood (such as deacon, teacher, or priest in the Aaronic Priesthood; or elder or high priest in the Melchizedek Priesthood). Thereafter, he might be ordained to other offices in that particular priesthood. A young male member of at least twelve years of age, however, always has the Aaronic Priesthood conferred upon him. [^5]

On occasion, he could also be set apart in a calling to lead or teach other priesthood holders within his quorum. Elder Bruce R. McConkie defined the three major types of priesthood ordinances and wrote that "modern usage of terms conforms to this pattern: Priesthood is conferred upon an individual; he is ordained to an office in the priesthood; and he is set apart to a position of presidency or administration." [^6]

In this last kind of ordinance, priesthood leaders give the people being set apart the keys, or authority, to function in their "callings." This is done through special priesthood blessings. Stake presidents, who must be high priests, are called and set apart by General Authorities to preside over the Melchizedek Priesthood offices in their stake. The stake presidents supervise the ordinations of all high priests and elders in their stake, and they, with their counselors and the high council, provide jurisdiction over the high priests groups and elders quorum presidencies in the local wards. Given the voluntary, lay leadership characteristic of the priesthood and the customary rotation of callings, an active man in the Church typically receives many priesthood callings during his life.

An interesting pattern has developed in the past few generations concerning priesthood ordinances. Previously, ordinations and settings apart usually took place during priesthood meetings with only quorum members present. Now, family members are encouraged to be present, whether the act takes place during quorum meeting or in the stake president's or bishop's office. This shift emphasizes the importance of the priesthood calling to the entire family. It also fosters family unity, encourages spiritual experiences, and provides role models for children.

Temple Endowment and Sealing

The temple ordinances consist of a number of rites and ceremonies essential for exaltation in the celestial kingdom: baptism and confirmation, washing and anointing, ordination to the Melchizedek Priesthood, endowment, and sealing. You will note that three of them, baptism, confirmation, and priesthood ordination, can take place outside the temple. In fact, people must receive them on their own behalf prior to going to the temple. In the temple, these three ordinances are performed exclusively for those who are deceased. Washing and anointing, endowment, and sealing are ordinances first received once by the living. Thereafter, individuals may receive them vicariously for the deceased. [^7]

The washing and anointing ceremony reminds temple patrons of the special, noble purposes of our physical bodies. This rite teaches members some of the ways they can consecrate themselves to God's service. As the name implies, the "endowment" is a special gift from God that helps his children attain the knowledge necessary to qualify for his special celestial blessings. Endowed members understand the purpose of life and commit to build God's kingdom. The sealing ceremony is of two types—sealing of spouses to each other in the covenant of eternal marriage, and the sealing of children to their parents in the family order of God's celestial society. These sealings eternally bind in heaven what would otherwise be valid only on earth in mortality. All the temple ordinances are sacred rites crucial to our exaltation, that is, becoming like and living with our Heavenly Father.

Ordinances for Edification

In addition to the ordinances necessary for salvation and exaltation, many other ordinances and blessings are given through the power of the priesthood to comfort, console, and encourage. Among these edifying ordinances, some provide reminders of our covenant relationship with God and our service relationship with others, especially family members. Others bless the body and strengthen the spirit of an individual, especially in times of illness, distress, or loss. The general requirements and procedures for these priesthood blessings vary from ordinance to ordinance, depending upon their function and setting. [^8]

The Sacrament

Of the edification-type ordinances, the sacrament service comes the closest to being a salvation-type ordinance, both because of its symbolic representation of Christ's atonement and also because it renews the covenant of the baptism and the temple vows. The bread and water represent the body and blood of Christ, who suffered for us. As we partake of the sacrament, we not only remember him, but we take his name upon ourselves and covenant to keep his commandments, as we did in the waters of baptism and at the temple altars.

Like the baptismal prayer, the sacramental prayers have fixed wording and are recited word for word. If part of the prayer is inadvertently omitted or a phrase slightly changed, the prayer must be recited again from the beginning. One responsibility of the presiding authority at sacrament meeting is to decide if the sacramental prayer is acceptable. Priests or Melchizedek Priesthood holders offer these prayers, and any worthy priesthood holder can pass the emblems of the sacrament to the members, who then pass them to those seated next to them.

All who participate in administering and passing the sacrament should do so solemnly and reverently. Those who partake of the sacrament should do so sincerely, with the intent to honor the vow they make with the Father. If we honor our part of the sacrament covenant, God promises us the constant companionship of the third member of the Godhead, the Holy Ghost. This divine association brings many spiritual gifts into our lives. [^9] No wonder the brethren admonish the Saints to attend their sacrament meetings weekly so they can maintain their spiritual priorities and remain worthy for this valuable spiritual power. [^10]

Setting Apart

An ordinance of "setting apart" is performed by one or more priesthood leaders laying hands on the head of a person, "setting them apart" for a Church calling, and pronouncing a blessing related to that calling. After a person has been called to a position of leadership, teaching, or service by the proper Church leader and has been sustained by the common consent of the local members, he or she is set apart to perform the duties and responsibilities of that new calling. Settings apart are required for missionaries and for people called to leadership positions over ecclesiastical units (wards and stakes), priesthood quorums, and auxiliary organizations. In the setting apart, the recipient receives the authority and the charge to act in that calling. Additional words of counsel, instruction, and blessing are usually included. For members called as teachers, advisors, musicians, librarians, and for other positions of service, a setting apart is usual though optional.

Settings apart benefit both the Church and the person. The ordinance gives authority to a person in a new calling and reinforces the obligations and blessings of the office so that more responsible service can be rendered. As the person pronouncing the setting apart is prompted by the Spirit, words of instruction can enlighten the person and words of blessing will edify him or her. Naturally, the blessings and rewards of the calling are conditional upon faithful service. An inspired setting apart immediately assists the person in serving more effectively—an advantage for all who are affected by the calling.

Naming and Blessing of Infants

The naming and blessing of an infant is generally the first ordinance performed for members of the Church. This blessing is given by a Melchizedek Priesthood holder, usually the infant's father, who may be accompanied by other bearers of the same priesthood.

Children are traditionally named and blessed during the monthly fast-and-testimony meeting in the ward, but this ordinance can also be performed on other Sundays, in the bishop's office, or at home if the family desires more privacy or needs to accommodate schedules of visiting relatives. In case of trauma at birth, the blessing can even take place in the hospital, but the family should remember that the blessing is not in any way essential for the child's salvation should the infant die without it. Wherever the ordinance is performed, a member of the ward bishopric should be present to make an official record for the Church.

The child first receives a name for the general records of the Church and then whatever personal blessing the father (or other officiator) desires. The privilege of giving personal blessings belongs only to the Melchizedek Priesthood and should be exercised by righteous holders of that priesthood. The father should rely on inspiration to discern the child's needs and offer counsel to guide the infant and the family. He should not merely repeat common phrases and niceties but should seek for personal inspiration to know the appropriate words of blessing and promise. Since the baby cannot understand the blessing, the family will often record some of the key elements in a journal for the infant; thus, the blessing can become a source of later inspiration and direction.

Patriarchal Blessings

Shortly before his death, the prophet Jacob (Israel) gave patriarchal blessings to his twelve sons, predicting what would befall them and their posterity. (See Gen. 49.) [^11] As literal or "adopted" descendants of Jacob, all members of the Church are likewise entitled to a patriarchal blessing. Such blessings are given by ordained patriarchs, men holding the Melchizedek Priesthood office, who officiate in their stakes.

In a letter dated June 28, 1957, to all stake presidents, the First Presidency (David O. McKay, Stephen L. Richards, J. Reuben Clark, Jr.) gave this definition and counsel on patriarchal blessings:

Patriarchal blessings contemplate an inspired declaration of the lineage of the recipient, and also where so moved upon by the Spirit, an inspired and prophetic statement of the life mission of the recipient, together with such blessings, cautions, and admonitions . . . for the accomplishment of such life's mission, it being always made clear that the realization of all promised blessings is conditioned upon faithfulness to the gospel. . . . All such blessings are recorded and generally only one such blessing should be adequate for each person's life. The sacred nature of the patriarchal blessing must of necessity urge all patriarchs to most earnest solicitation of divine guidance for their prophetic utterances and superior wisdom for cautions and admonitions.

Like the naming and blessing of a child, a patriarchal blessing is not a required ordinance for salvation, nor is there a set age at which the blessing is necessarily given. Generally persons in their late teens or older, on the assumption that they are mature enough to understand and appreciate the gift, receive patriarchal blessings. Such blessings contain sacred, personal counsel, which is a type of personalized scripture or "word of the Lord" for that individual (but which should not be regarded as canonized scripture for others). Comparing blessings randomly with others is also generally not a wise practice, for this may breed a sense of jealousy or competition if one feels his specific promises are not as glorious as those of someone else. The greatest blessing God can give to anyone—eternal life and exaltation with him in the celestial kingdom—is universally granted to every member of the house of Israel who faithfully keeps his covenants. Who could ask for more?

A patriarchal blessing is sometimes compared to a "road map of life" in that it indicates general directions, destinations, and obstacles. The details of the actual journey, however, are left to the individual. Thus it is imperative that the person remain spiritually in tune so he or she can know how to follow the course God has outlined. Also, the promises of a patriarchal blessing are almost all conditional upon continued righteousness. If one does not heed the counsel given by God through his ordained servants and is not worthy for the companionship of the Holy Spirit, one may detour from the journey that God would desire of him or her, the rewards and promises may be forfeited, and the person's divine destiny may not be met.

Father's Blessing

A father's authority and responsibility to bless his family members in times of need is a special privilege of the Melchizedek Priesthood. Unlike other blessings for set occasions, the father may take the initiative in discerning when one of his children is in special need of divine assistance. Children are also free to ask for such a blessing.

A father's blessing is appropriate when a child needs help in school, encounters serious social problems with peers, has difficulty keeping a particular commandment, or desires to develop a certain attribute of character. Transitional periods such as starting school, preparing for baptism, receiving the priesthood, beginning to date, or leaving home for an extended time also afford good opportunities for a father's blessing. Especially when a child is about to leave for a mission, enter military service, or be married, a father's blessing not only provides words of inspired counsel, but also builds bonds of love between father and child. Such blessings can be recorded and transcribed so that the child may look back upon them for additional strength and guidance, but they are not preserved by the Church as are patriarchal blessings.

Blessings of Comfort and Counsel

Melchizedek Priesthood bearers may also give special blessings of comfort and counsel to close personal acquaintances. An individual may request—or a priesthood holder may offer on his own initiative—personal blessings in times of spiritual, physical, emotional, social, or financial stress. Husbands particularly can give inspired blessings of comfort to their wives in times of personal or family turmoil, and such a blessing and concern enhance their relationship.

Even in the absence of the Melchizedek Priesthood, members may petition the Lord through fasting and prayer for needed blessings. In the New Testament, Book of Mormon, and Doctrine and Covenants, all disciples are admonished to seek spiritual gifts regardless of age, sex, length of membership, priesthood office, or any other consideration. The only requisite is faith. In fact, the unified prayer and fasting of a faithful group is likely the most effective means of communication with heaven (in the temple endowment, it is referred to as the highest form of prayer).

Administering to the Sick

Normally, two Melchizedek Priesthood holders administer to the sick. If no other Melchizedek Priesthood holder is available, one can both anoint and seal the anointing. In a family where the father or an older brother holds the Melchizedek Priesthood, he along with another priesthood holder should administer to family members. This ordinance is performed upon request from either the sick person or a close relative or friend, for the healing itself is effected through the faith of those involved. (See D&C 24:13-14.) The ordinance is performed in two parts.

First, one of the Melchizedek Priesthood holders anoints the head of the sick person with a small amount of pure, consecrated olive oil (see discussion of consecrating oil in the following section), lays his hands upon the person's head, calls the person by name, and states that by the authority of the Melchizedek Priesthood the person is being anointed with oil consecrated for the healing of the sick, and then closes in the name of Jesus Christ. These elements must be included in the prayer, but exact words are not prescribed.

Second, the anointing is sealed by two or more Melchizedek Priesthood holders, with one being voice. They lay their hands on the head of the ill person, and the spokesman calls the sick individual by name, states the Melchizedek Priesthood authority by which the ordinance is performed, and seals the anointing. He then gives a personal blessing by adding such words of comfort and promise as the Spirit dictates. Perhaps at no other time is it so crucial for the one acting as "voice" to be sure that his words are in harmony with the promptings of the Spirit. One should not attempt to invoke the Lord's power through a priesthood blessing to do what is contrary to the Lord's will. If constrained not to promise the sick a return to health, the giver of the blessing should offer appropriate, inspired words of comfort, counsel, and strength.

One priesthood leader recalls the surprise he once had when called upon to give a sick woman a blessing in which he was prompted not to promise a return to health but to advise her that her time on earth was shortly to end and that she should prepare for her imminent death. He did promise her, however, comfort and understanding in this experience. Within forty-eight hours of the blessing, she died, and the blessing lightened her burden of anxiety and fear during those final moments.

Such a blessing is within the guidelines of the Church leaders. They advise that when severe illness strikes and when dying becomes inevitable, death should be looked upon as a blessing and a purposeful transition into the next phase of our eternal existence. Members should not feel obligated to extend mortal life by unreasonable medical means or through unwise prayers and petitions. Competent medical advice and spiritual promptings (after prayer and fasting) should be followed in such situations. [^12] Although no one wants to be separated from a loved one, death should be accepted as an inevitable, natural part of our existence. If we are worthy, we will enjoy full fellowship with loved ones in the postmortal spirit world and the resurrected life to follow.

Consecrating Olive Oil for the Blessing of the Sick

As part of the ordinance of administering to the sick, the head of the sick person is anointed with a small amount of olive oil, consecrated for this purpose before it is used. To consecrate the oil, a good grade of olive oil is selected and placed in a small container, usually a little plastic bottle or metal vial. Holding the open container, the Melchizedek Priesthood holder consecrates the oil and sets it apart for its holy purposes—blessing and anointing the sick and afflicted. Since only a few drops of consecrated oil are used in each healing administration, a few years will probably pass before a new supply of oil will need to be consecrated. The use of the oil helps concentrate the attention, faith, and prayers of all involved on the important act of administering to the sick.

The source of this oil, the olive tree, is a major source of livelihood in the Holy Land. In the scriptures, the olive tree represents the house of Israel. (See Hosea 14:6; Rom. 11:17; Jacob 5; D&C 101:43-62.) The olive branch has long been considered a symbol of peace, and the oil has been used since ancient times in religious rites. The Old Testament records that olive oil has been used to anoint priests (see Ex. 29:7; Lev. 21:10-12), kings (see 1 Sam. 10:1; 16:3), and objects used in sacred worship (see Gen. 28:18-19; Lev. 8:10-12). It was also given as a tabernacle/temple offering. (See Ex. 25:1-6.) The New Testament records its use in anointing the sick (see Mark 6:13; James 5:14) and lighting lamps (see Matt. 25:3; cf D&C 33:17). Olive oil has a rich history of religious connotation, and the use of consecrated oil in anointing the sick and in anointing in the temple is very appropriate.

Dedicating Homes, Chapels, Temples, Lands, Countries, and Graves

The ordinance of dedication is an act of consecrating or setting apart something for a specific purpose. This priesthood ordinance deals not with people directly but with their places of abode and worship. Since homes and chapels are places where LDS families spend so much time and where they become strongly molded in their spiritual attitudes, it is important that a special spirit of peace and righteousness reign there.

A family's dwelling should be a haven from the world, where family members can find refuge and security. Melchizedek Priesthood holders may dedicate their apartment or home as a sacred abode or edifice in which the Holy Spirit can reside. Some Church members falsely assume that their home must be debt-free before it can be so dedicated, but this is not true. [^13] A worthy member can dedicate his home "as a sanctuary for his family where family members can worship, find safety from the world, grow spiritually, and prepare for eternal family relationships." [^14]

In addition, places of worship, such as meetinghouses and temples, and other Church buildings and properties are also dedicated. After appropriate open-house activities to which the general public is invited, an appropriate priesthood authority, usually a General Authority, conducts the dedication services, and local members are especially invited to attend. Unlike home dedications, Church buildings must first be completed and be debt-free. Also unlike the members' private dwellings, the chapels and temples are specifically dedicated and consecrated to the Lord to serve as holy places for worship and covenant making. Church schools, welfare facilities, office buildings, historical sites, and other properties are also dedicated to the Lord for their intended purposes.

Lands and countries are also dedicated so they can become places where God's work can progress. Under the direction of General Authorities and with the assistance of local members, many countries and areas within different nations have been dedicated for the preaching of the gospel. Any of these dedications of dwellings, Church buildings, or lands help God's children find truth and spirituality as they call upon the powers of heaven for enlightenment. They help the missionary work in such places and lands to go forward, often in miraculous ways.

A related ordinance performed by the Melchizedek Priesthood is dedicating a grave as the final resting place of one's body. The burial plot is consecrated for this purpose, and, if so prompted by the Spirit, the priesthood holder may petition God to hallow and protect that spot of earth until the time when the body will be resurrected and reunited with its spirit. Again, some inspired words of blessing may accompany the ordinance, addressing the needs of the deceased's family while providing counsel and comfort in their emotional distress and grief.

Who Composes the Words of a Blessing?

While the priesthood holder, officiator, or patriarch acts as "voice" for the Lord in any of these Melchizedek Priesthood blessings, the recipient should not presume that the Lord always dictates his message word for word through his mouthpiece. Priesthood bearers, particularly many patriarchs, state that they generally receive ideas and impressions concerning the person they are blessing. It is then up to them to deliver these thoughts in their own words. On occasions, though, some report that they do receive revelations in complete and exact phrases.

Indeed, exact phraseology may on occasion be necessary to insure that God's precise message is given. One bishop recorded a case where he was called upon to set apart a young man, a returned missionary, to be a Sunday School teacher. As he proceeded to add words of counsel and direction, he became aware that the words were coming not from him but were merely passing through his mouth as if he were, in fact, a mouthpiece or speaker for someone else's message. Some of this counsel was quite direct and rather harsh.

The two counselors participating with the bishop also remarked afterward that they had noted a change in his tone and manner of speech. The young man wanted to talk with the bishop later, for he was disturbed by this portion of the blessing. A couple of days later, he brought his patriarchal blessing to the bishop and asked him to read it. One paragraph was recorded word for word the same as the bishop's pronouncement in his blessing. The young man admitted that he had not read his patriarchal blessing for many months and that he was humbled by the censure he had thus twice received.

This experience, along with many others that numerous Melchizedek Priesthood bearers have witnessed, confirm the very real power and line of communication given by the Lord to those who act with authority in his name. When priesthood holders use their gift wisely and worthily, they receive important inspiration that can bless the lives of the members for whom they are performing a priesthood ordinance.

Remember that the efficacy of all these blessings and ordinances derives from the love and priesthood power that God has so graciously shared with his children on earth. These ordinances are performed through the power of God's priesthood with the keys he has invested through his Son, Jesus Christ, to the prophets. Thus, as part of most of the ordinances mentioned above, the priesthood holder or officiator will state the authority of the Melchizedek Priesthood by which the ordinance is performed, and in each of them he will conclude the act by closing in the name of Jesus Christ.

In summary, we recognize that a variety of spiritual BLESSINGS (or GIFTS) edify the Saints through their righteousness; and various sacred priesthood ORDINANCES magnify the Saints through God's power. We should be eternally thankful that God is willing to bless us so abundantly while we are separated from him. The ordinances and blessings of his holy priesthood provide direction and spiritual infusion in our lives. Because Heavenly Father amply rewards and strengthens us now as we journey through life, eventually we can enjoy the even greater blessings that await us when we are again in his celestial realms.

For further study, refer to the following entries:

TG: BD: EM: Blessing Laying on of hands Blessings Ordinance Dedications

Father's Blessing

Oil, Consecrated

Ordinances

Patriarchal Blessings

Priesthood Blessings

Sick, Blessing the

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Life is eternal, and each stage of existence provides new divine enlightenment and blessings. 2. Repentance and personal commitment are possible in the postmortal life as well as in this one, especially for those who did not have an opportunity to accept the gospel teachings in mortality. 3. Family bonds, as sealed in holy covenants and ordinances, extend beyond death in uniting the living with their deceased ancestors. 4. Salvation ordinances can be performed by proxies (living people in the flesh) for the dead (or, more specifically, for the living spirits of those whose physical bodies lie dead in the earth). 5. Temple ordinances are not mere signs; they are vital acts that are as real and binding as if the deceased person had done them during mortality. These ordinances are not binding, however, if that person in the postmortal spirit world does not freely choose to accept them. [^25]
[^2] See BD, Faith.
[^3] BD, Charity.
[^4] These ordinances are discussed at length in chapters 18 (baptism), 19 (gift of the Holy Ghost), 23 (temple covenants), and 32 (priesthood).
[^5] See Chapter 32 for a more detailed discussion of the priesthood.
[^6] MD, 549.
[^7] The nature and purposes of the temple are discussed in the next chapter.
[^8] A guideline for performing the priesthood blessings and ordinances is usually printed in the back of each year's Melchizedek Priesthood manual.
[^9] See chapter 19 for a discussion of spiritual gifts.
[^10] Under the bishop's direction, the Aaronic Priesthood can take the sacrament to the sick and housebound. Chapter 25 has some further insights about the sacrament and its role in our Sabbath worship services.
[^11] See also TPJS, 151.
[^12] GHI, 1989, 11-6.
[^13] GHI, 1989, 11-2.
[^14] MPLH, 1984, 29; see also GHI, 1989, 11-2; Melchizedek Priesthood Personal Study Guide 2, 141.
