Victor L. Ludlow, Principles and Practices of the Restored Gospel ( 1992)

Chapter 23

Temples of Holiness

When families or individuals must relocate to some distant place, adjusting is often traumatic. Working in a new environment with new colleagues, attending new schools, and associating with new neighbors all place stress upon a person. Such a transition is especially challenging if the person or family has never made a major move before and if they receive little help from others.

The trauma of moving from one place to another is intensified if people are completely changing their social and vocational condition. For example, prisoners who have spent long times in confinement have a hard time adjusting to a normal civilian life. From the first day in incarceration, most prisoners look forward to their release date. Yet when the day finally arrives, many experience great stress in the adjustment. Inmates are the first to admit that prison life is genuine hell on earth, but many of them return to prison because they are not prepared for the freedom and responsibility of civilian life. Indeed, part of the problem for some inmates is that they have rarely had a prolonged, positive experience in their family background or in society; thus, they do not really know how to take a productive role in society. If they are not prepared, they revert back to their former, negative behavior and end up back in confinement.

Most inmates require assistance in making the transition into being normal, productive citizens. For those inmates who really have the desire and potential to succeed in society, a "halfway house" can be an important aid. In a halfway house, ex-convicts are still restricted in many ways, yet they receive close supervision, direction, training, and motivation as they work outside the prison in a normal work place. Increased family visits and social contacts are allowed as they establish new behavioral patterns and rebuild their lives. Eventually they may be ready for the free life as productive, valuable citizens.

As a more positive example, refugees from oppressed societies or devastated lands are constantly striving to obtain citizenship in productive, progressive, free countries. Special refugee camps, often under the sponsorship of international organizations, assist these homeless people as does a halfway house and help prepare them for a new life in a new land.

Although few of us have ever been confined in a prison or had to live in a refugee camp, all of us are living in a corrupt world. Rather than being a heaven on earth, mortality often provides unpleasant work assignments, burdensome taxes, restrictive laws, painful ill-health, and other negative aspects of earth life. We sense that when we are finally freed from the burdens of mortality, these problems and limitations will not exist in our life after death. We anticipate a future existence of greater freedom and opportunity.

In order to prepare for this future life, we could be assisted by a transitional place that would make us ready for a heavenly style of spiritual life. We need help in preparing for our potential heavenly existence, for although we all existed in God's presence in our premortal life, we have no guarantee of returning unless we learn to live like him. Like the sweet, fresh innocence of childhood, which many of us now yearn for but did not understand or appreciate when we were growing up, we now need a renewed perspective about what celestial life is like and how we can obtain it. We need a spiritual training school, a university for eternal life, where we can receive inspired guidance, long-range instruction, special preparation, and genuine inspiration for obtaining the celestial life that might be ours to enjoy. This place would be God's halfway station between heaven and earth. Actually such a place already exists. It is called a temple, a place where holiness is learned and experienced.

The Temple Structure as a Symbol

We are invited into the Lord's house of learning to seek knowledge from him about the requirements of celestial life. In the Old Testament, the English references to temple come from two different roots: hekal, meaning a large place, such as a temple or palace; and beth, meaning a house, particularly a house of God. Combining the two Hebrew terms, the temple could be called "God's Great House." In many references, the sacred place of worship is called the House of the Lord, a place where God can come to earth and visit his prophets and followers in a pure, spiritual setting. (See Isa. 2:2-3.) It is also called a house of prayer, where our petitions ascend from the temple altars directly to God. (See Isa. 56:7; Matt. 21:13.) The temple is also identified as a sanctuary, a place of holiness set apart for sacred purposes. (See Ex. 25:8; Lev. 19:30; Ps. 150:1.) In summary, the Old Testament context of temple is that of a great, sacred place where people gather to learn, pray, and worship.

The term temple is also used frequently in the New Testament. It has two basic Greek roots: hieron, meaning a holy place; and naos, meaning a shrine or temple. According to Hugh Nibley, our English word temple comes from the Latin templum, which was first used by the Roman scholar Marcus Terentius Varro (116-27 B.C.) to describe a building used for interpreting heavenly signs and omens. Nibley also adds that the root tem- in both Greek and Latin means the cutting or intersection of two lines at right angles, or—referring specifically to the temple—the point where the four corners of the earth come together. [^1] A close cognate of templum is our English template, which is any sort of guide, pattern, or mold for making something else. From this brief etymology, then, we can see that a true temple is a central, pivotal point on earth designed to show mankind the pattern of heavenly things.

The key word used to describe temples is holy. The phrase "Holiness to the Lord" was inscribed on the gold plate on the brim of the cap of the High Priest Aaron and his successors who officiated over the tabernacle and temple worship of the ancient Israelites. (See Ex. 28:36; 39:30.) The same inscription is over the eastern entrance of modern LDS temples. The temples are holy because they are dedicated to the Lord, who has manifest himself within them. They are also the place where God's children learn more about the Man of Holiness, Jesus Christ, and the purpose of his atoning sacrifice. Finally, it is in the temples where those with "clean hands, and a pure heart" (Ps. 24:3) receive special instruction about the process of being made holy (see vv. 3-6; cf. Isa. 33:14-16). [^2]

For ancient Israel, the temple at Jerusalem was the center of the world, and the prophets foretold that in the last days Israel would be gathered there from the four corners of the earth to meet their God. (See Isa. 11:11-12.) Today, in temples on every settled continent in the world, worthy Latter-day Saints can gather to commune with God and receive instruction and blessings at his hand. Besides unifying all the faithful Saints on earth, modern temples unite the living with their deceased relatives, who now live in a postmortal spirit existence, and also the past with the present, all with a view toward a glorious eternal future.

The purpose of temples—uniting people and preparing them for eternity—is expressed in the location and design of the buildings themselves. Whenever possible, temples are built in a central location, representing the center of the earth, or on elevated ground, representing the meeting of earth with heaven. In ancient times, both types of places were points of contact with deity. For example, before the Israelites had established themselves in Canaan and centered their government and worship at the temple in Jerusalem, they built altars on mountains in the wilderness. Abraham climbing Mount Moriah to sacrifice Isaac, and Moses ascending Sinai to receive the Ten Commandments provide two notable examples of worthy men pressing forward in faith to do and receive God's word on his holy mountains. Nephi, in the Book of Mormon, also received instruction from the Lord on a mountain, which eventually led to his and his family's voyage to America. (See 1 Ne. 17:7-8.)

The external structure and foundation of most temples is rectangular, and the interior design and upper levels usually include a circular or a progressive pattern focused on the celestial room as one comes from the temple courtyard or grounds into the temple itself and then into the holy of holies or the celestial room. The rectangular shape establishes a firm footing and recalls the gathering from the four corners of the earth; the circular design gathers us together and reminds us that all the elect are joined into one eternal family, like a circle that has no beginning and no end. [^3]

Many temples, ancient and modern, also have three distinct levels, representing our movement upward as we progress through the three degrees of glory: telestial, terrestrial, and celestial. Each building is usually mounted by one or more spires ascending into heaven, for the temple is where Saints receive revelation from God, and only through the ordinances of the temple do they gain passage to him in the celestial realm. [^4]

The temple is more than a symbol of God's heavenly abode, it is a sacred place where one can feel his Spirit. Even nonmembers of the Church have recognized a special spirit at the temple, especially when they have entered a temple during a special public open house. Prior to the dedication of any new temple (or the rededication of an extensively remodeled older temple), the Church invites the public to visit and view its various facilities. This open-house period gives members and nonmembers alike the opportunity to see the beauty and craftsmanship in the temple construction and furnishings. They also learn about the purpose and sacred nature of the temple ordinances. Most importantly, it provides them an opportunity to feel the special spirit that resides in the temple.

For example, when the LDS Temple was dedicated in Freiberg, East Germany, many visitors waited for hours in the rain to view the temple and then immediately got back in line so they could have the experience one more time. When asked why they were willing to wait so long in unpleasant weather conditions for such a relatively short temple revisit, they responded that never in their lives had they felt such a spiritual sweetness and power as when they were in the temple, and they wanted to bask in that spiritual environment one more time. Many of them even returned a day or two later, often with friends and relatives, so they could enjoy the experience anew.

A Covenant People with Temples

There are certain patterns of spiritual behavior not normally learned in our social environment that are essential to our readiness for celestial life. Reverence for the sacred, and especially its expression through symbolic ritual, is far removed from modern life and therefore strange and incomprehensible to many people who live only in what they call the real, or practical, world. For a covenant people who take ordinances literally and seriously, however, the temple, as a model of the eternal world to come, is one place on this temporal earth that is truly significant. By participating in temple instruction and ordinances, Latter-day Saints prepare themselves and their kindred dead to enter into that eternal world.

Hugh Nibley has written, "The temple is the primal central holy place dedicated to the worship of God and the perfecting of his covenant people." [^5] God himself has revealed the instructions and ordinances that take place in this pure spiritual environment. The temple teachings have been restored through living prophets, and their sacred nature sets them apart from the profane teachings and practices of the world. Indeed, "so sacred and holy are the administrations performed that in every age when they have been revealed, the Lord has withheld them from the knowledge of the world and disclosed them only to the faithful saints in houses and places dedicated . . . for that purpose (D&C 95:8-9; 124:25-41; Luke 24:59)." [^6]

The temple also represents the divine principles and truths of the universe. "It is the school where mortals learn about these things," Professor Nibley has written. "The temple is a model, a presentation in figurative terms, of the pattern and journey of life on earth." [^7] Temple covenants provide God's children with essential spiritual instruction—the knowledge of the conditions and promises of eternal life in the celestial world to come. [^8]

Temple Covenants and Ordinances

The temple is more than a halfway station between earth and heaven where we temporarily escape the distractions of earth life and experience a taste of celestial environment. Since the temple is a sacred place unique in all the world, those who wish to receive its blessings must be worthy and prepared to do so. Only members of the Church who have a testimony of the gospel and are striving to keep the commandments are ready to receive greater spiritual knowledge and take upon themselves the responsibility of added covenants. For this reason, temple applicants must be carefully interviewed by both their bishop and stake president before receiving a temple recommend. Whoever can honestly qualify for entrance into the temple and who desires, like Abraham of old, "to be a greater follower of righteousness, and to possess a greater knowledge" (Abr. 1:2) will find the temple endowment a rich and rewarding experience.

Initiatory Ordinances

After baptism and prior to making further covenants and receiving an endowment of knowledge and blessings, each person receives initiatory ordinances called washings and anointings. The men and women go to separate areas in the temple where men administer these ordinances to men and women administer them to women. Somewhat like baptism, the washings are symbolic acts of purification, followed by anointings that give the recipient certain powers and blessings—some immediate, and some to be fulfilled later, even in the next life. As the ancient priests in Israel were purified and anointed prior to their standing as representatives of the Lord, we today are similarly prepared in the temple to become spiritually begotten sons and daughters of the Savior.

The ancient priests also put on special clothing symbolic of the Lord's covenants with Israel. Today, symbolic of our transformation into "new creatures in Christ," we also put on sacred clothing, a new garment, after the initiatory washing and anointing ordinances. We wear this special white underclothing afterward throughout our lives as a reminder of our covenants and as protection through our close association with the Holy Spirit. [^9] Since the initiatory ordinances prepare us to become truly begotten sons and daughters of Christ, we begin to assume a new spiritual identity, symbolized with a new name, before proceeding to the endowment session itself. [^10] (See Rev. 2:13-17.)

Endowment

Presented by means of a symbolic drama, the endowment is a gift of special spiritual knowledge. The New Testament phrase "to endow" comes from the Greek enduein, meaning both to clothe or put on garments, and to put on attributes or receive virtue. [^11] As noted in the root meaning, "to be endowed" involves both external acts (putting on sacred clothing) and internal edification (committing to righteous behavior). The endowment involves the physical, aesthetic, intellectual, and spiritual human faculties through art, drama, symbols, and scriptural representations. In the newer and recently remodeled temples, the drama is presented on film, though a few older buildings still have sessions with live actors and a change of scenery by movement of the congregation through a series of rooms, some with extensive murals and paintings. The endowment session consists of three interwoven parts: instruction, covenants, and keys (crucial information).

Divine instruction through symbolic representation has always been a part of temple ritual. Despite variations and various degrees of corruption, many temple rites in ancient cultures included a drama of the creation and redemption of the world. For example, the ancient Israelites were commanded to assemble at least three times yearly at the tabernacle or temple, where they sang psalms and received instruction from the Torah, the sacred writings of Moses. The same is true of our modern temple narrative, which builds upon the revelations in the first and second chapters of Genesis and the books of Moses and Abraham in the Pearl of Great Price. These scriptures are excellent reading material as preparation for the temple experience. Our modern temple narrative also includes additional revealed information from dispensations prior to the restoration. The essential, cardinal teachings of the endowment place the entire gospel structure into a divinely inspired eternal framework. [^12]

Elder James E. Talmage succinctly summarized the contents of the latter-day endowment thus:

The Temple Endowment, as administered in modern temples, comprises instruction relating to the significance and sequence of past dispensations, and the importance of the present as the greatest and grandest era in human history. This course of instruction includes a recital of the most prominent events of the creative period, the condition of our first parents in the Garden of Eden, their disobedience and consequent expulsion from that blissful abode, their condition in the lone and dreary world when doomed to live by labor and sweat, the plan of redemption by which the great transgression may be atoned, the period of the great apostasy, the restoration of the Gospel with all its ancient powers and privileges, the absolute and indispensable condition of personal purity and devotion to the right in present life, and a strict compliance with Gospel requirements. [^13]

Beyond providing instruction, the endowment gives opportunity for personal commitment. Just as the Prophet Joseph Smith never received a revelation without being bound to live by it, so the divine knowledge in the temple endowment is given only in conjunction with certain covenants, which commit us to principles of devotion, charity, righteousness, purity, and diligence.

After receiving instruction concerning the creation, the Fall of Adam, and the early laws given him by God, we can follow Adam's example and claim allegiance to God, promising to obey him and covenanting to be willing to sacrifice our time and talents to building his kingdom. As the narrative progresses to include teachings from Christ's original apostles, we covenant to keep the laws of the gospel and to work together in a spirit of unity. Two particular commandments represent our worthy intentions—the law of chastity and the law of consecration, signifying the degree of purity and commitment that God desires of his dedicated disciples. [^14]

Having pledged our all to God and his kingdom on earth, we are then privileged to participate in prayer circles surrounding the temple altars and to receive certain keys in the form of specialized instruction necessary to return back to God's presence. Prayer circles are collective prayers petitioning God's blessings for mankind, his Church and its leaders and missionaries, and for those with special needs, particularly those whose names are on the temple prayer rolls (consisting of names submitted by those attending the temple). [^15]

Keys are referred to often in the Doctrine and Covenants in the context of God's power to govern and the means "whereby something is revealed, discovered, or made manifest": [^16] "This greater priesthood [the Melchizedek Priesthood] administereth the gospel and holdeth the key of the mysteries of the kingdom, even the key of the knowledge of God. Therefore, in the ordinances thereof, the power of godliness is manifest. And without the ordinances thereof, and the authority of the priesthood, the power of godliness is not manifest unto men in the flesh; for without this no man can see the face of God, even the Father, and live." (D&C 84:19-22.) In the temple, therefore, the keys symbolically take us into the presence of God, into the celestial room, which represents the place where God himself dwells. If we keep our covenants, these keys will someday admit us to God's celestial kingdom.

Thus, we gain a sense of the divine presence at the culmination of the endowment. As President Kimball stated, there is an "aura of deity" in the temples that the worthy members feel. [^17] The endowment session concludes in the celestial room, a place of aesthetic splendor and quiet contemplation. The celestial room "represents the highest degree of heaven, a return to the presence of God, a place of exquisite beauty and serenity, where one may feel and meditate 'in the beauty of holiness' (Ps. 29:2)." [^18] Here the endowed, committed Saint can meditate upon the mysteries of God and his holiness in a sacred place erected to his glory. (See D&C 88:119.)

Sealings

To receive exaltation in the highest degree of God's celestial kingdom, however, yet another temple ordinance is required—celestial marriage and the sealing of families into an eternal union. One meaning of sealing means the securing of a lasting bond of legitimacy. Temple sealings refer to the marriage of a husband and wife and the joining together of children and parents into eternal family units. As the culminating temple ordinance, a sealing ceremony is an inspiring and solemn rite performed in specially dedicated sealing rooms of the temple. The couple to be married or the family members to be joined together kneel at an altar. An officiator performs the sealing in the presence of two witnesses. Close friends and family members usually witness the ceremony as well. Sealings become a spiritual foundation for a marriage and family—they sustain the family in life and unite its members after death, establishing eternal continuity for the family. [^19]

Eternal families are the nucleus of heaven. Family members born or sealed in the holy covenants of God are heirs for his highest blessings and become like him. Through God's sealing power, all such celestial beings will be linked in an unbroken family chain. Divine parenthood is the ultimate potential of these sealings because "the saintly life is not in renunciation but in glorification of the family." Thus, "the quest for happiness and completeness within the marital state is transformed from the banal and temporary toward the divine and eternal." [^20]

Those who are endowed but not sealed in marriage and family lines to other endowed Saints will be "ministering servants" in the celestial kingdom, serving as God's administrators, such as his kings and queens and his priests and priestesses, "to minister for those who are worthy of a far more, and an exceeding, and an eternal weight of glory." (D&C 132:16.) Those worthy persons sealed in eternal families will enjoy not only the presence of God, but also his power, inheriting "thrones, kingdoms, principalities, and powers, dominions, all heights and depths." (D&C 132:19.)

Unlike civil marriages between two persons performed under authority of the state, temple marriages, conducted under the authority of God, form a special covenant relationship between three individuals—husband, wife, and God. As with baptism, the covenant is sealed in the name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost. Therefore, the sealed man and woman have the right to call upon the Holy Ghost to bless and guide their union. Furthermore, by sealing themselves together, their children will be born under the covenant of an eternal family and will remain their rightful posterity throughout all eternity. [^21]

Naturally, these promises are conditional upon the righteousness of the family members, and the hope of their fulfillment becomes the foundation of a loving, caring, and united family. The sealing of families through the "new and everlasting covenant of marriage" (D&C 131:2) is the culmination of all ordinances performed in the temple. Without this last ordinance, the "whole earth would be utterly wasted at his [Christ's] coming," for the family relationships we hold so dear would be dissolved at death. [^22] (JS-H 1:39.)

Personal Preparation for Visiting the Temple

In biblical times, the temple was such a sacred place that the special ordinances could be performed only by selected individuals who met certain required qualifications. Likewise today, only Church members who meet certain requirements are granted a temple recommend with which they can then visit any temple and participate in the sacred ordinances there.

In order to maintain the spiritual purity of the temple environment, ecclesiastical leaders ask certain qualifying questions of Church members so that both parties can feel good about the the members' spiritual preparation and worthiness to attend the temple. Among other things, they are asked about their belief in God the Father, Jesus Christ, and the Holy Ghost. They also affirm their testimony of the restored gospel and their sustaining of Church leaders. Their Christian behavior with family members and others is also reviewed, along with their diligence in keeping the major teachings and commandments of the gospel. They themselves decide and declare whether they feel they are worthy to visit the temple, enjoy the spirit there, and share the purpose of that sacred place. Complete honesty in this introspection process and sincere evaluation of one's spiritual direction are invaluable steps in preparing a person to attend the House of the Lord. [^23]

Additional preparation can include selected reading from the scriptures and other written resources as advised by the bishop. In addition, most wards and branches have periodic temple preparation courses that provide specialized instruction to selected small groups of people. Anyone even thinking of preparing for the temple endowment should meet with the bishop or branch president and request such instruction. Ultimately, the best preparation for the temple is to live worthily and to seek earnestly for its blessings. A worthy, prepared member will feel peace and find valuable spiritual insights in the temple, God's house of spiritual training.

Doing Temple Work for our Deceased Relatives

All temple ordinances, from baptisms to sealings, may be performed by proxy for people who died without the opportunity of receiving these rites for themselves. In order to perform vicarious ordinances for the living spirits of the deceased, Church members must first receive these ordinances for themselves. They can then act as agents or proxies for others, particularly their deceased ancestors, and do the ordinance work in their name, in their behalf. [^24]

As outlined in the Encyclopedia of Mormonism, five fundamental principles underlie LDS beliefs concerning salvation for the dead:

Understanding these key teachings of salvation for the dead helps us appreciate why the Church builds temples and why Latter-day Saints spend so much time and effort in pursuing family history research and genealogy and in returning often to the temple to do the ordinance work vicariously for others.

An additional value of doing temple work for others is the review and reminder we receive of our own temple vows. It provides an opportunity for us to learn something new about the purpose of life and our responsibilities toward our families. These labors fulfill some of the promises of Malachi and Elijah in turning the hearts of fathers and children toward each other. [^26] (See Mal. 4:6.) Temple work brings the blessings of the Savior's redemption into the lives of others, and thus we join with him as saviors on Mount Zion. [^27] (See Obad. 1:21.) Indeed, without this vicarious work, the greatest blessings of God's plan and Christ's atonement would not be available for many of our spirit brothers and sisters. A major purpose of this earth life would be so frustrated that the Lord himself would come and "smite the whole earth with a curse" and consume all flesh before him. (D&C 98:16-17.) Temple work is a key element and a valuable blessing in this stage of our existence.

God has given us temples to enable us to prepare for his celestial kingdom. Providing a spiritual training school for the eternities, they help us sense the divine while living on earth. In temples, we learn about our Heavenly Father's plan of salvation, the nature of mortality, and our purposes for being here. There we can enter into sacred covenants wherein we promise to obey his commandments and whereby he endows us with promised gifts, especially eternal life with him. We also receive specific instructions or keys to enable us to enter into his highest realms. In addition, we are also privileged to act as proxies for others who have passed away, so they may benefit from these blessings. Through temple sealings, we can be united as eternal families in the service of our Heavenly Father. The temple stands as a symbolic yet real reminder of God's love for us, his expectations of us, and our potential as his children.

In summary, Latter-day Saints, like the ancient Israelites, are a covenant people who worship in TEMPLES, where they learn about their relationship with God, make sacred commitments, receive key directions about returning to God's presence, and do ordinance work for their deceased relatives. Latter-day temples are a gift from God where we receive sacred instruction and covenants. Different from all other buildings, the temple is a place of refuge from the world, a spiritual retreat where God's peace is felt, and a university of eternal life where sublime truths are learned and where all members of the Godhead work for our edification. It is the house of the Lord Jehovah on earth, where we can learn the mysteries of God the Father through his Holy Spirit. God invites us all to prepare and partake of the temple blessings. As we worthily prepare ourselves for the temple and then earnestly strive to keep our temple covenants, we come to know the glory and presence of God. (See D&C 97:15-16.)

For further study, refer to the following entries:

TG: BD: EM: Covenants Temple Baptism for the Dead Endowment, Endow Covenants Genealogy and Temple Work Endowments House Garments Marriage, Celestial Marriage Temple Salvation for the Dead

Temple, House of the Lord Sealing

Temple Ordinances

Temple Recommend Temples Washings and Anointings

---
Notas:
[^1] Life is eternal, and each stage of existence provides new divine enlightenment and blessings. 2. Repentance and personal commitment are possible in the postmortal life as well as in this one, especially for those who did not have an opportunity to accept the gospel teachings in mortality. 3. Family bonds, as sealed in holy covenants and ordinances, extend beyond death in uniting the living with their deceased ancestors. 4. Salvation ordinances can be performed by proxies (living people in the flesh) for the dead (or, more specifically, for the living spirits of those whose physical bodies lie dead in the earth). 5. Temple ordinances are not mere signs; they are vital acts that are as real and binding as if the deceased person had done them during mortality. These ordinances are not binding, however, if that person in the postmortal spirit world does not freely choose to accept them. [^25]
[^2] See BD, Faith.
[^3] BD, Charity.
[^4] These ordinances are discussed at length in chapters 18 (baptism), 19 (gift of the Holy Ghost), 23 (temple covenants), and 32 (priesthood).
[^5] See Chapter 32 for a more detailed discussion of the priesthood.
[^6] MD, 549.
[^7] The nature and purposes of the temple are discussed in the next chapter.
[^8] A guideline for performing the priesthood blessings and ordinances is usually printed in the back of each year's Melchizedek Priesthood manual.
[^9] See chapter 19 for a discussion of spiritual gifts.
[^10] Under the bishop's direction, the Aaronic Priesthood can take the sacrament to the sick and housebound. Chapter 25 has some further insights about the sacrament and its role in our Sabbath worship services.
[^11] See also TPJS, 151.
[^12] GHI, 1989, 11-6.
[^13] GHI, 1989, 11-2.
[^14] MPLH, 1984, 29; see also GHI, 1989, 11-2; Melchizedek Priesthood Personal Study Guide 2, 141.
[^15] DBY, 256, 332. See also chapters 1 (truth), 8 (scriptures), and 16 (cultivating faith) for further insights about how knowledge and study can enrich our spirituality.
[^16] God's primary moral expectations for his children are found in the Ten Commandments, which are discussed in chapter 24. The sexual laws concerning moral purity are presented in chapter 26. Issues surrounding our work ethics are evaluated in chapter 29.
[^17] CR, Oct. 1969, 8.
[^18] By Grace Are We Saved (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1989), 52.
[^19] NWAF, 290; see also TPJS, 314.
[^20] Doctrines of the Restoration: Sermons and Writings of Bruce R. McConkie (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1989), 53.
[^21] HC, 4:42.
[^22] 16. One valuable dimension of our earlier existence that carried over into our mortal life here is the essential element of agency, which is discussed in the next chapter. Other elements of our earth life and the promises of the future are discussed in chapters 11-15.
[^23] 17. Chapter 12 contains more insights into the nature of sin and the dangers of judging others.
[^24] 18. TPJS, 354.
[^26] 20. Chapter 20 provides more details on how to develop strong, regular spiritual growth.
[^27] 7. HC, 3:379; 5:355; LF, 3:1.
