Victor L. Ludlow, Principles and Practices of the Restored Gospel ( 1992)

Part 4:

The Lord's Commandments for Obedience and Blessing

Footnotes

Chapter 24

God's Laws to Bless

Most people would gladly work for an enlightened employer who puts their welfare above his desires for increased profits. A wise boss will run a business that not only clears a profit, but is also socially conscious and helps the workers feel worthwhile. If employment is more than just making money, also benefiting society by making valuable commodities or performing good service, then people are more willing to be productive workers. To ensure that workers' needs are addressed while various noble goals and financial ends are achieved, such an employer sets up rules and expectations so that each individual's personal efforts lead to the desired overall productivity. He also sets up some kind of a profit-sharing program so that all are rewarded when the company does well. Recognizing the company's rules and expectations as requirements for their best welfare, the workers should follow them willingly.

Although we may never work for an ideal employer in the professional world, we can all be in the service of the ultimate wise and loving supervisor, our Heavenly Father. God has placed us on this earth with a unique opportunity to learn, grow, and develop. To help us progress, he has provided rules and guidelines, which we call commandments. These divine laws are like road signs and fences in our lives. As road signs, the commandments direct us toward noble purposes and measure how close we are to Heavenly Father's expectations. And like fences, God's laws protect us from detouring into dangerous areas. His instructions derive from his great love for us and his desire to bring about our immortality and eternal life. (See Moses 1:39.) His divine wisdom and the natural laws of the universe serve as a foundation for his directives. He knows that only through obedience to them will we experience ultimate happiness.

Many traditional theologies conceive of God as some type of divine power, the "first cause" or "prime mover" of the universe, the self-creating, self-motivating source of all creation and progression. Many theologians claim that nothing existed before him, and that all things derive from him. Latter-day Saints, on the other hand, assert that God progressed to his present state of perfection and glory by strict adherence to eternal law. In Mormon theology, law is the first cause and prime mover of the universe, and by adherence to it, people may become like God. [^1] Thus, in modern revelation we read: "There is a law, irrevocably decreed in heaven before the foundation of this world, upon which all blessings are predicated—and when we obtain any blessing from God, it is by obedience to that law upon which it is predicated." (D&C 130:20-21.) In this chapter, we will learn how eternal principles form the foundation for God's commandments and how adherence to his commandments determines our level of spiritual progress.

From Principles to Particulars

Isaiah and other prophets understood that relative to God's understanding, all people are spiritually as little children who must be instructed in concrete particulars and simple laws before they can understand abstract principles and complex commandments: "Whom shall he [the Lord] teach knowledge? and whom shall he make to understand doctrine? them that are weaned from the milk, and drawn from the breasts. For precept must be upon precept, precept upon precept; line upon line, line upon line; here a little, and there a little." (Isa. 28:9-10.) The prophet Nephi speaks for God and adds a promise to this pattern of learning by stating, "Blessed are those who hearken unto my [God's] precepts, and lend an ear unto my counsel, for they shall learn wisdom; for unto him that receiveth I will give more." (2 Ne. 28:30; see also D&C 98:12.) Thus, the Lord will instruct us in knowledge and doctrine by teaching us precepts, line upon line, a little bit at a time—as we receive his truths, he will give us more.

Along with the knowledge and doctrine that the Lord teaches us are the fundamental ideas or precepts upon which he operates. A precept is a "principle imposing a particular standard of action." [^2] Among the principles motivating God's actions are his love for us and his desire to help good conquer evil. His divine actions harmonize with the eternal principles of light and truth as he pursues our eternal welfare. Meanwhile, as we come to understand the governing precepts and eternal purposes of existence, we come into harmony with God. The eternal principles of the universe are the basis for God's higher laws and the framework for his actions—as we understand them, we begin to appreciate why God acts as he does.

Within the framework of governing principles or higher laws, Heavenly Father ordains temporal laws, or particular commandments, to govern our behavior. The commandments are given "line upon line," an image reminiscent of the straight horizontal and vertical measuring lines and rods used to erect strong buildings from the ground up. Literally, the Hebrew phrase is equivalent to "rule upon rule" and can be considered as a proper course of conduct or policy. Similarly, in Lehi's dream, the iron rod represented "the word of God, which led to the fountain of living waters, or to the tree of life," meaning eternal life. (1 Ne. 11:25.) A certain straightness and firmness is necessary in any command for it to have power to move people to action, especially if they do not understand the purposes behind the instructions. God's commandments, given line upon line, contain his directions to us—telling us what he wants us to do.

The phrase "here a little, there a little" can be thought of as the private guidelines we set for ourselves to help us keep the commandments we receive. God expects us to learn his truths and to apply a few of his directions for our personal development a "little" at a time as we grow spiritually. He tells us to walk before we run and to not run faster than we are able. (Mosiah 4:27.) In the Isaiah passage quoted above, his truths are given to those weaned from infancy and ready for higher truths. The gradual means by which we learn and apply God's commandments are the personal resolutions and increased capacities we develop as we draw nearer to God. These personal laws structure our individual application of the commandments—they demonstrate how we live God's laws.

In other words, eternal precepts define why we should behave a certain way as eternal beings and spiritual offspring of our Heavenly Father. The commandments, or "lines" that direct and measure our behavior show us what to do—i.e., "thou shalt" and "thou shalt not." Finally, the "here a little" and "there a little" guidelines frame how we come to comply with the law.

Protective Fences or Prohibitive Barriers

In Jewish tradition, personal application of law is called a "fence" around the law. These fences protect one from accidentally or inadvertently breaking any commandment. As one applies a commandment in his own life, he establishes how he will interpret the Lord's law and put it into practice. To fully obey the law, he may need to narrow its parameters, putting a fence around his behavior to protect himself. For example, within the eternal principle that declares "life is sacred," God has given the commandment that we "should not kill." A personalized law or little "fence" that would protect us from life-threatening situations might be "Don't get angry with someone" or "Don't even threaten another person." Another example, within the wise precept "keep spiritual priorities in mind" would be God's commandment to "remember the Sabbath day and keep it holy." A personal application might be to "not engage in any sports activities on Sunday" or to "carefully select the music to listen to on the Sabbath."

Unfortunately, in trying to live the commandments, we can easily mistake our own adaptations and interpretations of the law for the law itself. For example, some Mormons interpret the commandment to keep the Sabbath day holy to mean that they should not watch television on Sunday. If not watching TV helps a family to properly observe the Sabbath, by all means they should avoid TV viewing. This does not mean, however, that they should automatically condemn other people who do watch television as being Sabbath-breakers. Nor should they assume that avoiding television is the same as keeping the Sabbath day holy. This attitude was the mistake of the Pharisees, who, over the centuries, built their "fences" around the law of Moses to protect people from disobeying it. Eventually, as the letter of the law strangled the spirit of the law, the protective fences actually became barriers to living the Mosaic law. It had degenerated so far that Jesus—accused of violating the Sabbath by healing the lame—had to ask the obvious question: "Is it lawful to do good on the sabbath days, or to do evil? to save life, or to kill?" (Mark 3:4.)

If not misapplied or carried to the extreme, fences around the law are very helpful. What driver, for example, does not appreciate warning signs and barricades around a road construction project, especially at night or during a storm? Likewise, a disciple of Christ appreciates and respects guidelines given by priesthood authorities to aid in living the gospel. Fences around the law of chastity are a good case in point. [^3] The prophets and apostles have specifically instructed Church members not to masturbate, neck, or pet, not only because they are sins, but also because such activities bring one to the brink of the pit of fornication and adultery, the most serious sin next to murder. Because sexual immorality is so prevalent in society at large and occurs far too often among Church members, a Latter-day Saint would be wise to construct his or her own fence, a fence that would keep the individual from getting into compromising situations where such sins could occur. Members should learn their own limits and weaknesses in the areas of obedience and should govern themselves accordingly.

Obedience Precedes Divine Understanding

Just as fences around the law can be highly individualized (like our example concerning the Sabbath) or nearly universal (like present-day advice concerning chastity), the commandments themselves may undergo modification according to circumstances. For example, both the ancient Israelites and modern Latter-day Saints have rather strict health codes, though they differ according to the health hazards of their respective times. The codes are related, however, because they are based on the same eternal principle—the physical body is a temple for the eternal spirit and the Holy Spirit as well.

The eternal principle reflected in each commandment is not always obvious, however. This may be because we are unable or unwilling to understand the "why," as in the instance with the early Israelites, who were not prepared to accept the higher laws of the gospel, and therefore were given the "carnal" commandments of the law of Moses. (See Heb. 9:9-12.) Or, to test our faithfulness and obedience, we may not be given knowledge of the principle that a law is based on. For example, upon expulsion from the Garden of Eden, Adam and Eve received a command to offer sacrifice to the Lord: "After many days an angel of the Lord appeared unto Adam, saying: Why dost thou offer sacrifices unto the Lord? And Adam said unto him: I know not, save the Lord commanded me. And then the angel spake, saying: This thing is a similitude of the sacrifice of the Only Begotten of the Father, which is full of grace and truth." (Moses 5:6-7.) Adam had to obey the law of God before the law's higher meaning was revealed to him.

A modern example of obedience preceding understanding is the 1833 revelation on the Word of Wisdom, which warns the Saints against using tobacco, hot drinks, and alcohol, while encouraging them to eat little meat and lots of grains, fresh fruits, and vegetables. More than a century later, scientific research began verifying the ill effects of nicotine, caffeine, and alcohol. Even more recently, nutritional studies have proven the Word of Wisdom to be a good, basic blueprint for a healthy diet. But even before the Word of Wisdom was verified scientifically, adherents to its principles knew it was sound counsel because they had received the promised blessings of "health in their navel and marrow to their bones; . . . wisdom and great treasures of knowledge." [^4] (D&C 89:18-19.)

Thus it is with all the commandments. As we do the will of the Father, we come to know the doctrine. (See John 7:17.) Our faith thereby increases, and we become able to accept correct, higher principles and govern ourselves without having to be commanded in all things. [^5] (See D&C 58:26-27.)

The Ten Commandments

Understanding the eternal governing principles and some modern applications will enrich our appreciation of the Ten Commandments. The Ten Commandments form the foundation of the Mosaic law, but their basic values are still fundamental to God's kingdom today. Given to Moses over three thousand years ago, later prophets of the Book of Mormon and in modern times have reemphasized their relevance. (See Mosiah 12:33-13:24; D&C 42:18-28; 59:5-13.) Living the letter of the Ten Commandments is only the beginning of their relevance—understanding the spirit or principle of the laws brings their values into focus. Jesus made this differentiation as he taught in the New Testament and the Book of Mormon records. He emphasized that man must live according to the spirit of the law as well as to the letter. As we apply the commandments within the context of our modern lives, we find spiritual strength and blessings.

Worshipping the True and Living God

The first four commandments provide direction on how we should worship God.

Showing Respect for Others

The next four commandments emphasize our relationships with other people.

Developing Integrity within Ourselves

The last two commandments encourage further self-control and an honest, personal evaluation of our words and ambitions.

Personal Patterns of Obedience

One of the earliest challenges of parenthood is teaching children to obey. The word obey has an interesting Latin root meaning "to listen to." Young children have a hard time listening to parents or authority figures for long periods, especially when it involves modifying their behavior. Each child has his or her own spirit, which must be individually approached and taught concerning this important principle. Children learn obedience best from example. No matter what we teach, they are influenced more by our deeds than by our words. A harmonious example of our own faithful words and corresponding actions, accompanied with a positive, spiritual attitude, will be the greatest teaching lesson we can give.

In addition, we should appreciate that obedience or "listening to" parents (whether earthly or heavenly) requires at least three key elements: agency, attitude, and attention. As we respect our children's agency, we will teach them correct principles and then provide a nurturing environment in which they learn to govern themselves. Ultimately, each individual must learn to exercise his or her own agency toward obedience if that person wants to follow God's laws. [^17]

Our attitude reflects our motivation toward obedience, whether it be fear, logic, or love, and it greatly affects both our incentive to obey and the rewards we receive from compliance. We need to help our children understand that not only what we do but also why we do it brings the blessings of obedience into our lives.

Attention means that we can never give up our allegiance to God but must stick to our commitments and endure to the end. The concept of enduring to the end is sometimes called the fifth principle of the gospel, a continuation of the set of the first four principles and ordinances of the gospel in the fourth Article of Faith. [^18] Parents must have the courage to pay attention to their own behavior and that of their children. If together they are obeying the commandments of God with a proper spirit, they will strengthen one another as they progress together.

As we obey some commandments, we find it easier to keep others until we find we are keeping most, if not all, of God's laws. The value learned by doing small and easy things is that we gain strength to do greater and harder things. We need to start somewhere to establish a pattern of obedience that can carry over into all aspects of our spiritual lives. Unfortunately, the converse is also true. If we start to neglect some of the commandments we have been keeping, neglecting other laws of God becomes easier. We must strive to keep all the commandments so that our pattern will be one of spiritual growth and increased commitment.

Why Do We Obey?

We experience different levels of motivation and incentive in obedience as we progress through life and develop varying attitudes toward individual commandments. In general, we tend to act out of three motivation levels: fear, logic, or love.

Fear

The first reason we usually obey a law or command, be it from God or some other authority, is out of fear. Often a small child can be convinced to do something by telling him the negative consequences of a wrong action. Other children, with an independent attitude, will test the authority figure to see if the punishment will be given. Having been punished for wrongdoing, they likely will not transgress the command again for fear of the consequences. For example, some young children can be told that they should not touch a hot stove. When told of the hurt that can occur, many will not touch the stove out of fear. Some children might still touch the stove. For them, the resulting pain should teach them to fear the hot stove.

Many individuals lack the desire and motivation to live the commandments of God with a cheerful heart. Nevertheless they obey out of fear, the least virtuous motivation for submission. Their fear can be directed toward God or others. They may fear the punishment of God, or they may fear what others may think of them or do to them if they disobey. In any case, they are acting out of a negative response that is not always strong enough to influence a person. For example, older teenagers or young adults usually lose their fear of parental punishment as they grow and become more independent. Fear can also be misdirected. Youth often fear the loss of popularity among their peers more than they fear the displeasure of their parents or Heavenly Father. At best, fear should be a temporary, emergency motivator toward obedience.

Reward (including Logic, Duty, Instinct, and Habit)

The next level of obedience comes when people experience the positive consequences and rewards of compliance. An individual who has obeyed a commandment and found that his or her life has been blessed as a result may then keep the commandment out of logic. Or a person may sense the responsibility of setting a good example and keep the commandment out of duty, particularly if a promise has been made to someone else to keep this law. Sometimes we act out of natural, healthy instinct to keep a commandment. Or, after living it for a longer period, it becomes a valuable habit. Abstaining from cigarettes is a good example for all of these motivators. An individual may enjoy the better health that nonsmoking brings, especially if he or she has witnessed the problems of smoking (logic). A parent may abstain for the good health of other family members (duty). Someone else may just have a natural aversion to cigarette smoke and irritation (instinct). Others may have abstained for so long that they no longer have a desire to start smoking again (habit). In any case, these motivating factors are more positive and lasting than the primary motivator of fear. Our family and friends are also better influenced by these motivators, while we recognize the benefits they bring into our lives.

Love

The highest and purest level of obedience, though, is displayed by the person who lives righteously out of noble love for his Heavenly Father, others, and self. This acquiescence usually develops from one of the aforementioned types of motivation, as a result of earlier obedience to God's laws. Personal concerns move into the background when one acts out of love. We do not have to have a logical reason to keep the commandment, we just sense that God loves us and only has our best interest at heart. We trust his word and strive to keep it.

Out of God's infinite love for us, he gives us commandments that help perfect us and bring us back into his presence. As we keep his laws, we develop love for God and are able to accept and live higher laws. The highest and all-encompassing law is love itself: "For God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but have everlasting life." (John 3:16.) Christ overcame sin and death because of love—love of the Father and of us. "Therefore," he said, "those things which were of old time, which were under the law, in me are all fulfilled." (3 Ne. 12:46.) We transcend temporal commandments to live divine principles in the same way. We love God through loving our neighbor: "Love worketh no ill to his neighbour: therefore love is the fulfilling of the law." (Rom. 13:10.)

The pure motivator of love is also easily transferred from one commandment to another. As we have a strong, positive, loving experience in keeping one law, we are more willing to trust in God when he asks us to keep others. As we progress in righteousness, we learn to rely on the Lord and to strive to keep all his commandments. In addition, others are more likely to follow our example when we act and obey out of love.

Do It!

Finally, the only way to learn why we need to follow God's laws and commandments is by experience, whether negative or positive. The wise person does not need to "burn oneself" spiritually to learn the value of obedience. One need only observe the destructive results in others' lives to appreciate the wisdom of following God's advice. As we learn firsthand the blessings that the Lord sends, we relish their sweet taste and want to do more. Obedience then becomes a natural part of our being, as normal as eating and sleeping.

But somewhere, sometime, we must start. As President Kimball stated, we must Do it and Do it now! In fact, his advice to the Church members shortly after he became President of the Church led to the popular primary song "Keep the Commandments." For whatever reason, we should start to keep the commandments now. As we keep them, our level of obedience and the personal rewards we experience through that righteousness will rise to more fulfilling dimensions. We will taste and rejoice in the sweet fruits of obedient living.

The Values of Obedience

Obedience is a requirement of heaven and, therefore, a cardinal principle of the gospel. Part of God's purpose for his children on earth is to "prove them herewith, to see if they will do all things whatsoever the Lord their God shall command them." (Abr. 3:25; D&C 98:14.) To regain Heavenly Father's presence, we must first "listen to" (or obey) all that he has commanded. Thus, "obedience is the first law of heaven, the cornerstone upon which all righteousness and progression rest." [^19] Our compliance to God's laws will ultimately prove our worthiness to return to live with our Father in Heaven and Jesus Christ again.

Obedience is not passive. It is an active commitment to a decision, including the courage and discipline to personally carry that decision to completion. In today's world, as always, one must fight to remain in harmony with all the commandments of God. But some will ask: "Why must we be obedient? Isn't required obedience oppressive? Doesn't obedience restrict our own free agency and choice?" These are legitimate and important questions that need to be answered.

Two key principles become the foundation for our answers. First, God knows, comprehends, and understands all things. We are all dependent upon our Father in Heaven for correct understanding, knowledge, and truth. Second, God gives us commandments to bless our lives. Every commandment is given with the purpose to lead men and women back to his presence.

Why Must We Be Obedient? Obedience Brings Blessings and Happiness

By obeying God, we are happier and eventually will become like him, dwelling in eternal joy. God commands us that we may benefit from his infinite wisdom. When we obey, we are happier and we grow closer to God in knowledge and truth. When we disobey, our lives are full of sorrow, regret, and pain as we move further away from him. Joseph Smith taught: "Happiness is the object and design of our existence; and will be the end thereof, if we pursue the path that leads to it; and this path is virtue, uprightness, faithfulness, holiness, and keeping all the commandments of God. But we cannot keep all the commandments without first knowing them, and we cannot expect to know all, or more than we now know unless we comply with or keep those we have already received." [^20]

The kingdom of heaven is governed by law, and when we receive any blessing, it is by obedience to the law upon which that blessing is based. (See D&C 130:21; 132:5.) By keeping all the commandments of God, we prepare for eternal life and exaltation. Nephi taught us that the Lord will give no commandment without preparing a way for us to accomplish what he has commanded. This can help us when we think that a commandment is too hard to live. Like Nephi's brothers, we may say, "It is a hard thing which [you] have required of [us.]" (1 Ne. 3:5.) Yet, like Nephi, we can be sure that when God gives a commandment, he prepares a way for us to obey him.

Sometimes we do not know the reason for a particular commandment, or we may think that it is not very important. The scriptures tell of a man named Naaman who thought that way. (See 2 Kgs. 5:1-14.) Naaman had leprosy, and he traveled from Syria to Israel to ask the prophet Elisha to heal him. Elisha's instruction to Naaman, by way of a servant message, was to wash seven times in the river Jordan. Naaman replied, "Are not . . . [the] rivers of Damascus . . . better than all the waters of Israel? May I not wash in them, and be clean?" His servants commented, "If the prophet had bid thee do some great thing, wouldest thou not have done it? How much rather then, when he saith to thee, Wash, and be clean?" (2 Kgs. 5:12-13.) Naaman thought the commandment insignificant, yet he was wise enough to follow the Lord's instruction. Because he did, he was healed.

Joseph Smith commented on this matter of obedience in seemingly small matters: "The object with me is to obey and teach others to obey God in just what He tells us to do. It mattereth not whether the principle is popular or unpopular, I will also maintain a true principle, even if I stand alone in it." [^21] We show our faith and trust in God when we obey him without knowing why, and he rewards us with blessings and happiness.

Isn't Obedience Oppressive? Obedience Leads to Personal Perfection

Perhaps the most difficult test ever given, save Christ's, was Abraham's commandment to sacrifice his son Isaac, as recounted in Genesis 22. Abraham had waited many long years for the birth of Isaac—the son whom God had promised and through whom a prophesied lineage was to descend. How could Abraham now lose his son and the promise by killing him in sacrifice? The deed must have been most repugnant to Abraham, partially because he himself had barely escaped being a human sacrificial offering. (See Abr. 1:7, 12, 15-20.) Yet he disregarded his own feelings and chose to obey God. Not until the knife was raised did the Lord intervene. Abraham, by passing this most trying test, had portrayed his unquestioned obedience before the Lord.

Why the test? Hugh B. Brown commented, "Abraham had to learn something about Abraham." [^22] Joseph Smith taught, "Whatever God requires is right, no matter what it is, although we may not see the reason thereof till long after the events transpire." [^23] Our love of God, not the hope of reward, must be our highest motivation if we are to pass tests of life similar to Abraham's.

King Saul is a sad example of one who fell out of harmony with the Lord because of disobedience. The Lord had commanded Saul to utterly destroy the Amalekites, including their cattle. Saul, relying upon his own wisdom and fearing his people more than God, spared the best cattle and the Amalekite king, Agag. The Lord, through Samuel the prophet, told Saul, "Hath the Lord as great delight in burnt offerings and sacrifices, as in obeying the voice of the Lord? Behold, to obey is better than sacrifice." (1 Sam. 15:22; italics added.) Because of his disobedience, Saul was rejected by the Lord as king of Israel.

Christ, himself, set the perfect example of obedience for all of us. At the start of his ministry, he was baptized to witness "unto the Father that he would be obedient unto him in keeping his commandments." (2 Ne. 31:7.) The scriptures teach us that he did not receive of the fullness at first but continued from grace to grace. (See D&C 93:13.) The apostle Paul wrote, "Though he were a Son, yet learned he obedience by the things which he suffered." (Heb. 5:8.) Christ said: "I came down from heaven, not to do mine own will, but the will of him that sent me." (John 6:38.) His whole life was devoted to obeying his Father; yet it was never easy for him. During the time of the great atoning sacrifice as he bled from every pore of his body, he cried: "O my Father, if it be possible, let this cup pass from me: nevertheless not as I will, but as thou wilt." (Matt. 26:39.) Jesus' obedience led to his perfection, "and being made perfect, he became the author of eternal salvation unto all those that obey him." (Heb. 5:9.) Our obedience allows us to follow him on the path toward our perfection.

Doesn't Obedience Restrict Agency? Obedience Brings More Freedom

At the beginning of this chapter, we looked at the example of the wise employer who placed the welfare of his employees above making more profit. As the workers trusted in his noble purposes, they willingly worked harder and longer. As the quality of their work improved, the company's reputation and profits increased, and all were amply rewarded through their profit-sharing program. How a person becomes free and happy by obeying someone else's laws and expectations is hard for many people to understand, just as workers at another firm might not appreciate how the employer mentioned above could really be genuine in his beneficent motives. The only way one knows is to become active within the system and to experience its rewards.

As God directs us on earth, he seeks for our eternal welfare, and so his laws include blessings of lasting value. Among the greatest rewards for obedience to his commandments is further freedom. As we are faithful in a few things, the Lord rewards us with greater powers and opportunities. (See Matt. 25:21.) To become a part of God's social system, one must learn to obey God's commandments. Yet this obedience should be given freely while respecting God's authority. The delicate balance between obedience, individual agency, and authority is beautifully expressed in a brief statement by the First Presidency in one edition of the LDS General Handbook of Instructions:

A distinguishing characteristic of the Church organization lies in its balance of authority and individual rights. Priesthood is a brotherhood, and in its operation the highest capacities of man—his capacity to act as a free agent and his capacity to be spiritual—must be respected and enlarged. Leaders invite, persuade, encourage, and recommend in a spirit of gentleness and meekness. Members respond freely as the Spirit guides. Only this kind of response has moral value. An act is moral only if it expresses the character and disposition of the person, that is, if it arises out of knowledge, faith, love, or religious intent. Fear and force have no place in the kingdom because they do not produce moral actions and are contrary to God's gift of free agency. [^24]

Individual freedom must be the premise by which a person chooses to obey. We are all free to choose whether or not to obey God's commandments. Because our agency is so important to him, he will not take it from us or force us to obey him. As Elder Boyd K. Packer stated: "Obedience to God can be the very highest expression of independence. Just think of giving to him the one thing, the one gift, that he would never take. . . . Obedience—that which God will never take by force—he will accept when freely given." [^25] We always have the freedom to obey.

[^26]

In addition, freedom becomes a natural gift resulting from obedience. By subjecting our will to God and following his Spirit, we are entrusted with greater blessings and responsibilities because Heavenly Father knows we will use our agency to further his purposes. As we obey more and more of God's laws, he blesses us with increased knowledge and power and thus enhances our capacity to do even more in the future. Continuing the words of Elder Packer: "He [God] will then return to you freedom that you can hardly dream of—the freedom to feel and to know, the freedom to do, and the freedom to be, at least a thousandfold more than we offer him. Strangely enough, the key to freedom is obedience." [^27] Compliance to God's instructions brings us lasting freedom along with peace and many other blessings associated with keeping his commandments.

We know that obedience to the physical laws of health, diet, and exercise leads to greater physical capacity and well-being. We also learn that obedience to spiritual laws results in increased spirituality and spiritual gifts. As a contrast, neglect of physical laws may jeopardize our health, while disobedience to spiritual laws will lead to the bondage of sin. (See Rom. 7:14-23; Alma 41:11.)

Obedience to the laws of nature and God increases our freedom and joy. For example, as we place our devotion to God above material desires, we receive spiritual direction that can inspire a more effective use of our time and talents. Through greater productivity, we are free to pursue personal priorities that bring us a sense of peace and fulfillment. Thus, obedience to God's commands is no long-term sacrifice, but rather an inspired path to achieving our personal destiny and joy.

To conclude, we learn that out of God's love for us, he gives us diverse COMMANDMENTS and makes OBEDIENCE to him the first law of the gospel; as we learn to obey him and to serve others because of love (more so than logic or fear), we receive multiple timely blessings. As we wisely and truly "listen to" (obey) God's directives, we willingly keep his commandments and enjoy the blessings of obedience. With Heavenly Father as our overseer, we will find joy and purpose in our journey through life as we help ourselves and others on our way back toward God's presence.

For further study, refer to the following entries:

TG: BD: EM: Commandments of God Commandments, The Ten Accountability Obedience, Obedient, Obey Commandments Vow Obedience

Ten Commandments

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] The Jews retained Saturday as their sabbath, Christians developed the practice of a sabbath on Sunday to commemorate the day of Christ's resurrection, and Moslems have set aside Friday as their sabbath.
[^2] Judah remained in bondage in Babylon, ironically, for seven decades.
[^3] Using the Jewish method of reckoning at that time, the count was from Sunday to Sunday, counting the first day (Sunday) as one, the second (Monday) as two, and so on.
[^4] ISBE, 3:158.
[^5] William Smith, ed., A Dictionary of the Bible (London: William Clowes & Sons, 1863), 2:136, "Lord's Day."
[^17] TSWK, 535. Review chapter 10 for more insights on agency.
[^18] EM, 4:1445. See chapters 16-19 for ideas on the first four principles and ordinances of the gospel.
[^19] See EM, 3:1289. See MD, 539.
[^20] EM, 4:1445. TPJS, 255-56.
[^21] See EM 1:218, 4:1445. TPJS, 332.
[^22] More insights about the eternal roles of the family are found in chapter 30.
[^23] See EM, 4:1446-47.
[^24] See EM, 1:95-96, 4:1445.
[^25] See EM, 3:1258-59.
[^26] See EM, 2:452, 3:1258-59.
[^27] See EM, 4:1449.
