Victor L. Ludlow, Principles and Practices of the Restored Gospel ( 1992)

Chapter 25

A Holy Day of Restful Service

A radio, flashlight, or toy fails to perform when its batteries no longer carry an electrical charge. People often select rechargeable batteries for such products rather than buying new batteries at every need. Over time, rechargeable batteries cost less and have less adverse environmental impact because less energy is required to recharge them than to manufacture new ones; furthermore, they provide fewer disposal problems. With recharged batteries, the appliance or toy is again able to perform its functions.

Sometimes we feel run down and without energy, not necessarily physically tired but emotionally drained or spiritually weak. We sense that our emotional and spiritual powers need to be built up again. How would it be to have special spiritual batteries that we could just replace or plug in somewhere to be recharged? Actually, there is a spiritual battery recharger available—a weekly holy day called the Sabbath. Like batteries, it takes less effort to regularly recharge our spiritual powers than waiting to completely rebuild spiritually after losing all energy. If on a weekly basis we rejuvenate our spirits, our spirituality will remain stronger through the work days. The Sabbath has the potential of providing constant spiritual recharging.

The very first decree God made upon completing the creation of the world and its inhabitants was that the seventh day should be a Sabbath, a sanctified "day of rest" from weekly labor: "God blessed the seventh day, and sanctified it: because that in it he had rested from all his work which God created and made." (Gen. 2:3.) The primacy of a holy day, when one rests from the normal work routine, was thus established literally "in the beginning" and remains a fundamental observance among all true followers of God.

Sabbath observance is a practice that readily distinguishes the people of God from those of the world. The three great religions that have primarily influenced western civilization—Judaism, Christianity, and Islam—all celebrate a Sabbath. [^1] In resting from our daily labors one day each week, we give ourselves formal occasion to acknowledge God as the creator of all blessings and to engage ourselves in his service rather than in our own ambitions. Through rest, worship, covenant renewal, and service to others, we acknowledge the Sabbath as the Lord's day, not our own.

How Did Sabbath Worship Come into Practice?

For ancient Israel, many Mosaic laws involved Sabbath requirements and restrictions. In addition to the weekly Sabbath, holy days of abstaining from work were established for special festivals. When the Lord led Israel out of bondage from Egypt, he established the first Sabbath feast—the Passover—to show "that the Lord doth put a difference between the Egyptians and Israel." (Ex. 11:7.) Following the flight from Egypt, the Feast of the Passover was instituted as an annual, week-long celebration and sanctification stretching from one Sabbath rest day to the next. Sabbath days in general became days not only of rest, but also of worship, thanksgiving, and sacrifice wherein the Lord was acknowledged as Creator and Redeemer, one who had to "buy back" Israel from her slavery or spiritual bondage.

The Lord taught Israel more about Sabbath observance during the forty years of the Exodus, as he fed them with manna from heaven six days a week, giving a double portion on the sixth day to supply the seventh. Israel could not have survived in the wilderness without their "daily bread"; thus they were constantly reminded that their sustenance came from the Lord, not their own labors, and that the Sabbath was a time for rest and remembrance.

Once established in a land of plenty, Israel formally celebrated the Lord's assistance in Canaan by letting their fields lay fallow every seventh year and living off the surplus God had previously provided. He had promised them that if they would keep the Law of Moses (emphasizing Sabbath observance), they should never want for anything: "I will give you the rain of your land in his due season, . . . that thou mayest gather in thy corn, and thy wine, and thine oil. And I will send grass in thy fields for thy cattle, that thou mayest eat and be full." (Deut. 11:14-15.)

To further acknowledge the Lord's gifts, Israel set aside every fiftieth year (after seven times seven) as the greatest Sabbath celebration of all, the Year of Jubilee. In this year all outstanding debts were forgiven, all mortgaged lands reverted to the original families, and all indentured Israelite servants were set free. Thus the Sabbath became a time for forgiving and doing good to others, as God does to us. Jubilee was a dramatic reminder that the richness of the earth does not belong to any one man over another, but that everything is the Lord's, and all blessings flow from him. Other feasts, celebrations, and customs were added to Israelite tradition over the years, each enriching the character of the Sabbath while maintaining the essential elements of rest, worship, and sacrifice.

Unfortunately many Israelites paid little attention to the spiritual dimensions of the Sabbath and often ignored the major Sabbaths of the land. The prophets witnessed repeatedly that the Sabbath was either improperly observed or altogether ignored. Amos chastised those who impatiently waited for the passing of the Sabbath so they could continue their dishonest pursuits. (See Amos 8:5.) Isaiah condemned his contemporaries for the iniquity of their Sabbaths and religious celebrations. (See Isa. 1:13.) He also rebuked their strifes and wickedness on the fast days. (See Isa. 58:4.) Jeremiah exhorted his listeners to refrain from their Sabbath labors, but they ignored his admonitions. (See Jer. 17:21-23.) Because the children of Israel continually disregarded the Sabbath and other Mosaic laws, the divided kingdoms of Israel and Judah were subjugated by other nations, culminating first in the Assyrian invasion and scattering of Israel in 721 B.C. and second in the Babylonian conquest and destruction of Judah and Jerusalem in 586 B.C. [^2]

During the Babylonian captivity, the prophet Ezekiel repeatedly noted continuing Sabbath neglect. (See Ezek. 20:12-24; 22:8; 23:38.) After Babylon fell to the Persian Empire, the conquering emperor Cyrus allowed the Jews to return to Jerusalem, to rebuild their temple, and to reestablish their Sabbath practices. From that time onward, Judah remained predominantly subjugated under various foreign powers—the Persians, Greeks, and then the Romans. During this period, some Jews developed particular and even fanatical practices in their Sabbath observance while others became more lax. For example, Nehemiah rebuked the Jews of his day for profaning the Sabbath, and he ordered the city gates closed to prevent travel and trade. (See Neh. 10:31; 13:15-22.) Some of the more strictly observant rabbis believed that redemption from foreign rule would come only if all Jews would just honor and obey one complete Sabbath, and therefore they pushed even harder for their Sabbath practices.

How Did Jesus Observe the Sabbath?

Judah was laboring under Roman rule and suffering internal conflicts between differing Jewish religious attitudes when the Great Redeemer was born. Though many Jewish leaders strictly adhered to outward forms and traditions of the Mosaic law, they would not acknowledge the supreme lawgiver himself when he appeared among them.

A frequent charge levied by the Jews against Jesus was that he broke the Sabbath by failing to observe some customs, traditions, or protective fences built around the law by the scribes and sages. In reality, Jesus attended faithfully to the letter of the original Mosaic law, and more important, he exemplified its spirit. For example, on one occasion, the Pharisees accused Jesus and his disciples of violating the Sabbath because they plucked and ate grain while walking through a field. (See Mark 2:22-28.) The Mosaic law stated, however, that in passing through a field or vineyard in Israel, anyone who was hungry was free to eat as he went: if the owner refused him, the owner broke the law; if the wanderer took more than he needed, then he broke the law. (See Deut. 24:19-22.) Thus, the fruits of the field, when collected and eaten casually, were not considered a type of labor, even on the day of rest.

Immediately after the incident in the grainfield, Jesus entered the synagogue, saw a man with a withered hand, and promptly healed him. Again the elders were outraged at what they felt was an act of labor on the Sabbath, but Jesus silenced them by asking, "Is it lawful to do good on the Sabbath days, or to do evil? to save life, or to kill?" (Mark 3:4.) In conclusion, he said, "The Sabbath was made for man, and not man for the Sabbath: therefore the Son of man is Lord also of the Sabbath." (Mark 2:27-28.)

As the Lord of the Sabbath, Jesus not only lived the Mosaic law, but he also introduced symbolic observances that would make future Sabbaths more meaningful for his followers. The most dramatic symbols dealt with bread and blood. When Jesus broke a few pieces of bread and fed five thousand, the people wanted to make him their earthly king. Jesus, however, wanted the people to realize that, though he was the giver of earthly bread, he was more interested in their spiritual sustenance: "Your fathers did eat manna in the wilderness, and are dead. . . . I am the living bread which came down from heaven: if any man eat of this bread, he shall live for ever: and the bread that I will give is my flesh, which I will give for the life of the world." (John 6:49, 51.) Israel's collective dream of temporal redemption became a spiritual reality in the individual lives of those who believed in the "Bread of Life." The ancient rites and symbols were made real in Christ, and "all things are become new." (2 Cor. 5:17.) Christ himself was the sacrificial lamb of the Passover and the symbolic bread of the sacrament, come to redeem men with his own life.

The blood of Christ also became symbolic of mankind's redemption. The atonement, death, and resurrection of the Lord fulfilled the law of Moses, and the Savior's "great and last sacrifice" put a stop to the ritual "shedding of blood." (See Alma 34:13.) Thus during the Last Supper, shortly before his atoning sacrifice and death, Jesus instituted the symbolic Christian sacrament of bread and wine in remembrance of his body and blood. The Christian Sabbath day was later changed from the last day of the week to the first in commemoration of the Lord's resurrection, and the sacramental remembrance of his sacrifice became a primary purpose of worship services on this day.

Why Do Most Christians Worship on Sunday?

The steps in the change from Saturday to Sunday as the traditional Christian Sabbath are not completely recorded in the scriptures, but the importance of the first day of the week (Sunday) can be recognized early in the postresurrection narrative. Mary Magdalene went to the sepulchre "the first day of the week" and met the Lord, then ran to tell the disciples afterward. Jesus appeared later to them "the same day at evening, being the first day of the week, when . . . the disciples were assembled." (John 20:1, 19.)

Thomas, one of the twelve apostles, was not present at this first meeting and would not believe that the Lord himself had come. "After eight days" (which brought them again to Sunday [^3]), the disciples were assembled again, including Thomas, apparently for a meeting appointed by the Lord. The Lord showed himself a second time and did other sacred things briefly mentioned in the scriptures. (See John 20:26-30.) Because Jesus was resurrected on the first day of the week and met with his gathered disciples both on that day and on the same day a week later, early Christians naturally chose Sunday as a day of worship. Since he ate and drank with them, "renewing the table fellowship that He had shared with them on the night on which He was betrayed," [^4] the sacrament emblems became a natural part of the early Christian worship service. (See Luke 24:41-43; cf. Acts 10:41.)

Bible scholars also report that the day of Pentecost, in which the apostles received the gift and power of the Holy Ghost, "that year fell on the first day of the week." [^5] The disciples were already assembled "with one accord in one place" (Acts 2:1) perhaps for a Sabbath type of worship. Some Christian groups believe that Christ's early church "was born as a Lord's Day [Sunday] assembly, whether one thinks of the original gathering of the disciples on the evening of the first Easter or of the subsequent gathering in the upper room at Pentecost when the Spirit was poured out and Christians first preached." [^6]

Luke also notes a later occasion in which, "upon the first day of the week, when the disciples came together to break bread, Paul preached unto them." (Acts 20:7.) Paul also refers to the first day of the week when instructing the Corinthians about some monies to be sent to Jerusalem. (See 1 Cor. 16:2.) As one scholar notes, "Since in a later letter (2 Cor. 9:12) he called the collection set aside on this day a leitourgia, i.e., a ministration of a sacred character, the choice of the day definitely points to its religious significance. Here then is further evidence that by the middle of the 1st cent. the first day of the week had unique meaning for the Christian community." [^7]

Some groups of early Christians held religious celebrations on both Saturday and Sunday, but the first day of the week, Sunday, "the Lord's day" of resurrection, became the exclusive Christian Sabbath by the end of the fifth century. Early Christians found it difficult to worship on either Saturday or Sunday because of the vocational problem of abstaining from work and also because of pagan persecution. Persecution resulted if Christians worshipped on Saturday because they were sometimes confused with the Jews and their day of worship—this became especially dangerous in periods when the Jews were actively persecuted. They were also persecuted for Sunday worship because their loyalty to the Roman Empire was often questioned and their Sunday meetings were misinterpreted as political assemblies. Sunday remained a difficult day on which to hold religious services until Emperor Constantine made a proclamation allowing for rest from work on Sundays in A.D. 321.

Throughout the Middle Ages, Sunday remained the traditional Christian day of rest and worship. Mormons not only continue this tradition, but its validity has also been confirmed in modern revelation: "For verily this is a day appointed unto you to rest from your labors, and to pay thy devotions unto the Most High; . . . on this, the Lord's day, thou shalt offer . . . thy sacraments unto the Most High, confessing thy sins unto thy brethren, and before the Lord." (D&C 59:10, 12.)

In modern times, however, Sunday is losing its significance worldwide as either a day of rest or a time to worship, as more people work and fewer attend church services. Interestingly, most places of employment will still give their employees at least one day off each week, but it is not always Sunday. Humans seem to need one day weekly for a rest from normal labors and work routine. This was particularly demonstrated in the failure of Napoleonic leaders in France who allowed just one day in ten free from work because they wanted to increase productivity. Their change in the ancient weekly routine simply did not succeed, resulting in less productivity and public unrest. People who work too many continuous days or at multiple jobs "burn out," and their productiveness decreases if they do not rest occasionally—preferably weekly. We are better people and workers when we observe the Sabbath.

Having established Sunday as the common Christian Sabbath, we should note that in some non-Christian countries, custom dictates a different day of rest and abstinence from normal labors. In these countries, Latter-day Saints may formally worship on a day other than Sunday. For example, some LDS congregations meet on Friday in Moslem countries and on Saturday in the Jewish state of Israel. These actions have been approved by the living prophets, believing that the devotions of Latter-day Saints in these countries are acceptable to the Lord since the function of the Sabbath predominates over the particular day it is recognized.

What Should We Do on the Sabbath?

Anciently the Lord governed Israel more through specific laws than through general principles, imposing exact restrictions concerning all sorts of activities on the Sabbath day. Under the restored law of the gospel, he governs more through principles rather than specifics, and his followers have more agency and therefore more responsibility to decide their own priorities for the day. Aside from commandments to rest from our labors, to worship the Lord, and to partake of the sacrament on his holy day, Latter-day Saints have no other major scriptural injunctions concerning the Sabbath, and their other Sunday activities are left to their own discretion. (See Ex. 20:8-10; D&C 59:9-13.)

Jesus gave personal examples of some appropriate Sabbath acts, and he also provided some general counsel, affirming that we should do good on the Sabbath day. (See Mark 3:4.) How we observe the Sabbath becomes a good test of whether we are "wise" servants who weekly renew our priorities with the Lord of this earth or "slothful" servants who weakly observe the Sabbath, pursuing instead our own selfish interests or being "compelled in all things." (D&C 58:26.) To recharge our spiritual batteries, four elements—rest, worship, sacramental renewal, and service—should be a part of our weekly Sabbath observance. If practiced, they will lead to a strong spirit of reverence for this weekly holy day.

A Day of Rest

Modern prophets have given us good counsel and some general guidelines concerning proper Sabbath observance. Concerning the day of rest, President Spencer W. Kimball wrote: "The Sabbath is not a day for indolent lounging about the house or puttering around in the garden, but is a day for . . . worship of the Lord, drinking at the fountain of knowledge and instruction, enjoying the family, and finding uplift in music and song." [^8] We cease from the routine of normal labor not just to rest, or even to be lazy and waste time, but to rejuvenate ourselves physically and spiritually.

Beyond resting from our physical work, we need to dedicate ourselves to renewed spiritual holiness as we worship God and serve others. We can do this in many ways, beyond just attending church. President Kimball suggested some examples of Sabbath day activities, including "reading the scriptures, visiting the sick, visiting relatives and friends, doing home teaching, working on genealogy records, taking a nap, writing letters to missionaries and servicemen or relatives, preparation for the following week's church lessons, games with the small children, fasting for a purpose, writing devotional poetry, and other worthwhile activities of great variety." [^9] Having found restful, appropriate activities, we must be careful that we do not become as the Pharisees and take upon ourselves the role of lawgiver by dictating to others our preferences for Sunday activities. Each family needs to establish its own restful activities for the Sabbath. Appropriately carried out, a restful Sabbath refreshes us in body and soul for the coming week.

A Day of Worship

Spiritual refreshment results primarily during periods of worship and religious devotion. Since a major purpose of the Sabbath is to recognize the Lord of this earth and appreciate all the blessings he provides for us, we have a spiritual responsibility each week to worship him and to recommit to live his gospel. The act of worshiping God best takes place in association with others who share our feelings and devotions. Church services enrich the Sabbath as a holy day when we sing hymns, pray, renew vows, and study together.

Typical Sunday Meetinghouse Schedule. Currently, most Latter-day Saints throughout the world travel weekly to their meetinghouse for a three-hour block of meetings. The order of the meetings may vary, but they contain three segments: (1) a sacrament meeting service of seventy minutes, (2) a Sunday School class period (for those twelve and older) or Primary organization meeting (for those three to eleven) of forty minutes, and (3) age-group, organizational, and priesthood assemblies and classes of fifty minutes, with separate sections for Primary-age children, young women (ages twelve to eighteen), Relief Society (adult women), and priesthood holders (young men and adults, twelve and older). The other twenty minutes are used for musical interludes, hymn practice, and breaks between the sessions.

Sunday meetings provide opportunities for partaking of the sacrament, joining in prayer, and singing hymns of religious devotion. Talks and class instruction provide instruction and edification. Social fellowship and spiritual bonding between the Saints also characterize the day.

If for reasons of health, travel, or other serious conflicts, we are unable to attend church services on any given Sunday, we should try to incorporate into that day appropriate spiritual activities—such as scripture reading, gospel study, journal writing, and spiritual discussion. Such activities are not meant as substitutes for attending church, but they may help fill the spiritual void and give spiritual strength. For hospital and nursing home patients, or those housebound people who are unable to attend church and receive the sacrament, arrangements should be made with the local bishop or branch president so that the sacrament can be provided by the priesthood members. Whenever possible, the blessings of the sacrament should be enjoyed weekly by all members of Christ's church.

Other Sunday Meetings. Besides the three-hour block of meetings, additional Sunday activities often take place in a typical LDS meetinghouse. For some adults and older youth in leadership callings, leadership and council meetings are held either before or after the block meetings. Occasionally, special firesides, musical programs, temple preparation classes, and priesthood assemblies are held in the evenings.

In addition, four weekends annually are devoted to larger gatherings of Mormons. Twice a year, the members of an entire stake assemble together for a two-hour session of Sunday stake conference, which replaces the block meetings for that week. A Saturday evening session of stake conference is also held for all adults, and it may be preceded by leadership meetings Saturday afternoon. The first weekends of April and October are reserved for the Church's general conference, with direct video transmission of the conference sessions now made available to most stake centers in North America. (Video- and audiotapes of the general conference sessions are sent to those areas of the Church that are unable to receive the direct broadcasts.)

A Day of Sacramental Covenant Renewal

A major value of the Sunday worship service is the opportunity to renew our covenants with the Lord by partaking of the sacrament. Through sacrament hymns and prayers, we bring our spirit in tune with the Savior's mission and atoning sacrifice. As he sacrificed body and blood on our behalf, we covenant to take his name upon ourselves and to keep his commandments so we can better serve and sacrifice for others. To assist us in our own lives and in our opportunities to help others, he promises us the constant companionship of the Holy Spirit as we adhere to our promises. The sacrament is a marvelous opportunity to draw near to Christ and to allow him and the Holy Ghost to become a vibrant, spiritual force in our lives. This symbolic act gives purpose to our lives and elevates our existence from mundane weekly burdens.

The Sacrament of the Lord's Supper. The form of the sacrament service consists of two parts, a special sacramental hymn and the actual ordinance. The hymn directs our thoughts toward Christ's atonement and the vows we have made with God, helping to prepare us to partake of the sacrament. The congregation should be especially reverent during the entire ordinance of blessing and passing the sacramental bread and water, which represent the body and blood of Christ—symbols of remembrance for the agony of Gethsemane and the torment of Golgotha that Jesus endured for the redemption of our sins. The sacramental emblems are blessed using prescribed prayers read aloud by priesthood holders. These prayers remind us of what the Son of God has done and suffered for us, and of what we have covenanted with God. Each week we promise to remember Christ, to take his name upon us, and to keep his commandments. In return, we are promised the companionship of the Holy Spirit. (See D&C 20:75-79.)

Our act of partaking of the sacramental symbols brings into focus the offerings of commitment and religious service that we have promised to God. This time of covenant renewal is our promise to live as true Christians and to keep the sacred vows we have made both publicly and privately. Our public vows include the renewal of our baptismal and any temple covenants. Our private vows include personal promises made to God. The sacrament is a sacred ordinance, to be approached with reverence and sincerity. Partaking of the sacrament on a weekly basis provides a regular opportunity to assess our spiritual worthiness and reevaluate our religious commitment.

A Day of Service

Many Sabbath activities furnish opportunities to do good as we give service to others. Indeed, another reason we rest from our vocational labors on the Sabbath is so that we can fully attend to the Lord's work, which is service to others in his kingdom. This can include fulfilling our formal Church callings, which, for some leaders, particularly those in bishoprics and stake presidencies, can involve nearly their entire Sunday. Priesthood and auxiliary leaders provide much valuable service and direction during their Sunday activities and meetings. Teachers, nursery workers, librarians, and others also render valuable aid as they fulfill their callings. In addition, many ward members give important service to other members through home and visiting teaching visits, which may take place on Sunday (as well as the other days of the week).

Some of the most valuable service comes outside of Church callings. Spontaneous visits to the sick and housebound are edifying Sabbath experiences. Writing letters to missionaries and assisting others in gospel study are additional valuable activities. Families are strengthened as family councils and family gatherings are held on Sunday. Scripture reading, gospel discussions, preparations of talks and lessons to be given in church, and other family activities can cultivate a special, reverent spirit of Sabbath devotion within a family. Indeed, one reason the First Presidency consolidated the key Sunday meetings into a single time block was to provide more time for the family on Sunday. They suggested that families participate in gospel study and "other appropriate Sabbath activities, such as strengthening family ties, visiting the sick and homebound, giving service to others, writing personal and family histories, genealogical work, and missionary work." [^10]

A Day of Reverence

The sum of these elements makes the Sabbath into a very special day—a day of reverence. To revere is to "treat with deep respect." A spirit of reverence is a feeling of admiration and appreciation. On the Sabbath as we worship the Lord and esteem what he has done for us, we will have a spirit of reverence with us. Conversely, as we cultivate reverence on Sundays, our thoughts will more easily turn to God and his great works in our behalf.

In all respects, the Sabbath day should be a day that is different from others during the week. As the Jewish sages say, "The Sabbath is the queen of the week," and, "Those who both observe the Sabbath and call it an enjoyment will rejoice in the kingdom of God and enjoy the riches of His bounty." [^11] Most people spend the majority of their time providing for themselves and their families, and the Sabbath provides them a weekly opportunity to rest from cares and rejuvenate themselves spiritually. The Sabbath is a day to rise above mundane concerns, acknowledge the Lord as the ultimate giver of life, look to the needs of others, and rejoice in the eternal truths that give meaning to our everyday lives.

If we allow our selfish and materialistic concerns to govern our Sundays, we become like a battery with a weakened seam that allows the chemicals to seep out. Such a battery not only loses its power, but it corrodes whatever it touches. If we corrupt the Sabbath, we not only lose our own spiritual powers, but we also weaken the resolve and ability of others to have a proper Sabbath experience. For example, if we insist on shopping on Sunday, we encourage employers to keep their businesses open on the Sabbath, requiring employees to work on what should be a day of rest and worship. Or if we disturb the Sabbath spirit in our families with inappropriate activities, especially those that take us away from Church, we dilute the spiritual energy that should be coming into our family members.

On the other hand, as we set this day apart from the rest of the week and treat it with a special spirit of reverence, we will be physically refreshed, emotionally strengthened, and spiritually renewed. The Lord promises us—as he did ancient Israel—that as we keep the Sabbath holy, we will both inherit special spiritual blessings and be provided with basic physical needs: "Inasmuch as ye do this, the fulness of the earth is yours, the beasts of the field and the fowls of the air, and that which climbeth upon the trees and walketh upon the earth; yea, and the herb, and the good things which come of the earth, whether for food or for raiment, or for houses, or for barns, or for orchards, or for gardens, or for vineyards. . . . And it pleaseth God that he hath given all these things unto man; for unto this end were they made to be used, with judgment, not to excess, neither by extortion. . . . But learn that he who doeth the works of righteousness shall receive his reward, even peace in this world, and eternal life in the world to come." (D&C 59:16-17, 20, 23.)

In conclusion, Sunday is our SABBATH, a holy day when we should rest from our weekly labors, worship God, renew our sacramental covenants, and serve others in a spirit of reverence. As we develop a reverential Sabbath spirit with our families and ward members, we are blessed spiritually and temporally. The Sabbath gives us a taste of the heavenly life-style and prepares us for similar celestial pursuits in God's kingdom. A weekly Sabbath observance provides spiritual refreshment and keeps us pointed correctly toward the kingdom of our Heavenly Father.

For further study, refer to the following entries:

TG: BD: EM: Assembly for Worship Communion Communion Church Lord's Day Fast and Testimony Meeting Meetings Sabbath Hymns and Hymnody Reverence Reverence Sabbath Sabbath Day Sacrament Sacrament Worship Sacrament Meeting

Sunday

Worship

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Victor L. Brown, Jr., Human Intimacy: Illusion and Reality (Salt Lake City: Parliament Publishers, 1981), 5-6.
[^2] See Professional Psychology: Research and Practice, June 1988, pp. 290-97.
[^3] David Van Biema, ''What's Gone Wrong with Teen Sex,'' People Weekly, April 13, 1987, p. 111.
[^4] Andrew Hacker, ''Promiscuity and AIDS: Moral or Clinical Issue?'' The Wall Street Journal, May 21, 1987, p. 28.
[^5] Ironically, ''safe sex'' in the 1990s represented sexual activity with any or even many sexual partners, but always with the use of some contraceptive device, whose absolute reliability could not be guaranteed.
[^6] See John Leo, ''The [Sexual] Revolution Is Over,'' Time, April 9, 1984, pp. 74-83.
[^7] TPJS, 157; see also 278.
[^8] See Ernest Gordon, ''The New Case for Chastity,'' Reader's Digest, January 1968, pp. 81-85.
[^9] EM, 3:1306.
[^10] TSWK, 311.
[^11] EM 3:1306.
