Victor L. Ludlow, Principles and Practices of the Restored Gospel ( 1992)

Chapter 26

The Sanctity and Purity of Life

In an age of environmental concerns, the advantages of pure air, water, and food are increasingly more obvious. The need for purity extends beyond the external world of our physical bodies, however. It includes the internal recesses of our mind and body and involves the spirit of our soul. Beyond what we breathe, drink, and eat, cleanliness incorporates a variety of mental attributes and sexual practices that influence the body's health and the soul's sanctity. Also, the necessity for pureness extends beyond this life into the future. God's heavenly realms are clean and pure, and he tells us that any who want to live in his presence must have clean hands and a pure heart. (See Ps. 24:4; Matt. 5:8.) Indeed, the prophets repeatedly warn us that no unclean thing can enter into God's kingdom. (See Eph. 5:5; Alma 11:37; 40:26; Moses 6:57.)

Much of God's effort on this earth is directed toward providing and maintaining a pure physical and spiritual environment for us. Many divine commandments address issues of purity, dealing with the sanctity of life, moral cleanliness, and chastity. It is sobering to realize that God has, with few exceptions, given us the power to procreate. Thereby we provide physical tabernacles for his spirit children so that God may achieve his aim "to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man." (Moses 1:39.) Not surprisingly, the power of giving life should be carefully guarded and judiciously used. For this reason, God has given us, his creative apprentices, the law of chastity as one of his strictest and most important commandments. The sacredness of the power to create life is a primary reason to study and honor the law of chastity.

In this chapter, we will concentrate on the higher principles surrounding the law of chastity, but we will also touch on the serious consequences of violating this law and the lasting rewards of keeping it.

Chastity as Common Wisdom

For generations, the conventional wisdom of many nations and the moral practices of a variety of cultures considered it healthy and proper for young men and women to refrain from premarital sexual relations and to remain faithful to one another in marriage. In Europe and America, these ideas derived from the traditional Judeo-Christian doctrines of marriage being a rite or sacrament ordained by God and of extramarital sex not being condoned by him. In the post-World War II period, however, the religious foundation of public morals greatly eroded, and a drastic corruption of sexual attitudes soon followed. The late 1960s saw the beginning of the "sexual revolution," in which intimate relations between men and women were taken out of their religious context—in fact, out of any moral context at all—and set up as an independent mode of self-expression and gratification. Ironically called the age of the "New Morality," this period appeared to be more a reversion to the old blatant immorality of some ancient, decadent societies.

Despite a flood of public propaganda to the contrary, the experience of people subscribing to new sexual mores eventually confirmed what conventional wisdom had always held—sexual behavior in human beings is much more than an animal instinct for pleasure and must include stable emotional ties to bring long-term satisfaction and fulfillment. Casual sex without emotional ties brings sexually fragmented relationships, since what should be most personal and intimate becomes common and transitory.

Even secular psychologists and therapists now generally accept this view. One Latter-day Saint marriage counselor explained that "if we relate to each other in fragments, at best we miss full relationships. At worst, we manipulate and exploit others for our gratification. Sexual fragmentation can be particularly harmful because it gives powerful physiological rewards which, though illusory, can temporarily persuade us to overlook the serious deficits in the overall relationship. . . . The intense human intimacy that should be enjoyed in and symbolized by sexual union is counterfeited by sensual episodes which suggest—but cannot deliver—acceptance, understanding, and love." [^1]

The 1980s, therefore, saw a gradual return toward the traditional commitment of marriage and sexual fidelity between men and women. As the decade of the 1990s opened, a great majority, over 90 percent, of mental health professionals endorsed the concept of being true to one's spouse. [^2] Thus the sexually aware person is torn between a natural instinct for personal gratification and the enticements of the media on the one hand and an inner voice whispering for sexual fidelity and the advice of wise clergy and professionals on the other hand. At least, more people seem to be accepting what the scriptures have taught all along—higher moral values should govern human sexual behavior.

Unfortunately, Western society did not begin to recognize the value of higher moral values until after some tragic societal casualties had occurred. The era of so-called "free sex" came with its own steep price—fragmented families, teenage pregnancies, and a plague of socially transmitted diseases. One of the social casualties of the age of "new morality" has been an astounding divorce rate throughout Western countries. Millions of divorces have left millions of men, women, and their children without the emotional security of strong, permanent family ties. Heavenly Father wants each of his spirit children to be born and reared in a loving, supporting family environment. (See D&C 42:45; 68:25, 28.) However, selfish infidelity seriously handicaps this divine objective. Instead, parents are at odds with each other, marriage bonds are weakened or even severed, parental example is tarnished, adult leadership is fragmented, and confusion and distrust abound. Although infidelity is not the only cause of divorce or family problems, chaos and sorrow often replace the stability and joy that should prevail in a moral family.

Second, though the sexual revolution has now been largely rejected by the generation that initiated it, the fallout of sexual permissiveness prevailed among the succeeding generation. Sexual activity among adolescents reached an all-time high, attended by a soaring incidence of teenage pregnancy and abortion. As reported in the late 1980s: "In America 3,000 adolescents become pregnant each day. A million a year. Four out of five are unmarried. More than half get abortions." [^3] Two decades of widespread tampering and experimenting with the wellspring of creation has born its ominous fruit—the random and irresponsible giving and taking of innocent human life.

Third, the seeds of life have become the seeds of death in an equally frightening way through the sexual spread of diseases, particularly Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome (AIDS). Lowered moral standards during the sexual revolution led to increased sexual deviancy, which has now spread this deadly and so far incurable disease, initially prevalent among homosexuals and intravenous drug users, into the general population: "AIDS . . . may reach plague proportions. Even now it is claiming innocent victims: newborn babies and recipients of blood transfusions. It is only a matter of time before it becomes widespread among heterosexuals. . . . AIDS should remind us that ours is a hostile world. . . . The more we pass ourselves around, the larger the likelihood of our picking something up. . . . Whether on clinical or moral grounds, it seems clear that promiscuity has its price." [^4] Considered prudishness two decades ago, sexual restraint is now heralded not only as good common sense, but also as literally a matter of life and death. Safer than "safe sex," [^5] a virtuous life-style is the best guarantee against sexually transmitted diseases.

Old versus New Morality

"Old morality" refers to the Judeo-Christian expectations of the scriptural laws concerning adultery. It is sometimes satirized by highlighting the prudishness of the Victorian era in England. Under the social pressures of the old-morality standards, many who wanted to follow the approved moral behavior found it difficult to determine whether people lived chaste lives out of fear for God's wrath, out of social pressure, or by personal choice. Even among those who claimed to be virtuous, some had hidden affairs and thus lived as hypocrites. After World War I, some public figures, particularly a few movie stars and sports idols, demonstrated their individuality by being unchaste without hiding the fact. People's moral behavior at this time was subject to many conflicting influences.

In the age of the so-called "new morality," sexual preferences and behavior became much more open and free. Initially, much of Western society seemed obsessed with sex. Illicit sexual relations were openly portrayed in books and movies and discussed in magazines and TV shows. Many people rejected moral standards in their quest for personal gratification. However, the shallow emptiness of this life-style soon became apparent as people could not find substance and durability in casual sexual relationships. Searching for more meaningful and permanent values, many rediscovered the traditional principles of fidelity, obligation, and marriage. Under an enlightened moral environment, chastity was seen more as an expression of choice and less as a burdensome obligation—at least until the AIDS epidemic hit and fear became a primary motive for many chaste relationships. As time passes and experiences accumulate, more people are recognizing the wisdom of God's commandments and are encouraging a more virtuous behavior for themselves and their families. [^6]

Hopefully, a pattern of increased wisdom leading to more positive behavior will occur in the sexual dimension. This pattern has developed in some health areas, particularly those dealing with tobacco, alcohol, and dangerous drugs. Starting in the late '60s and continuing through the twentieth century, medical research has demonstrated the health risks of smoking and drinking along with the emotional and social ills of alcohol abuse and the street drugs like marijuana, heroin, and crack. Although some people, especially the youth, curiously explore tobacco, alcohol, and drug use, aggressive education programs and government legislation have helped to gradually decrease the percentage of people who smoke, drink, and use dangerous drugs. Much remains to be done, especially concerning the many abuses of alcohol, but the path of wisdom dictates that this pattern should be encouraged.

As similar enlightened wisdom and modified behavior improve the sexual relations of more people, families and cultures throughout the world will be blessed. Granted, people may not be changing their behavior because they recognize the divine wisdom in the scriptural injunctions, but at least they sense the wisdom of these higher moral principles. An even higher level of enlightenment occurs when people appreciate the spiritual values of the law of chastity.

Chastity as a Key to Spiritual Life

More important than protecting emotional or physical health, the law of chastity affects a person's spiritual status on earth and in eternity. Violating the law of chastity through fornication or adultery is explicitly stated by Alma as the "most abominable above all sins save it be the shedding of innocent blood or denying the Holy Ghost." (Alma 39:5.) By way of definition, fornication is having sexual relations with someone else when you are not married; adultery is having sexual relations with anyone else when you are already married to someone.

The three greatest sins—denial of the Holy Ghost, murder, and adultery—are so serious because they all frustrate God's plan of eternal life for his children, destroying the sanctity of life, both spiritual and physical. To deny the absolute witness of the Holy Ghost devastates the spiritual life of oneself and others by denying known truths and spiritually cutting oneself off from light and truth for all eternity. To murder is to cut short the crucial physical probationary state of a person, immediately thwarting any further chances in the flesh at progression and eternal life. To disregard the law of chastity is to toy with the fountain of physical life for mankind's second estate, tampering with the divinely appointed life-beginning process. All three of these sins demonstrate the sanctity of life and illustrate why God has given important commandments concerning life.

As expressed at the beginning of this chapter, breaking the law of chastity violates the supreme trust God has placed with us to responsibly bring immortal spirits into mortal bodies. Beyond this primary purpose of sexual relations, a positive physical association can help create an emotional and spiritual unity between husband and wife. The secondary purpose of sexuality relates directly to the first, for love and unity between spouses contributes immeasurably to the quality of the family environment in which children are raised. When a commitment to bear and rear children is not central in a sexual relationship, immortal spirits who may be born (on accident) are usually denied the nurturance they need to progress to their full, eternal potential. For this reason, among others, the Lord has expressly commanded that sexual relations be confined to marriage and that children be raised in righteousness, or "the sin be upon the heads of the parents." (D&C 68:25.)

The spiritual effects of immorality are well documented in the scriptures. The seriousness of infidelity, and particularly adultery, might explain Christ's statement where he said that an evil and "adulterous generation seeketh after a sign." (Matt. 12:39; 16:4.) Adulterers are cut off from the Spirit of the Lord, and thus they may seek for supernatural signs as a type of spiritual communication. Joseph Smith said that "whenever you see a man seeking after a sign, you may set it down that he is an adulterous man." [^7] In other words, the adulterer, as a sinner, is no longer able to rely upon the Holy Ghost for confirmation of gospel truths, and he or she demands outward manifestations to justify belief.

Of course, since the Lord does not operate in that fashion, the sinner rarely receives his sign. Hence, he self-deceptively justifies his apostasy, reasoning, "After all, wouldn't the Lord show me a sign if the gospel were really true. Since he hasn't, it must not be true, and I should feel no obligation to keep its teachings or commandments." Thus, disobedience to the law of chastity or any other serious sin clouds our perception of truth, and if we do not repent of our immoral behavior, we become corrupt in our beliefs as well as our actions. This warning applies particularly to those who have been taught God's commandments. Believers who commit serious sexual sins must genuinely struggle to regain the companionship of the Holy Spirit so they can be worthy for other blessings promised to the virtuous.

Add to Your Faith, Virtue

When Peter wrote his epistle to the early Saints, he told them to add virtue to their faith. (See 2 Pet. 1:5.) Faith without virtue would soon languish and die, because without virtue there is no purity. Without purity, there is no moral strength. Without moral strength, there is no spirituality, and without spirituality, there is no salvation in God's kingdom. In short, faith without the works of virtue is dead belief. (See James 2:14, 17, 22.) But faith strengthened through virtuous behavior leads to spirituality and inspired knowledge. (See 2 Pet. 1:8.)

The great sins against life and proper procreation grossly deprive others or ourselves of physical, emotional, or spiritual development. A commitment toward proper moral behavior, on the other hand, can greatly enhance these facets of life. Indeed, only in marriage can a stable hierarchy of enduring physical satisfaction, emotional security, and spiritual unity be experienced through sexual relations.

When sex is viewed as an end in itself for physical gratification, having sex with different partners and experimenting with sexual "techniques" are the surest routes to emotional fragmentation and even sexual dysfunction, since prowess and performance become a preoccupation and source of anxiety. We have no way of knowing the general level of sexual satisfaction in former times when sex was largely monogamous and, thankfully, private. What we can measure since the sexual revolution, however, are the reported cases of sexual deviancy and the increased needs for counseling of sexual problems.

Some specialists in "sexual therapy" provide helpful counseling, while others, either through ignorance or shortsightedness, provide suggestions that incorporate no moral values at all. LDS Social Services can recommend discreet, experienced, value-oriented counselors. Some members receive valuable help from their bishops. Others seek their own "cure," learning to appreciate the emotional security of marriage as the basis for sexual satisfaction. Fortunately, many so-called experts on "sexuality" are beginning to recognize that premarital sexual experiences are no guarantee for later, good sexual adjustments in marriage. In fact, the more frequent and transitory the earlier sexual experiences, the more challenging and difficult it becomes to establish a long-lasting intimate relationship. [^8]

There is nothing so mysterious about the experience of sex that two young, chaste people cannot sufficiently learn together for themselves in the love and security of marriage. Parents and education can teach the facts of life, but the loving bonds of marriage provide the beneficial context for the actual experience. Mutual marital commitment eliminates the pressure of performance found with "one-night stands." Instead, the couple have their entire married life to grow together in sexual intimacy. The uniqueness, or even "thrill" of this experience, is that their sexual relationship is their own, not shared previously by anyone else. For those who have erred earlier, a genuine, long-term commitment to faithfulness in marriage will lead to a purity in heart and a righteousness in behavior. From this bond of physical and emotional fidelity comes a security and trust in the marriage from which can grow the highest spiritual fulfillment as well.

Spiritual Bonding of a Proper, Virtuous Relationship

Only those who understand and honor the eternal, procreative purpose of sexual union can know sex as the spiritual experience that it was ordained to be by the Great Creator himself. Sexual relations are a fundamental part of the marriage covenant, which would not be complete without them. To be "one flesh" as husband and wife is a divinely ordained act that serves as an expression of love as long as it is not abused. As stated in the Encyclopedia of Mormonism, "This oneness is as fundamental a purpose of marital relations as is procreation." [^9]

The Lord did not intend that sex be a purely physical act. President Kimball stated that the principal purpose of the union of husband and wife is to bring children into the world. He continued, "Sex experiences were never intended by the Lord to be a mere plaything or merely to satisfy passions and lusts. We know of no directive from the Lord that proper sex experience between husbands and wives need be limited totally to the procreation effort, but we find much evidence from Adam until now that no provision was ever made by the Lord for indiscriminate sex." [^10] A proper physical union builds emotional and spiritual unity. As one Mormon scholar explained, "Physical intimacy is a blessing to married couples when it is an expression of their mutual benevolence and commitment to each other's well-being, an affirmation of their striving to be emotionally and spiritually one." [^11]

Celestial marriage and its sanctioned sexual relations also symbolize heavenly unity and actualize the purpose of creation: "From the beginning of creation God made them male and female. For this cause shall a man leave his father and mother, and cleave to his wife and they twain shall be one flesh: so then they are no more twain, but one flesh. What therefore God hath joined together, let not man put asunder." (Mark 10:6-9.) The Savior speaks symbolically here, since a husband and wife obviously do not literally become one individual upon marriage. Instead, the sexual union of their flesh symbolizes spiritual unity, which can actually be achieved because the God who made them has joined them together eternally. We therefore speak about unity between not two, but three entities. As the husband and wife maintain their bonds of matrimony and draw closer to each other, they also grow closer to God, becoming more like him.

The unity between husband, wife, and God is actualized in the flesh by the birth of children, who have spirits created by God and bodies created by their earthly parents. This is one way that a man and his wife literally become "one flesh"—through the sexual consummation of their marriage and the procreation of children together with God.

The divine purpose of the law of chastity does not restrict or diminish the physical pleasure of sexual relations, but rather enhances it through added emotional and spiritual dimensions. If we relentlessly crave and pursue purely physical gratification through sex, we live like animals operating on instinct. But by disciplining our spirits to be master over physical desires, we attune ourselves to the Holy Spirit and thereby are able to focus more on the needs of our mates. If our flesh is subdued, the Spirit can enrich and inspire all aspects of our lives.

Virtue Leads to Strength

The Middle English (vertu) and earlier Latin (virtus) roots for virtue mean strength, that is, having and exhibiting strength and courage. One contemporary meaning in Webster's dictionary states that virtue is having "effective power or force," that is, "efficacy; especially, the ability to heal or strengthen." [^12] Pure virtue brings us strength in at least five primary areas of our lives: physical, emotional, mental, moral, and spiritual.

Physically, a chaste and virtuous life by both marriage partners not only avoids the health dangers of AIDS and other diseases, but it also instills patterns of physical self-discipline that carry over into marriage and other social relationships. Self-control by both partners is just as important and yet, ironically, may be more challenging after marriage. Although one is married, one cannot demand or expect the other spouse always to be ready or willing to engage in intimate behavior. Patience developed through sensitivity and mutual consideration becomes a valuable commodity after marriage. Virtuous self-control, patience, and physical integrity also enhance one's human associations outside the marriage. They provide effective barriers against child abuse and workplace indiscretions. They help ensure that private and public behavior remain consistent and harmonious. Virtuous intentions and acts not only encourage a positive, beneficial physical relationship for both partners, they also enrich society.

Sexuality also has important emotional dimensions. As a whole, women tend to be especially sensitive to the emotional values derived from a proper sexual relationship. Sensitive people recognize sex as more than a physical, animal act. They appreciate that mutual respect and pure motives enhance the emotional intimacy. Individuals, especially young people, strengthen their emotional integrity as they take control over their lives and find the courage to avoid peer pressure to engage in pre- or extramarital sex. Emotional power grows as dignity and respect are shared between men and women. A proper sexual relationship conducted by the Lord's standards helps people feel better about themselves and leads to emotional stability and greater self-worth, which, in turn, make them into better family and society members.

Mentally, the importance of pure thoughts is both obvious and subtle. Acts of sexual deviancy, such as rape or child abuse, are almost always (if not always) preceded by "thinking them out" in the aggressor's mind. If any such thoughts of immoral acts were quickly avoided, the possibility for such acts would be blocked. Thus we see the importance of following the modern prophets' advice to avoid movies, videos, music, magazines, photos, and other media with sexually inappropriate or suggestive content. We cannot begin to realize the many subtle influences that improper thoughts can have on the relationships between men and women and between adults and youth. A virtuous person will be one with clean thoughts.

The moral strengths and values of virtue and chastity are very apparent. The most common dictionary meanings for virtue emphasize its moral dimensions: a general moral goodness, uprightness, morality, or a good or meritorious moral quality. [^13] Living a virtuous life strengthens one's sense of what is right and good in sexual behavior, in business dealings, and in neighborhood and community associations. Virtuous people are committed to the sanctity of life, and they respect God's counsel on how life is to be conceived, protected, and nurtured. They respect their own procreative abilities, the physical sensations, limitations and handicaps of the body, and the intimate feelings of others. They would rather die or suffer themselves than deliberately injure another person. They would no more impose their physical desires on another than beat up a person or steal from another. Their moral values are strong and grow even stronger as they live the law of chastity.

The spiritual strengths of virtue become especially obvious after one has lost them following a transgression against the law of chastity. Moral impurity leads to an immediate loss of the companionship of the Holy Spirit, since he cannot abide in an impure person. (See 1 Cor. 3:16-17; Alma 7:21.) The prophets have always reminded us that the Lord views unchastity as a grievous sin, even the "most abominable above all sins save it be the shedding of innocent blood or denying the Holy Ghost." (Alma 39:5.) One who thinks continuously on physical gratification becomes carnally minded and an enemy to God. (See Mosiah 3:19; 2 Ne. 9:39.)

On the other hand, virtuous behavior leads to spiritual growth (see 2 Pet. 1:5), worthiness to be the Lord's servants in his temple (see Isa. 52:11), and the purity required of all in God's kingdom (see 1 Ne. 10:21). Moroni summarizes ancient prophetic teachings about chastity as he tells us to be wise during our sojourn on earth and to discard uncleanliness. He counsels to avoid consuming our mortality upon our lusts, but instead to seek strength in avoiding temptation so that we can "serve the true and living God." (Morm. 9:28.) A modern prophet has extolled the values of virtue in the following words: "There is nothing more beautiful than virtue. There is no strength that is greater than the strength of virtue. There is no other nobility equal to the nobility of virtue. There is no quality so becoming, no attire so attractive." [^14] Virtue brings a variety of strengths into our lives as we obey the law of chastity. Chaste marriage partners are able to expand their interrelationship through the strong bonds of trust, love, and communication.

Building T.L.C. into a Relationship

Any developing courtship and every effective social relationship, particularly those worthy of the eternities, must develop some "TLC." The initials "TLC" usually stand for "Tender Loving Care," although each initial also represents an essential element in any lasting human affiliation: T = Trust, L = Love, and C = Communication.

Trust

Trust provides the important foundation in any strong relationship. President McKay often quoted a Scottish poet who said that it is better to be trusted than to be loved. God loves us all with a never-ending, supreme love, but he does not trust us all equally. Staying absolutely true to the law of chastity, that is, never having any sexual relations with anyone other than a marriage partner, solidifies the bonds of trust in a marriage and demonstrates the trustworthiness of a person in other areas of human behavior.

Only those who earn God's trust by obedience to his commandments will be trusted with the choicest blessings of the gospel and the priesthood. Pivotal opportunities for service, temple ordinances, missionary work, or parenthood are entrusted to some as a sacred responsibility. As we are reliable in some things, such as marriage fidelity, then the Lord can bless us in other dimensions of our lives. (See Luke 19:17.) Trustworthiness will enrich our lives if it is the foundation in all our relationships.

Love

Love is the bonding power of human relations and should be the glue in every courtship, marriage, family, and social relationship. Although we cannot trust all people, we are commanded to love everyone. Love rather than lust, and affection rather than passion should be the ruling emotions in a strong relationship. The spirit of the law of chastity also requires that we have no lust or sexual yearnings for anyone outside our marriage. (See Matt. 5:27-28.) Betraying this emotional level of fidelity usually precedes the actual physical breaking of the law of chastity.

Love has great power to heal emotional wounds, especially if trust can be built up and open communication encouraged. For instance, one would think that in cases of adultery, the betrayal would completely destroy the love between married couples. However, it is amazing how often the betrayer still professes love for the betrayed, and the betrayed partner will still maintain some love for the betrayer, although trust has been lost. Unless both partners enrich and strengthen their love and trust, their marriage will be almost impossible to salvage. If trust is the foundation of a strong relationship, then love represents the walls and pillars upon which lasting associations are built.

Communication

Communication between marriage partners is vitally important. [^15] Without communication, each person has to learn everything by himself or herself and has to base decisions on guesswork. No marriage relationship will survive for long without at least some forms of personal communication. Effective communication between a man and woman should include at least three characteristics: it should be open, sincere, and supportive. It should be open so that simple, clear messages can be given and understood. Verbal rather than nonverbal communication is usually more effective in open communication. Sincerity demonstrates the genuineness of a relationship and is usually indicated through the tone of verbal communication and the eye contact of nonverbal communication. Effective communication should build up the other person and enhance mutual rapport; verbal abuse has no place in productive associations. Even negative comments, although based in fact, can be destructive, especially when repeated often. Instead, patience and silence are preferable, with supportive comments being even more preferable.

The messages communicated one to another should reinforce the bonds of trust and love between the individuals. In addition, chaste behavior improves the communication and inspiration channels of both partners with Heavenly Father, who then, through clear promptings of his Holy Spirit, is able to guide the marriage and family. Sensitive, enlightened, and effective communication strengthens any relationship. Inspirational communication is like a door or window that allows valuable blessings and light to enter the association.

By encouraging "TLC" in our marriage, family, and social relations, we include both "tender, loving care" and the essential elements of trust, love, and communication. As we develop our interpersonal associations, we should particularly remember the importance of these principles in our dealings with Heavenly Father. He loves us and knows the very best way for a man and woman to have a meaningful, satisfying, pleasurable, and eternal marriage—by building a pure and loving relationship. We need to trust God when he commands us about chastity. We must follow his directions to attain true marital bliss. His special blessings upon a marriage and family can be like the roof of a strong house—it provides shelter and protection. If a marriage has a strong foundation of trust and faith, solid walls of love, clear windows of communication, and the sheltering roof of the Lord's protection, the winds and rains of earthly disturbances will not bring that relationship down. It is built for the eternities.

In summary, we should remember that life is sacred, and God has protected procreation through the law of CHASTITY, which teaches self-mastery, enhances physical love, strengthens emotional relationships, and empowers spiritual gifts. By living pure, chaste lives, we not only keep our bodies in a clean state, but also enrich the moral environment and enhance the joyful experiences of earth life. We purify our souls for richer spiritual experiences now, and we also enhance our preparations for the celestial eternity with our Father in Heaven. The law of chastity and a pure life edifies all Latter-day Saints as they build faithful trust, develop energizing love, maintain open communication with each other, and receive God's divine assistance in their interpersonal relationships. Purity in the physical realm leads to pureness in the emotional, moral, and spiritual dimensions of our existence. Purity increases our effectiveness as we progress on the path toward our celestial future. [^16]

For further study, refer to the following entries:

TG: BD: EM: Adulterer, Adultery Adultery Adultery Body, Sanctity of Chastity, Law of Chastity, Chaste Homosexuality Cleanliness Modesty Fornication Pornography Modesty Premaritial Sex

Purity, Pure Sex Education Virtue, Virtuous Sexuality

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] See ''UA.''
[^2] Ibid, 6.
[^3] ''Drinking and Breast Cancer,'' Newsweek, May 18, 1987, p. 73.
[^4] B. Bower, ''Drinking While Pregnant Risks Child's I.Q.,'' Science News, Feb. 4, 1989, p. 68.
[^5] See Testimony of Hon. Byron L. Dorgan (R) North Dakota, in HSIH, 3-4.
[^6] ''UA,'' p. 6.
[^7] See Testimony of Beckie Brown, Chairperson, National Board Legislative Committee, Mothers against Drunk Driving, in HSIH, 71.
[^8] See ''UA,'' p. 6.
[^9] STH, 1.
[^10] See Gregory Byrne, ''Nicotine Likened to Cocaine, Heroin,'' Science 240 (May 27, 1988): 1143.
[^11] STH, 1.
[^12] STH, 8.
[^13] STH, 14.
[^14] See Judith Mackay, ''The Tobacco Epidemic Spreads,'' World Health, Oct. 1988, p. 9.
[^15] See Times and Seasons 3:800; EM, 1:289, 4:1441.
[^16] See EM, 4:1441.
