Victor L. Ludlow, Principles and Practices of the Restored Gospel ( 1992)

Chapter 28

Contributing to God's Kingdom

One day an unemployed individual received an outstanding job offer with a generous salary, additional benefits, and self-fulfillment opportunities beyond his wildest dreams. Two stipulations accompanied the offer: he would have to relocate to an area noted for its pleasant weather and great natural beauty, and he would be asked, but not required, to contribute one-tenth of his salary to building the local community and assisting those in need. Few people would turn down such an outstanding offer, yet some might accept the offer with both stipulations and then later neglect the promise to share a fraction of their wealth. Indeed, there are many people on this earth who are in a similar situation, who have received great blessings and riches from Heavenly Father but are unwilling to share them with others.

God has placed us on this beautiful earth, surrounded with natural and mineral resources, with fertile soil and adequate climatic conditions to produce enough food, clothing, and shelter for all. But inadequate means of production, transportation, and distribution, along with political manipulations, selfishness, and unwillingness to share have resulted in an unequal and often unfair distribution of life's natural necessities. To make matters worse, the corrosive and polluting influence of Satan brings wars and destruction that disturb the process even more. This is not how Heavenly Father planned it long ago as we met with him in the premortal councils before we all came to this earth.

Heavenly Father has chosen to remedy these inequities by working from within the heart outward toward society and the world. Rather than impose some all-powerful political-economic system, God chooses to work with the human soul. As each person learns to work and produce commodities or services and then willingly shares them with others, more and more of God's children are benefited. Through his Son, Jesus Christ, our Heavenly Father has also established a body of teachings and an organization to transmit these charitable principles to more and more people. Anciently, the patriarchs and their extended families and then the prophets and the House of Israel transmitted these teachings and practices. Today, the teachings are part of Christ's gospel, and the social structure is The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. God has instituted various programs to help teach his followers how to share their time, talents, and material resources. The most common program of shared resources among God's children through the ages is known as the law of tithing.

Tithing and Consecration

Like the law of the Sabbath, the law of tithing serves to remind the Saints that the Lord's ways are different from those of man. A capitalistic economy, for example, emphasizes work and free enterprise as means for the individual to accumulate wealth and material goods. Socialistic systems believe that the government rather than individuals should own a nation's resources and control their use. Dictatorships funnel the wealth into the hands of a few while most citizens suffer. In contrast, the Lord's economy discourages the Saints from trying to get ahead of their neighbors, commanding them instead to use their material goods to care for the poor.

Participation in the Church financial and welfare systems remains voluntary, not compulsory. If a Church member cannot provide enough for his or her personal needs, and family or friends also cannot provide enough, then the Church will provide assistance from its available resources. Thus the Lord's plan eliminates the abuses of the common political systems, supports the religious community, and provides for the individual member's needs, all the while respecting the agency and dignity of that person.

By engaging in the Lord's work and by paying tithes and offerings for God's kingdom, we acknowledge that we are not "self-made men" (to use a capitalist phrase), or "selfish pariahs" (to use a socialist phrase); rather we are the Lord's servants. We acknowledge that the riches of the earth are his to share, not ours to take. In return for acknowledging him and caring for the poor, the Lord promises that he will care for our temporal and spiritual needs. This is the covenant and promise of the law of tithing. Further blessings for individuals and greater benefits for society will accrue as more people progress from the law of tithing to the higher law of consecration.

The law of consecration, as revealed to the Prophet Joseph Smith, begins with the individual deeding his property and substance (goods and wealth) to the bishop. (See D&C 42:30-34.) He would then receive back what was necessary for him and his family, and the bishop would retain any excess for the benefit of the Church and other members. Persons in need of assistance could thus receive land, goods, or money from the bishop. Those who build upon their initial grants and gain a surplus, along with those whose circumstances change and who find themselves with an excess of goods, are expected to give what they do not need to the Church. (See D&C 82:15-20.)

The law of consecration was first implemented in Missouri and Ohio during the 1830s with limited success. It was discontinued as the Mormons were expelled from Missouri. Since many early Latter-day Saints were unable to fully live the law, it was withdrawn, and the law of tithing was given in its place. (See heading, D&C 119.) The law of tithing is thus a lesser law, given by the Lord as a test to see if the Saints can keep it and demonstrate their readiness to live higher laws. After Church members live the common law of tithing and contribute one-tenth of their increase, they become ready to live the more perfect law of consecration and share all of their surplus.

Thus, the law of tithing and the law of consecration are separate and distinct, although they embody the same principles: all things belong to God; we should not seek for excessive riches or possessions; we should share with others, whom we esteem as ourselves; as responsible stewards, we should help build Christ's church; and then the Church should have the necessary resources to assist the needy. (See D&C 38:17-27; 51:3; 104:13-18.) Willing obedience to the law of tithing elevates a person's soul by developing a more charitable child of God and follows a pattern set by Abraham almost four thousand years ago.

A Blessing for the Faithful

The earliest scriptural reference to tithing states that Abraham paid "tithes of all" to the high priest Melchizedek, acknowledging God as "the possessor of heaven and earth." (Gen. 14:20, 22.) When Abraham's grandson, Jacob, later received a dream confirming the promises of the Abrahamic covenant upon his head, he responded with a vow to pay tithes to the Lord: "If God will be with me, and will keep me in this way that I go, and will give me bread to eat, and raiment to put on, so that I come again to my father's house in peace; then shall the Lord be my God: and this stone, which I have set for a pillar, shall be God's house: and of all that thou shalt give me I will surely give the tenth unto thee." (Gen. 28:20-22.) This account teaches that the covenant of tithing was an integral part of the Abrahamic covenant.

That ancient law remains central to membership in the Church to this day. "By this principle," says President Joseph F. Smith, " . . . the loyalty of the people of this Church shall be put to the test. By this principle it shall be known who is for the kingdom of God and who is against it. . . . [Those] who are opposed to this principle . . . cut themselves off from the blessings of Zion." [^1] Church members are not excommunicated for failure to pay tithing, but they are encouraged to become full participants in building God's kingdom, for only members who pay a full tithe may receive the ordinances and blessings of the temple, which join our families together for eternity in the lineage of Abraham. [^2]

In addition to entitling us to the full spiritual blessings of the gospel, the law of tithing carries with it the promise of temporal security. Just as the Lord covenanted to provide Jacob "bread to eat, and raiment to put on," he promises Latter-day Saints who keep the Sabbath and pay their offerings that "the fullness of the earth is [theirs] . . . ; yea, for food and for raiment . . . to strengthen the body and enliven the soul." (D&C 59:16, 19.)

Notice that the emphasis in both the ancient and modern covenant, even when the "windows of heaven" are opened (Mal. 3:10), is on necessities, not luxuries. In the scriptures, the fullness of the earth pertains to God's natural creations, not the wealth amassed by men. The promise of worldly wealth is not guaranteed with tithing. The promise is one of material necessity and spiritual prosperity. Therefore, Malachi warns the Saints not to be surprised or despair that the wicked prosper. Neither should they complain, saying, "It is vain to serve God: and what profit is it that we have kept his ordinance?" Man's economy, like the rest of man's world, belongs to Satan for a season: "Now we call the proud happy; yea, they that work wickedness are set up; yea they that tempt God are even delivered." (Mal. 3:14.)

The true wealth promised a tithe payer is spiritual in nature, coming from heaven and not earth. God promises that he will open the windows of heaven and "pour you out a blessing, that there shall not be room enough to receive it." (Mal. 3:10.) Special blessings of divine protection are also promised righteous tithe payers who have separated themselves from the wicked in the terrible times preceding the Second Coming. (See Mal. 3:11-18; D&C 64:23.)

Though the basic needs of the righteous are promised through faithful obedience, the poor, the meek, and the righteous will not fully inherit the earth until Christ's second coming. Then the wicked "shall burn as an oven; and all the proud, yea, and all that do wickedly, shall be stubble: and the day that cometh shall burn them up, saith the Lord of hosts, that it shall leave them neither root nor branch." (Mal. 4:1.) Note the imagery in this passage. Instead of receiving the fullness of the earth harvested for the righteous, the wicked will be as dry stubble after the gleaned fields are burned. The Lord uses fire imagery in modern scripture too, condemning those who will not acknowledge the earth as his: "In nothing doth man offend God, or against none is his wrath kindled, save those who confess not his hand in all things, and obey his commandments." (D&C 59:21; italics added.)

Thus we see that tithing brings a variety of blessings: it builds faith, demonstrates loyalty to God, promises material security, provides spiritual blessings, and protects against the destruction accompanying Christ's second coming. Note that these blessings are predominantly spiritual in nature, even though the law of tithing appears to be a temporal one.

Sacrifice Brings Multiple Blessings

Once we accept the Lord as the rightful owner and giver of all we possess, the sacrifice he asks of us through tithing seems small indeed. Though we give up ten percent of our increase, we still retain ninety percent for our benefit. Furthermore, even the amount we give to God's kingdom comes back to bless our lives. In this respect, the law of tithing is very much like the law of sacrifice in ancient Israel. Many people have the misconception that in all sacrificial offerings, the entire animal was burned on the altar and transported as smoke and ash to heaven. Actually, there were three major types of sacrifices (the burnt, sin, and peace offerings) and various minor ones in the sacrificial practices under the Mosaic law, only one of which required the whole animal to be burnt on the altar.

The average Israelite offered a complete animal as a burnt offering only a few times at most in his entire life. (See Lev. 1:9; Deut. 33:10.) On the other hand, the frequency of the sin or trespass offering varied greatly according to the faithfulness and righteousness of the individual Israelite. In a sin offering, only the fat and blood of the animal was burnt on the altar, with the priests and their families eating the rest of the flesh.

The most common sacrifice for the average Israelite was the peace or thanksgiving offering, which indicated that the sacrificer was at harmony with God and wished to remain so. In this offering, only the kidneys, internal fat, and some of the blood of the animal was burnt on the altar. (See Lev. 3.) The right front quarter of the animal was separated and dedicated to the Lord to provide food for the Levites and priests. (See Lev. 7:11-34.) Because the Levite tribe had received no land inheritance in the settlement in Canaan, and because their priestly duties did not allow them time to tend fields and large flocks and herds, the burden of providing for them and their families fell to the other tribes. The meat, wine, grain, and other food offerings were the means established by the Lord to provide this sustenance. After the priests took their portion of the peace offering, the remaining three quarters was returned to the giver for his own family's festival meal.

Peace offerings were given during public festivals and at private celebrations. The public feasts included, above all, the three pilgrimage festivals of Passover, Pentecost, and Tabernacles, although the peace offering could be given at any festival. (See Num. 29:39; Ex. 20:24; Deut. 27:7.) The most well-known example of a public thanksgiving offering meal is the annual Jewish Passover dinner. The Last Supper between Jesus Christ and his apostles was also a form of this communal meal. The private celebrations included times of marriage, birth, restored health, abundant crops, or other occasions of thanksgiving, for which a freewill offering could be given. (See Lev. 22:29.) The peace offering marked a feast of conciliation, communion, and thanksgiving with God and his servants. It was an occasion when the bounties and blessings of life were shared with God, his priests, and all the families of Israel.

Like the return of most of the animal that the Israelites received from their peace offerings, most of our tithing money comes back to us in ways that directly and indirectly bless our lives. And the part that does not directly benefit the majority of us advances the kingdom of God, of which we are all a part. Decisions about the spending of these funds are made by the Council on the Disposition of the Tithes, comprised of the members of the First Presidency, the Quorum of the Twelve, and the Presiding Bishopric. This council observes two basic guidelines: "One, the Church will live within its means. . . . Two, a fixed percentage of the income will be set aside to build reserves against what might be called a possible 'rainy day'." [^3] From the available funds, these General Authorities of the Church decide where and how the tithing funds should be spent. For our consideration, spending from tithing and general Church funds can be divided into three major portions of approximately two-thirds, one-fourth, and one-tenth.

Two-thirds (Direct Benefits Received from Sacrifice and Tithes)

Similar to the majority of sacrificial meat returned to the giver, about two-thirds of Church contributions are returned directly to the members on a ward and stake level—mostly to build and maintain meetinghouses and to provide local operating budgets. The Church builds an average of three chapels each day throughout the world and continually remodels older buildings as well. The greatest financial assets of the Church are land and physical facilities of the many chapels scattered throughout dozens of nations. Because these buildings are money-consuming rather than income-producing assets, they require tithing to pay for repairs, utilities, custodians, and other upkeep. These physical buildings facilitate the many programs of the Church, providing places to encourage the faith and activity of the Saints, teach gospel doctrines, and stimulate individual and social development. This is possible only because the members of the Church pay tithing.

The basic operating budgets of the stakes and wards also come from tithing funds. Active members thus benefit directly from their contributions through auxiliary programs, instructional materials, and varied social, cultural, and sports activities. Those for whom Church activity is central in their lives could hardly place a monetary value on the blessings of full fellowship in the kingdom and the strengths of learning and growth that our children experience at church. For example, the Primary program for the children, the Scouting program for the boys, and the Young Women's program provide guided, inspirational opportunities for learning, social development, and service. The youth, their families and neighbors, and the whole community are blessed by these programs and the strengths they give to the coming generation. Most of our tithing contributions thus return to our local units where they can bless us directly.

One-fourth (Indirect Benefits Received from Sacrifice and Tithes)

Equal to the portion of animal sacrifice given to Israel's ancient priests, approximately one-fourth of contributions helps to support smaller, more specialized groups of members: seminary and institute students in the Church Education System, some missionaries, General Authorities, and members who earn wages working as secretaries, translators, office workers, gardeners, maintenance workers, employees, and so on at the Church offices in Salt Lake City and at area headquarters throughout the world.

Many Mormons receive a major tithing benefit from the Church Educational System, which provides some secular learning but mostly religious education for hundreds of thousands of members, mostly in their youth. Besides wages, the CES operation budget includes maintenance of its own university and college campuses, institute facilities (for college and university students at local and private institutions), and many seminary buildings (for secondary school students). Major learning institutions, such as Ricks College and Brigham Young University, are largely subsidized through tithing funds in order to keep the tuition fees reasonable. The continuing education received by hundreds of thousands of members each year strengthens the Church now as well as for the future.

Although individual missionaries are mostly supported from personal and family missionary savings funds, local members and wards and the Church's general missionary fund also provide much-needed help, especially valuable financial support for missionaries from indigent countries. Many unseen costs of missionary work, such as mission offices, mission homes, proselyting materials, pamphlets, and other missionary aids are largely supported through tithing funds. The missionary program benefits the whole Church through increased membership and a spirit of growth and excitement. The testimony and zeal of recent converts are constant sources of spiritual strength for Church members and their local congregations.

Although many members serve as volunteer workers in Church headquarters and area offices, many hired employees are necessary to move the work of God's kingdom along. Tithing money is used to pay secretaries, translators, maintenance workers, and others for their skills so they can provide for themselves and their families. Limited vocational opportunities are also extended to unskilled or vocationally weak workers who find temporary and valuable work experience at Deseret Industries, welfare facilities, and other similar programs. All these recipients of tithing funds and Church wages are like the priests and Levites of ancient times in that they are dedicated full-time workers in the Lord's service who receive their material needs from the tithes and offerings of God's people.

One-tenth (Subtle, Sacred Benefits Received from Sacrifice and Tithes)

Finally, comparable to the small portion actually burned on the ancient sacrificial altar, the last fraction of approximately one-tenth of Church monies is used for special programs that God has directed us to establish in order to provide for the sacred, holy needs of his children. These funds bless the kingdom of God through the construction and maintenance of temples, visitor centers, and other general Church buildings. Vast microfilming programs, genealogy research and library facilities, museums, and the operational costs of these special programs are included in this portion. Outsiders might be critical of the use of such resources, but these sacred programs separate The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints from social organizations, government projects, or fraternal orders that care primarily for the material, social, and educational needs of their members. These consecrated funds and programs carry Church members from this world into the spiritual realms of eternity and are, therefore, a truly worthwhile and productive use of financial resources.

So either directly or indirectly, members of the Church benefit from their tithing and offerings. If all members paid a full tithe, tithing alone would cover all the expenses of the Church, and there would be little need for additional missionary, welfare, and other funds. In the past few decades, the increased faithfulness of the Latter-day Saints in the payment of tithes has resulted in the elimination of the major building fund, budget, and priesthood and auxiliary fund projects that were necessary to provide these resources. These needs are now provided from the tithes of the Church. However, one significant financial need remains—caring for the poor.

Fast Offerings for the Poor and Needy

Ancient Israelites had tithes and offerings that they brought to the Lord. (See Mal. 3:8.) In addition to tithing, Latter-day Saints are invited to contribute fast offerings, which are used solely to help the poor and needy. Fast offerings have always been kept separate from the general tithing and operating funds of the Church. The prophets of this dispensation have designated one day each month, now usually the first Sunday, as a fast day in compliance with the Lord's command to continue in fasting and prayer. [^4] One of the chief purposes of this organized monthly fast is to enable the Saints to contribute the money thus saved to the poor.

This use of fasting to assist the needy is very much in keeping with the admonitions of the great prophet Isaiah, who spoke for the Lord, saying, "Is not this the fast that I have chosen? . . . Is it not to deal thy bread to the hungry, and that thou bring the poor that are cast out to thy house?" (Isa. 58:6-7.) Since fasting is the primary vehicle to care for the poor among us, Church leaders have constantly admonished the Latter-day Saints to be liberal and generous in their fast-offering contributions.

They have also sometimes directed special fasts to assist many people outside the Church in special times of need, such as during famines and droughts in Africa, earthquakes in Armenia, and economic disturbances in Russia. For example, the proceeds from two special fast days in 1985 collected over thirteen million dollars, of which almost nine million dollars was utilized in Africa. [^5] Sometimes the Church will cooperate with international relief and service organizations to assist the needy, such as in the joint effort with Rotary International's Polio Plus campaign when the Church purchased polio serum for hundreds of thousands of children. In a similar fashion, local Church leaders have advised special fasts and welfare projects to assist those suffering from regional catastrophes.

Fast offerings are submitted to the local bishop, who has discretionary use of them to assist needy members and others. [^6] Surplus funds are forwarded to the stake president on a periodic basis, usually monthly. He can then distribute money to wards that have demands exceeding contributions. Surplus stake fast-offering funds are periodically forwarded to the Church general fast-offering fund, which is only used to help the impoverished. Individuals, including nonmembers, can submit funds for special humanitarian purposes directly to LDS church headquarters in Salt Lake or to the Presiding Bishopric Office of the LDS area headquarters in foreign countries. [^7]

One can give generous fast offerings and know that the money is going directly to help the poor. Many operational and overhead needs are contributed through voluntary labor in welfare services, which makes the money even more effective in achieving its noble aims. Thus, while usually ten to twenty percent of money donated to large secular charities is used for operational expenses, less than three percent of fast offerings must be used in that way. Fast offerings, then, remain a pure contribution from the giver, since they are used only to benefit others. Although no member ever knows when unfortunate circumstances might make him the recipient of those sacred funds, he gives to bless others and not for his own benefit. Whatever our circumstances, the Lord fulfills his ancient promise of "bread to eat, and raiment to put on" in modern times through the Church fast offering and welfare system. [^8]

The Church program of assisting the needy could become a pattern for the world. President Gordon B. Hinckley observed what would happen "if the principles of fast day and the fast offering were observed throughout the world. The hungry would be fed, the naked clothed, the homeless sheltered. Our burden of taxes would be lightened. . . . A new measure of concern and unselfishness would grow in the hearts of people everywhere. Can anyone doubt the divine wisdom that created this program that has blessed the people of this Church as well as many who are not members of the Church?" [^9]

The Spirit of a Higher Law

Presently, a full tithing is the only monetary commitment required of Church members to enjoy the full blessings of the gospel through the temple endowment and celestial marriage. But tithing, fast offerings, missionary support, and other contributions are within the framework of the higher law of consecration. The full spirit of the law of consecration elevates us to a level of charity and service in which we pledge not just a portion of our wealth and possessions but all that we have and will possess to building the kingdom of God on earth. All endowed Mormons have indicated a willingness to live the law of consecration—the final and highest temple covenant—as it may be asked of them. (See D&C 82:15-20.) The personal covenants made in the temple and the social structure of the Church must someday again be united, for consecration is a celestial law, "and Zion cannot be built up unless it is by the principles of the law of the celestial kingdom; otherwise I cannot receive her unto myself." [^10] (D&C 105:5.)

To prepare ourselves to live the higher law of consecration as a community, we can each begin by living the spirit of the law in our tithes and offerings. For example, salaried workers are not explicitly instructed whether to pay tithing on net or gross income, or whether to pay before or after their mandatory deductions, so they must decide what their tithing should be. Self-employed business owners, too, must individually decide for the payment of tithes what constitutes their income, after they have paid their operational expenses. Tithing on the interest or income received from savings funds, stocks and bonds, and other financial investments should also be included. A tithe needs to be a full one-tenth of all our income, but we can be generous in deciding what that income is, sharing with the Lord and his kingdom the material wealth with which he has blessed us.

A spirit of generosity also should influence our contributions to the poor. Concerning fast offerings, President Spencer W. Kimball repeatedly encouraged the Saints to live the spirit of the fast by multiplying their contributions, even up to ten times the amount of their meals, if possible. [^11] Many financially established Church members can and do give much more than the estimated cost of meals on fast Sundays, as well as generous contributions to other Church funds beside tithing. On the other hand, there are some poorer members for whom ten percent of their income represents a complete consecration of all their surplus or even a sacrifice of necessities as well. They are like the poor widow of Jesus' day who gave only two mites into the temple treasury, but whom the Lord praised, saying, "This poor widow hath cast more in, than all they which have cast into the treasury: for all they did cast in of their abundance; but she of her want did cast in all that she had, even all her living." (Mark 12:43-44.)

The law of consecration encompasses the highest expectations of the temple endowment because it is the most difficult of all commandments to live: "The law pertaining to material aid is so formulated that the carrying of it out necessitates practices calculated to root out human traits not in harmony with requirements for living in the celestial kingdom and replacing those inharmonious traits with the virtues of character essential to life in that abode." [^12] People will naturally state that they need more income before they will admit that they should be giving more to others. The natural human tendency to love riches and use them selfishly must be overcome to inherit the nature of deity: "For if ye are not equal in earthly things ye cannot be equal in obtaining heavenly things; for if you will that I give unto you a place in the celestial world, you must prepare yourselves by doing the things which I have commanded you and required of you." (D&C 78:6-7.)

These verses refer to establishing the first storehouse for the poor, preparatory to making the early Church financially independent through the law of consecration and the "United Order." (D&C 104:48; see also 92:1; 104:1.) The United Order refers to the establishment of cooperative enterprises in Kirtland and Missouri that were later disbanded because of economic difficulties and persecution. During the last quarter of the nineteenth century, Brigham Young also initiated cooperative enterprises under the United Order throughout the Western United States, Canada, and Mexico, some of them involving entire communities. The United Order was seen as a preparatory step to an ideal community based on consecration and stewardship. Although of short life and limited success, the United Orders promoted economic self-sufficiency among inhospitable frontier colonies and fostered group identity and religious commitment among many struggling Mormon communities. Today, as one LDS scholar noted, "The united order experience remains in Mormon historical consciousness as a symbol of the more perfect society that Latter-day Saints believe will one day be achieved." [^13]

Living in a Zion society where all things are held in common is a lofty goal, but preparation begins with living the law of tithing and learning to share. We can then catch a vision of its higher principle—to learn to give not only of our wealth, but also of ourselves in building God's kingdom. The greatest gifts of self that we can give are the time and individual talents we possess. Giving of money, hard as it may be, is usually easier than generously giving of our precious personal time and of the energy and abilities we possess.

When we realize that God is the giver of all and that we are all beggars and stewards before him, we understand the foolishness of striving to financially "get ahead" in an attempt to leave our neighbors behind. When we remember that God has given us life itself and the time and opportunities we have on this earth, we learn the wisdom of directing our time and energy toward helping others. When we appreciate that all our good gifts and talents come from above, we more readily use them to bless others. Thus, we learn to share all that we have with others in building God's kingdom.

Saying that we want to help the poor and to build God's kingdom is easy, but the mark of our sincerity comes as we part with the things that are precious to us. Understanding and following the Lord's law of economics are not easy, which seems to say that "charity brings prosperity" (as we share, we are blessed by God) and "greed leads to need" (as we are selfish, we are never satisfied). For most of us, money is a precious commodity, and as we generously share it through our tithes and offerings, we demonstrate that our words of compassion and willingness to serve are genuinely meant. Our time and personal talents are other valuable resources we possess that we can share in building God's kingdom, indicating even further a willingness to live the law of consecration.

In summary, we can say that paying TITHING prepares us for the law of CONSECRATION, which is God's celestial law of social behavior, inviting us to share our material wealth and possessions and our personal time and talents with others in building and enjoying his glorious kingdom on earth. We live the spirit of the law of consecration as we apply the principles of stewardship, equality, and charity. When we generously and willingly give of tithes and offerings, we prepare ourselves and Christ's kingdom for the glorious Second Coming, when the King of kings will protect us from destruction, overthrow evil, and welcome us into his marvelous realm.

For further study, refer to the following entries:

TG: BD: EM: Consecration Tithe Consecration Sacrifice Fast Offerings Tithing Finances of the Church Financial Contributions Humanitarian Service Sacrifice Tithing Ward Budget Wealth, Attitudes toward

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Literacy and Education. The prepared person should be able to read, write, and do basic mathematics. Reading the scriptures and other good written works, attending public schools and availing oneself of other educational opportunities, and using other communication and learning resources should be a high priority for everyone. Parents particularly should use available resources to teach positive learning attitudes and effective educational skills to all family members. Fast Offerings and Other Welfare Services Resources. Fast offering and other Church funds are available to help those in need. All Church members in good health are asked to abstain from two meals for one day a month (usually on the first Sunday) and to contribute a fast offering equal to at least the cost of the meals (more when possible). Their donations are used only to assist the poor and needy and not for other Church programs. The bishop directs the distribution of these funds. He is not to make loans to the poor from these funds, but if a recipient is later able to repay assistance, he or she should do so by paying a generous fast offering. [^11] MD, 847.
[^2] Career Development. Each qualified head of a household should select a suitable vocation and pursue appropriate professional training. Receiving specific vocational training and higher education (beyond the required minimum education and high school) is especially valuable in our contemporary society. Once in a career track, industrious work, further training, and career advancement will enrich one's professional success. Parents should counsel children to select a career that will satisfy their future family economic needs and provide personal satisfaction. Employment System. Church members, particularly priesthood quorum leaders, should help the unemployed and the underemployed find good, satisfying jobs. In the meantime, work and service opportunities in the ward, stake, or storehouse resource system facilities are provided members while receiving Church assistance. Local employment specialists are also called, and some full-time employment centers and regular employment opportunity newsletters are also provided by the Church. These programs help members find jobs, receive career guidance and direction in vocational rehabilitation, and access job information while coordinating assistance on all levels. See GP, 169.
[^3] Financial and Resource Management. Prudent people establish financial goals, spend money for righteous purposes, avoid debt, preserve economic resources, and save for the future. They learn self-discipline and apply self-restraint in money matters. They pay a full tithing and a generous fast offering. As they properly budget their money, especially for major purchases, they learn to live within their income and avoid large consumer debt. Where possible, they work for home ownership and a secure retirement plan. A savings plan for emergencies and future needs is an important part of their finances. Bishops' Storehouses and Production Projects. In areas of larger Church membership, bishops' storehouses are maintained, containing food and essential nonfood commodities that bishops can provide for those in need. Some local Church units also operate welfare farms, canneries, and other projects that produce and process quality food and nonfood items for distribution. Church volunteers and welfare recipients provide most of the labor for these projects. Other local units are asked to provide special funds or resources to support various welfare projects. Joseph B. Wirthlin ''Seeds of Renewal,'' Ensign, May 1989, p. 8.
[^4] Home Production and Storage. Well-prepared individuals and families should seek for some temporal independence by producing basic needs through gardening, cooking, sewing, handicraft, and handyman skills. Families should learn food preservation techniques of home canning, freezing, and drying foods. Where legally allowed, each person or family should store a one-year supply of food, clothing, and, if possible, fuel. Emergency first aid, shelter, bedding, and water supplies should also be maintained. Parents should involve children in the planning and execution of the family storage program, particularly in the selection, inventory, and rotation of the food supplies. LDS Social Services. Various professionals and agencies comprise the LDS Social Services system. They assist ecclesiastical leaders in helping members with critical social and emotional needs. The agencies provide licensed services for unwed parents, adoption procedures, foster homes, and other complex needs. LDS Social Services also provide counseling services through clinics and referred specialists. Further insights into the law of consecration are found in the preceding chapter.
[^5] Physical Health. Sound physical health programs are an essential element of every prepared family. Naturally each family member should obey God's instruction in the Word of Wisdom concerning our bodies. [^8] (See D&C 89.) Every member should practice sound principles of nutrition, physical fitness, immunization, home cleanliness, environmental quality and sanitation, accident prevention, dental health, and medical care, especially for young mothers and children. The family should also learn and practice some basic home health skills, such as first-aid, safety, and emergency preparedness. Parents should encourage family members to eat properly, to obtain adequate rest and physical exercise, to have regular physical examinations, and to practice wisdom in all health practices. Deseret Industries. Deseret Industries are stores and work centers that recycle clothing, furniture, and other household goods. Located in areas with enough of an LDS population to support them, their primary purpose is fourfold: (a) to provide work opportunities and rehabilitation for unemployable individuals, (b) to provide common household items to the public at a low cost and to bishops for distribution to welfare recipients, (c) to give people an opportunity to share of their means and time to help those in need, and (d) to avoid waste by recycling, refurbishing, and renovating usable goods. CR, Oct. 1936, 3.
[^6] Emotional, Social, and Spiritual Strength. Seasoned, mature people can meet life's challenges with confidence, stability, and commitment. Each person should build internal strength by learning to love and respect himself or herself through self-mastery and righteous living. Families should learn to love and serve their neighbors and to love God and communicate with him through personal prayer. Parents should teach the children that emotional and social confidence along with spirituality provide an inner strength. Missionaries with Welfare Services Assignments. At the request of local priesthood leaders, full-time missionaries with welfare service assignments and local members with specialized callings can be assigned temporarily to special areas to help Church leaders identify needs and provide welfare services. A welfare service missionary makes application and receives a call in the same manner as a proselyting missionary, beginning with a bishop's interview where the prospective missionary might express a desire to serve and use any special talents or professional skills he or she possesses. Welfare service missionaries provide valuable assistance to the Saints and their neighbors, especially in underdeveloped and depressed areas. Leonard Arrington and Davis Bitton, The Mormon Experience (New York: Vintage, 1979), 262.
[^7] WSRH, 1-2.
[^8] See chapter 32 in this book for an examination of God's health laws.
[^9] Additional guidelines on these topics are found in WSRH.
[^10] GHI, 1989, 2-3.
[^11] See chapter 28 for a discussion of fast offerings and their uses.
[^12] Quotations are from the Heritage Foundation's journal Policy Review as cited in The Daily Herald, Feb. 12, 1992, A1-2; italics added.
[^13] Ibid.
