Victor L. Ludlow, Principles and Practices of the Restored Gospel ( 1992)

Chapter 29

Work and Welfare—Providing for Oneself and Others

The beehive is the central symbol on the flag and seal of the state of Utah, an emblem from pioneer times representing the hardworking nature of the large Mormon population in that state. If the beehive represents the community, then the people are represented by the many bees, flying in and out of the hive, industriously doing their work. Most people assume that the primary work of the bees is making honey, which they do in such abundance that they can feed themselves and still have a large surplus to be consumed by animals and humans. However, bees have a much more important function than producing honey. Their greatest value is the extensive and essential pollination work they do, particularly with fruit trees, vegetables, and other crops necessary for humans and livestock. Moving from one blossom to another, they transfer pollen from one plant to another, thus fertilizing the seed-producing flowers. Honeybees carry out more cross-pollination than any other insect and are extremely valuable members in our ecological system.

In a similar fashion, one may ask, "What are Latter-day Saints accomplishing with all their industrious work?" An initial response would involve an evaluation of their financial and economic productivity in Utah, the area of their greatest population density. A variety of facts could be brought forth showing the business growth and the solid international reputation of Utah-based firms, such as WordPerfect and Novell. Indeed, the work ethic of the local population (which is over ninety percent LDS) was one reason why Money Magazine voted the Provo-Orem area the number-one city in the United States in 1991. For similar reasons, Fortune Magazine selected Salt Lake City in 1990 as the best city in the United States for business and labor.

However, as with the honeybees, there are more important but less obvious values in Utah labors, whether performed by Mormons or non-Mormons. The greater LDS values derive from the enrichment that a work ethic provides in the human soul and the lasting effects that work habits carry over into all areas of life. A hardworking person enriches both self and society, but increasingly more people seem to ask, "Why should I work if I don't have to?"

Why Work?

Our Heavenly Father and Jesus Christ have shown us by their examples the importance of hard work. "In the beginning God created the heaven and the earth," that is, he was found working for the salvation of humanity. (Gen. 1:1; see also Moses 1:39.) Since God's life is a pattern for us in all things, we should not be surprised that honest labor for the earthly well-being of ourselves and others is a basic spiritual principle of the gospel. Jesus Christ, under the direction of our Father in Heaven, worked to create the heavens and the earth. (See John 1:1-3; Heb. 1:1-2; Eph. 3:9.) Christ, being the Anointed One in the premortal existence, also accomplished much work while on the earth. His example of personal effort and constant concern for the needy provides a role model in our lives and exemplifies the foundation of the Church welfare plan.

Expounding on the creation in modern scripture, the Lord emphasizes that temporal and spiritual salvation are really one and the same: "I say unto you that all things unto me are spiritual, and not at any time have I given unto you a law which was temporal . . . for my commandments are spiritual." (D&C 29:34-35.) We are not commanded to tend to our basic physical and material needs because monetary resources or our choice of careers will matter in the life to come. On the contrary, they will not matter at all. What will matter and remain with us into eternity is the obedience, self-reliance, discipline, and organization we incorporate in our character as we cultivate temporal well-being. Thus our temporal work is preparation for our spiritual inheritance: "If you will that I give unto you a place in the celestial world, you must prepare yourselves by doing the [earthly] things which I have commanded you and required of you." (D&C 78:7.)

Even our first ancestors had to learn to work. When Adam and Eve were driven out of the Garden of Eden, the Lord commanded them: "In the sweat of thy face shalt thou eat bread." (Gen. 3:19.) We likewise are commanded to work, for the Lord commanded his covenant people: "Six days shalt thou labor." (Ex. 20:9.) This command has been repeated in latter days as the Lord has instructed his disciples to not be idle, but to labor with all their might and then to rest from their labors on the Sabbath. (See D&C 42:42; 59:10; 75:3.)

Work is both a divine command and a key to success in life. Like Adam and Eve, we each have to leave paradise or the leisure of our youth and learn to work. Granted, some drudgeries of work can be overcome, but the basic principles of work cannot be violated. Although our many modern labor- and time-saving devices have eliminated much of the physical work required of our ancestors, each of us still must develop the work ethic within ourselves. Learning the habits and enjoying the fruits of work are like most things of lasting value—they take hard, continuous effort. Elder Bruce R. McConkie has stated: "Work is the great basic principle which makes all things possible both in time and in eternity. Men, spirits, angels, and Gods use their physical and mental powers in work. . . . Without work there would be neither existence, creation, redemption, salvation, or temporal necessities for mortal man." [^1] The success of God's plan requires his work and our effort. (See Moses 1:39; Matt. 20:1-8; D&C 64:25.) Unlike the quick pleasures advertised by society, work's rewards require time, persistence, and diligence.

Learning to Work

God has provided us families where we can observe and learn the values of work. Good work attitudes, habits, and skills should first be learned in the home. [^2] Elder Joseph B. Wirthlin has taught, "Parents should plant deeply the seed of the work ethic into the hearts and habits of their children. As society has shifted from an agrarian to an urban structure, . . . hard work [has] been neglected. If our young people do not learn to work while in their homes, they likely will be compelled to learn later in a setting where the lesson may be painful." [^3] The sooner children learn how to work, the sooner they, their families, and society will be blessed.

Sadly, many people in the world do not want to work. They want the knowledge, gifts, rewards, and privileges of the laborers without putting forth the necessary effort. They want an education but do not want to read, study, and analyze. They want skills without having to learn, practice, or perfect them. They want prestigious jobs, and they envy people in rewarding professions, but they are unwilling to pay the price of apprenticeship, commitment, and effort. Far too many tend to take the course of least resistance, the fastest way to success, and the quickest method for wealth, trying to find substitutes for simple, hard work. The Lord has said that the idler "shall not eat the bread nor wear the garments of the laborer." (D&C 42:42.) If we want to enjoy the great temporal and spiritual blessings of life, we need to learn how to work.

Personal Welfare Principles and Their Rewards

Through the development of good work habits, one learns the principles of self-discipline, both physical and mental. Such personality traits can then carry over into all aspects of life. They become the foundation in developing and sustaining one's personal welfare. "Personal welfare" and "personal preparedness" are stock phrases used in the Church to describe the individual characteristics necessary to become independent, productive members of society. As people prepare themselves, they become better able to assist in developing family preparedness and alleviating community welfare needs.

Welfare is a combination of health, happiness, and general well-being. The term welfare derives from old English and Anglo-Saxon roots meaning "a well journey" or "a good trip." If people are in a state of being or doing well, enjoying health, prosperity, happiness, and spirituality, they will experience a pleasant journey through life. Note that the image of well-being describes people on their way toward some destiny. Welfare becomes the means or the path to this destiny and not the sole object of the trip itself. In other words, preparedness and welfare are not meant to be the end purpose of life; rather, they are aids to assist us and others toward our ultimate destiny.

To reach this destiny, we need to learn how to care for ourselves, our possessions, and others. Six key principles guide us in developing our welfare preparedness: work, self-reliance, consecration, stewardship, love, and service. The first two, work and self-reliance, direct our initial energies toward ourselves as we increase our self-confidence and our capacity to produce. Our personal welfare is enriched as we gain talents, income, and emotional strength. The next two welfare principles, consecration and stewardship, focus our attention upon the wise management of our possessions, property, gifts, and talents. [^4] As we develop these resources, we exhibit responsibility and gain respectability in the world, but we then need to use these resources toward helping others. The last two principles, love and service, demonstrate our concern for others as we develop charity. If we are strong in all six basic welfare principles, we strengthen ourselves, improve the world, and assist its inhabitants. In short, we become productive, positive members in society.

The Spiritual, Eternal Nature of Self-Sufficiency

When the modern Church welfare plan (originally called Church security program) was established in 1936, the First Presidency issued this mission statement concerning the program: "Our primary purpose was to set up, in so far as it might be possible, a system under which the curse of idleness would be done away with, the evils of a dole abolished, and independence, industry, thrift and self-respect be once more established amongst our people. The aim of the Church is to help the people to help themselves. Work is to be re-enthroned as the ruling principle of the lives of our Church membership." [^5] Though the immediate purpose of this program is for temporal security, notice that none of the primary goals are temporal at all. Instead of planning to help a certain number of people, raise a certain sum of money, or produce a certain amount of goods, the First Presidency's aim was to develop the eternal virtues of "independence, industry, thrift and self-respect," with "work . . . as the ruling principle."

The phenomenal success of the Church's self-sustaining welfare plan is due to its foundation in the correct principle of work, which teaches people to govern themselves temporally and spiritually. In the words of President Joseph F. Smith, "It has always been a cardinal teaching with the Latter-day Saints that a religion which has not the power to save people temporally and make them prosperous and happy here, cannot be depended upon to save them spiritually, to exalt them in the life to come." [^6] The mission of the Church welfare program is to help us now in our temporal existence so we can become strong, independent, helpful, and happy members of God's celestial society.

A Temporal Plan for Personal and Family Preparedness

With a spiritual underpinning of work to achieve self-reliance and serve others, the modern welfare plan is designed along three levels: "the responsibility for one's economic maintenance rests (1) upon himself, (2) upon his family, and (3) upon the Church, if he is a faithful member thereof." [^7]

On the first level, adults are responsible for their own well-being and that of their families. In physical terms, this involves maintaining good health and providing the temporal necessities of the family members. Families are also counseled to live within their financial means and to save a portion of what they earn. Beyond providing basic needs, fathers and mothers also bear the responsibility of preparing their children to serve their fellow men and lead independent, productive lives. To meet these needs, standards in six basic areas of personal and family welfare preparedness have been provided by LDS Church leaders:

Parents should train their children in financial responsibility by providing some regular allowance or other income opportunities and then allowing the children to manage these resources through their own experiences. They should encourage teenagers to develop and use a budget, with savings for missions, education, and other important long-range goals. By using economic resources wisely, the family can avoid much of the stress and friction that otherwise disturbs many people who try to live beyond their practical means.

As individuals and families reach these standards for each of the six areas of personal and family preparedness, their temporal welfare will be provided for as they establish a work-ethic pattern that will bless themselves and others. [^9]

What to Do When a Crisis Arises

Sometimes people or families are not able to fully provide for their own welfare. When accident, illness, death, or any source of financial hardship strikes a family, the family members should first look to their own resources and then to their extended families for assistance. After the resources of this second level have been exhausted, they may turn to the Church for aid. Whenever possible, those receiving welfare assistance work for what they receive by assisting at various LDS Church or welfare facilities. Cash aid is sometimes provided directly from fast offerings, particularly to help with rent, utility, and medical payments. Food, clothing, and other basic goods are usually provided through store-houses, which are supplied from goods produced by stake and regional welfare projects. The recipient should use his available funds to pay debts and to buy as many family necessities as possible. In addition, LDS Social Services helps members who need personal and family counseling, assistance in adopting children, aid in obtaining employment, and so on.

Accepting and Giving Assistance

Members of the Church are commanded by the Lord to be self-reliant to the extent of their ability. (See D&C 78:13-14.) No righteous, able Latter-day Saint who understands the importance of this principle will voluntarily shift the responsibility for personal or family welfare to someone else. As long as he is able, he will work with his own resources and labor with divine inspiration to help provide himself and his family with the temporal necessities of life. When he or the extended family cannot provide these needs, Church and government assistance will help. As guided by the Spirit and through applying the welfare principles mentioned earlier, each Church member decides what assistance to accept, be it from the bishop, a governmental agency, or other source. In this way, agency is maintained, while independence, dignity, and self-respect are fostered.

The giving of assistance can always be done on an individual basis by neighbors, home teachers, and visiting teachers who are aware of special needs and who can move directly to resolve them. Church members should be prepared and willing to give of time, talents, and means to the needy in the Church and the community. When greater resources are needed, such as from the priesthood quorums, the ward, or LDS Social Services, the bishop needs to be informed and involved.

Welfare Services on the Local Level

The bishop is responsible for determining who should receive Church help and when and how it should be given. Those eligible for assistance include faithful Church members, part-member families, less-active members who are willing to work for their assistance, and traveling or transient members with emergency problems whose eligibility has been verified by their home bishop. At his discretion, the bishop can provide aid to inactive members and nonmembers with special, temporary needs.

An LDS bishop or branch president has six primary responsibilities for the welfare needs of those living in his unit boundaries: (1) to seek out the poor, needy, and distressed, (2) to meet needs with available resources, (3) to teach welfare principles and explain welfare programs, (4) to administer welfare resources through the ward welfare services committee, (5) to encourage members to give generous fast offerings, and (6) to coordinate needs for Deseret Industries and raise storehouse commodities and funds as requested by regional and area leaders.

A wise bishop relies on much counseling, prayer, and inspiration to resolve the temporal needs of Church members. Other people also provide important help. A valuable local resource to assist the bishop is the ward welfare services committee. This committee is comprised of the bishopric, ward priesthood leaders, and the ward Relief Society presidency. They meet at least monthly to consider the temporal needs of ward members. They become aware of arising needs and keep the bishop informed of the circumstances of needy individuals or families. They then direct their priesthood and Relief Society members in the administration of local resources and manpower to provide assistance.

The bishop also meets regularly with other bishops in the stake in a stake bishops welfare council meeting to receive training in welfare duties, exchange ideas and experiences, study community welfare resources, review fast-offering contributions and use, discuss assistance trends, and evaluate local Church welfare projects. [^10] In addition, the bishop should be aware of and use applicable local agencies, such as governmental and United Way offices, which can lend valuable assistance and professional help for his members in need.

Church Welfare Resources

When the personal or family situation is critical enough that individuals must go "on welfare," they become dependent upon public relief. Some government resources may be available, and depending upon the situation, those in need could apply for them. Other helpful welfare resources are available through the Church. The LDS Church provides a storehouse resource system to help bishops assist needy members. The Church welfare program has six major components: fast offerings, employment assistance, bishops' storehouses, LDS Social Services, Deseret Industries, and welfare service missionaries.

The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints not only preaches a concern for the poor and needy, but it also encourages and directs the members in providing help for others. The Church also sets the example as an organization by committing many financial and human resources to these welfare programs. Church humanitarian efforts are sometimes noted in the public press when large contributions or emergency shipments are sent to areas where catastrophic disasters, such as earthquakes, famine, or floods, have afflicted many people.

The validity and value of the guiding principles of the Mormon welfare program are sometimes also noted by government leaders and research foundations. For example, one noted journal suggested that the Church's welfare themes "are ones the secular world would do well to study," stating that the LDS welfare system provides material necessities while focusing on "strengthening the family, teaching a vigorous work ethic and helping the needy to help themselves." It remarked that a sign of the Church's success was that able-bodied people on Church welfare "became independent in an average of about one hundred days," compared "to the federal welfare system in which half of the families . . . will remain on the dole for over ten years. The explicit aim of Mormon welfare is to wean people from it. That it succeeds is its greatest achievement." [^12]

One editor for the journal suggested five reasons why the Church system is highly successful, especially when compared to government programs: (1) Mormon welfare recipients work at various Church facilities for what they receive, (2) home teachers visit the Church member monthly, helping correct problems before they become critical, (3) local bishops, who are often professionals or business owners, supervise the program, (4) bishops tailor benefits to needs and help the families to budget, and (5) the Church aggressively encourages families to take care of their own members. The article includes a quote from a former Deputy Secretary of the U.S. Health and Human Services agency: "People in need want to be connected to family and community. The Mormon Church recognizes these ordinary human facts." [^13]

Although some attention has been directed to the Mormon welfare program, most of its work is done behind the scenes. Like the bees with their unnoticed but valued pollination, the greatest social value of Church welfare usually remains hidden as Latter-day Saints quietly and carefully lend assistance to others, following the principles and guidelines of welfare services. [^14]

Women in the Workplace

Church welfare principles and the work patterns of families need to adapt to constantly changing social-economic realities. Just a few generations ago, most families lived in rural areas where they farmed or were involved in small family businesses. All family members were expected to work together, and one advantage of larger families was the greater number of available workers. Today, most families live in urban areas where a large family can be a financial liability. To meet the needs and expectations of the family, more and more mothers are entering the work force as they seek employment outside the home. This naturally puts increased stress upon them and the family. However, by following a few guidelines, these pressures can be lessened.

The family first should counsel together to evaluate financial needs and family priorities. All family members, especially older children and parents, need to work together with a healthy attitude toward work. President David O. McKay gave the following counsel: "Learn to like your work . . . [and] say, 'This is my work, my glory, not my doom.' God has blessed us with the privilege of working. When he said, 'Earn thy bread by the sweat of thy brow,' he gave [us] a blessing. Men and women have . . . accepted it. Too much leisure is dangerous. Work is a divine gift." [^15]

Ideally, the husband's primary work would be in the workplace while the wife's essential efforts would be concentrated in the home. President Benson and other Church leaders have counseled the women of the Church to stay at home with their children if possible. The mother's role in educating, guiding, and nurturing the children is especially critical in contemporary times. Her direction in providing a safe, clean, and loving environment is vital for the whole family, particularly to provide a counterbalance to the weight of evil that children must face today.

Unfortunately, in our present-day society, many women must work outside the home. In such cases, every family member needs to sacrifice and cooperate so that primary family functions and values can be maintained. Such sacrifices should not be required just so the family can keep up with their neighbor's style of living. However, these sacrifices should be expected when there is a real need for the mother to work.

In all families, but especially for those with two working parents, there needs to be a balance of the family work load shared by all family members. Sometimes, children and even husbands erroneously look upon mother almost as a servant/slave, ready and willing to fulfill all their basic needs. For them, mother cooks all their meals, cleans their rooms and makes their beds, picks up after them, chauffeurs them around town, does all the shopping, and is always there to help. Meanwhile, the children feel free to watch TV, play games, be involved in sports and hobbies, and just have fun without learning to work. And in some families, the husband may feel he has a right to relax at home in the evening after his work while also expecting the wife to keep a full family work load in addition to her employment.

In all homes, but especially in those where the mother works outside the home, children need to share responsibility for some of the chores, and the husband can pick up an extra share of duties as well. Too much idleness can cause children to become lazy, selfish, and insensitive. By helping with family responsibilities, family members learn self-discipline, service, and cooperation, and everyone in the family benefits.

The spiritual and emotional needs of the family should always have priority over the monetary values of a supplemental income. Sometimes increased thriftiness and wise budgeting can lessen or eliminate the need for the mother to work, especially while young children are still in the home. After family needs and work load are balanced, then the mother can concentrate on her professional development.

To further help her and her family, she could consider support and involvement with such employment situations as these: flexible working hours (or different work schedules for both parents) so that at least one spouse can be home as the children leave for and arrive from school, child-care facilities closely associated with and even located at work so she can spend breaks and lunchtime with preschool children, home work station opportunities where the employer may set up a computer terminal or other equipment in the home to do all or some of the work there, job sharing (splitting a job between two or more people) or permanent part-time work so that the parent has more time to care for family needs, and contract work where a person offers services to many people and companies, such as house cleaning, typing, catering, and so on. For working mothers in such situations, hard work is imperative to demonstrate that their productivity, efficiency, and value in the workplace do not diminish but actually increase while family needs and priorities are met.

Nothing Is Free

In spite of all the advertising gimmicks, nothing in life is really free. Any goods or services given to someone without cost on their part still require the time and effort of someone else, and the true but hidden cost of the goods or services will be carried by other consumers. As mentioned earlier, productivity and things of greatest value are received only after good, hard work.

We need to ask ourselves not just "What do we do at work?" but also "Why do we work?" Some people work for as much money and as many material possessions as they can acquire for as little effort as possible. They are even willing to cheat and steal to gain more. Other people want to do their fair share in society during their working years. They are willing to give honest work for their wages, and they expect others to do the same. A third category are willing to work as much for others as for themselves, especially for the family and those in need. They develop skills and build themselves and others not just for the present but for the eternities. These three types of differences are illustrated in the following story:

A visitor in a city was passing a construction site and observed three workers near him, all seated on the ground chiseling on some large stone blocks. All three appeared to be doing the same labor. When he asked them, "What are you doing?" one responded, "I'm a laborer earning a few bucks so I can buy some booze and have a party tonight." The second answered, "I'm a stone mason using my labors to build a building and provide wages for my family and my retirement fund." The third replied, "I'm a craftsman helping erect a temple where people can come and worship the Lord in a beautiful setting."

This story illustrates three people doing basically the same work but viewing it with completely different attitudes and a varying sense of pride in their efforts. What is our attitude and pride in our work? Wherever we are working, we can change our attitude, but if we have a hard time taking pride in our work, perhaps we should consider changing our employment, if possible. This is one of the reasons why Church leaders encourage Church members not to be employed in industries where the net effect of the product or activity is negative and destructive to society at large. We should approach our vocation with appreciation for what it can provide us and others.

In conclusion, the Mormon attitude toward work involves four principles: "Work is a universal obligation; work enhances the quality of life on earth; daily work has eternal consequences; and work will continue in the eternities." [^16] Latter-day Saints receive multiple blessings as they labor industriously to improve their physical welfare. Indeed, hard, honest, physical WORK earns self-discipline, self-respect, material rewards, and habits for spiritual growth. The Church WELFARE and social services programs assist individuals after they have tried to help themselves and have used all available family resources. When developed with understanding and diligence, a strong work ethic blesses many lives. These blessings reach beyond the obvious temporal needs of human beings and enrich us as God's children. Thus, the beehive is not just a Mormon symbol of busy community effort, it represents the sweet lasting fruits derived from honest work.

For further study, refer to the following entries:

TG: BD: EM: Almsgiving Deseret Industries Needy Emergency Preparedness Offering Self-Sufficiency Poor Social Services Welfare Ward Welfare Committees Work Welfare Work, Value of Welfare Farms Welfare Services Work, Role of

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Gospel commitment to the Church and the commandments. Effective LDS families are committed to the gospel of Jesus Christ, and they are active in the Church as demonstrated by three key barometers: attendance at Church meetings, full payment of tithing, and willingness to accept Church positions. Family prayer, family home evening, and temple attendance are also important patterns in these families. Missions, temple marriage, gospel study, and scripture reading are also emphasized. These religious ideals are not always achieved, but they are encouraged in strong LDS families. In essence, effectual Mormon families feel that their commitment to the gospel is more than verbal—it requires active involvement.
[^2] Positive environment of love, care, and unity. The motto "Families are forever" is often seen in framed stitchwork and on automobile stickers of LDS families. Conscientious LDS parents recognize that their responsibility goes beyond nourishing and clothing their children; they desire to nurture and rear their children with fostering care. They treat their offspring as precious children of God who have been entrusted to their stewardship. Family members feel a sense of love and belonging—the children especially feel they are wanted, integral members of the family. Family members also try to spend both quantity and quality time together, particularly as parents and older siblings work, talk, teach, study, and play with the younger children. Their support of each other is not always complete since it requires planning, effort, and personal sacrifice, but they strive to provide it because of the importance and eternal nature of the family.
[^3] Clear communication of family expectations, goals, and concerns. Not only do the parents spend a good deal of time talking with their children, but the children are open and free in their conversations with each other. The talking does not need to be serious or lengthy; it can be time to just chat and discuss current events and school activities. Individual conversations and group discussions, along with family home evenings and family councils, communicate the high expectations and eternal goals for which the family should be striving. When critical times of decision making arise or as personal problems and concerns develop, family members should feel they can talk freely with each other about feelings, expectations, and goals.
[^4] Supportive education in secular and religious subjects. Supportive parents consider teaching as one of their most important responsibilities. They take advantage of daily teaching moments and help the children to find answers to their questions about school, secular, and gospel topics. The parents support their children's teachers as they place a high priority on reading, learning, and quality education. To provide the time for this learning, effective LDS families watch less than half as much television as the national average, and they tend to be selective in their television viewing. Thus many home-centered learning hours and opportunities are shared with each other with varying degrees of success.
[^5] Affectionate reinforcement of personal value and successes. Verbal and physical expressions of love and affection are commonplace in solid LDS families. Family members express praise and approval of each other and their individual and collective accomplishments. Love can be expressed through open signs of affection, such as hugging, or through more subtle means, such as service and help for each other. Other kinds of affection are also important, such as forgiving each other, being patient and willing to accommodate others' schedules and needs, teasing and playing with each other, and exhibiting a sense of humor. In spite of occasional disappointments, each family member generally feels comfortable and welcome in the family, knowing that his or her self-worth and individuality are appreciated.
[^6] Strong bonding and support between parents and children. The parents have developed a good relationship with each other, and the strengths of their union become a role model for the whole family. This strong bonding requires effort on all three levels of human relationships discussed earlier in this chapter (affection, joint-service as helpmates, and mutual esteem). Although their marriage is not perfect, they are willing to work on improving it through trust, love, and communication. Because they usually are able to work hard together as a team, they are committed to each other and to their joint expectations for the family. The stability and tone of the parents' relationship reflect directly on the quality of home life and the general well-being of the children.
[^7] Firm but fair discipline for infractions of family rules. Almost all effective LDS families have few specific rules or long lists of particular requirements, but they do have general family guidelines with high expectations. Among the general rules they usually share are these three: treat each family member with respect, let the parents know where you are going and when you will return, and be honest and dependable. Such guidelines become the family life-style, reinforced both through positive teaching moments (such as individual counseling, family home evenings, and family councils) and through necessary discipline.
[^9] Family identity with extended relatives and the community. A base of support extends beyond the immediate family, and family activities often extend beyond the family into the community. The family interacts with extended family members through correspondence, visits, and family reunions. Especially in times of need, extended families pull together to help face problems. Those who can do so also join together at times of family celebrations, such as baptisms, missionary farewells and homecomings, marriages, funeral services, and other similar occasions. In addition, these families do not isolate themselves from the world but try to be involved in a variety of activities at work, school, church, and in the community. They often support and help each other in sports, music, Scouting, drama, and other activities. In other words, they reach out to the family first for help and support while demonstrating a willingness to assist and be involved with others, both extended relatives and community members.
[^10] Problems handled with creativity, sensitivity, and vision. Effective LDS families are not freed from adversity, health problems, wayward children, financial setbacks, and other difficulties. But rather than dividing or weakening under these afflictions, they combine their resources and energy to solve the problems and to bend with adversity without breaking. As they learn to endure together, they develop empathy for those struggling under trying circumstances. They seek for and respond to advice from others and inspiration from above to meet challenges. They also try to look beyond the immediate difficulties at the long-range priorities and values they must develop. They sense the Lord's help as they exercise their faith, strengthen their patience, and struggle through problems together.
[^12] Quotations are from the Heritage Foundation's journal Policy Review as cited in The Daily Herald, Feb. 12, 1992, A1-2; italics added.
[^13] Ibid.
[^14] See Welfare Services Guide for Priesthood Leaders and WSRH for further information on these Church programs.
[^15] ''Man Is That He Might Have Joy,'' CN, Aug. 8, 1951, p. 4.
[^16] EM, 4:1585.
