Victor L. Ludlow, Principles and Practices of the Restored Gospel ( 1992)

Chapter 30

Families Can Be Forever

When under attack, some animals develop protective barriers by forming a circle of defense. For example, musk oxen, with their broad shoulders, massive heads, and sharp horns establish an impenetrable, outer perimeter to defend against timber wolves. Only the weak or foolish animals who separate themselves from the herd become vulnerable to the wolf pack. Likewise, pioneer settlers moving across the plains drew their wagons into a circle each night to protect themselves. Similarly, the ancient Israelites formed a large circular community with twelve tribes on the outside and the Levites with the Tabernacle and the Ark of the Covenant on the inside. In these examples, the young and more defenseless individuals stayed inside with whatever else was most valuable.

The family provides the same function as rallying around in a circle—both are natural defense mechanisms. Individuals turn to the family for help in times of confusion and tribulation. The family is often considered to be a miniature reflection of society at large, particularly because the foundation of all human and societal relations originates with the family. In primitive societies, the family was the main social structure that protected family members, bound the community together, and provided most of its productivity. In modern society, families are a source of both weakness and strength. Many societal problems confronting us stem from weak, disturbed family situations. But as society has become more complex, and as some family functions have altered, one primary role of the family has remained—providing a peaceful haven for its members.

The Community Value of Families

Families should provide more than physical protection; they also need to guard their members against the social and moral evils surrounding them. President David O. McKay stressed this role when he noted that "a child has the right to feel that in his home he has a place of refuge, a place of protection from the dangers and evils of the outside world. Family unity and integrity are necessary to supply this need." [^1] The family can offer a peaceful haven as individuals under attack from worldly pressures seek safety. As older, stronger, and more experienced family members give protection, counsel, and aid to other family members in need, the family and society are benefited.

In more complex, modern societies, the family's value becomes less obvious because schooling and employment spread family members outside the home and throughout the community. As family members work in different places of employment, a family role of "working together" becomes minor. Nevertheless, the family's influence in the social structure remains very important because it still establishes much of the emotional, social, moral, and spiritual environment of society.

Families are more than a defense or refuge—they also provide many assets to the community at large. A developed, productive family can be compared to a bustling town or city neighborhood and the local structures that carry out community functions. Like a hotel, motel, or inn, the family home or apartment provides shelter and a place to rest. Like a bank, the family provides financial assistance and resources to its members. Similar to a hospital or clinic, the home is a place for the healing of physical and emotional wounds. Like many bustling shops and stores, the family provides food, clothes, appliances, and other goods. Comparable to a school, the family stimulates the intellectual development while teaching basic communication and social skills. Similar to government offices, the family gives control and direction by providing necessary moral priorities and modes of discipline. Finally, like a church, the family gives spiritual direction to its members. If all these local institutions and family functions are being provided, the whole community profits and each individual enjoys a compatible social environment.

Human Relationships within the Family

The Greek philosopher Aristotle recognized several millennia ago that human relationships are based upon three levels of association: pleasure, utility, and esteem. These three levels are most obvious in a couple's relationship. When a man and a woman are attracted to each other, fall in love, and marry, they experience physical pleasure and enjoy the emotional interaction of being together. As their relationship develops, they see the strengths that each brings to their union, and they recognize the utility, or practical value, in their social development. They realize they must work together as a team to foster their relationship and rear a family. As their association matures, they grow in esteem, appreciating more fully the goodness in each other and the value in their association. In other words, partners in a lasting marriage need to be genuine lovers, sincere helpmates, and lasting friends.

These three levels also encompass the children within a family. On the pleasure level, children should be reared in a physical and emotional environment where they are nurtured and loved. On the utility level, the family should meet the children's basic needs, fostering their social and intellectual development and helping them become productive members of society. And on the esteem level, a value system of moral and spiritual principles should teach them that they are children of a loving God who expects them to love and help others. President David O. McKay emphasized these three areas of child development: "Fundamentally, our characters are formed in the home. The family is a divine organization. Man's greatest duty in that family is to rear boys and girls possessing health of body, vigor of mind, and higher even than these, a Christ-like character. Home is the factory where these products are made." [^2] Ideally, parents will reinforce these three levels of health, development, and spirituality in their association with their children.

Others, such as relatives, friends, and Church members, can also supplement these relationships. Parents and adult friends need to nourish the body and psyche of children, build their personality and mind, and respect their unique souls and eternal spirits. As children are nurtured, educated, and cherished, they feel love. As they strengthen their relationships with others, especially parents and family members, they value their self-worth. Children raised in such a nurturing environment will almost always become beneficial members of the community.

Characteristics of Effective LDS Families

Good, righteous families do not develop by accident. Much work and inspired effort are required to produce them. An oft-repeated quote from President McKay stresses the priority of rearing a family: "No other success can compensate for failure in the home." [^3] Though no single, simple plan has been found for rearing a family, a variety of valuable guidelines have been established. Research by university professors of sociology and organizational behavior has identified several key principles in developing effective families. [^4] Additional studies by Parent Teacher Association surveys, family and marriage counselors, and ecclesiastical leaders have provided insights into the characteristics of strong LDS families. [^5] Their research findings can be summarized as follows:

The most common form of discipline is through talking and reasoning together. If talking does not produce the desired results, the next line of action is usually withdrawing some privileges, particularly those associated with the type of infraction. Sometimes physical punishment may be administered, such as slapping the hand or spanking, but it is seen as a means of last resort. Some firm control and discipline is required in rearing children, but instead of simply punishing for disobedient behavior, parents should try positive reinforcement, reasoning, rewards, restrictions, and other appropriate means with their children.

Obviously, no Mormon family is perfect. Although strong LDS families incorporate the principles mentioned above, none of them do them perfectly. Each good family is weaker in some areas than in others and tries to reach these ideals in different ways with varying levels of success. The important thing is that families work together by building upon their strengths and learning to overcome their weaknesses. Following these guidelines will develop committed, loving, and unified LDS families that will not only enrich themselves, but also benefit society.

Church Aids for the LDS Family

Most of the Church programs and curricula are developed to assist the family with their needs. Home teachers and visiting teachers are assigned to visit each family on a monthly basis and to teach, inspire, and assist the family as needed. Various classes in all age groups emphasize strengthening the family, and they help in this by providing gospel instruction, social interaction, practical learning, and opportunities for spiritual growth. Moral values taught at home are strengthened in various Church meetings and associations.

Spiritual commitment is increased through encouraging service to others, particularly to family members. As family financial crises occur and the immediate and extended family resources are depleted, the Church welfare program and fast offerings are directed to help the family. During times of health problems or hospitalization, Church members often rally to provide meals, child care, transportation, and other needs. During periods of emotional trauma, the bishop and other appropriate leaders (including the professional experts at LDS Social Services) provide counseling, moral support, and other assistance. Undeveloped or unused social skills at home are enriched and expressed though group activities, Church callings, and leadership positions. The full range of Church resources, including the auxiliary organizations and Church periodicals, assist the family to grow and progress together.

Individual Roles within the Family

In marriage, neither the husband nor the wife is more important, and both share in the family responsibilities. As children enter the family, the health and welfare of each family member is of equal importance. In the main, LDS families are patriarchal—the father is expected to assume leadership and to direct the spiritual atmosphere of the family, as well as be the primary provider for the family. Contrary to many societies where the mother assumes the major responsibility for the family's spiritual development, the LDS father should be fully committed to this family priority, though both parents are responsible for teaching their children the gospel, and important decisions are made in tandem.

The mother, as his coequal helpmate, provides her nurturing skills, educational gifts, and other talents to strengthen the whole family. She supports her husband in righteousness while he, in turn, supports her family roles, both of them following the Lord in full obedience and righteousness. As parents, they are commanded to teach their children the gospel principles and to pray and to obey God's commandments. (See D&C 68:25, 28.) They should teach by precept and by example. They should establish a role model of love and respect. Indeed, a husband and wife should join together as one into a unity comparable to Heavenly Father and Jesus Christ, who maintain separate identities and distinctive roles and relationships while working together.

Thus, the key word in parenting is partnership, and no one person acts exclusively in any role. For instance, though one may be called the leader in the home, both parents lead together. Though one may be called the homemaker, both parents function together as homemakers. They operate together. Referring again to the Godhead as an example of unity, we see that one of the roles of the Holy Ghost, who is also called the "Spirit of truth," is to guide men to "all truth." (John 16:13.) At the same time, Jesus Christ himself exemplifies truth as "the way, the truth, and the life." (John 14:6.) Though Christ himself is the Comforter, since he cannot be with us always, the Father sends the Holy Ghost, "another Comforter, that he may abide with [us] for ever." (John 14:16.) This concept of unity, of oneness, which is the goal of husband and wife, is what keeps any family system from being tyrannical, or separatist, or elitist. Keeping this in mind, then, let us examine the primary roles of the members of the traditional LDS family.

Roles of a Husband and Father

The father serves as the head of his home and family. His key roles are those of a leader, provider, and role model. He should lead the family through kindness, not force, and with humility, not arrogance. The Prophet Joseph Smith revealed some guiding principles for the husband who desires to be a righteous leader of his family. As a basic premise, a man's power should not be maintained simply because of his position as a husband, father, or priesthood holder. Instead, his influence should generate from the principles of persuasion, long-suffering, gentleness, meekness, love, kindness, knowledge, sincere development, gentle discipline, and faithfulness. (See D&C 121:40-44.) In order to receive the needed spiritual strength and inspiration, he must cultivate the three attributes of charity, faith, and virtue. (See v. 45.) Such leadership and spirituality are far more persuasive than any other kind of leadership.

As a provider, the father earns a living for his family. (See D&C 75:28.) He should assume financial responsibility to provide for the family's material needs, such as the necessary food, housing, clothing, and education, assisted by the other family members as needed. He should also provide encouragement, direction, and supervision to fulfill the family's spiritual needs, such as family prayer, family home evening, gospel study, scripture reading, gospel ordinances, and priesthood blessings. [^6] A provident man will prepare and guide the family members as they learn, grow, and serve together.

A righteous man serves as a role model for all the family members, not just his sons. His work, effort, and talents should set an example for the whole family. His faith, testimony, and righteousness should motivate family members toward spirituality. His patience, love, and service should inspire all in the family to do likewise. A wise father will also look to the ultimate example of a righteous father, even our Heavenly Father, to be a role model for him and his own family. Any earthly father who patterns his life after God will be a help and strength for his family.

Roles of a Wife and Mother

Similarly, the main expectations of the wife in an LDS family are to be a mother, teacher, and role model. President David O. McKay said that motherhood is a woman's noblest calling. Motherhood is a sacred partnership with Heavenly Father in bringing his spirit children into the world [^7]—a great, creative blessing that only women can enjoy. President McKay also taught that "motherhood is the greatest potential influence either for good or ill in human life. The mother's image is the first that stamps itself on the unwritten page of the young child's mind. It is her caress that first awakens a sense of security; her kiss, the first realization of affection; her sympathy and tenderness, the first assurance that there is love in the world." A mother who successfully nurtures and raises her children "deserves the highest honor that man can give, and the choicest blessings of God." [^8]

A mother's greatest service as a teacher does not usually come while helping a child with homework. Family counselors tell us that children experience their most dynamic and important learning within their first few years. Long before the child attends school, a mother should have conveyed the feeling of love, the power of truth, and the value of honesty. A wise mother will teach children the importance of self-worth, diligence, and fair play. Not that she should neglect teaching children to read or do math, but a mother's most important teachings are the ethical and moral values and the spiritual truths of life. Her children can be like the two thousand warriors of Helaman who attributed their greatness to the teachings of their mothers. Their mothers did not teach them how to be successful soldiers; they taught their sons to be faithful, God-fearing, honest, brave, and trustworthy. (See Alma 53:16-23; 56:47-48.) Such women of testimony and conviction are great teachers in Christ's kingdom, both of their own children and other children of God.

Mothers serve also as natural role models in the family. As she provides a pleasant, healthy environment in the home for her husband and children, a mother exemplifies the care and concern we should have for others. As she shares her time and domestic talents in giving the home a taste of heaven on earth, a wife demonstrates the good that can be produced here and now. As she defends the family and community against unrighteousness, a woman shows the importance of vigilance in the cause of truth and right. A righteous daughter of God is a noble example and inspiration for all.

As seen in these brief descriptions, both husband and wife have important, complementary roles in the family. An ideal family needs different but equal partners. As Elder Boyd K. Packer taught, "The separate natures of man and woman were designed by the Father of us all to fulfill the purposes of the gospel plan. . . . Men and women have complementary, not competing, responsibilities. There is difference but not inequity. Intelligence and talent favor both of them." [^9]

Roles of Children in a Family

Children share some responsibility in building happy families. In one of the Ten Commandments, the Lord commanded children to honor their father and mother. (See Ex. 20:12.) The best way to honor someone is to love and respect them. The scriptures also tell children to "obey your parents in the Lord: for this is right." (Eph. 6:1.) Modern Church leaders have admonished children to learn righteous obedience to God's commandments and family guidelines. In addition, they have admonished children to try to cooperate with other family members in sharing family and home duties and to help keep the house or apartment neat, clean, and safe. They can develop responsibility in getting themselves out of bed and to school or work on time. Essentially, they can learn to lend their energy and effort in strengthening the family. [^10]

Nontraditional Families

As ideal as these father and mother expectations are, the fact is that as many as one-half of LDS families cannot even begin to match the ideal because they are not two-parent families or they are families without children. Some of these are older families where the children have grown up and left on their own, or only one or two older teenagers remain. In other families, one of the parents has either died or left the family. The family members who are left are fairly independent but still lack the companionship, wisdom, and stability of the missing parent. In some cases, families have been started out of wedlock by single parents, some of whom are LDS and others who join the Church. In other cases, couples cannot have children, or they wait many years before a child is born into their home or they adopt a child. There are also many families with children in which one of the parents either is not a member of the Church or is inactive, indifferent, or even antagonistic toward the Church.

These kinds of families find it extremely difficult to develop all the characteristics of effective LDS families mentioned earlier. Single-parent families need especially diligent home and visiting teachers to help provide the missing strengths and role models. Other Church programs, particularly the Scouting and Young Women programs for the youth, and leaders, such as course instructors and advisors, can also be of invaluable help so that all family members can still develop and progress as our Heavenly Father desires.

Another type of incomplete LDS family is apparent in many areas of the world. It is a family without parents during the work hours because both parents are fully employed. The impact of having both parents work is not as strong if the parents can alternate their work schedules so that at least one of them is at home most of the time, or if all the children are in school during most of the working hours (although these "latchkey children" still face some noteworthy challenges). Families with younger children requiring baby-sitting and child care are placed under greater stress, especially if there are no grandparents and extended family members to help fill the void. In any of these situations, close Church members and good neighbors can help bridge some gaps and provide the necessary adult guidance to help out.

Apparently many modern families are reverting back to family patterns common in earlier centuries where both parents were heavily involved in working their farm or small business. The children also started to work at an early age to help the family. Extended family and neighbors were generous to help in times of emergency, and thus the basic family needs were fulfilled. The difference is that the family today is not working together in the fields or small business, but father and mother go their separate directions to work, and the older children may also have part-time jobs. The exception would be a family working together in a family business enterprise. The varied vocations can fracture the family unity unless careful planning and joint effort are achieved.

For such working families, regular family councils with open discussion and careful explanation of family and individual expectations will help moderate the stress and pull the family together. Children not working outside the home can be expected to help more in household responsibilities. All should not be solemn duty and heavy responsibility, however; the parents should insure that the children still have their time for fun with their young peers, and the family should experience their own fun and recreational times together. Hopefully, the time and effects of having both parents work can be lessened so that the family can experience the full advantage of a family environment.

Finally, there are those LDS adults who are unmarried and without any children and thus lack many of the challenges and associations experienced by families. For them, meaningful professional development, full activity and service in the Church (including the Single Adult activities), and interaction with extended family members can provide some of the personal, social, and spiritual benefits of involvement in a full, immediate family.

In all these cases of traditional or nontraditional families, the Church programs are designed to strengthen the individual and the family. [^11] Since all families and individuals in the Church are imperfect and face a variety of challenges, families with greater needs should especially emphasize full Church involvement in order to assist each person in the best use of abilities, energy, and resources. In this role, the Church becomes an extended family, providing emotional and spiritual resources otherwise unavailable for a struggling family or individual. With these resources, families large and small, whole and disjointed, can develop strong social and religious bonds while family members strengthen their spirituality. As each family member develops faith and remains obedient to God's commandments, he or she strengthens commitment as a disciple of Christ and renders greater service to the family. Thus, one important goal of life on earth—developing individual spiritual testimony and power—is achieved in spite of less-than-ideal family circumstances.

Individual Worth and Growth within the Eternal Family

The family serves not only as a refuge and an institution of learning for children, but also as the prototype of the ideal spiritual environment that exists only in the celestial kingdom. As a small nuclear unit, the family helps us to know and serve a few other individuals who are our spirit brothers and sisters. As an extension of God's family, our earthly family helps us draw nearer to other children of God and, through this involvement, draw nearer to God and become more like him. This experience then expands through our interaction with relatives, neighbors, and others in the Church and community, and we begin to see and appreciate the type of social organization that exists in God's celestial kingdom. As we are righteous and faithful, our families can become eternal units, segments of Heavenly Father's social organization.

The family is the fundamental social unit for people on earth and in God's celestial realms. The blessings of the gospel and the central functions of the Church revolve around the family. As temple marriages and solid family relationships are established on earth, the Holy Spirit promises that families can continue into eternity. As a husband and wife are faithful to their temple marriage and administer their family affairs in unity with the guidelines of the Holy Spirit, "they will continue as co-creators in God's celestial kingdom through the eternities." [^12]

As the spirit children of heavenly parents and the physical children of mortal parents, we have an opportunity to emulate the heavenly family environment here on earth, establishing a little "heaven on earth" for our family. The patterns of our family life here and the attitudes and behavior that we develop now will become the patterns of our social interaction and our characters in the future. Thus we need to strengthen our families to achieve our full potential, helping others to do the same. The Church and its programs are to aid the family in its ultimate function—to help each child of God toward his or her ultimate destiny. In other words, the family exists as much to help us as we exist to help the family. Like other areas of service, when we make the family a priority and strengthen it, we will receive much more than we will ever give, becoming more fulfilled and complete children of our heavenly parents.

In summary, the FAMILY, as a potentially eternal union ordained of God, provides the best environment to learn, grow, develop, and serve in our society; and thus the Church supports the family through various instructions, programs, and activities. Since, in President McKay's words, "No success can compensate for failure in the home," Latter-day Saints should work diligently to strengthen their families and assist others to do likewise. As they do so, they are best able to protect the family members, perfect themselves and others, and prepare for a celestial community of never-ending love.

For further study, refer to the following entries:

TG: BD: EM: Children Divorce Birth Control Family Family Children Family, Children, Duties of Marriage Divorce Family, Responsibilities toward Family Family, Eternal Family Homo Evening Family, Love Within Family Organizations Family, Patriarchal Fatherhood

Marriage, Marry Marriage Men, Roles of Motherhood Procreation Women, Roles of

---
Notas:
[^1] Gospel commitment to the Church and the commandments. Effective LDS families are committed to the gospel of Jesus Christ, and they are active in the Church as demonstrated by three key barometers: attendance at Church meetings, full payment of tithing, and willingness to accept Church positions. Family prayer, family home evening, and temple attendance are also important patterns in these families. Missions, temple marriage, gospel study, and scripture reading are also emphasized. These religious ideals are not always achieved, but they are encouraged in strong LDS families. In essence, effectual Mormon families feel that their commitment to the gospel is more than verbal—it requires active involvement.
[^2] Positive environment of love, care, and unity. The motto "Families are forever" is often seen in framed stitchwork and on automobile stickers of LDS families. Conscientious LDS parents recognize that their responsibility goes beyond nourishing and clothing their children; they desire to nurture and rear their children with fostering care. They treat their offspring as precious children of God who have been entrusted to their stewardship. Family members feel a sense of love and belonging—the children especially feel they are wanted, integral members of the family. Family members also try to spend both quantity and quality time together, particularly as parents and older siblings work, talk, teach, study, and play with the younger children. Their support of each other is not always complete since it requires planning, effort, and personal sacrifice, but they strive to provide it because of the importance and eternal nature of the family.
[^3] Clear communication of family expectations, goals, and concerns. Not only do the parents spend a good deal of time talking with their children, but the children are open and free in their conversations with each other. The talking does not need to be serious or lengthy; it can be time to just chat and discuss current events and school activities. Individual conversations and group discussions, along with family home evenings and family councils, communicate the high expectations and eternal goals for which the family should be striving. When critical times of decision making arise or as personal problems and concerns develop, family members should feel they can talk freely with each other about feelings, expectations, and goals.
[^4] Supportive education in secular and religious subjects. Supportive parents consider teaching as one of their most important responsibilities. They take advantage of daily teaching moments and help the children to find answers to their questions about school, secular, and gospel topics. The parents support their children's teachers as they place a high priority on reading, learning, and quality education. To provide the time for this learning, effective LDS families watch less than half as much television as the national average, and they tend to be selective in their television viewing. Thus many home-centered learning hours and opportunities are shared with each other with varying degrees of success.
[^5] Affectionate reinforcement of personal value and successes. Verbal and physical expressions of love and affection are commonplace in solid LDS families. Family members express praise and approval of each other and their individual and collective accomplishments. Love can be expressed through open signs of affection, such as hugging, or through more subtle means, such as service and help for each other. Other kinds of affection are also important, such as forgiving each other, being patient and willing to accommodate others' schedules and needs, teasing and playing with each other, and exhibiting a sense of humor. In spite of occasional disappointments, each family member generally feels comfortable and welcome in the family, knowing that his or her self-worth and individuality are appreciated.
[^6] Strong bonding and support between parents and children. The parents have developed a good relationship with each other, and the strengths of their union become a role model for the whole family. This strong bonding requires effort on all three levels of human relationships discussed earlier in this chapter (affection, joint-service as helpmates, and mutual esteem). Although their marriage is not perfect, they are willing to work on improving it through trust, love, and communication. Because they usually are able to work hard together as a team, they are committed to each other and to their joint expectations for the family. The stability and tone of the parents' relationship reflect directly on the quality of home life and the general well-being of the children.
[^7] Firm but fair discipline for infractions of family rules. Almost all effective LDS families have few specific rules or long lists of particular requirements, but they do have general family guidelines with high expectations. Among the general rules they usually share are these three: treat each family member with respect, let the parents know where you are going and when you will return, and be honest and dependable. Such guidelines become the family life-style, reinforced both through positive teaching moments (such as individual counseling, family home evenings, and family councils) and through necessary discipline.
[^8] Strong work ethic with industry and honesty. Learning to work is a desired family value. Almost all successful parents expect their children to work around the house with some household chores. They set examples of industry and teach their children how to work by giving them family responsibilities. While no single method is effective in motivating children to willingly assist in family chores, most will respond as their roles are explained, particularly if they have some choice in which responsibilities they will receive. Older children with heavy school commitments or outside part-time work often do less work in the home, but they are still expected to assist. As they work, they are expected to be honest in their dealings with others and to give diligent labor for their allowance or wages. Mormons usually have a good reputation in their communities for industrious labor and honesty in the workplace.
[^9] Family identity with extended relatives and the community. A base of support extends beyond the immediate family, and family activities often extend beyond the family into the community. The family interacts with extended family members through correspondence, visits, and family reunions. Especially in times of need, extended families pull together to help face problems. Those who can do so also join together at times of family celebrations, such as baptisms, missionary farewells and homecomings, marriages, funeral services, and other similar occasions. In addition, these families do not isolate themselves from the world but try to be involved in a variety of activities at work, school, church, and in the community. They often support and help each other in sports, music, Scouting, drama, and other activities. In other words, they reach out to the family first for help and support while demonstrating a willingness to assist and be involved with others, both extended relatives and community members.
[^10] Problems handled with creativity, sensitivity, and vision. Effective LDS families are not freed from adversity, health problems, wayward children, financial setbacks, and other difficulties. But rather than dividing or weakening under these afflictions, they combine their resources and energy to solve the problems and to bend with adversity without breaking. As they learn to endure together, they develop empathy for those struggling under trying circumstances. They seek for and respond to advice from others and inspiration from above to meet challenges. They also try to look beyond the immediate difficulties at the long-range priorities and values they must develop. They sense the Lord's help as they exercise their faith, strengthen their patience, and struggle through problems together.
[^11] See chapter 28 for a discussion of fast offerings and their uses.
[^12] Quotations are from the Heritage Foundation's journal Policy Review as cited in The Daily Herald, Feb. 12, 1992, A1-2; italics added.
