Victor L. Ludlow, Principles and Practices of the Restored Gospel ( 1992)

Part 5:

Christ's Kingdom on Earth

Footnotes

Chapter 31

Valleys of Apostasy and Mountains of Restoration

An ideal trip through any Garden-of-Eden countryside should include a leisurely drive over rolling hills and through fertile plains interspersed with forests, lakes, and quaint villages. Any long trip is made more interesting by changes in scenery, especially if the passing countryside has dramatic panoramic views. On the other hand, a trip may seem boring where the scenery remains flat, dull, infertile, and unchanging. Civilizations and personalities are as varied as any topography. Studying humanity and the history of God's dealings with his children on this earth is like traveling through a countryside that constantly changes but repeats certain patterns. Seeing how Heavenly Father has blessed and disciplined our ancestors helps us understand his contemporary efforts in our behalf.

The recorded behavior of mankind likewise presents a changing tapestry of events and personalities. Sometimes so much has happened in short periods that the historian cannot remember and process all that has transpired. When life seems to be a constant maze of change, the natural step is to search for consistency amid the turmoil. In an attempt to understand our past, historians have devised patterns and models of human history, focusing on the factors that shape individuals and nations, including environment, economics, politics, religion, technology, and important leaders, among others. As nations and civilizations have arisen, flourished, and diminished, historians have recognized trends and patterns. They plot the trends using charts, lists, and diagrams to show the key events and links in the flow of history. Their views of the cause and effect of historical trends become stimulating food for thought as students of history look for benchmark events of the past.

Another viewpoint of humanity is seen through the eyes of the prophets, many of whom also wrote history. The historical portions of the scriptures provide an elevated perspective of the past events of mankind. Indeed, one purpose of scriptures is to teach the House of Israel "what great things the Lord hath done for their fathers." (Title page, Book of Mormon.) Instead of seeing history primarily in a horizontal dimension, the prophets often portray events on a vertical axis, measuring the cyclic periods of humility and religiosity and the times of pride and depravity by how close or far they are from God. Within the framework of the restored gospel, the whole history of the world—from Adam to the present—is viewed as one recurring instance of spiritual growth and decline after another. Certain key factors and personalities also seem to be instrumental in this viewpoint. The inspired view of the prophets lets us see the grand scheme of earthly history and the ways our lives fit into it.

Gospel Dispensations through the Ages

Throughout history, the Lord has willingly dispensed his word to his children to the degree that they are willing to hear it. When a new generation is willing to receive much more spiritual enlightenment and prophetic leadership than their immediate ancestors, then a new dispensation has begun. A dispensation is a time period "in which the gospel of Jesus Christ is administered by holy prophets called and ordained by God to deliver his message to the inhabitants of the world." [^1] The word "dispensation" derives from the Latin roots dis + pendere, meaning "to weigh out in portions." As the gospel truths are weighed and given out in new, significant portions, a new spiritual dispensation begins. This pattern of dispensations beginning and ending can be illustrated by a series of mountain ranges with peaks of varying heights and valleys of various depths. These represent the stages of spiritual enlightenment or apostasy among different world peoples at different times.

Stages of Spiritual Enlightenment.

As the mountain ranges of spiritual history show, some peoples and ages have been more willing to accept the truth than others, confirming the word of God to Nephi: "Blessed are those who hearken unto my precepts, and lend an ear unto my counsel, for they shall learn wisdom; for unto him that receiveth I will give more." (2 Ne. 28:30.) Thus, when people receive and apply God's word, they receive more and more—growing and maturing in spiritual power. Conversely, the prophets also warn that "from them that shall say, We have enough, from them shall be taken away even that which they have." (2 Ne. 28:30.) As people reject God's truths, and as the prophets and the priesthood are withdrawn from them, they begin to lose the essential gospel principles and ordinances of salvation. The spiritual blessings and powers are returned to heaven and held in reserve to be restored or "weighed out" again later under divine direction when a new dispensation is founded.

The term dispensation appears four times in the Bible, and only in the epistles of Paul. (See 1 Cor. 9:17; Eph. 1:10; 3:2; Col. 1:25.) It is translated from a Greek word, oikonomia, describing the administration or stewardship of a household or group. Other English terms deriving from the same Greek root are ecology, economy, and ecumenical. A dispensation conveys the idea of an extended family or large group working together under centralized leadership. In a gospel dispensation, the prophetic leaders, as dedicated, authorized stewards of the Lord, administer the spiritual affairs of the group. As Moses quickly learned, wise stewards delegate much of the administration and instruction to other diligent workers in the group. [^2] (See Ex. 18:25.) As the group loses its cohesiveness, the dispensation comes to an end.

The Seven Major Dispensations

Due to apostasy and fragmentation, earlier prophetic dispensations declined and weakened until the Lord called new prophets as stewards of restored truth and renewed priesthood power. The mountains outlined in the foreground of the first illustration represent the seven major dispensations of the gospel among the children of Adam and Eve, as recorded in the Old and New Testaments and in modern revelation. The founders of these dispensations were noted patriarchs, prophets, and priesthood leaders. Each dispensation is often identified according to its principal prophet: Adam (see Moses 5:58-59), Enoch (see Moses 6:26-68; 7), Noah (see Moses 8), Abraham (see Gal. 3:6-8, 18; Abr. 2:6-11), Moses (see Ex. 3:7-12; D&C 110:11), Jesus Christ and his apostles in the meridian of time (see Matt. 16:18-19; 18:18; D&C 27:12-13; 128:20), and Joseph Smith in the fullness of times (see D&C 112:14-32).

Time line and the titles of the different dispensations.

A gospel dispensation typically starts with a selected family or group who receives the charge to take the gospel teachings and priesthood blessings to other specific peoples. (See Abr. 2:11; Matt. 28:19-20.) Correct teachings and practices have rarely been universally disseminated; instead, some peoples have responded to God's directions while most nations have languished in ignorance. Even Jesus Christ's admonition, "Go ye therefore, and teach all nations" (Matt. 28:19), was limited in its fulfillment by where his disciples went in the Roman Empire, and even today, Christians have not yet taken the teachings of the Lord to every nation. Eventually, some ethical teachings of the prophets and some moral values as taught in the scriptures have penetrated most cultures of the earth, but much missionary work remains. Still, the impact of each dispensation has been profound, and several achievements of the earlier ones are worth noting.

Adam and Eve received the commandment to multiply and replenish the earth. (See Gen. 1:28.) They were later given instructions to teach the gospel to their children and to prepare them to receive the saving ordinances. We know from modern revelation that the first man, Adam, received the priesthood, was "caught away by the Spirit of the Lord" to be baptized, and received the Holy Ghost. (Moses 6:64-66.) Thus, the first principles and ordinances of the gospel—faith, repentance, baptism, and the gift of the Holy Ghost—have formed the core of revealed truth from the very first dispensation. From the beginning, however, a major portion of Adam's posterity rejected the gospel and fell into apostasy. (See Moses 5:51-59.) Through Seth's posterity, the gospel was handed down from generation to generation in a patriarchal order.

Among the faithful of Adam's seed was Enoch, who "as he journeyed, the Spirit of God descended out of heaven, and abode upon him." (Moses 6:26.) The Lord called Enoch to preach repentance to those who would listen, and so great was his faith that "the mountains fled, even according to his command; and the rivers of water were turned out of their course; . . . and all nations feared greatly." (Moses 7:13.) In his visions, Enoch beheld the inhabitants of the earth and their history down to the second coming of the Son of Man.

Enoch initiated missionary work and converted many people from throughout the land. He gathered them together into a newly founded city known as the "City of Holiness, even Zion." (Moses 7:19.) He and his people not only lived the first principles and ordinances of the gospel—as did the righteous in Adam's dispensation—but they also formed the ideal political, economic, and social order of a Zion society, "because they were of one heart and one mind, and dwelt in righteousness; and there was no poor among them." (Moses 7:18.) The people of Enoch practiced the law of consecration, having all spiritual and temporal things in common, which is the highest law of the gospel and the culminating covenant of the holy temple. The supreme status of Enoch's Zion is represented by the highest peak in the chart's primary mountain range.

Because the people of Zion lived the order of heaven on earth, they were literally "too good for this world" and were taken from it, closing the dispensation of Enoch: "It came to pass that Zion was not, for God received it up into his own bosom; and from thence went forth the saying, Zion is fled." (Moses 7:69.)

The Lord opened a third dispensation, calling Noah to preach repentance to those whom Zion left behind. "God saw that the wickedness of men had become great in the earth; and every man was lifted up in the imagination of the thoughts of his heart, being only evil continually." (Moses 8:22.) The people tried to kill Noah and would not repent, so Noah and his family (eight people) alone were saved from the great flood that cleansed the earth from apostasy.

Noah's posterity soon spread throughout Asia, Africa, and Europe, where most of them corrupted or forgot the righteous teachings of their fathers. Ham's descendants settled in western Asia and Africa, controlling the rich Nile River civilization of Egypt and the Mediterranean coast of the fertile crescent, from which the idolatrous Canaanites would spring. The seed of Japheth, whose descendants included many of the Gentile nations, settled more into Europe and central Asia. Shem, whose lineage carried on the knowledge of the gospel and the records of the scriptures, settled in southwest Asia, including most areas of the fertile crescent and the Arabian peninsula. (See Gen. 9:18-27; 10.) Most of Shem's seed also apostatized from the truth, especially after their language was confounded at the tower of Babel. (See Gen. 11:6-9.)

Among the descendants of Shem was Abraham, who left the idolatrous city of Ur of Chaldea (near Babylon) where his family had settled. He "sought for the blessings of the fathers, and the right whereunto [he] should be ordained to administer the same." (Abr. 1:2.) Because of Abraham's great faith and righteousness, he received the priesthood from Melchizedek, who had himself received it from his ancestors, all the way back to Adam. (See D&C 84:14-16.) God revealed to Abraham great doctrines of the eternal nature of time, space, matter, and of the eternal existence and nature of intelligences, especially their involvement in the premortal heavenly councils. (See Abr. 3.)

In addition, the Lord entered into a special covenant relation with Abraham and promised him three great blessings: (1) his posterity would be as numerous as the stars in the heavens, (2) they would inherit the land of Canaan (Palestine), and (3) "in [him], and in [his] seed after [him] . . . shall all the families of the earth be blessed, even with the blessings of the Gospel, which are the blessings of salvation, even of life eternal." (Abr. 2:11.) As the Lord's chosen people, Abraham's posterity was to be the light to the world as they increased in numbers and influence. These blessings were deferred for several generations, however, and the sons of Jacob (Israel) settled in Egypt during a great famine, where their posterity mingled with the corrupt Egyptian culture and eventually became captives there. (See Gen. 46:2-3; Ex. 1:8-11.)

After Moses led the children of Israel from bondage in Egypt, he climbed Mount Sinai to receive the Lord's revelations for his dispensation. From Joseph Smith's Inspired Version of the Holy Scriptures (JST), we learn that the first time Moses ascended the mount, he received the fullness of the gospel, as had earlier prophets. Upon returning to camp and finding Israel worshiping an idol, Moses broke the first stone tablets, upon which God's laws were written. Because Israel could not live the higher law of the gospel, the Lord then revealed a lesser law of "carnal commandments"—the law of Moses. (See Ex. 34:1-2, JST.)

Thus, the higher (Melchizedek) priesthood was withheld from most of the Israelite men in Moses' dispensation, leaving the sons of Aaron to officiate in the "preparatory gospel" of the Aaronic priesthood until the time of Christ. (D&C 84:23-27.) Unfortunately, by 400 B.C. the Assyrians and the Babylonians had scattered most of the Israelites, and the last of the Old Testament prophets, Malachi, had finished his time of service. A new period of apostasy and spiritual darkness fell upon Israel.

The dispensations from Adam to Abraham overlapped one another; therefore, the keys of the Melchizedek priesthood passed from one living prophet to the next. (See D&C 84:6-16.) In contrast, for some four hundred years before and after the dispensation of Moses, the children of Israel had no unified, organized priesthood. Throughout the history of the Old Testament, the descendants of Adam and later the House of Israel were encumbered by varying degrees of apostasy. The prophets in the earlier dispensations were often rejected as they called the people to repentance, trying to bring spiritual enlightenment so the people of the world could enjoy gospel and priesthood blessings.

Out of the darkness of apostasy, the light of the dispensation of Jesus Christ shone forth. This dispensation of the meridian of time was heralded by John the Baptist, an Aaronic priest. Christ and his apostles attempted to restore the higher gospel to the Jews, who largely rejected it, as had their Israelite fathers in the wilderness of Sinai. The apostles then preached the gospel to the Gentiles, some of whom accepted it, and the gospel message and baptisms began to spread throughout the Roman Empire. Ideally, Christ's word and church were to have encompassed the known world of that time as the gospel was to be preached "unto the uttermost part of the earth." (Matt. 28:19; Acts 1:8.) However, the early Saints had already begun to apostatize in the apostles' day, and most Gentiles remained in darkness while missionary work faltered, apostles and Church leaders were martyred, and the early church fell into apostasy.

As the early Christian church became corrupted, the Old World entered into the centuries of the Dark Ages, a period also known as the "Great Apostasy," which continued until the final gospel restoration through the Prophet Joseph Smith in the early 1800s. After God the Father and Jesus Christ appeared to young Joseph in the spring of 1820, other angelic messengers periodically came to the prophet and gave him instruction, the priesthood, and spiritual gifts or keys of this dispensation. He further translated the Book of Mormon from ancient records, and in 1830, he organized The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, the church that Jesus himself had set up during his mortal ministry. [^3]

The dispensation of the fullness of times consists of two parts—the time of building Zion and the period of Christ's millennial reign. Zion is built as the gospel spreads throughout the earth, the Saints establish stakes of Zion and build temples, and the Lord's work rolls forth to fill the earth. [^4] The Lord himself will usher in the millennial reign as he demonstrates his great powers prior to governing the earth for a thousand years. [^5]

Two New World Dispensations

While the Bible records the seven major gospel dispensations, another scripture witnesses the Lord's doings among some descendants of Shem and Israel in the Americas. The mountains outlined in the middle ground of the first illustration represent the two dispensations in the New World, as recorded in the Book of Mormon: the Jaredites and the Lehi colony.

Two earlier American gospel dispensations.

The Ancient Colony Dispensation of the Jaredites (c. 2200-300 B.C.)

After the great flood, even as apostasy prevailed in the Old World, the Lord maintained some blessings of the gospel in the New World, the Americas. When Noah's descendants were confounded and scattered at the Tower of Babel, the Lord preserved a portion of them, led by Jared and his brother, and brought them to the New World. (See Ether 1:33, 40-43.) The Jaredite civilization, with its continuous cycle of righteousness and wickedness, illustrates the value of obeying God. Through it, we also learn the importance of the American continents in God's plans for this earth. (See 2 Ne. 1:7-8; 3 Ne. 20:22; Ether 13:2-8.) Eventually, the same "secret combinations" with Satan and the bloodthirsty oaths and wars that cursed Adam's descendants prior to the flood also destroyed the Jaredite civilization. It came to an end in the lands of North America as a new settlement of Israelites was being established toward the south. (See Ether 11:20-22; 13:19-22; 15:30-33.)

The New World Dispensation of Lehi (c. 600 B.C.-A.D. 400)

Before Jerusalem fell to Babylon, as the dispensation of Moses was rapidly declining, Lehi, a prophet contemporary to Jeremiah, also warned the Jews about their impending judgments and destruction. Lehi's family was joined by others, and they took a copy of most of the scriptural records of the Old Testament, other prophetic teachings, priesthood keys, and additional gifts of the gospel with them. The Lord subsequently led Lehi's family and their associates to the New World. Lehi's more righteous posterity, called the Nephites after one of Lehi's sons, Nephi, recorded their own scriptures and maintained the law of Moses until the dispensation of Christ. When Christ appeared in the New World after his resurrection, he conferred the higher gospel blessings on the people.

Here we reach another pinnacle in religious history, for the Nephites and Lamanites went on to form a perfect society patterned after Enoch's: "They had all things common among them; therefore there were not rich and poor, bond and free, but they were all made free, and partakers of the heavenly gift. . . . And surely there could not be a happier people among all the people who had been created by the hand of God." (4 Ne. 1:3, 16.) But after two hundred years, the society began to disintegrate, "and they began to be divided into classes; and they began to build up churches unto themselves to get gain, and began to deny the true church of Christ." (4 Ne. 1:26.) From this point onward, the Nephites continued to apostatize until they, like the Jaredites before them, were completely destroyed. The Lamanites, a people without prophets and scriptures, remained in a state of apostasy, becoming the ancestors of many of the native Americans.

Gospel Dispensations among the Ten Tribes

Beyond the second mountain range symbolizing the dispensations in the New World lies a third range. To our view, this range is mostly obscured by clouds. These mountains represent the religious history of the lost Ten Tribes of Israel, who were led away to unknown lands by the Lord after the Kingdom of Israel fell to Assyria about 721 B.C. (See 2 Kgs. 17:6; Amos 9:9; 1 Ne. 22:4.)

Gospel dispensations among the Ten Tribes.

We know little about gospel dispensations among the Ten Tribes, except that the resurrected Christ appeared to them and initiated his own dispensation among them after he visited the Nephites. (See 3 Ne. 15:20; 16:3.) We are also told that eventually a revealed record or scripture will come forth from these ancient people, giving us further details about their spiritual history. (See 2 Ne. 29:13.)

Christ also taught the Nephites that the restoration of the Ten Tribes would be a part of the final restoration of all things in the latter days. (See 3 Ne. 21:26-28.) We can assume, then, that the Ten Tribes have also undergone a "Great Apostasy," coinciding with that in the Old and New Worlds, after Christ's teachings were corrupted and his apostles were rejected by the scattered Israelites and Gentiles. [^6]

The Great Apostasy

Though mankind has suffered through many periods of apostasy, the Great Apostasy marked the first time in history that the entire world labored in spiritual darkness—a period lasting some fourteen hundred years, from A.D. 420 to 1820. Perhaps one reason for this long period of spiritual darkness is that Satan knows the general outline and some key prophecies of God's plan concerning this earth. The father of lies realizes that his reign on earth will draw to a close as the period of "falling away" ends and the Messiah's millennial era is established. (See 2 Thes. 2:3.) The devil desires that all men remain in his power through the bonds of sin and death. Since Satan was unable to foil God's plan by preventing the Savior from fulfilling his mission, his primary course of action has been to perpetuate a world of such wickedness that God's children will never be ready for a kingdom of righteousness.

It is no wonder, then, that Satan has redoubled his efforts after the dispensation of Christ to try to prevent the restoration of all things through Joseph Smith. From the time of Joseph's first vocal prayer in the Sacred Grove in 1820, which resulted in the appearance of the Father and the Son to the young prophet, Satan desperately tried to destroy the young prophet and his work. (See JS-H 1:15-16, 20, 23.) Despite great persecution against the early restored Church, the priesthood keys and saving ordinances were restored and made available to increasing numbers of peoples in many lands, and the Church continues to grow today.

Satan's final recourse, then, is to prevent individuals from accepting the Atonement and the restored gospel. For those who reject these truths, it is as though—in an individual sense—they never were accomplished. Although the gospel is preached in numerous countries, for the most part "darkness covereth the earth, and gross darkness the minds of the people." (D&C 112:23.) Even within the Church, worldliness, false doctrines, and iniquity must be continuously guarded against. [^7] As Satan introduces apostate doctrines and incomplete ordinances that will satisfy some and confuse others, he makes finding the truth as difficult as possible for individuals seeking it. He desires that the latter-day church fall into apostasy like the early Christian church did. He also desires that individuals should slide down their own paths of apostasy.

Steps to Apostasy Affecting Baptism

Since the first and primary ordinance of salvation is baptism, a brief study of the steps of apostasy as they pertain to that ordinance can illustrate the general nature of apostasy so that we can more knowledgeably resist Satan's ambitions. In the early Christian Church, the doctrine of baptism was changed through seven basic steps:

Satan has thus succeeded in Christendom to either eliminate baptism altogether, or make it so random and irregular a procedure that people cannot receive a legitimate baptism in the eyes of God. For many centuries, the practice, purpose, and power of the ordinance were completely corrupted. By the time the reforming groups, such as the Baptists, or members of the restored gospel sought to establish more correct practices, the power of the apostasy was so strong that many martyrs gave their lives before the complete, correct ordinance could again be practiced.

These same steps not only characterize the apostasy of large religious communities, such as the Jews after the Old Testament period and the Christians after the New Testament period, but they also typify the path to apostasy that most individuals follow as they leave a true and correct religion:

(1) They feel secure in the correctness of their religious beliefs and practices. (2) They make an exception for themselves for one of the commandments because of a unique set of circumstances. (3) They deviate from more and more of the accepted commandments until their misbehavior becomes standard. (4) They rationalize their own personal behavior or doctrinal interpretations and allow misrepresentations and heresies to develop. (5) They become critical of priesthood leaders and other Church members, undermining the authority of the religion, and are often excommunicated, losing all priesthood blessings. (6) They live in a state of spiritual confusion, often not affiliating with any religious denomination. (7) They are in complete apostasy—not keeping the commandments, not believing in gospel truths, and not following the Lord's prophets and servants. Indeed, they may actively fight against them. [^9]

Lest we become too critical and judgmental of the less active or nonmembers of the Church, we should remember first that any person on the path toward apostasy can stop at any of the steps and turn back toward full activity. Personal apostasy is a spiritual cancer, unpredictably yet continuously destroying the spirituality of a person. But like physical cancer, the sooner it is detected and the sooner steps are taken to counteract it, the easier it is to overcome. The key to full and complete recovery is early recognition and quick personal effort to regain spirituality. [^10] We must also remember that people in other Christian denominations who sincerely believe in Christ and have been baptized—though improperly and by one not having authority—will surely have the opportunity to undergo a legitimate baptism. If they cannot be taught and converted to the truth in mortality, that work will be done vicariously for them in holy temples so that they may accept the ordinance in the spirit world. [^11]

The Restoration of the Gospel

To bring back what was lost during each period of apostasy, a "restoration" was necessary. This restoration process usually began when some of God's children on earth desired and prayed for a deliverance from political bondage, intellectual ignorance, or spiritual darkness. God then called and instructed prophets to restore his priesthood authority, gospel teachings, and covenant practices. The period of initial restoration usually took a few years or decades before a strong foundation was laid. The spiritual development then continued through succeeding generations, depending upon the faithfulness of the people and the persistent efforts of later prophets. We are now in the advanced stages of a latter-day restoration that has followed a series of significant steps.

Steps to Restoration

Just as the early Christian church underwent certain identifiable steps to apostasy, so certain steps can be recognized in the restoration of the gospel. Not surprisingly, we can follow them in the reverse order of the Great Apostasy:

The Protestant Reformation in the sixteenth century was the second and most significant step in preparing the world for the gospel restoration to come in the nineteenth century. While Martin Luther and the early reformers did not hold the priesthood or have a complete understanding of true doctrines, the restored Church recognizes them as honorable, inspired men who tried to live biblical teachings to the best of their knowledge and ability. They helped change apostate attitudes and elevate the spirituality of those who followed them from darkness toward the light. A doctrinal statement of the First Presidency describes their efforts as follows: "The great religious leaders of the world such as Mohammed, Confucius, and the Reformers, as well as philosophers including Socrates, Plato, and others, received a portion of God's light. Moral truths were given to them by God to enlighten whole nations and to bring a higher level of understanding to individuals." [^12] The first New England converts to the restored Church—Protestants from various sects—were products of these earlier movements.

The Enlightenment, an eighteenth-century philosophical movement characterized by rationalism and a spirit of skepticism in religious and political thought, also helped break the bonds of established state religions and prepared people and countries for the gospel restoration. By the time of the Restoration, open religious dialogue and freedom of religion were necessary elements already established in the United States and other western nations.

Every individual who embraces the restored gospel must undergo a change similar to the historical one just outlined. (7) They must recognize that they are in a state of spiritual apostasy or incompleteness. (6) They need to have a humble attitude and a desire to seek out the light of truth and goodness. (5) Developing this attitude further, they search for true representatives of God (that is, his missionaries or priesthood leaders). (4) They begin to believe in the true doctrines of Christ's gospel. (3) They receive saving ordinances and spiritual gifts, especially the gift of faith. (2) True faith in the living God naturally leads them to further action and gospel commitment as they study the scriptures and follow the admonitions of Christ's authorized servants. (1) Through faithfulness, they qualify for the fullness of the temple blessings and the greatest of all spiritual gifts, eternal life—a never-ending state of heavenly bliss.

Blessings of the Restored Gospel

The Restoration opened the way for the power of God and his gospel truths to be returned to the earth. As revelations and priesthood authority were "weighed out" in abundance to the Prophet Joseph Smith, a new dispensation began. As God's steward, he received the charge to organize and administer Christ's church on earth. As one of his apostolic successors, President Gordon B. Hinckley, noted, Joseph Smith brought forth six valuable fruits or gifts as he opened this dispensation: a true knowledge of the Godhead, the Book of Mormon and other inspired scriptures, the priesthood of God with its keys and sealing powers, the doctrines of salvation that teach us the eternal purpose of life and provide temporal guidelines, the organization of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints with its profoundly simple financial system of tithing, and a witness and sacrifice of his own life, which he sealed with his blood. [^15] Joseph Smith fulfilled his prophetic destiny, ushering in the dispensation that will culminate with the millennial reign of the Savior.

Members of the Church today are able to share in the many blessings provided by the Restoration. They can enjoy blessings of the priesthood, gospel knowledge, revealed scriptures, companionship of the Holy Ghost, temple ordinances, and many other spiritual gifts. As mentioned earlier, Satan is desperately working in his last attempt to thwart God's plans by distracting God's children away from these blessings. As will be discussed in the succeeding chapters, God's priesthood is a mighty power for good as Christ's church rolls forth to fill the earth. The mission of his church is to bring us back into Heavenly Father's celestial presence. Ultimately, blessings of the Restoration will allow us to enjoy Heavenly Father's exalted glory as we rest in his presence. What a contrast that will be from the life of turmoil and strife that mankind has faced on earth over the last six thousand years.

As we look at the changing panorama of human history, we see that God's spiritual dispensations were born on prophetic mountaintops of revelation. They were forged in the deserts of trial and adversity before they began to bear spiritual fruits in the hills of Zion, where the righteous and pure in heart dwelt. Unfortunately, these societies of God's children weakened as the people slid into the valleys of pride, materialism, and idolatry. Eventually, these communities, who were to be a light to the world, fell into darkness and depravity as they became bogged in the swamps of sin. As time passed, Heavenly Father would bring forth new prophets, and the cycle would continue.

To summarize, GOSPEL DISPENSATIONS are periods of spiritual enlightenment, priesthood keys, and prophetic leadership, usually followed by times of moral decline and worldly corruption. The GREAT APOSTASY concluded the apostolic period of Christ's dispensation, following which, the GOSPEL RESTORATION to Joseph Smith opened this final dispensation of the fullness of times. The blessings of the restored gospel and priesthood are on the earth to be shared with others as we help prepare the inhabitants of the earth for Christ's millennial reign. As we take advantage of the gospel truths and priesthood blessings available to us today, we should naturally desire to join in fellowship with many others of Christ's followers so we can build his kingdom together.

For further study, refer to the following entries:

TG: BD: EM: Apostasy Dispensations Apostasy Apostasy of the Early Christian Church Restitution; Restoration Dispensation of the Fulness of Times

Dispensations of the Gospel Restoration of the Gospel First Vision Joseph Smith-History Restoration of All Things Restoration of the Gospel of

Jesus Christ Visions of Joseph Smith

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] MPLH, 1.
[^2] TPJS, 167.
[^3] DBY, 130.
[^4] TPJS, 166-67.
[^5] See chapter 3 for a discussion of the roles and work of Jesus Christ.
[^6] MPLH, 1.
[^7] A full discussion of ordinances and other priesthood blessings is found in Chapter 22.
[^9] MD, 595.
[^10] BD, 714.
[^11] See BD, 715.
[^12] See BD, 600.
[^15] Ibid., 1-3 to 1-4.
