Victor L. Ludlow, Principles and Practices of the Restored Gospel ( 1992)

Chapter 32

Sharing God's Power on Earth

Imagine the confusion that would result if you lived in a society where members of the local police force never wore uniforms or carried badges or any form of identification. Soon anybody could claim to be a police officer, and you would not know if he or she were telling the truth, especially if no government agencies could quickly verify if someone was indeed a police officer. In such a setting, what would you do if you were driving, a "police officer" directed you to the curbside, and he ordered you to pay him a fine for some supposed traffic violation? In such a chaotic, uncertain situation, would you pay a traffic fine to this officer, especially if you felt it was unfair?

In order to avoid such anarchy, legal police officers usually wear distinctive uniforms and/or carry badges or other forms of identification. Also, government bodies have passed laws making it illegal to impersonate an officer of the law. They have established criteria to determine if individuals are true, legal public servants of law enforcement agencies. Thus the badge and uniform have become the symbols we usually look for to identify true law enforcement officers.

Just as we might be confused in identifying legal representatives of governmental agencies, we are even more vulnerable in recognizing true representatives of God's spiritual kingdom on earth. While the uniform and badge help us accept the authority of a police officer, we have no such outward, physical symbols that readily establish whether a person is indeed God's true minister or prophet. The power and keys that the Lord gave to Moses and that Jesus gave to the apostles were not recognizable by the clothes, badges, or ID cards that our public servants of today have. The authority of God, as administered through his ecclesiastical servants and by the power of his priesthood, is an inward, spiritual force. It is usually acknowledged through a personal, spiritual witness, which we receive after we have petitioned God or witnessed a manifestation of his power through his servants. One might ask, how can we see the priesthood of God in action today? Or, how can we know if someone is God's true representative?

True prophets and servants of the Lord are not like a police force, but they are authorized to represent him as they administer the affairs of his spiritual kingdom and perform the saving ordinances of the gospel. One way they are recognizable is that they are all ordained priesthood holders who can trace the authority of their priesthood back to the early period of the Church when heavenly messengers conferred priesthood powers upon Joseph Smith and other leaders of the Restoration. Before revealing the fullness of the gospel or organizing a new dispensation through his prophets, the Lord confers upon them his holy priesthood. This priesthood is the power of God given to men to act in his name. Through proper administration within its organizational structure, the priesthood helps build God's kingdom in an orderly way. In order to see how God and his chosen servants act through the priesthood to minister to the Saints, we must first understand what the priesthood is.

Priesthood Is the Power of God

God the Father and Jesus Christ have divine powers far greater than any type of power on earth. They exercise their power in ways that man is not yet able to comprehend. Mankind has gradually progressed from muscle power to mechanical power to electrical power to nuclear power, but other, stronger types of power exist that we do not yet understand or control.

The priesthood of Almighty God is an eternal, all-encompassing power through which God blesses us. Church leaders define priesthood as the power and authority of God. It existed with him in the beginning and will exist throughout all eternity. (See D&C 84:17.) By it, "he creates, sustains, governs, redeems, and exalts." [^1] Its force was instituted "prior to the foundation of this earth." [^2] Likewise, priesthood influence will endure beyond the end of this earth, when all other temporal institutions—both religious and secular—have passed away. God's priesthood encompasses varied powers and forces in the universe.

The Prophet Brigham Young stated, "If anybody wants to know what the Priesthood of the Son of God is, it is the law by which the worlds are, were, and will continue for ever and ever. It is that system which brings worlds into existence and peoples them, gives them their revolutions . . . their seasons and times and by which they are rolled up as a scroll, as it were, and go into a higher state of existence." [^3] Many of our blessings on earth flow through the priesthood of God. The Prophet Joseph Smith explained that it is "the channel through which all knowledge, doctrine, the plan of salvation and every important matter is revealed from heaven." [^4]

For us on this earth, this divine power has always been administered by Jesus Christ. Ancient scriptures imply and modern revelation makes clear that the premortal Messiah was the creator of the world and the author of its salvation: "That by him, and through him, and of him, the worlds are and were created, and the inhabitants thereof are begotten sons and daughters unto God." (D&C 76:24; John 1:3.) Christ, because of his righteousness and the divine faculties granted him by Heavenly Father, received this creative power in premortality when he served in the office of God's great High Priest. [^5] (See Heb. 3:1; 5:5-10; 7:14-28.)

In order for us to become God's "begotten sons and daughters" through Christ and to inherit all the Father possesses, we must learn how to fully use the same priesthood promised those in the resurrection of the just: "They are they into whose hands the Father has given all things—they are they who are priests and kings, who have received of his fulness, and of his glory; and are priests of the Most High, after the order of Melchizedek, . . . which was after the order of the Only Begotten Son." (D&C 76:55-57; cf. Mosiah 5:7-9.) As soon as we learn how to apply Christ's atoning power, while receiving priesthood blessings and living in righteousness, we develop the power to become like God.

Man's Use of the Power of God

To prepare his spiritual children to receive the fullness of his glory in their resurrected state, God gives them the priesthood while they are in their probationary mortal state. God shares priesthood power with worthy male members of the Church, who receive it "by prophecy, and by the laying on of hands" through his authorized servants. (A of F 5; see also Heb. 5:1, 4.) As Church leaders have instructed us, "The priesthood enables mortals to act in God's name for the salvation of the human family. Through it they can be authorized to preach the gospel, administer the ordinances of salvation, and govern God's kingdom on earth." [^6]

Only through the priesthood are the ordinances of salvation—baptism, laying on of hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost, endowment in the temple, and celestial marriage—given to men. Blessings of comfort, healing, and other types of spiritual assistance are also given through the priesthood. [^7] A true priesthood ordination can only be conferred from heaven, that is, through heavenly messengers or priesthood bearers having divine authority. A person cannot seek to take the priesthood unto himself; it must be given him through God's prophets. (See Heb. 5:4.) As stated by the Prophet Joseph Smith, "We believe that a man must be called of God, by prophecy, and by the laying on of hands by those who are in authority, to preach the Gospel and administer in the ordinances thereof." (A of F 5.)

Unlike other forms of power available to men that can be used to both bless or harm others, the priesthood of God can be used only for good. For example, nuclear energy can be used as a power source for electricity or destructive bombs. God's power cannot be used for sinful or selfish purposes; it can be used only to bless his righteous children. Whoever is ordained unto the priesthood can only exercise its power to the extent that he fulfills his callings and lives righteously. (See D&C 84:33-41.)

The Prophet Joseph Smith recorded that "the rights of the priesthood are inseparably connected with the powers of heaven, and . . . the powers of heaven cannot be controlled or handled only upon the principles of righteousness." (D&C 121:36.) The Lord also reveals that, although he may confer his priesthood power upon us as his servants, "when we undertake to cover our sins, or to gratify our pride, . . . or to exercise. . . compulsion upon the souls of the children of men, in any degree of unrighteousness, behold, the heavens withdraw themselves . . . and. . . Amen to the priesthood or the authority of that man." (D&C 121:37.) To possess and fully exercise the power of God on earth, priesthood holders must conduct their lives in harmony with his commandments and his righteous will.

Worthy men in the Church may receive this power to perform saving ordinances and to serve others through priesthood blessings and callings. They can also serve through Church callings and service not directly associated with any priesthood office. Righteous women have responsibilities and opportunities for service through motherhood, compassionate service, and Church callings, including leadership positions. Faithful men and women who serve God and others as he has endowed them will both have equal access to the blessings and powers of God. The blessings and ordinances of the priesthood come to Church members according to their faith, through priesthood-bearing fathers, husbands, family members, or ecclesiastical leaders.

In order to have these blessings readily available in the home, women should seek a celestial marriage to a righteous holder of God's high priesthood. Those women who progress to their celestial exaltation will rule and reign in God's kingdom with their husbands, who will serve as Heavenly Father's kings and priests over his many worlds. These women will themselves be queens and priestesses of the Most High God, with great "positions of power, authority, and preferment in eternity." [^8]

Organization of the Priesthood

God organized the priesthood with order, giving it a definite structure. The priesthood of God is divided into two branches or orders, Melchizedek and Aaronic, and each order contains a variety of offices, such as deacon, teacher, priest, elder, and high priest. Though a man receives various Church and priesthood callings during his lifetime, they remain less important than the priesthood he holds. Elder Bruce R. McConkie explained that "no office adds any power, dignity, or authority to the priesthood. All offices derive their rights . . . and powers from the the priesthood." [^9] The differing offices of the priesthood simply indicate administration and responsibility in different areas of stewardship.

The Aaronic Priesthood and Its Offices

When the ancient Israelites failed to observe the gospel laws given by the Lord to Moses, they received a preparatory law of special performances and ordinances along with a lesser priesthood, which was confirmed "upon Aaron and his seed, throughout all their generations." (D&C 84:18.) This priesthood was used to administer outward, physical ordinances, particularly those characterized by Mosaic ceremonies. Today these ordinances are primarily baptism and the sacrament.

The Aaronic Priesthood continued in a patriarchal order within the tribe of Levi among the children of Israel until the time of John the Baptist, who was a priest in the Aaronic order. (See Luke 1:5-25, 57-80; D&C 84:26-27.) He was the "outstanding bearer of the Aaronic Priesthood in all history, and was entrusted with its most noble mission"—to prepare the way for the Savior and baptize him, and to restore the Aaronic Priesthood to the Prophet Joseph Smith on May 15, 1829. [^10] (See D&C 13.) Thus his ministry operated in three dispensations: he was the last prophet under the law of Moses, he was the first prophet of the New Testament, and he restored the Aaronic Priesthood in the dispensation of the fullness of times. [^11] With the keys of the Aaronic Priesthood, Joseph Smith was empowered to ordain other men and to organize them into different offices of deacon, teacher, priest, and bishop, and from that time on, the priesthood has been conferred in the Church without restriction to the lineage of Aaron. [^12]

Deacon

According to the priesthood organization that the Lord revealed to Joseph Smith, the first, or lowest, office in the Aaronic Priesthood is that of a deacon. Deacons are "appointed to watch over the church, to be standing ministers unto the church." (D&C 84:111.) Beginning at the age of twelve, they are very limited in the ordinances they can perform. Deacons generally pass the sacrament among the congregation, act as ushers, assist in building and grounds clean-up, and perform other tasks as assigned by the bishopric. To help accomplish the mission of the Church in an orderly manner, priesthood bearers in some offices are formed into groups called quorums. In the case of deacons, a group up to twelve form a separate quorum.

Teacher

Beginning at age fourteen, young men may be called as teachers in the Aaronic Priesthood. Their duties are similar to those of deacons, "but neither teachers nor deacons have authority to baptize, administer the sacrament, or lay on hands." (D&C 20:58.) In the absence of higher authority, however, the teacher may preside over Church meetings. (See D&C 20:56.) Teachers assist with preparing the sacrament, serving with Melchizedek Priesthood holders as home teachers, performing any of the duties of a deacon, and fulfilling other assignments from the bishopric and priesthood advisors. A group of up to twenty-four teachers form a quorum.

Priest

The office of priest is the highest office that youths will hold in the Aaronic Priesthood, and it is generally bestowed on young men when they reach sixteen years of age. Adult, male converts to the Church are also often initiated into priesthood responsibilities through this office. The duties of priests differ from those of deacons and teachers in that they may perform the first ordinance of salvation—baptism. They may also bless and administer the sacrament and ordain other priests, teachers, and deacons. (See D&C 20:46-48.) A priests quorum contains up to forty-eight people.

Bishop

The presiding office in the Aaronic Priesthood is that of bishop. Bishops are adult men called by stake presidents to preside over the Aaronic Priesthood in their wards. Bishops are called from among the high priests in the ward, or an elder can be ordained a high priest and then called and ordained a bishop. (See D&C 68:15-19.) Any literal descendant of Aaron actually has the right to preside as a bishop if properly called, sustained, and ordained, but since few Jews of Levitical descent have joined the Church, this has not yet become a practice in the Church. As part of the restoration of all things, the office of bishop will one day again be conferred on members of Levitical lineage, as designated by revelation through the president of the Church. [^13] (See D&C 84:14-21; 107:13-17.)

Current Church practice requires the stake presidency to nominate a candidate for bishop. The name is forwarded to the Office of the First Presidency at Church headquarters. After the First Presidency and Council of the Twelve Apostles have cleared the name, the stake president is authorized by letter to issue the call. The new bishop is presented to the ward members for their sustaining approval, and he is then ordained and set apart in the calling.

The local administration of the Aaronic Priesthood rests in the hands of the ward bishop. He and his counselors supervise any ordinations and the quorum presidencies, instruction, and activities. The bishop also functions as president of the priests quorum. The offices and affairs of the Aaronic Priesthood for the whole Church are administered through the office of the Presiding Bishopric of the Church. [^14] (See D&C 107:15, 68.)

As leader of the Aaronic Priesthood in his ward, the bishop has the primary responsibility for the temporal affairs of the ward and its members. (See D&C 107:68.) Also, as the presiding high priest in his ward, he presides over the ward, administering its programs and counseling the members. He is a "common judge" in Israel with the right to have the gift of discernment for matters of worthiness and fellowship pertaining to his ward members. (See D&C 107:74.) The bishop and his counselors call and set apart all leaders in their Aaronic Priesthood and ward auxiliary callings.

As the lay priesthood leader of the local congregation, the bishop is the most visible and valuable officer of the Church. He is exhorted to be exemplary in his life and diligent in his calling. (See Titus 1:7-9; 1 Tim. 3:1-7.) His three primary functions are to lead the youth, administer the ward, and counsel the members. Indicative of his heavy responsibility, the Church's General Handbook of Instructions lists thirty-one primary duties of a bishop, many of which he shares with his two counselors in the bishopric, though he shoulders several on his own. [^15] Bishops usually serve for three to five years in their calling.

The most valuable personal association that individual members have with the bishop is developed in moments of fellowship and private interviews. As a spiritual advisor and temporal counselor, the bishop is accessible to every member. Through his ordination and setting apart, he is entitled to a heavenly endowment of the discernment and inspiration necessary to advise the ward members who seek his help. [^16] He is indeed the primary shepherd of the local flock of Christ's followers.

The Melchizedek Priesthood and Its Offices

What is the relationship between the Aaronic and Melchizedek Priesthoods? Although Latter-day Saints commonly speak of two priesthoods, Aaronic and Melchizedek, in actuality there is only one, just as there is "one Lord, one faith, one baptism, one God and Father of all." (Eph. 4:5-6.) The Prophet Joseph Smith confirmed this, saying, "The Melchizedek Priesthood comprehends the Aaronic or Levitical Priesthood, and is the grand head." [^17]

The great priesthood of God, however, has been divided into two orders. As noted in the previous chapter, the Aaronic Priesthood was first introduced through Moses because the children of Israel were not spiritually prepared for the fullness of the priesthood. The Aaronic Priesthood is called the lesser priesthood "because it is an appendage to the greater, or the Melchizedek Priesthood, and has power in administering outward ordinances." (D&C 107:13-14.) As one progresses in the offices of the Aaronic Priesthood, all the responsibilities and opportunities of the earlier offices are included in the higher callings. As one receives the Melchizedek Priesthood, all Aaronic Priesthood powers are encompassed within that higher branch of the priesthood, as seen in the following diagram:

Offices of the priesthood.

As this illustration demonstrates, higher Aaronic Priesthood offices incorporate the powers of any lesser Aaronic Priesthood office, and any Melchizedek Priesthood office includes all the powers of the Aaronic Priesthood.

The number and magnitude of Melchizedek Priesthood duties are far greater than any in the Aaronic Priesthood, because only the higher priesthood performs all ordinances of salvation and confers many spiritual gifts and blessings. The Melchizedek Priesthood must be present and functional whenever the kingdom of God is upon the earth, regardless of whether that kingdom is organized in a patriarchal order, by tribes, as a congregation, or in an ecclesiastical church structure. [^18] This priesthood was first given to Adam; since then, the patriarchs and prophets in every dispensation have had its authority. [^19] (See D&C 84:6-17.)

President of the High Priesthood

The Melchizedek Priesthood was restored to the earth in these last days through Peter, James, and John, Christ's chosen apostles of old. As resurrected beings, they came to Joseph Smith in the spring of 1829 and conferred the power and authority of this high priesthood upon him. (See D&C 27:12-13.) Other ancient prophets and angelic messengers restored further priesthood keys and powers to the prophet. [^20] Today, the President of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints bears the title "President of the High Priesthood of the Church." [^21] This position carries with it all the keys for supervising the priesthood of God on earth, and thus the President directs all the affairs that pertain to the kingdom of God on the earth. He has delegated the local administration of the Melchizedek Priesthood to the stake president.

Stake President

The stake president is the presiding high priest for all the members within the local stake boundaries. Like the bishop who is the president of the priests quorum, the stake president is the president of the high priests quorum. Although not always as visible as the bishop, the stake president has many responsibilities, especially over the spiritual affairs of the members within his stake. He is responsible for fulfilling the mission of the Church and directing all programs, finances, and member discipline for the Church within his stake area. [^22]

To help him with this heavy responsibility, each stake president calls two counselors and clerks to help in the stake presidency. He also calls and directs a dozen high priests to serve on a stake high council. Indicative of his heavy responsibility, the General Handbook of Instructions lists fourteen areas of primary responsibility and more than twenty-five areas of indirect responsibility, administered through the high council and stake presidency. [^23] Called and set apart by the General Authorities of the Church, a stake president usually serves for seven to ten years in his calling. As a part of his administering over the stake, his primary responsibility is to supervise the Melchizedek Priesthood offices and quorums.

The offices of the Melchizedek Priesthood are structured differently than the offices of the Aaronic Priesthood, both in size and relationship to each other. You may remember that the Aaronic Priesthood offices have a definite vertical hierarchy in their relationship to each other, going from deacon up to bishop. Also, their size is somewhat limited, ranging from twelve to twenty-four to forty-eight members. Note that the Aaronic Priesthood quorums double in size each step upward, in keeping with the vertical hierarchy.

On the other hand, the offices of the Melchizedek Priesthood are more in a horizontal relationship to each other. The quorums of the Melchizedek Priesthood are larger in number, and they are usually organized according to geographical ward and stake boundaries. Once a man has received the Melchizedek Priesthood, it really does not matter as much which particular office he holds in that priesthood—with any of them he is eligible to perform most priesthood ordinances, receive a temple endowment, enter into a temple marriage, give priesthood blessings, and share in its power.

Elder

The first and most common office in the Melchizedek Priesthood is that of elder, whose responsibilities include baptizing, laying on of hands for giving the Holy Ghost, conducting Church meetings by the Spirit, healing the sick, preaching the gospel, and carrying out any other duties of the priesthood as needed. (See D&C 20:42-45; 42:43-44; 42:80; 53:3.) A man may be ordained an elder from age eighteen on, so elders are generally younger men in the Melchizedek Priesthood. Some may be preparing to go on missions, although the majority of them are past the primary missionary ages of nineteen to twenty-two years old. Most are married and rearing young families. Up to ninety-six men form an elders quorum, and under the direction of the elders quorum presidency they serve, teach, and fellowship one another. They also assume major responsibilities for home teaching many families in the ward and in assisting the bishopric by caring for the welfare of many ward members.

The term "elder" has a variety of interesting and important meanings beyond identifying the members of the local elders quorum. Actually, the meaning of the term "priesthood" comes from the root word for elder. The word "priest" comes from the Anglo-Saxon preost and the Icelandic prestr, which in turn derived from the Latin presbyter and the Greek presbyteros, meaning "an old one," otherwise called a "presbyter" or "elder." [^24] Thus, "elder" is the most universal word for identifying a priest of God.

This usage is supported in LDS terminology since the term "elder" is the title given all Melchizedek Priesthood holders regardless of whether they are in the elders quorum. [^25] (See D&C 20:38; 1 Pet. 5:1; 2 Jn. 1; 3 Jn. 1.) For example, the apostles of the Church are usually identified as Elder, such as Elder Thomas S. Monson or Elder M. Russell Ballard, when they are introduced. Also, all full-time male missionaries of the Church are called elders and have that title printed on their name tags. Some people who first meet a pair of missionaries assume that they share the same first name of Elder, or they wonder how such young people could become elders. After seeing "Elder" on other missionary name tags, they realize that it is a title and not a personal name or a rank of age. If the elders of the Melchizedek Priesthood are true to their office and calling, the term elder will be held in high esteem by both members and nonmembers alike.

High Priest

Another common office in the Melchizedek priesthood is that of high priest. From the time of Adam to the present, whenever the fullness of the gospel has been on the earth, there have been high priests to oversee all spiritual affairs of God's kingdom. (See D&C 107:53; Alma 13.) High priests in the latter days are specifically called to minister in spiritual matters, (see D&C 107:18), preach the gospel (see D&C 84:111), and officiate in all other offices of the priesthood when necessary (see D&C 68:19). High priests are organized on a stake level, so no matter how many of them are in a stake, that number constitutes their quorum. Some stakes might have just a few dozen, while older, more established stakes might have a few hundred high priests.

High priests tend to be older men who have been active members of the Church for many years. Usually men will become high priests under one of two circumstances. First, some leadership offices in the Church require that the person be a high priest in order to serve in that office—such as in the bishopric, on a stake high council, or in the stake presidency. Therefore some men will be made high priests so they can serve in those particular callings. Second, as men mature and their children become older, they are brought into the high priests quorum because of the compatible fellowship to be found there. When a man begins to feel awkward or out of place with the younger men in the elders quorum, this usually indicates an appropriate time to be moved into the high priests group in the ward.

Since the high priests quorum is organized on a stake basis, and some stakes can be spread over large areas, the quorum is subdivided into groups, with the high priests of any given ward comprising a separate group. A group leader is called by the stake president, and he and his assistants direct the instruction, fellowship, and home teaching for the group members and their families. The high priests group also assists in the ward as directed by the bishopric, and it usually supervises the temple and genealogy work of ward members. In the main, high priests are sincere, dedicated priesthood holders who exemplify years of service and brotherly kindness.

Other Melchizedek Priesthood Offices

The other offices of the Melchizedek Priesthood—patriarch, seventy, and apostle—are rather limited in number and more universal in the scope of their callings. As indicated in the next chapter, patriarchs are called on a stake level to give patriarchal blessings. A stake will usually have only one or two patriarchs serving at any one time. For many patriarchs, as long as their physical, mental, and spiritual health is strong, their service in this calling will last the rest of their natural lives. Thus relatively few men in the Church will ever be called as patriarchs.

The other two Melchizedek Priesthood offices serve in general, central Church leadership positions. [^26] Seventies serve under the direction of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles and they have a special call and ordination "to preach the gospel, and to be especial witnesses unto the Gentiles and in all the world—thus differing from other officers in the church in the duties of their calling." (D&C 107:25.) Seventies receive their name from being organized into quorums of seventy men, both in ancient times and modern. (See Ex. 24:1-11; Luke 10:1-24; D&C 107:93-97.) Members of the First Quorum of Seventy are called for a lifetime of service, while members of any other seventies quorum currently serve for approximately five years of full-time service.

The calling of an apostle is to be a special witness of Christ in all the world. (See D&C 107:23, 33.) They also serve for their entire lives once they are ordained, and with some of their number serving in the First Presidency, there may be fifteen or more apostles serving at any one time. Apostles serving in the Quorum of the Twelve and in the First Presidency are also sustained as prophets, seers, and revelators. [^27] The quorum forms "a Traveling Presiding High Council, to officiate in the name of the Lord, under the direction of the Presidency of the Church, agreeable to the institution of heaven; to build up the church, and regulate all the affairs of the same in all nations." (D&C 107:33.)

The presiding prophet of the Lord administers over all the priesthood offices. He is also the President of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. He and his counselors are known by the title of "president," which is sometimes considered a special office of leadership. Usually the term President refers particularly to the President of the Church, although the title is also applied to stake presidents and to the presidents of any of the priesthood quorums. (See D&C 107:21, 29.) As President of the Church, this prophet, seer, revelator, and apostle holds all the keys of God's kingdom on earth. [^28]

Calling a Person to a Priesthood Office

Before a young man (aged twelve or older) or an adult male member of the Church receives his first office in the Aaronic or Melchizedek Priesthood, he must receive that priesthood and then be ordained to an office within that priesthood. The initial priesthood ordinance thus consists of two parts: conferring the priesthood upon him and ordaining him to an office. For example, a youth would have the Aaronic Priesthood conferred upon him, and then he would be ordained to the office of a deacon. Or an adult male would have the Melchizedek Priesthood conferred upon him before being ordained to the office of an elder. Thereafter, when a priesthood holder receives another office within either order of the priesthood, he is simply ordained to that office. For instance, a deacon being ordained a teacher does not need to have the Aaronic Priesthood conferred upon him again.

The bishop and the Aaronic Priesthood advisors assist parents in preparing their young men to receive and honor the priesthood. Together they encourage the young men to be active and worthy and to help them with their priesthood duties. The bishop privately interviews each young man before he is advanced to a new priesthood office.

Along with reviewing the duties of the new office (listed in D&C 20:46-60), the bishop discusses the religious behavior of the young man in order to determine his worthiness. Also he should encourage the youth to (1) pray regularly in private and with his family; (2) honor his parents; (3) speak and act honestly; (4) treat everyone with kindness and respect; (5) be morally clean; (6) refrain from reading, listening to, or viewing pornographic material; (7) pay a full tithing; (8) obey the Word of Wisdom, including abstinence from tobacco, alcoholic drinks, coffee, and tea; (9) refrain from the use of illegal drugs and from the misuse of other substances; (10) refrain from using the name of the Lord in vain, vulgar expressions, and other degrading language; (11) do his duty in the Church and live according to its rules and doctrines; (12) fulfill assignments given him by his quorum presidency; and (13) attend priesthood and sacrament meetings, and participate in other Church meetings and activities. [^29]

After the interview, the youth's name is presented in sacrament meeting for the sustaining vote of the ward members. The bishop then directs the priesthood ordinance ceremony and has the ward clerk record the ordination and issue an Aaronic Priesthood ordination certificate to the young man. This procedure is also followed for adult males who are recent converts to the Church, although they may be directly ordained as priests without needing to pass through the offices of deacon and teacher. [^30]

Worthy men eighteen and older may become elders. Since Melchizedek Priesthood offices come under the supervision of the stake president, a member of the stake presidency interviews the prospective elder. He asks questions concerning the man's readiness and worthiness to receive the higher priesthood and usually gives instruction concerning the oath and covenant of the priesthood. An oath is a solemn promise, and a covenant is a witnessed act of commitment. A man who receives the priesthood makes a solemn promise to the Lord to righteously magnify that priesthood. The covenant act of commitment is the ordination, which is witnessed by the priesthood holder performing the act and by others.

As the oath and covenant is outlined in Doctrine and Covenants 84:33-42, the Lord presents certain obligations and promised blessings to priesthood holders. They are to receive the priesthood in good faith, with a sincere intent to magnify it by fulfilling all responsibilities associated with the office. Having fulfilled their obligations, Melchizedek Priesthood holders are promised a sanctification "by the Spirit unto the renewing of their bodies." (V. 33.) They become part of "the church and kingdom, and the elect of God." (V. 34.) They receive Heavenly Father's kingdom, and "all" that the Father has will be given them. (See v. 38.) A stern admonition is also given to remain true to the covenant; otherwise, a person who breaks the covenant and deliberately turns away from the priesthood commits an unforgivable sin. (See vv. 41- 42.)

These solemn warnings, promises, and obligations are usually explained and discussed as part of the interview process. After the person's prospective ordination has been cleared by the stake presidency, the high council, and the local stake members, the ordination is supervised by the stake president, who may perform it himself or authorize another Melchizedek Priesthood holder to do it. A similar pattern of interviewing, sustaining, and ordaining is followed later if the man becomes a high priest.

Priesthood Organization and Keys

As mentioned earlier, to help accomplish the mission of the Church in an orderly manner, priesthood bearers in their various offices are organized into ecclesiastical groups called quorums. There are the five types of local quorums—deacons, teachers, priests, elders, and high priests—and three quorums that preside over the whole Church—Quorums of the Seventy, the Twelve Apostles, and the First Presidency. [^31] (See D&C 107:21-37; 124:125-45.) Bishops and patriarchs are not organized into quorums; they belong to the local quorum of high priests.

Other administrative units such as stake presidencies, stake high councils, bishoprics, and other regional or area groupings of priesthood bearers organized for particular purposes are more correctly identified as councils and not quorums. One simple way to distinguish these two terms is to remember that while all priesthood holders are organized into quorums, the Church members, whether priesthood holders or not, are governed by councils. [^32]

Sometimes confusion also arises from misunderstanding about two other terms associated with the priesthood: setting apart and keys of the priesthood. In establishing new leadership in any priesthood quorum, the person performing the ordinance sets apart the new leader and gives the president of the quorum any special keys, or authority, to function in his calling. These keys constitute the distinctive directive powers of presidency. [^33] Stake presidents are therefore called and set apart by a General Authority of the Church, who also gives him the keys of presidency over his stake. The stake president may then call and set apart elders quorum presidents and give them the keys of their office because that office comes under the jurisdiction of the stake president and the keys that he holds.

The quorums are not only organized to provide a group for joint instruction and united service, but they also provide a source of rich fellowship and a brotherhood far more valuable and lasting than found in any secular service or fraternal organization. Quorum members who have the vision of their brotherhood willingly care for each other and assist both temporally and spiritually in uplifting and edifying each other.

The Power of God through the Ages

Because the priesthood is so important and is the power of God that gives validity to all his creations, it always precedes and supersedes gospel dispensations and church organization. The priesthood links between the dispensations verify the authenticity of the new order of God on earth. In the scriptures, we find that the priesthood, not names, titles, or unique callings, is the essential element to establish God's kingdom on earth. The kingdom might be called or organized in any manner, shape, or form, but it always depends upon the inspired leadership of the priesthood holders of God who hold the keys of presidency at that time.

In the example of Abraham, we see the priesthood in use as God's power on this earth. Abraham said, "I sought for mine appointment unto the priesthood according to the appointment of God." (Abr. 1:4.) Thereafter, because Abraham used his priesthood in righteousness, it brought him and his descendants many blessings. Indeed, through the descendants of Abraham, all the families of the earth have been blessed. (See D&C 110:12.) All righteous descendants of Abraham are "lawful heirs" to these blessings and the powers of the priesthood. (See D&C 86:8-11.)

At the time of Moses, a social organization somewhat similar to ours was revealed to the Israelites. Both the Melchizedek and Aaronic Priesthood were on the earth, although the higher was only sparsely used, especially when compared with the numbers of active Melchizedek Priesthood holders today. Anciently, the congregation of Israel was organized into tribes and clans with a prophet, Moses, at its head. Today we have areas and regions administered by modern prophetic leadership. Alongside Moses was his brother Aaron, the presiding High Priest, whose position was analogous to the Presiding Bishop today. The twelve princes of the tribes of Israel, resembling our Council of the Twelve, formed a governing body, aided by seventy elders consisting of older men from all the tribes. Finally, Moses appointed judges or rulers over units of a thousand, a hundred, fifty, and finally ten men. These can easily be likened to stake presidents, bishops, quorum presidents, and perhaps home teachers, who have stewardship over similarly sized groups of men and their families.

In defending the authenticity of the restored church, we often point to the similarities between our modern priesthood organization and that existing in the early apostolic church organized by the mortal Lord himself. We see from many scriptures that the structure was much the same. As Paul said, "Ye are . . . of the household of God; and are built upon the foundation of the apostles and prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the chief corner stone." (Eph. 2:19-20.) Further, Christ "gave some, apostles; and some, prophets; and some, evangelists [patriarchs]; and some, pastors [bishops] and teachers; for the perfecting of the saints." (Eph. 4:11-12.) There was a full ecclesiastical organization of the early church under the Melchizedek Priesthood.

Having the blessings of the priesthood today, all worthy male members of the Church can enjoy the powers of God's priesthood on earth. They can trace the authority of their priesthood office through the individual who gave it to them on back to Joseph Smith, and from Joseph to Peter, James, and John back to Jesus Christ. So every priesthood holder has a direct line of priesthood authority to Christ, who received his power and glory from God, our Heavenly Father.

Indeed, we say that the PRIESTHOOD is the power and authority to act for God, and with it and through various priesthood councils, Christ's church administers to all members. Worthy men have the Aaronic or Melchizedek Priesthood conferred upon them, are ordained to offices in that priesthood, are organized into quorums, and are set apart and given keys to administer in certain callings. We recognize that, along with having God's power on earth, righteous use of this priesthood entails many responsibilities. We cannot take for granted the marvelous power given us and expect the priesthood to remain in power in our lives. Like the uniform and badge of a policeman, certain standards of righteousness and displays of service are recognizable emblems of a proper priesthood that remains in full force. As the priesthood is wisely used, both the priesthood bearer and those he serves are richly blessed and strengthened as they journey together on their way toward God's celestial realms.

For further study, refer to the following entries:

TG: BD: EM:

Priesthood Aaronic Priesthood Aaronic Priesthood Priesthood, Aaronic Bishop Deacon, Aaronic Priesthood Priesthood, Keys of Elders Elder, Melchizedek Priesthood Priesthood, Melchizedek High Priest High Priest Priesthood, Ordination Melchizedek Priesthood Levitical Priesthood Priesthood, Power of Melchizedek

Melchizedek Priesthood Oath and Covenant of the

Priesthood Ordination to the Priesthood Priest, Aaronic Priesthood Priesthood Priesthood Interview Priesthood Offices Priesthood Quorums Teacher, Aaronic Priesthood

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Type of Government See chapter 18 for further values of the baptismal ordinance.
[^2] Organizational Structure See BD, ''Church,'' 645.
[^3] Functioning Programs Ibid.; see also chapter 38 for more insights into the millennial reign of Jesus Christ.
[^4] Long-range Purpose World Book Encyclopedia (Chicago: Scott Fetzer Co., 1987), 8:272.
[^5] Available Assets See chapters 7, 8, and 32 for further insights on prophets, the scriptures, and the priesthood.
[^6] See MD, 149.
[^7] GHI, 1989, 3-2.
[^8] Ibid., Foreword.
[^9] Ibid., 10-1.
[^10] See MD, 789.
[^11] EM, 1:327.
[^12] EM, 1:65.
[^13] See GHI, 1989, 1-1.
[^14] EM, 3:1198.
[^15] MD, 558; see also chapter 22.
[^16] EM, 3:1199-200.
[^17] Learn of Me: Relief Society Course of Study, 1987 (Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1986), 4.
[^18] This three-fold mission of the Church is discussed in more detail in the next chapter.
[^19] See chapter 28 for a discussion of financial donations to the Church.
[^20] See chapters 34 and 35 for a discussion of missionary work and discipleship.
[^21] See GHI, 1989, 1-1.
[^22] See MD, 763.
[^23] See GHI, 1989, 1-1 to 1-3.
[^24] WNTCD, 1428.
[^25] See MD, 215.
[^26] These offices as they constitute the three presiding councils of the Church are also discussed in the following chapter.
[^27] See chapter 7 for further details on the distinctive roles of prophets, seers, revelators, and apostles.
[^28] See BD, 731; chapter 7 in this book.
[^29] See GHI, 1989, 4-1.
[^30] Ibid.
[^31] See EM, 3:1144-46.
[^32] The function of Church councils is presented in the next chapter.
[^33] See MD, 410.
