Victor L. Ludlow, Principles and Practices of the Restored Gospel ( 1992)

Chapter 33

God's Government on Earth

The creation of any new automobile requires two major stages—planning and production. First, directors, designers, and engineers at an automobile company will struggle to design a new car, with particular emphasis upon its power source—the engine. They know that in any engine, the raw potential power of the fuel must be transformed into energy that can be channeled into productive output so the machine can do its work. Many moving parts are necessary to transfer the power through the engine to the drive train. Good lubricants are also necessary to overcome friction and keep the parts moving smoothly. The engineers design the engine and specify the fuel, lubricants, parts, and servicing necessary to keep it running efficiently. In their design, they also provide mechanical, safety, and aesthetic features so that the end product is an efficient, safe, comfortable means of transportation.

Second, the factory needs to produce the automobile. The purpose of the production phase is to incorporate the design concepts and to profitably manufacture a quality product that customers will want to purchase. So plants and assembly lines are organized, quality controls are established, materials are purchased, and distributing and marketing strategies are developed. Eventually the concept becomes reality as the new car rides the highway.

In a similar process, most of us have experienced occasions when we plan and talk about doing a project and then organize and work (and probably reorganize and revise the work) until we finally get the job done. During the transfer of any expectation into reality, various alternate means must sometimes be provided to transform what was planned into success, especially if the initial plan does not seem to be working. If we are wise, we learn from experience and gradually refine our capacity to transform hopes into reality. For example, a coach spends many hours in training his team for competition. He prepares a game plan and hopes the team will be victorious. Nevertheless, a major part of his coaching effectiveness depends upon his ability to adjust to the changing circumstances and challenges of each game as he coaches the team to a successful season.

God set and followed a similar pattern when he planned for the organization of this earth and the placement of his spirit children upon it, without however having had to fumble through errors and misjudgment. As part of our premortal existence, he designed the truths and ordinances of the gospel to bless many lives. On earth he has also organized a means—the ecclesiastical structure of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints—by which his gospel and power could be delivered for the best benefit of the people. Within that church, the gospel truths and ordinances and the priesthood powers and blessings can be channeled through many active people and programs in such a way that best meets the needs of God's children.

Unfortunately, like workers in a factory who might not produce the highest quality product, members of the church of Jesus Christ are not always successful in fully blessing peoples' lives. Natural friction and resistance occur that impede the smooth transfer of spiritual blessings throughout God's kingdom, especially as new, inexperienced members come into the Church during its rapid expansion to the far corners of the earth. Even worse, the corrosive and polluting influences of the world weaken the Church's effectiveness. God helps compensate for these inadequacies and resistance through the cleansing power of his love, the gospel principles of his Son, Jesus Christ, and the spiritual strength of the Holy Ghost.

Unity and Structure within the Church of Christ

Those baptized in Christ's name become members of his church. Baptism serves as a gateway into his spiritual kingdom on earth as well as a cleansing ordinance. [^1] Salvation and many other blessings (present and potential) await the faithful members of the Church. However, these spiritual rewards are available only within the religious community as individual members work together, each doing his or her own part to further the Lord's work.

The importance of belonging to the Lord's church is emphasized in the New Testament with these words: "The Lord added to the church daily such as should be saved." (Acts 2:47.) To emphasize the need for unity and order in the early Christian church, the Apostle Paul compared its diverse membership to the various parts of the body. He noted that even though each body member is different and though some body parts are esteemed less than others, each part is essential to the proper functioning of the whole: "Now hath God set the members every one of them in the body, as it hath pleased him. . . . that there should be no schism in the body; but that the members should have the same care one for another." (1 Cor. 12:18-25.) But while all body parts depend on each other, there is a hierarchy of functions, in the Church as well as in the body: "God hath set some in the church, first apostles, secondarily prophets, thirdly teachers, after that . . . helps, [and] governments." (1 Cor. 12:28.)

The latter-day church of Jesus Christ requires the same unity as in the earlier apostolic period. As the membership works together to edify and strengthen one another, the benefits are for the good of the whole. A similar structure and hierarchy is still needed to organize the efforts of the members. Thus the leadership in the Church is structured after the same pattern that existed in Christ's time. Prophets, evangelists (patriarchs), pastors (bishops), and teachers function in their same priesthood offices today. (See Eph. 4:11-14.) Paul repeatedly explained that all the offices and functions of the Church are necessary for the whole structure to be recognized as Christ's church. [^2] (See Rom. 12:4-5; 1 Cor. 12.)

While a hierarchy of priesthood leadership continues, an equality of brotherhood and sisterhood is also a hallmark of the church of Christ. These elements are not as contradictory as they might at first appear—the combination of leadership and fellowship promotes the advancement of the Saints as a whole, while preserving a line of authority extending to Christ himself, the head of the Church. Like water coming from heaven to earth, the leadership authority line connects Christ with every bishop and family patriarch to guide the membership. Like water distributed through canals, pipes, and hoses, the fellowship bonding joins every member with each other as they work together to build Christ's kingdom here on earth.

God's System of Governing

The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is an organization structured to meet various needs of the baptized followers of Jesus Christ. The term church derives from the Greek ecclesia, meaning "an assembly called together." The organized body of believers who have taken upon themselves the name of Jesus Christ through baptism and confirmation are called by their head, Jesus, to work together within the assembly or association of his church and to serve one another.

The current ecclesiastical organization of Jesus Christ is his spiritual kingdom on earth; it has the responsibility to spread his gospel and to prepare all people for his coming millennial reign. The Church thus serves as the Lord's government on earth. A government is a body or system that exercises authority over a group. The concept "to govern" comes from the Greek kybernan, meaning "to steer or pilot a ship; to direct or command a group." The church of Jesus Christ serves to steer its members in God's desired direction so his children can strengthen each other within his spiritual kingdom on earth. The Church exercises God's authority over this organized body of Christ's followers as it pilots them safely back to a heavenly realm.

Since the days of Adam, groups of believers in the true and living God have assembled together under the direction of prophets and priesthood leaders to strengthen their spiritual fellowship. God has continually adapted the social structure of his believers to reflect the political systems of the time. In ancient times, this assembly of followers was organized into a patriarchal order, with the primary association being within and between family units. Later in the Old Testament period, the primary social structure was based on the Tribes of Israel and featured a centralized levitical priesthood. This community of believers was commonly called a "congregation" in the Old Testament. In the New Testament period, a fellowship of saints under the direction of priesthood leaders provided the primary assembly for Church members.

As indicated earlier in this chapter, a similar Church organization has been established today for the followers of Jesus Christ. Eventually, Jesus Christ will come to earth to personally preside over his church after it has joined together with his kingdom from heaven. Indeed, the word kingdom is often used in the scriptures to identify God's community of believers, since they are literally God's kingdom on earth. [^3]

Some Governing Principles of Christ's Church

Political scientists have identified five basic elements that are common to all governments: sovereignty, legitimacy, rules of conduct, jurisdiction, and law enforcement. [^4] These five elements serve as an outline by which the key governing principles of Christ's Church on earth can be defined and discussed.

Sovereignty

Sovereignty is the supreme power or authority of a government. In most democratic nations, this sovereign power rests with the people, who then allow the governing body to exercise limited authority. In the church of Jesus Christ, the governing authority must be Jesus Christ himself, or it cannot be his church. To be the Lord's church, it must have his teachings, his laws, his name, and be governed by him through his appointed representatives. (See 3 Ne. 27:1-12; D&C 115:4.)

The foundation for the true power of the Lord's church is laid through the restored priesthood with its keys, revealed scriptures and revelations, and prophetic leadership. [^5] Consequently, the same authority, doctrines, and organization established by Jesus Christ in apostolic times have been restored to the earth to constitute the true church of Christ. It operates through his divine authority and under his godly sovereignty.

Legitimacy

In the political world, legitimacy is the acceptance by the people of a government's authority to exercise power. In the religious community, after God has empowered his followers as true members of his church, the people must accept the church's legitimacy in order for it to have any lasting effect in their lives.

Indeed, the pattern of the restored church has been to seek legitimacy from both without and within the Church membership. As The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints was founded on April 6, 1830, Joseph Smith followed the laws of the state of New York in organizing a legal entity. In a similar fashion, Church leaders seek for legal recognition in all countries where there are members and where they want to send missionaries. They want the members and missionaries to have full legal rights and religious legitimacy in these nations.

Acceptance of authority from within the Church membership is established through the "law of common consent." According to this law, Church members exercise their agency in accepting or rejecting the decisions and directions of Church leaders, who make their decisions after the Lord has given them spiritual confirmation. [^6] For example, after a bishop has prepared the annual ward budget or decided on a program of special emphasis for the ward members, he seeks for a spiritual confirmation and then asks the adult members for their sustaining vote before finalizing the plans.

The most common use of sustaining occurs after Church officers are selected through the spirit of revelation by their leaders. These officers must be sustained in their callings by the membership over whom they will exercise authority. This sustaining is usually done in a sacrament meeting or a general assembly of the organization in which they will serve. The presiding officer asks the members to be called into the new offices to stand while their names and positions are presented and the congregation votes. (If any member should oppose a person in a calling, he may, in a private interview, state his reasons, which will be considered by those in authority. It is particularly important to determine whether the negative vote was "based on knowledge that the person presented has been guilty of conduct that should disqualify the person from the position." [^7])

As the Lord revealed through the Prophet Joseph Smith, "No person is to be ordained to any office in this church, where there is a regularly organized branch of the same, without the vote of that church." (D&C 20:65.) This sustaining vote by the body of saints is known as the "law of common consent," and it legitimizes the Church leadership in their callings. It also is a sign by those who vote to sustain their leaders that they will support them and take counsel and direction from them. Thus a clear, recognized, and accepted body of leadership is established.

Rules of Conduct

All organizations need basic laws to guide their social structure and to keep life running smoothly for the group and its members. As the Mosaic law and the church of Christ were established in ancient times, the scriptures record some divine expectations for the Lord's followers. For instance, some of the most challenging reading material of the Old Testament is found in the book of Leviticus where the Lord provided quite a few sets of rules for ancient Israel.

The Doctrine and Covenants and the Church's General Handbook of Instructions provide similar but more pertinent direction for leaders of the Church today. As an indication of the great diversity of guidelines found in the General Handbook, note the titles of its eleven sections: Church Administration; Meetings; Calls and Releases; Ordinations; Ordinances and Blessings; Temples, Marriage, and Family History; Missionary Service; Records and Reports; Finances; Church Discipline; and Church Policies. Approximately one hundred and twenty pages in length and amazingly small for a guidebook directing an organization of over eight million members, the General Handbook has been prepared "to guide servants of the Lord in directing the Church and helping to strengthen families." [^8]

Further detailed instructions regarding priesthood, auxiliary, and other Church programs are provided in various organizational handbooks, printed guidelines for priesthood leaders, and other administrative publications. Current, up-to-date, and supplemental instructions are given through a periodical Bulletin and correspondence sent to local leaders. General Church periodicals, especially the Ensign magazine, inform the general membership about changes in Church organization, establishment of new policies, founding of new missions, and other announcements or programs of the Church. All in all, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints diligently strives to keep leaders and members informed about the rules of conduct expected of them.

Jurisdiction

Jurisdiction defines the range of authority that a government or body has. For example, the jurisdiction of a political government extends over the citizens of that entity and the noncitizens who live or travel within its boundaries. The jurisdiction of a church's authority extends only over the members of that given religious community. For example, in the Roman Catholic Church, its leaders govern only other Roman Catholics, and likewise, any disciplinary action or enforcement of religious standards for The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is limited to members of the Church. Thus any one nation or church does not have the right to make and enforce rules or laws for another political or religious group.

The separateness and independence of both political and church groups is a fundamental doctrine of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints as stressed in the eleventh and twelfth Articles of Faith. The eleventh Article of Faith claims our privilege to worship God as we desire and allows all people the same privilege to "worship how, where, or what they may." The twelfth Article of Faith states that we believe in being subject to political rulers and in "obeying, honoring, and sustaining the law" of the nations where we live. We recognize the importance of maintaining jurisdiction over our own members, and we accord other groups the same right.

Law Enforcement

The last element of governmental rule comes out of the two previous ones. The concept of enforcement is closely related to the rules of conduct and jurisdiction of a government. Rules are ineffective unless people obey them, and if an organization has little or no jurisdiction to enforce its laws, it loses control and cannot operate. Soon no law or order would exist within such a society.

Religious standards within The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints are enforced privately through interviews with local ecclesiastical leaders or through limited, organized disciplinary councils conducted by the bishop or stake president. The purposes of Church discipline are to "(1) save the souls of transgressors; (2) protect the innocent; and (3) safeguard the purity, integrity, and good name of the Church." [^9]

Church discipline is handled through one of two ways. First, members are encouraged to be fully active and committed so they can enjoy all the blessings of Church membership, including worthiness to be called into any Church position or to attend the temple, and readiness to have full access to all the Church programs and assistance. Second, if a member's behavior falls below Church standards, certain rights and privileges can be withdrawn, placing members on probation or, if the sins are more serious, withdrawing fellowship and even membership. Thus, in an appropriate, loving manner, obedience to Church laws and God's commandments is developed and maintained among the members of Christ's church.

In summary, all five elements of a sound government or society are found in the Church: sovereignty, legitimacy, rules, jurisdiction, and enforcement. Through the power of God's government on earth, the lives of his children who choose to become active members of the church of his Son, Jesus Christ, are blessed and strengthened.

Some Organizational Functions of Christ's Church

After governing principles are set in place, they must be put into practice within the actual structure of a government or church organization. Each nation, church, and religion has certain distinctive characteristics. Five identifying factors can be used to compare different groups or governments: type of government, organizational structure, functioning programs, long-range purpose, and available assets. A study of these five characteristics will distinguish the Mormons from all other religions and Christian denominations.

The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is a theocracy. A theocracy is a form of religious government in which appointed leaders receive and interpret God's laws and have his authority in matters pertaining to the organization. The term theocracy comes from two Greek words, theos, meaning "God," and kratein, meaning "to rule." As we indicated in the earlier section on sovereignty, the Lord directs his own church through his appointed servants, be they patriarchs, prophets, priests, or apostles.

Theocracy was God's original earthly government with Adam and the great patriarchs, who served as the Lord's presiding high priest through whom the laws of the Lord were revealed and administered. [^10] The ancient House of Israel and the early church of Jesus Christ were also theocracies in that the Lord governed them through his appointed servants: the prophets, priests, and apostles. When the resurrected Messiah comes to personally reign during the millennial era on earth, he will be recognized by all peoples as the King of kings, and a perfect theocracy will govern. (See Rev. 19:16; D&C 38:20-22; 58:20-22.)

When most people compare churches, they often first look at the church organization. The church of Jesus Christ is distinguished by its hierarchy of priesthood councils. The hierarchy of leadership existing in the kingdom of God on earth is patterned after what prevails in the heavens. From the beginning, the affairs of God's kingdom—including the very creation of the world—have been conducted through councils: "The Gods said among themselves: . . . We will end our work, which we have counseled; and we will rest . . . from all our work which we have counseled." (Abr. 5:2.) Likewise, the Church today is governed by a series of higher general and lower local councils.

The appointed leader of any one council does not dictate his wishes, nor do the other council members demand the right of "majority rule." They are to arrive at agreement together through discussion and, most importantly, inspiration from God through united prayer.

As quoted earlier from Paul's discussion of the "body of Christ," the highest authority in the Church resides in the apostles whom Christ has called to direct Church affairs. The original council, or quorum of Twelve Apostles, was chosen personally by the Lord during his mortal ministry, and he was the presiding officer. After the resurrection and ascension of Christ, the need for a new presiding authority on earth arose. Peter—the senior apostle—became the presiding officer of the Church, with James and John as his two counselors. (See D&C 7:5-7.)

Presiding Councils of the Church

As the seventh Article of Faith states, "We believe in the same organization that existed in the Primitive Church, namely, apostles, prophets, . . . and so forth." In the latter days, the head of the Church (representing Christ) is the President, again the senior apostle. As President of the High Priesthood of the Church, he presides over the entire Church. (See D&C 107:65-67, 91.) He and two other apostles or righteous high priests form a quorum and constitute the First Presidency of the Church, in whom the supreme authority and keys of the kingdom reside. (See D&C 107:22; 124:126.)

The Twelve Apostles form a quorum "equal in authority and power to the three presidents" (D&C 107:24), but officiating under their direction (D&C 107:33; 112:30). These apostles serve as "special witnesses of the name of Christ in all the world." (D&C 107:23; see also v. 33.) Besides governing the established Church, the Quorum of the Twelve, under direction of the First Presidency, is also called "to open the door by the proclamation of the gospel of Jesus Christ." (D&C 107:35.) Weekly, these two presiding quorums of the Church "meet jointly as the Council of the First Presidency and the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles. Meeting in a room in the Salt Lake Temple, this council discusses and decides all major Church appointments and policy matters." [^11] At the death of the President, the First Presidency is automatically dissolved, and the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles becomes the presiding body of the Church until a new president is ordained.

Additional leaders assist the apostles in their callings. The First Quorum of the Seventy holds special authority to help govern the Church together with the Council of the Twelve, but it acts "under the direction of the Twelve . . . in building up the church and regulating all the affairs of the same in all nations." (D&C 107:34; see also vv. 22-30.) Other quorums of Seventy are called as needed to conduct general Church affairs. The temporal affairs of the Church are administered through the Presiding Bishopric, which is also the Presidency of the Aaronic Priesthood of the Church and serves under the direction of the First Presidency. (See D&C 107:15, 68.)

The First Presidency, the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles, and the First Quorum of the Seventy are the standing, presiding councils of the Church. These general priesthood officers of the Church are collectively known as the General Authorities. Their stewardship is Churchwide and they may receive assignments anywhere in the world to administer Christ's kingdom on earth.

Areas of the Church

The worldwide Church is divided into a number of areas, the largest geographical administrative subdivision of the Church. A typical area would consist of two to five hundred thousand saints, organized into dozens of stakes, with a few missions and temples serving the area. An area presidency is composed of three members from the presiding quorums of the Seventy. They "provide spiritual guidance and administrative direction to leaders and members of the Church in their area." [^12] They implement the policies and instructions of the presiding councils of the Church and supervise the broad range of Church activities and programs in their area.

Area presidencies will sometimes convene informal councils of regional representatives, stake presidents, and possibly mission presidents in their area in order to provide training and direction. When needed, other councils and lines of leadership are organized as a bridge between the general Church leadership and the local stake and ward units.

Regions of the Church

While the functions of priesthood offices are divinely established, the number and arrangement of officers in the administration of Church affairs can be flexible according to the needs of the members. Hence, Paul made provision in the early Christian Church for various "helps" and "governments." (1 Cor. 12:28.) Because the Church is so large today and is spreading rapidly in many foreign lands, an expanding structure is used to administrate various areas and regions in order to unite them with the whole Church.

Most areas are subdivided into a number of "regions," intermediate geographic units with Regional Representatives called to train, instruct, and advise the local stake leaders as directed by the Quorum of the Twelve through the Area Presidencies. [^13] Regions around the world consist of two to six stakes in close geographical proximity. A Regional Representative's primary responsibility is to train stake leaders, which he does "through personal visits, regional council meetings consisting of stake presidencies in the region, stake conferences, or other leadership meetings." [^14]

Stakes and Wards of Zion

The fundamental geographic unit of the Church that provides the full Church program to members is a "stake." In ancient Israel, Zion was pictured as a great tent supported by cords securely fastened to stakes. (See Isa. 54:2-7.) In the latter days, segments of Church population and strength are likewise called stakes—their presence indicating priesthood strength, membership stability, and Church maturity in the locality. Each stake has an organization patterned after the First Presidency and Council of the Twelve, being governed by a stake presidency of three members and a high council of twelve high priests.

The stakes, in turn, are composed of several wards and sometimes smaller branches, each having a bishopric (or branch presidency) and a ward (or branch) council. The ward and branch leaders assist the local priesthood quorums and family heads in bringing the blessings of the Church and gospel into the lives of the individual members.

Any viable organization needs to provide strong programs of instruction and leadership training. Through the leadership of the priesthood administration, a variety of local callings and programs are provided to assist the members. Some of these aids are specifically organized to meet special needs or interests of the members, but most of them are structured around different age groups.

Some Church resources assist individual members or nonmembers. For example, on a stake level, two callings deserve particular mention. A stake patriarch is called to give patriarchal blessings to individual, mature members. A patriarchal blessing is a sacred, confidential, and personal blessing of inspiration and direction. It contains an "inspired and prophetic statement of the life mission of the recipient, together with such blessings, cautions, and admonitions as the patriarch may be prompted to give." [^15] Also, a stake mission president is called to direct the proselyting efforts of the members and missionaries at a local level. He works together with the full-time mission president and missionaries to preach the gospel to nonmembers living in the stake area.

Other local programs are directed toward special needs and interests. For example, stake and ward music, library, public communications, and auditing personnel are called as needed to assist in their particular areas of expertise, which are often unnoticed by most members. More visible are the efforts of the stake and ward activities leaders and committees as they provide a whole variety of sports, cultural, and social activities for the members. Many of these activities are done on a ward or branch level, but some, such as the sports competition and large-scale cultural productions, are necessarily accomplished on a stake level.

Most of the Church programs are organized for particular age and interest groups and are part of the auxiliary organizations of the Church. Besides the priesthood quorums for the men, the Church also has several major auxiliary groups: the Relief Society for all adult women, the Young Men's and Young Women's organizations for the youth aged twelve to eighteen, the Primary for younger children, and the Sunday School for members twelve and older. In addition, young adult and special interest programs are organized for single adults and single heads of households.

Relief Society

The Relief Society was formed in 1842, and it has since grown to become the largest women's organization in the world. Twelve years after the organization of the Church, a few women discussed the idea of forming a society to assist workers at the construction of the Nauvoo Temple. When twenty of these women presented their idea to the Prophet Joseph Smith, he said they should be organized "under the priesthood after a pattern of the priesthood." The selected president (Joseph's wife, Emma), two counselors, and a secretary and treasurer were to preside over the society, just as the First Presidency presided over the Church. "The Church was never perfectly organized until the women were thus organized," the Prophet claimed. The leaders of this women's organization work together with priesthood leaders in a "companionship relationship—not inferior or subordinate, but companion, side-by-side." [^16]

The duties of that first Relief Society were to administer to the poor, strengthen morality in the community, and support the elders of the Church. While the organization has grown to include millions of women worldwide, the charter is basically unchanged. "As defined for the women of the Church today," says Barbara W. Winder, former General President of the Relief Society, "the mission of the Relief Society is to help women (1) have faith in God and build individual testimonies of the gospel of Jesus Christ, (2) strengthen the families of the Church, (3) give compassionate service, and (4) sustain the priesthood." [^17] With the motto "Charity Never Faileth," Relief Society sisters provide sterling examples of compassionate service for Church members and others in their communities.

Young Women's and Young Men's Organizations

Later in Church history, when the Saints were fully established in the Utah territory, and after the initial hardships had passed, young women in the Church began yearning for fashionable clothes like those worn in the East. In 1869, President Brigham Young commissioned Relief Society leaders to form an organization to encourage their daughters in economical and modest dress manufactured locally instead of importing extravagant fashions from other areas. This society became known as the local Retrenchment Association.

The "retrenchment" focus soon expanded to include many areas of "mutual improvement," and then, after a while, the young men were invited to join also. The Young Ladies' and Young Men's Mutual Improvement Associations were organized in the wards in 1875. Besides receiving religious instruction, the teenagers studied history and literature, held debates and dramas, and socialized through dances, picnics, and athletic events. Similar activities still characterize the modern Young Women's and Young Men's organizations as they attend classes on Sunday and participate in various activities during the week, such as game nights, service projects, dances, Scouting camps, sports, homemaking and etiquette demonstrations, and a variety of social and cultural activities.

Primary

In 1878, the need to reach even younger children became apparent, and so Primary Associations were established in wards throughout the areas of Mormon settlements. This organization supplemented the children's early religious training and protected them from worldly influences. Today, small groups of children from three to twelve are taught the basic principles of the gospel in their Primary classes each Sunday and join with larger groups in joint activities that include talks, songs, and stories.

Sunday School

While some adults and a few youth are involved with directing and teaching the Primary-age children, the rest of the members attend age-group classes for religious instruction. Sunday School is the name given the Church auxiliary with the responsibility to instruct members from age twelve upward. Classes for the twelve- to eighteen-year-old youth are coeducational and structured by age. Course instruction focuses on gospel principles and teachings, Church history, scripture study, and the lives and teachings of the modern prophets.

After age eighteen, the adult members can attend a variety of classes, such as Gospel Essentials (primarily for investigators or new members of the Church), Gospel Doctrine (for most adult members), Teacher Development (for prospective or current teachers), Family History (for those interested in help in genealogy and family histories), and Family Relations (for parents seeking helpful instruction). The curriculum for the most heavily attended course, Gospel Doctrine, is based on a four-year rotation of scripture study, with one year devoted to the Old Testament, one year to the New Testament, one year to the Book of Mormon, and one year to the Doctrine and Covenants (with some emphasis on modern Church history.)

Some government bureaucracies, and even a few service clubs and other organizations, continue to exist with minimal effect long after their original purposes have been fulfilled. Having a clear-cut and correct mission statement or declaration of purpose is essential in providing up-to-date, valid reasons for an organization's existence.

The eternal purpose of the church of Jesus Christ is to assist God's children to return in righteousness and purity back into his presence. To focus our attention on more immediate means to achieve this noble purpose, Church leaders have developed a mission statement for the Church with a three-fold emphasis: to preach the gospel to the nonmembers, to perfect the Saints within the Church, and to redeem the dead through the saving ordinances of the temple. [^18] The unique and farsighted mission of the Church distinguishes it as an organization zealously endeavoring to further God's work here on earth and into eternity.

Any effective government, business, or organization needs a variety of personnel and material assets by which it can provide the goods and services its membership needs. By far, the Church's greatest asset is its dedicated members, who work and serve to bring much goodness and righteousness into the lives of many people. As members catch the spirit of the law of consecration, they willingly and anxiously devote their time, money, gifts, and talents to the building of God's kingdom. [^19] As they live as true saints and followers of Christ, they become the living beacons of the restored gospel and help bring many into the full fellowship of the Church. [^20]

From their childhood, members serve each other closely in the Church organization. The Church programs not only instill gospel principles, but they also prepare people to serve and lead in Christ's kingdom. The fact that bishops, stake presidents, and other Church leaders are not paid help their motives for service to remain pure. Also, Church callings and offices are rotated frequently to provide many with the opportunity to grow and learn many aspects of leadership and service. Through long-term, deep and personally involved association with each other, members come to feel a kinship with other Saints exceeded only by the natural one in their own families. Thus, in the words of Paul, members "have the same care one for another. And whether one member suffer, all the members suffer with it; or one member be honoured, all the members rejoice with it." (1 Cor. 12:25-26.)

A School, a Hospital, or a Museum for the Saints?

In some ways, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is like a special school of the Lord on earth. The administrators are the presiding councils of the Church, the faculty are the Church leaders and teachers, and the students are the members. However, there is much more cooperation and rotation between the various positions than one finds in a normal school. The principle of common consent and the practice of lay leadership develop a sense of fellowship as member-students become leader-teachers and as leader-teachers always remain member-students. Through teaching, strengthening, and serving one another, all are edified together.

The Church has also been compared to a hospital or clinic where the spiritually ill can go to find the appropriate cure. Like doctors and nurses, divinely called and inspired leaders and teachers bring God's healing powers into our lives so that we can leave the maladies behind us and in turn strengthen ourselves and serve others. Like staff members and volunteer workers who often work behind the scenes, many Church members serve in callings that provide valuable help so that the Church programs can properly function. And like family and friends who visit and support the sick, our brothers and sisters in the gospel give needed help and encouragement. In the Church, each member serves as both "doctor" and "patient" because all have the opportunity to serve and be served. In the end, all of us enjoy greater spiritual health through our association with each other.

Finally, some might claim that the Church is like a museum of holy saints and sacred relics. Granted, the Church of Jesus Christ houses many valuable spiritual gifts and precious priesthood powers, but they are not to be catalogued, mounted, and displayed in sterile showcases. If the Church is like a museum, it is more like a series of dynamic, hands-on exhibits with which people can become actively involved. The gospel truths and ordinances and the priesthood powers and blessings are available for all to study and, more importantly, to take home with them; they are not just stored in the museum's warehouse.

Whether the Church is compared to a school, hospital, or museum, or if it is likened to the development of a new product, such as an engine, the Lord planned and designed his kingdom on earth to provide the greatest possible blessings to his disciples and followers. The Church members who are trying to fulfill his expectations are far from perfect, but, in the main, they are earnestly striving to help and serve one another. Together, they are working diligently to bring spiritual productivity into many peoples' lives.

In conclusion, we recognize that the CHURCH is an assembly of faithful believers. Although God's kingdom on earth, it is an organization also supported by the law of common consent. Through the Church, the gospel is applied in individual lives as the members strengthen, teach, edify, and serve each other in inspired love and through special programs. Together the Lord's followers establish a social order for those who have entered a covenant relationship with God. This organization then assists in the perfection of the individuals with the help of the whole group. Thus the members grow spiritually and progress together on their way back toward our Heavenly Father's kingdom.

All Church members are expected to work together with unity and love in this soul-building, heavenly reaching effort. While only a small fraction of the membership will ever rise to positions of high leadership, the highest blessings of the kingdom—eternal life and exaltation—are available to all through compliance with essential ordinances and obedience to the commandments. When this joint effort is accomplished, the Lord promises that "the angels [shall] be crowned with the glory of his [Christ's] might, and the saints shall be filled with his glory, and receive their inheritance and be made equal with him." (D&C 88:107.) This is the glorious promise awaiting the faithful members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints—when they and God's angels shall enjoy the Lord's blessings.

For further study, refer to the following entries:

TG: BD: EM: Church Church Auxiliary Organizations Church Organization Kingdom of Heaven or Bishopric Common Consent Kingdom of God Callings

Kingdom of God on Earth Church of Jesus Christ of

Latter-day Saints, The Common Consent First Presidency General Authorities Kingdom of God Lay Participation and Leadership Name of the Church Organization of the Church President of the Church Primary Region, Regional Representative Relief Society Scouting Stake Sunday School Ward Ward Organization Young Men Young Women

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] TPJS, 356.
[^2] ''The True Way of Life and Salvation,'' Ensign, May 1978, p. 4; italics added.
[^3] ''A Report of Stewardship,'' Ensign, May 1981, p. 5.
[^4] This passage has purportedly been quoted more often by General Authorities at general conference than any other single verse of scripture.
[^5] More highlights on the missionary program of the Church will be given later in this chapter.
[^6] See BD, 663.
[^7] Our specific responsibilities as Latter-day Saints are discussed in chapters 33 and 35.
[^8] TPJS, 172.
[^9] See chapter 23 for an examination of the temple, its purposes, and uses.
[^10] See chapter 14 for a discussion of the period after death and before resurrection.
[^11] See BD, 664.
[^12] More details about the eternal family and temple covenants are presented in chapters 23 and 30.
[^13] EM, 2:915.
[^14] Related in an informal gathering of BYU students, Provo, Fall 1983.
[^15] MD, 558; see also chapter 22.
[^16] EM, 3:1199-200.
[^17] Learn of Me: Relief Society Course of Study, 1987 (Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1986), 4.
[^18] This three-fold mission of the Church is discussed in more detail in the next chapter.
[^19] See chapter 28 for a discussion of financial donations to the Church.
[^20] See chapters 34 and 35 for a discussion of missionary work and discipleship.
