Victor L. Ludlow, Principles and Practices of the Restored Gospel ( 1992)

Chapter 34

A Divine Mission

Business firms and service organizations often develop a statement of purpose, a motto, or a mission declaration. More than a catchy slogan or a commercial jingle, a mission statement defines objectives and gives value to the efforts of the group. This expression of intent is usually printed, circulated, and discussed by the leaders and members of the group. The members then focus and unify their efforts to achieve its stated aims. Families and individuals who desire a fulfilling life also need some personal expectations or a type of "mission statement" to help them achieve success.

Similarly, as God's spirit children work together in The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, they need an understanding of the organization's mission so they can best direct their collective effort in returning to God's presence. Until the 1970s, if members were asked to define the purpose of the Church, they would have given a myriad of good responses and correct answers, but an outsider would have had a hard time determining a single, comprehensive, clear statement of purpose. Today, most active members would express the mission of the Church something like the following: "The threefold mission of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is to [1] proclaim the gospel to all peoples, [2] perfect the Saints in Christ's church, and [3] perform vicarious ordinances for the eternal spirits of our deceased ancestors and others."

Longtime Mormons sense that although the central purpose of the Church is to help one another, they need to reach out and share the gospel through missionary work and exemplary service, and they also have a responsibility to establish eternal family ties. Through reviewing this threefold mission of the Church, we come to appreciate how united and loving dedication helps Christ's kingdom on earth fulfill its special destiny.

Evolution of the Church's Threefold Mission Statement

The Church's mission has three primary areas of emphasis: sharing the gospel, strengthening one another, and building eternal families. Missionary work, Church service, and temple assignments all find their place in these three all-encompassing objectives. Church leaders starting with Joseph Smith have stressed the importance of these programs, but they were not combined into one concise declaration. For example, since the beginning of the restoration of the gospel, the Church has been dedicated to missionary work. Church programs, from their origin, were encouraged to develop spirituality in each member's life. Furthermore, the prophets have continuously emphasized the importance of redeeming the dead. Indeed, Joseph Smith stated that "the greatest responsibility in this world that God has laid upon us is to seek after our dead." [^1]

The Church's mission statement as we now know it was first outlined in a series of statements made by President Spencer W. Kimball. He combined two of the three elements together in a general conference talk delivered on April 1, 1978. He indicated that most Church members were aware of the modern prophets' "intense interest in the missionary work . . . and the appeals we have made in many lands for the rededication to preaching the gospel and . . . the good news of the restoration to the people everywhere. . . . I feel the same sense of urgency about temple work for the dead as I do about missionary work for the living, since they are basically one and the same." [^2]

Three years later, again in an April general conference address, President Kimball introduced the threefold mission of the Church for the first time. He said:

My brothers and sisters, as the Brethren of the First Presidency and the Twelve have meditated upon and prayed about the great latter-day work the Lord has given us to do, we are impressed that the mission of the Church is threefold:

1) To proclaim the gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ to every nation, kindred, tongue, and people; 2) To perfect the Saints by preparing them to receive the ordinances of the gospel and by instruction and discipline to gain exaltation; 3) To redeem the dead by performing vicarious ordinances of the gospel for those who have lived on the earth. [^3]

Obviously the General Authorities had spent much effort and prayer in preparing this concise but comprehensive statement. Some of their inspiration undoubtedly came from the New Testament and the emphasis given to these same principles by the Savior and his apostles of old.

Concerning the charge to preach the gospel, Jesus instructed Simon Peter to help convert his brethren after he was converted. (See Luke 22:32.) Christ's last instruction to his apostles was to preach the gospel to every nation, kindred, tongue, and people. (See Matt. 28:19-20; Mark 16:15-19.)

The concept of perfecting the saints finds its origin in the admonition of Jesus to his followers to become "perfect, even as your Father which is in heaven is perfect." (Matt 5:48.) Teachings about perfection within the Church are also found in the writings of Paul who told the Ephesians that Christ organized the Church and provided apostles, prophets, and other priesthood leaders "for the perfecting of the saints" so the saints could be unified in faith until each becomes a "perfect man" or woman. (Eph. 4:12-13; see also 2 Cor. 13:11; Col. 4:12.)

The purpose of redeeming the dead, although unfamiliar among other modern Christian denominations, was taught and practiced in early Christianity. Jesus taught that no person can enter the kingdom of God unless he or she is baptized in water and the spirit. (See John 3:5.) Peter declared that "for this cause was the gospel preached also to them that are dead, that they might be judged according to men in the flesh." (1 Pet. 4:6.) Paul also talked about the foundation temple ordinance—baptism for the dead—in his epistle to the Corinthians. (See 1 Cor. 15:29.)

Note that all three of these Church purposes (sharing the gospel, helping one another, and performing salvation ordinances for others) direct us in accomplishing what seems to be Heavenly Father's own "mission statement" as recorded by Moses centuries ago. God the Father stated that his work and glory was "to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man." (Moses 1:39.) [^4] Mormons actively engaged in fulfilling the Church's threefold mission help bring to pass what God desires.

Keys Restored in the Latter Days for the Church's Mission

Essential elements of the Church's mission statement are found in the revelations and angelic manifestations received by the Prophet Joseph Smith in the Kirtland Temple in April 1836. At that time, three prophetic figures from past gospel dispensations returned to earth to impart special keys to the prophet of the restoration. These three ancient prophets were Moses, Elias, and Elijah.

Moses and Missionary Work

After a glorious appearance of the Savior himself, the Prophet Joseph Smith records, "The heavens were again opened unto us; and Moses appeared before us, and committed unto us the keys of the gathering of Israel from the four parts of the earth, and the leading of the ten tribes from the land of the north." (D&C 110:11.)

The keys of divine authorization and priesthood power that the Prophet received from Moses restored authority to perform true missionary work. Moses was the keeper of these keys because he was the ancient prophet who gathered the Israelites out of the wicked world, epitomized by Egypt, the world's greatest empire of that time. Later, wicked Israel was scattered by the Assyrians, Babylonians, Romans, and others among the nations of the earth. However, the Lord promised many prophets that he would remember and gather Israel in the last days.

Moses was the steward for the House of Israel within God's plan. After directing the first gathering of Israel to their promised land, Moses continued through the ages to supervise the later scatterings and the eventual gathering of Israel. He gave the keys for this final gathering to Joseph Smith. Today, authorized missionaries gather the scattered remnants of Israel (as well as willing Gentiles) from nearly every country on earth into the congregations and stakes of Zion. The commission to preach the gospel to every nation and people was reiterated in modern revelation. (See D&C 58:9, 64; 133:7-8, 37.) The promise has been given that all the world will have the opportunity to hear the gospel as this part of the Church's mission is fulfilled. [^5]

Elias and the Blessings of Abraham

After Moses' visitation, the Prophet Joseph records that "Elias appeared, and committed the dispensation of the gospel of Abraham, saying that in us and our seed all generations after us should be blessed." (D&C 110:12.) The scriptures reveal little about the mortal life and ministry of Elias, but he apparently lived in the days of Abraham and Melchizedek, two role models of faithful and righteous living. Abraham was a noble patriarch, a man of faith and an obedient follower of God. Melchizedek, as his name "king of righteousness" declares, was the king of Salem and an exemplary high priest of God. This man, Elias, committed the keys of the gospel dispensation of Abraham to Joseph Smith. [^6]

Moses reviews the dispensation of Abraham in Genesis, enumerating three great blessings promised to Abraham: (1) he would have a numberless posterity, (2) his posterity would be heirs to a certain land, including Palestine and neighboring areas, and (3) through his descendants, all families of the earth would be blessed. (See Gen. 12:1-3; 17:1-7.)

The first and third of these promises were mentioned by Elias as he conferred the keys of Abraham's dispensation upon Joseph Smith—the promise of posterity (or seed) and the blessings of future generations through this posterity. Abraham's descendants among Church members in this dispensation increase their numbers as they rear their families in the gospel, and they bless other families as they share their gifts and efforts in blessing others.

The gospel or "good news" that God gave to Abraham and that Elias restored was the promise that the blessings of truth and the priesthood would come from Abraham's posterity to the whole earth. Abraham records that his seed was called to direct the ministry of the gospel and the priesthood to the nations of the earth. (See Abr. 2:9-11.) The great patriarch's ancient responsibility, then, was to engrain in his children the gospel truths, their covenant relationship with God, and their responsibility to righteous examples. They would thereby continue throughout the ages as a light and example to all other peoples.

In the latter days, too, the fundamental duty of Church members is to rear their children under the Abrahamic covenant—teaching them correct principles, helping them make sacred covenants, and encouraging them to live exemplary lives. In this way, "all generations after us should be blessed," and our seed, as a continuation of Abraham's, will be perpetuated throughout eternity. In addition, as brothers and sisters in the gospel, we are to help one another as we teach, serve, and strengthen fellow Saints through our individual efforts and Church callings. A central principle in the gospel is that by serving others, one can progress closer to perfection. In essence, we help perfect each other.

Mormons strive for perfection, which is made possible by the atonement and power of Jesus Christ, trying to live all of God's commandments as revealed in the Holy Scriptures. They also strive for the companionship of the Holy Ghost as their guide. Modern-day apostles and prophets, as well as personal revelation received from the Holy Ghost, give Church members further direction, knowledge, and encouragement in their ultimate goal of perfection. Elias' keys, then, are being fulfilled as the Saints are involved in perfecting each other. [^7]

Elijah and the Sealing Powers

Joseph Smith recorded that after Elias delivered his keys, one more angelic visitor appeared to him and Oliver Cowdery in the temple: "Another great and glorious vision burst upon us; for Elijah the prophet, who was taken to heaven without tasting death, stood before us, and said: Behold the time has fully come, which was spoken of by the mouth of Malachi—testifying that he [Elijah] should be sent, before the great and dreadful day of the Lord come—to turn the hearts of the fathers to the children, and the children to the fathers, lest the whole earth be smitten with a curse." (D&C 110:13-15.)

Elijah's latter-day mission, Joseph later wrote, was to "restore the authority and deliver the keys of the Priesthood, in order that all the ordinances may be attended to in righteousness." [^8] In other words, Elijah's keys allowed the blessings of the gospel covenants to be enjoyed by all of God's children. The most important key is the power to seal generations of families together through sacred ordinances. If we fail to perform the sealing ordinances for our ancestors in the temple, we are cut off from them, and the Abrahamic covenant is not perpetuated through them to us. Instead of the whole earth being blessed and united through Abraham's seed, it would be cursed, and the chosen seed would be scattered and lost.

In accordance with the third purpose of the Church, Latter-day Saints have built dozens of modern-day temples throughout the world to do work for those who died without a knowledge of the gospel. Baptisms for the dead, washings and anointings, temple endowments, marriages and sealing ceremonies are performed in the temples on behalf of the living and the dead. [^9] Latter-day Saints believe that by doing this work, those who accept the gospel on the other side of the veil will be able to receive all the blessings promised to those who are faithful members of Christ's church. This doctrine is an expression of the justice and mercy of God, for he has provided a way that all might have the opportunity to accept or reject the gospel, whether in this life or the next. [^10]

Significantly, Elijah, the bearer of the sealing keys, never "tasted death" but was preserved by God to fulfill important missions on the earth that would bless both those living in the flesh and those in the postmortal spirit world. [^11] For the Lord there is no barrier between the world of the physically living and the world of those spirits living on after their physical bodies have died. Also, God is able to bridge the past, present, and future generations of his children. He has provided keys so that mortals now living on earth, the spirits of our deceased ancestors, and the souls of those yet unborn will eventually form a continuous family—sealed together through ordinances performed by the living in holy temples.

Physically, without our ancestors, we would not have been born; likewise, the spirits of the unborn depend on us for their future physical bodies. Spiritually, we are indebted to our ancestors for our religious heritage, and we have a responsibility toward future generations to build upon and transmit this religious heritage. So, neither physical nor spiritual life can continue unbroken unless people continue having children and the hearts of different generations turn toward one another. [^12]

Nurturing an Olive Tree

The inseparable relationship between spreading the gospel, nurturing members in the Church, and maintaining family ties is beautifully illustrated in the allegory of the vineyard recorded in the fifth and sixth chapters of Jacob in the Book of Mormon. Jacob recites this allegory from the writings of an otherwise unknown prophet Zenos of the Old Testament period. The allegory is summarized in the following paragraphs, with an historical interpretation written in italics.

Zenos compares the house of Israel to an olive tree that the Lord planted and nourished in the best soil of his vineyard. After a time, despite the Lord's persistent care, the tree began to decay and the main branches started to wither. (Though settled and preserved in the promised land of Palestine, Israel rejected the word of the Lord until she was nearly destroyed.) To preserve what he could of the tree, the Lord took some surviving branches and planted them in various places throughout the vineyard. (Remnants of Israel were scattered throughout the world.)

In place of the original tree's natural branches, the Lord grafted in branches of wild trees in hope that they might bear good fruit if nourished by strong roots. (Rejected by Israel, the gospel was given to the Gentiles.) For a while, the wild branches did bear good fruit, but in time they began to overrun and sap the strength of the roots. (The early apostolic Christian church flourished among the Gentiles but soon fell into apostasy.)

Again, to preserve the roots, the Lord cast off the wild branches and again grafted in the original branches. During their absence from the mother tree, these original branches had borne good fruit for a season but later started to bear wild fruit. (Scattered Israel also received Christ and his gospel, but fell into apostasy. The Lord then started to gather the house of Israel again into the gospel fold.)

In the end, the Lord will be able to preserve the best of the natural and wild branches. These will bear an abundance of good fruit, which he will gather in and store up against unseasonable weather. (The Lord gathers and restores Israel to her lands of promise, fulfilling all the ancient covenants. Gentiles who embrace the gospel are numbered among the redeemed house of Israel.) The rest of the vineyard is burned, and the Lord enjoys his bounteous harvest. (The Lord destroys the remainder of the wicked world prior to his second coming and glorious millennial reign.)

In Zenos's extensive allegory, the roots of the natural tree were the only thing that could ultimately produce and preserve good fruit. These roots are the Abrahamic covenant and our ancestral ties to it. We nurture these roots as we perform vicarious ordinances for our deceased ancestors. The natural branches of the olive tree, like our established families in the Church, propagate themselves abundantly, complementing and reinforcing each other while drawing their strength from the roots of faith and righteous tradition. We nourish these branches as we perfect the Saints in the household of faith. The grafted branches that also bear good fruit are converts to the Church from among the Gentiles. We multiply and strengthen these branches as we proclaim the gospel to all peoples.

Missionary Work Today

From this allegory and other scriptures, we know that the gospel of Christ was first preached to the Israelites, who rejected it. Christ's apostles then took the word to the Gentiles. When restored in the latter days, however, the gospel was first preached in the Gentile nations, especially to the scattered remnants of Israel among the Gentiles. (See D&C 109:57-67.) It is only now being taken in force to other more identifiable remnants of the house of Israel, such as the Lamanites. Thus, the prophecy is being fulfilled that says "the last shall be first, and the first shall be last." (1 Ne. 13:42.)

Because of many generations of wickedness, the nation of Israel was broken up into four main parts: the "lost" ten tribes who fled from the Assyrian yoke after their deportation in 721 B.C.; the Book of Mormon exiles (Nephites, Lamanites, and the people of Zarahemla or the so-called Mulekites) who fled Jerusalem around 600 B.C. (their descendants are now usually called Lamanites); the house of Judah (the Jews) who were scattered by the Babylonians (586 B.C.) and the Romans (A.D. 70); and other scattered remnants of Israelites (particularly the house of Ephraim) who mixed in among the Gentiles over the course of many centuries. Except for the Jews, the great majority of the descendants of these ancient Israelite groups lost their distinctive identity. They became "lost" as they mixed in among the nations of the earth and forgot their religious heritage. But they were not hidden to the Lord.

The Lord has used prophets and scriptures to reveal where and how these various remnants of Israel will be gathered back together again into one flock. (See 3 Ne. 15:15-16:20.) Also, the Book of Mormon has revealed the location of the Lamanites in the Americas, and early missionary work quickly began to let these scattered remnants of Ephraim and Manasseh know of their Israelite ancestry. Prophets are also preparing the Ten Tribes for their return since, as prophesied, a remnant of them and their special set of scriptures will come forth in the last days. (See D&C 77:9, 14; 2 Ne. 29:11-14; 3 Ne. 21:26.)

The Lord's Way of Missionary Work

The avowed missionary goal of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints was the same as the rest of Christianity—to take the gospel to every nation, kindred, tongue, and people. In the seventeenth through the nineteenth centuries, most Christian missionary societies concentrated on taking the gospel to the pagan and heathen nations of Africa and Asia. Joseph Smith was definitely inspired in his early missionary decisions because he did not follow this accepted practice of the nineteenth-century Protestant missionary societies. Instead of imitating this proselyting pattern, Joseph Smith received divine inspiration to send the missionaries of the restored gospel to the Christian countries of North America and Europe, where other Christians often rebuked and challenged them to go to the pagans instead. However, the success in the numbers of early converts from other Christian denominations and their migration to the settlements of the Latter-day Saints in the Rocky Mountains provided the nucleus for eventual missionary work in other, non-Christian nations—especially after World War II.

From the 1950s through the 1980s, the Church steadily grew in western Europe, South Africa, and in some nations along the Pacific rim. Stakes were established and temples were built to provide centers of strength. By the mid-1980s, the Church had the organization and numbers of close, strong Church members ready to take the gospel to nations formerly under the communist yoke and into other countries in Africa and parts of Asia that had earlier prohibited our activities. Now, missionary success is rapidly growing in eastern Europe, in a variety of central African nations, and in many Asian countries—all with local government recognition and full Church organizational support readily available. With further growth from Church centers of strength and with the aid of modern media and other helps, Mormons will continue their expansion into the rest of the world until the gospel message is heard by all peoples.

Until the 1970s, the majority of converts to the Church came from Protestant backgrounds. These converts consisted of Gentiles and scattered remnants of Israel living among the nations of North America and northern Europe. Very few Catholics and non-Christians joined the Church prior to the 1960s. Today, many Protestant converts still join the Church, but many more new members come from Catholic backgrounds, primarily in Central and South America and the Philippines. For example, in the 1980s, consistently eighteen of the top twenty baptizing missions of the Church were in Latin countries every year, with the other two being in the Philippines. The Latin members, usually called Lamanites by the Latter-day Saints, are mainly descendants of the Book of Mormon exiles and are therefore part of the gathering of Israel.

We are also beginning to see increasing numbers of non-Christians join the Church, especially in Japan, Taiwan, Southeast Asia, and some African countries. If this pattern continues, we can soon expect growing numbers of baptisms among the other groups of scattered Israel, such as those descendants of the Ten Tribes living among Moslem or formerly communist peoples. Also, other non-Christians residing in Africa and Asia will come into Christ's church in increasing numbers.

Thus the goal of early Christianity to take the gospel to the whole world will finally be fulfilled as people everywhere will have the opportunity to hear the restored gospel—whether they have heard the message of Christianity from other Christian missionaries or not. The missionary efforts of previous Catholics and Protestants attempted to convert other peoples, and in some cases they made valuable inroads and prepared the way for the restored gospel.

In the eyes of many non-Christians, however, their attempts were often seen as brutal, imperialistic, and self-serving. For example, apostate Christianity of the Middle Ages sent the Crusaders and their weapons to take back the Holy Land from the infidels and to spread Christianity back into that area of the world. They failed and left in their wake a tradition of deceit and manipulation, all in the name of Christianity. In more recent times, traditional Christianity, especially the Protestants, sent missionaries to Asia and Africa, but they had only limited success because they were seen as representatives of the governing European powers. As most African and Asian nations gained independence from European domination, they not only threw off political controls, but also rejected religious influence. However, the message of the restored gospel, especially as it is proclaimed by missionaries sent from the stakes of Zion, is finally reaching more and more of the inhabitants of the earth. Eventually, the message of the restoration will reach every people.

The Missionary Program of the Church

Mormon missionaries serve on a voluntary, nonpaid, temporary basis. The great majority of missionaries are young men between the ages of nineteen to twenty-six, who customarily serve for two years. A large minority, about one-fifth, of the missionaries are single women, ages twenty-one and older, who usually serve about one-and-a-half years. A smaller minority, about one-tenth, of the missionary force is comprised of older married couples who usually serve for a year or more.

Missionary service is preceded by an interview with the local bishop and the submitting of certain documents, including ID photos, health records, dental forms, and so on. Usually the prospective missionary initiates this process, but the bishop or other Church leaders may initiate the invitation to serve a mission. The bishop evaluates the person's spiritual strengths, commitment to serve, worthiness to represent the Church, social skills, financial resources, and the appropriate timing of missionary service. When the bishop feels the person is ready and worthy to serve, he forwards the recommendation to the stake president, who also interviews the candidate. When the papers and interviews are completed, the stake president submits the recommendation to the Missionary Department of the Church.

The Missionary Department keeps track of all Church missions and their needs for expansion or replacements. In an atmosphere of discussion and prayer, designated members of the Quorum of the Twelve meet weekly with representatives from the Seventies and the Missionary Department to suggest preliminary assignments for each missionary or couple. These recommendations are sent to the First Presidency, who approves or modifies them according to inspiration. After the date for entering a missionary training center is established, a formal letter is sent by the President of the Church to the individual or couple, inviting them to serve in a specific mission.

The prospective missionary usually has from a few weeks to a few months to make final preparations to enter missionary service. The timing depends upon how quickly they are needed in their respective missions and how soon necessary visas and other requirements can be met. Letters from the assigned mission presidents and the Missionary Department inform the missionaries about clothing, health, and other special needs and expectations for the particular areas where they will be serving. On a Sunday shortly before beginning their service, missionaries are almost always invited to speak in their local ward sacrament meetings. Just prior to entering the assigned Missionary Training Center (MTC), each missionary is set apart by his or her stake president, and the mission officially begins.

The first few weeks are spent at one of the Church's Missionary Training Centers, which are established throughout the world. At the MTC, missionaries adjust to missionary life as they study the scriptures, learn methods of teaching the gospel, and attend inspirational meetings and study sessions. Missionaries going to a foreign-language mission also receive intensive language instruction and cultural information and helps. Missionaries going to a foreign mission usually spend two months at the MTC before departing for their field of labor, while missionaries already fluent in the language of their assigned mission usually spend three weeks.

When entering the mission field, new missionaries are welcomed and oriented by the mission president, his wife, and the mission office staff. Mission presidents are typically high priests of late middle age who temporarily leave their professions and serve for three years. A mission president and his wife are both set apart as missionaries and receive special training from the General Authorities before entering the mission field. Dependent children will accompany the parents, but they are not set apart as missionaries, and they continue their schooling and other normal family and social activities, as much as is possible in the area where the parents are serving.

The mission president "trains, counsels, assigns, and gives spiritual support to each missionary, and his wife plays a vital role in training programs and the health, welfare, and safety of each missionary." [^13] Together, they nurture and direct the efforts of the one hundred to two hundred and fifty full-time missionaries currently serving in that mission. After three years of intensive, edifying service and involvement with hundreds of missionaries, members, and nonmembers, the mission president and his family return home, and a new president begins his own administration.

The mission president assigns each new missionary and couple to an area where they will serve. New single missionaries are trained by experienced companions, and couples are usually assisted by other experienced couples or local Church leaders. Additional training occurs at weekly district meetings (a missionary district comprises two to five companionships or couples serving in close geographic proximity). Periodic zone conferences and testimony meetings are also held, usually under the direction of the mission president and his assistants (a missionary zone consists of a number of districts). But the most valuable training usually comes from one's companion. A missionary never labors alone; each always has an assigned companion to live, study, and work with as they find, teach, and fellowship people who are searching for the gospel truths and who want to become covenant members of Christ's church by entering the waters of baptism.

Following the principle that one's time and talents as a missionary are dedicated to the Lord, missionaries work very hard in their callings. Typically, they arise early, usually by 6:30 A.M., and spend some time studying and preparing before leaving their apartments for a full eight to eleven hours of missionary-related activities. Part of one weekday, usually known as a "P-Day" (preparation day), is devoted to laundering clothes, cleaning apartments, shopping, writing letters, and meeting other personal needs. Periodically, the mission president changes companions and transfers missionaries to new areas of service. As the months of hard work go by, eternal friendships are established with fellow missionaries and many members in the area. Because missionaries are able to concentrate fully on serving others, most of them later describe their missions as "the best two years" of their lives up to that time.

Missionary work has a long tradition in The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Except in times of extreme economic or political distress, such as in times of depression or war, large numbers of Latter-day Saints have served full-time missions. In recent decades, more than one-half of one percent of the Church membership is involved in full-time missionary work at any given time. For example, in 1990 over forty thousand full-time missionaries were serving from a Church membership of slightly over seven million people—for a percentage of .57% (or 1.14 missionaries for each two hundred members.) Similar ratios are found in other years: 1970 = .47%; 1975 = .53%; 1980 = .67%; 1985 = .49%. The average for these five measurements is .55% (or 1.1 missionaries serving for each two hundred members.)

This means that at least one of every two hundred Latter-day Saints is deferring schooling, vocation, or retirement in order to serve full-time in missionary service. As they return home, others take their place, and the service cycle continues. Since missionary service is rotated among Church members, many Mormons will have served at least one mission during their lifetimes. Some members will serve two, three, and even more missions, especially in their retirement years. Missionaries receive many social and spiritual rewards from their service, but their greatest satisfaction usually derives from the fact that they are sharing the "good news" of the Lord's teachings with many people. Missionaries are the latest generation of Christ's disciples who are following his admonition to preach his gospel in all the world. (See Matt. 24:14; 28:19.)

As the restored gospel is taught to more and more people throughout the nations, hundreds of thousands of them join the church of Jesus Christ every year. As a result, new branches and wards are organized, and new meetinghouses are dedicated almost on a daily basis. On an average Sunday, one to three new stakes are organized somewhere in the world. As the magnitude of the Church increases, its influence in society grows, and world citizens cannot ignore its presence.

What Is the World's View of the Church?

Just as convert success has moved from those of Protestant background to the Catholic community and now more into the non-Christian world, a similar evolution is recognizable in the world's changing perception of the Church. The Church was founded in nineteenth-century Protestant New England and shared many practices and cultural traditions with the prominent sects of that day. Like Baptists, we Latter-day Saints baptize by immersion; like Seventh-Day Adventists, we practice a strict health code; like Quakers, we espouse values of self-sufficiency. In fact, the "Mormons" are still commonly grouped with the Protestant sects in many religious textbooks.

As the twentieth century concludes, however, the view is changing. With our continued emphasis on ordinances, revealed doctrine, divine priesthood authority, and a strong hierarchical church structure, Latter-day Saints are now perceived by the world as sharing much in common with Catholic dogma. For example, Mormons and Catholics both share a more traditional family life-style—large families on the East Coast are assumed to be Catholic; in the West they are likely Mormon. In addition, the leaders of both religions repeatedly speak out against abortion and about other moral issues, and they maintain the priesthood and its ecclesiastical callings exclusively for male members.

Another trend has been developing in which people are beginning to identify some church practices with those found among non-Christian religions. For example, the patriarchal family structure of LDS families appears similar to the strong family practices in Islam. The appreciation and reverence for our ancestors and having sacred temples for special worship seem to outsiders to be similar to traditions in some oriental religions. Our peculiar health laws have a similar uniqueness to those practiced by devout Moslems and Jews. And the practice of periodic fasting is found in a variety of non-Christian faiths. Finally, our tolerance toward other religions and our acknowledgment and respect for the truths they contain reflect oriental philosophy more than that of traditional Christianity. In short, as more non-Christians come into the Latter-day Saint fold, they find family practices and religious teachings similar enough to their own that the transition from their culture to that of the kingdom of God on earth is made easier.

The transition from a worldly culture to the spiritual kingdom is nonetheless difficult for many converts. Their families, friends, and peers often ostracize them. They must adjust to new and usually more strict religious and moral expectations. Although the Latter-day Saints are noted for their warm, open, and friendly ways, new members still need time before they feel fully integrated within the congregation. This is particularly true in areas of great missionary success where new converts are brought into young, struggling branches and wards on an almost weekly basis.

This does not mean, however, that a new convert must reject all of his previous culture when joining the Church. Many cultural differences can easily coexist in the worldwide kingdom of God, just as there are differences among the cultures of the Old and New Testaments, the Book of Mormon peoples, and earlier converts in our modern dispensation. Some traditional cultural practices are steeped in pagan idolatry, however, and are antithetical to the gospel and must be given up.

As a simple example, Dr. Arthur Henry King—an English convert to the Church and a former professor at Brigham Young University—tells the story of an Asian friend who had joined the Church and later came to England for a visit. When Dr. King met the man and his wife at the London train station, he was dismayed to see his friend walking quickly toward him in greeting, leaving his wife behind struggling with all of their luggage. Dr. King, in his characteristically straightforward manner, informed his friend that the docile servitude of Asian wives to husbands was a tradition not in keeping with noble gospel principles. [^14]

When converts join the Church, they must bring their personal background and beliefs into harmony with those of Christ's kingdom on earth. The threefold mission of the Church becomes the primary means by which they focus their energy toward building God's kingdom on earth. Through increasing missionary efforts, all God's children will be given a chance to hear and accept divine truth. By perfecting the Saints, the covenant members of Christ's kingdom learn to live together in righteous harmony, preparing themselves for the heavenly social structure of eternity. By performing temple covenants for the dead, generations of God's children are linked together in heart and mind, just as they are united in the loving eyes of the Lord. Thus the blessings of Abraham are made available to all despite their varied physical and cultural backgrounds, and the divine social organization of families is established for eternity.

The fulfillment of this threefold mission and the establishment of this eternal, heavenly kingdom are manifestations of God's power and orderliness. Things that are not joined together in any kind of order or system are naturally in a state of disorganization. In the beginning, the Lord took things that were disorganized (such as intelligences, material matter, worlds, and so on) and then organized them into a state of order and purpose. Similarly, he is helping his spirit children develop and progress from a weak, incomplete, telestial existence toward a glorious state of eternal order. In the resurrection, God's children will be organized into differing kingdoms, depending upon their actions in this existence.

God's kingdom on earth must likewise follow this organizational pattern and purpose: "Mine house is a house of order, saith the Lord God, and not a house of confusion." (D&C 132:8.) We have the opportunity to help God's children achieve their divine potential through the threefold mission of the church, which unifies our power in this marvelous effort.

In summary, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints has a threefold MISSION: (1) to proclaim the gospel to all peoples, (2) to perfect the Saints in the household of faith, and (3) to perform vicarious ordinances for the living spirits of the deceased. The threefold mission of the Church has given guidance, direction, and purpose to Latter-day Saints. God, in his infinite wisdom, has restored his glorious gospel upon the earth to bless the lives of all his children. All three purposes of the Church are part of one great work—to assist our Father in Heaven and his Son, Jesus Christ, in their grand and glorious mission "to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man." (Moses 1:39.) Church members working toward fulfilling this mission not only spread the restored gospel abroad, but they also bless others and strengthen themselves, making it possible for more of God's children to progress together on their way back to his kingdom.

For further study, refer to the following entries:

TG: BD: EM: Elias Elias Baptism for the Dead Elijah Elijah Elias Missionary Work Fellowshipping Members Peculiar People Missionary, Missionary of Life Missions Teaching the Gospel

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] See chapter 15 for the rewards of salvation, chapter 18 for an examination of baptism, and chapter 19 for the gift and companionship of the Holy Ghost.
[^2] Oxford English Dictionary (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1989), 4:733.
[^3] WNTCD, 520.
[^4] Chapters 3 and 13 explain more about the attributes of Christ and the power of his atonement.
[^5] Refer to chapter 16 for further insights on the gift and power of faith.
[^6] TC, 22.
[^7] Chapters 20 and 24 provide further insights into why and how we can strengthen our spirituality through obedience to God's commandments. Chapters 4 and 19 highlight the teaching and testifying roles of the Holy Ghost.
[^8] Titles used in the scriptures to describe Christ are listed at the end of chapter 3. Insights about the Messiah's redeeming role in God's plan are highlighted in chapters 13-15.
[^9] Chapter 26 reviews other blessings that result from living a pure life.
[^10] TC, 24.
[^11] Further insights on the roles and values of Church fellowship are in chapter 33.
[^12] Chapter 20 provides a variety of suggestions for improving one's spiritual health.
[^13] Chapter 17 outlines the steps of repentance that can help any struggling Saint to find the way back into full gospel commitment and Church fellowship.
[^14] Chapter 12 covers the warning signs and dangers of falling into the path of sin.
