Victor L. Ludlow, Principles and Practices of the Restored Gospel ( 1992)

Chapter 35

One Fold—One Shepherd

Next to physical survival, the need to identify and belong to a loving, supportive group is one of the strongest human needs. A desire for mutually beneficial companionship naturally finds expression in many forms: immediate and extended families, religious denominations, service organizations, professional societies, recreational clubs, political affiliations, nationalities, and races. Even adolescents rebelling against "the establishment" in the name of individualism soon form their own gangs and subcultures. It seems that almost everyone wants to belong to a compatible group.

Belonging to a select group has both requirements and rewards. The most common requirement is a certain allegiance to the association, including a commitment to an expected life-style. The predominant rewards are a sense of identity and positive reinforcement as the mutual purposes of the group are accomplished. To a degree, the rewards of belonging exact the price of conformity because we blend our personality with the assemblage. If this process requires us to drastically change our behavior or does not seem to meet our own needs, we may choose to move on to another group. In fact, since our personalities are so rich and our needs so varied, we are often involved in many groups. Thus people modify their associations throughout their lifetimes in search of the right combination of human interactions.

The gospel of Jesus Christ reminds us that all mankind is bound together in two most fundamental ways—common spiritual parentage from God and our shared physical lineage from Adam and Eve. Since the days of Adam, the Lord has invited us as brothers and sisters to join together with him in several unions—families, church, kingdom, and sometimes even cities and nations. He requires a full gospel commitment of every individual follower. Like a shepherd watching over his flock, he recognizes the strengths of bringing his disciples together as a community of believers. He expects unity among his followers, and in return he promises them great personal and eternal rewards.

Even when some adherents of the gospel kingdom distort the true teachings, practices, or purposes of the Lord's gospel, some good is still accomplished as the imperfect community and its members strive to do things that are right and noble. This is one reason why religious and family traditions have endured for centuries amid the rise and fall of gospel dispensations and the passing of various civilizations and nations.

As we seek to build upon family bonds and grow together in a covenant fellowship, we need to discuss the basic requirements and rewards for discipleship as followers of Jesus Christ. Baptism is the initial requirement for entrance into Christ's church, and the ultimate rewards of salvation and the companionship of the Holy Ghost are promised those who remain faithful in his spiritual kingdom. [^1] We will now highlight what is expected of members of his church and review additional blessings flowing from fellowship with other Latter-day Saints.

Discipleship

Though the Lord invites "all to come unto him . . . black and white, bond and free" (2 Ne. 26:33), the requirements of discipleship are exacting. The term disciple is found frequently in the four gospel accounts of the New Testament. Jesus specifically called twelve special disciples or apostles to help him in his work, and the term was subsequently used to describe all true followers of Christ. Defined as "one who follows or attends upon another for the purpose of learning from him," [^2] a disciple is also identified as "a pupil, follower, or adherent of any teacher or school of . . . learning." [^3] Jesus Christ instructs us, as his disciples, that our most noble aim is to perfect ourselves and become like him and our Heavenly Father. He said, "Therefore I would that ye should be perfect even as I, or your Father who is in heaven is perfect." (3 Ne. 12:48; cf. Matt. 5:48.) To become like Christ, we must learn to emulate him and become more than a pupil of his learning—we become a follower of his behavior.

Discipleship requires three steps: motivation, learning, and application; or as Christ calls them: faith, obedience, and righteousness. In order to have the desire to be Christ's disciple, we must first believe in his divinity. Then we must study his teachings and learn to do all that he asks of us. Finally, we must live a life of purity, love, and service as he did. Following these three steps will eventually bring us to where he is—in the heavenly realms in a state of spirituality. Thus, when we become disciples of Christ, we learn from him all that we must know, do, and be in order to live with him and God the Father.

Though the pathway is hard, the rewards of discipleship are great. Some are readily apparent, such as the blessing of an ever-increasing testimony, the peace of knowing that what we are doing is right, and the acquisition of spirituality and eternal life. But other rewards are not as easy to perceive—such as new dimensions of understanding, fellowship shared with other Church members, or the sense of fulfilled destiny that accompanies being a disciple. Discipleship with Christ and membership in his church on earth actually prepare us for the heavenly association with Christ and Heavenly Father, where "no unclean thing can dwell." (1 Ne. 10:21.)

Faith: Strengthening Our Belief in Christ

To the true disciple, Jesus is not merely another great teacher. He was not born just to deliver a message—he is the message: "I am the way, the truth, and the life: no man cometh unto the Father, but by me." (John 14:6.) All people enter into heaven through him, because of his atoning sacrifice and his infinite love. He is the great focal point of the universe, the "light which is in all things, which giveth life to all things, which is the law by which all things are governed, even the power of God." (D&C 88:13.) Every true and good thing is embodied in him. [^4]

To follow Christ, a disciple must develop faith in him and remain true to this belief above all else. [^5] He or she must also refuse to follow the philosophies of men or to be "conformed to this world" with its patterns of materialistic selfishness. (Rom. 12:2.) A disciple judges all ideas and practices of the world by only one standard, given in great simplicity by Moroni in his closing remarks in the Book of Mormon: "It is given unto you to judge, that ye may know good from evil; and the way to judge is plain, . . . for every thing which inviteth to do good, and to persuade to believe in Christ . . . is of God. But whatsoever thing persuadeth men to do evil, and believe not in Christ, and deny him, and serve not God . . . is of the devil." (Moro. 7:15-17.)

With such a strict standard, we can easily see why the disciples of Christ are usually unpopular with the world, which is full of people who insist on thinking and acting "independently" of any such rigid code. Only when the disciples' testimonies are unshakable will they be able to ignore all other distractions and follow the Savior wholeheartedly.

Obedience: Learning the Discipline of Discipleship

Once a person has a strong belief in Christ, the next step is to seek learning from him and to follow his counsel. A commitment to study and achieve requires a great deal of discipline. Indeed, without discipline no one can become a lasting disciple of any great master or school of learning. Discipline is the essence of discipleship, as seen in the common Latin roots of these two words. In English, a disciple is a learner, and the word comes from the Latin root discipere, meaning "to learn." To discipline oneself is to subject oneself to instruction and training. This term comes from the Latin root discipulus, meaning "a learner." Ironically, our contemporary English has almost transposed the original Latin meanings of these terms: the old root to learn now means "a learner," while the ancient root for a learner now describes the self-control necessary "to learn." Thus, without discipline one cannot be a disciple.

To be a disciple of Christ, we must conform to his standard of moral behavior and obey his spiritual laws. Only those with great discipline are able to do this. Many who will not admit the need for discipline in moral and spiritual behavior at least recognize its value in other fields of human endeavor, such as in the classroom, on the sports field, or in business. As Elder Neal A. Maxwell explains, "Man did not get to the moon with random trajectories and with each astronaut 'doing his own thing.' The price for reaching the moon was obedience to universal law." [^6] Likewise, the individual interpretation of the concert pianist and the graceful spontaneity of the ballet dancer are possible only after years of strict technical discipline.

The disciple of Christ must similarly add strict obedience to his belief so that the truth can make him free. (See John 8:32.) In fact, we must first follow the example of Christ before we can fully know that his doctrine is true. This is another way in which spiritual truth differs from secular knowledge—it is obtainable only through action. "If any man will do his [God's] will," the Savior said, "he shall know of the doctrine, whether it be of God, or whether I speak of myself." (John 7:17.) As we discipline ourselves in keeping Christ's commandments, we earn the companionship of the Holy Ghost, through which we are spiritually reborn and able to overcome bondage to our own earthly ignorance and nature. The Spirit is then able to teach us great hidden truths of the eternities. [^7]

Righteousness: Following a Path to Perfection

As we study and follow Christ's teachings, thereby demonstrating obedience to his commandments, the Holy Spirit enlightens us, and we gradually become more Christlike. We begin to incorporate the divine personality of Christ into our own. Thus, Alma speaks in earnest when he asks, "Have ye received his image in your countenances? Have ye experienced this mighty change in your hearts?" (Alma 5:14.) The spiritually reborn "know that, when he shall appear, [they] shall be like him; for [they] shall see him as he is." (1 Jn. 3:2.) The last step is to become like Christ.

Among the Lord's many titles is "THE LORD OUR RIGHTEOUSNESS." (Jer. 23:6.) He is also a source and model for our righteousness. In Nephi's great psalm, he calls God "the rock of my righteousness." (2 Ne. 4:35; see also Ps. 4:1.) In becoming like Christ, we must strive to emulate the qualities that he has. Although his attributes and titles are too numerous to mention here, [^8] three key qualities characterize Christ's divine nature: purity, love, and service. These three characteristics of Jesus Christ are the basic characteristics of true righteousness.

Jesus' Example of Purity

At first glance, Jesus was simply a carpenter's son from Nazareth. But closer observation reveals a person of absolute purity. Never did he transgress or sin against any law of God. He always sought God's kingdom first as he went about his Father's business. Not once did he seek to acquire worldly wealth. He gave of himself without selfishness or personal ambition. Never did he succumb to the baseness of Satan's world. Without guile or hypocrisy, he brought spiritual power into the lives of others. Pure intent motivated all that he thought, said, and did. And after he had drunk the bitter cup and fulfilled all righteousness in the suffering of his atonement and the glory of his resurrection, he commanded us to follow him since he was then "made perfect." (Heb. 5:8-9; see also 3 Ne. 12:48.)

As we live clean healthy lives, we provide a purer physical tabernacle for our heavenly spirit. As we purge our souls of sin and cleanse ourselves from vanity and pride, we purify our spirit so we can grow spiritually. As pure intent motivates our thoughts, words, and actions, we prepare ourselves to stand in holy places, even in God's celestial realms. [^9] (See Ps. 24:3-4.)

Christ's Example of Love

The greatest and most encompassing quality Jesus shows us is his unconditional love for all mankind. His love motivated his atoning sacrifice for our sins. Without his love and atonement, we would be unable to return to our Heavenly Father's presence. All other aspects of the gospel and the commandments hinge on this quality as well. We can only fulfill the necessary requirements to return to the highest realms of the celestial kingdom when we have a love of God and others. Love of God motivates us to return to him, and our love of others increases our capacity to enjoy God's heavenly company.

Any disciple of Christ who develops empathy and sensitivity toward others will experience a special fullness of joy. (See Alma 27:17-19.) Elder Maxwell explains how discipline can foster our capacity to love: "Self-discipline can keep us sensitive to others, whereas hedonism and pleasure-seeking rob us of our capacity to feel and to empathize." [^10] Through refinement by the Spirit, sensitivity and empathy can grow to divine love, which is the Savior's ultimate qualification for discipleship: "A new commandment I give unto you, That ye love one another; as I have loved you. . . . By this shall all men know that ye are my disciples, if ye have love one to another." (John 13:34-35.)

When Jesus tells us to love one another, as he has loved us, he encourages us to develop a special type of love that is important for our eternal well-being. Other prophets have described this edifying love as charity, which is "the pure love of Christ, and it endureth forever; and whoso is found possessed of it at the last day, it shall be well with him." (Moro. 7:47.) This passage makes it clear that love is a quality we need in these last days. Through earnest prayer and with God's help, we can obtain this love, as Mormon promised when he said, "Pray unto the Father with all the energy of heart, that ye may be filled with this love, which he hath bestowed upon all who are true followers of his Son, Jesus Christ." (Moro. 7:48.) After we obtain this love, we manifest it in our works as the Lord did.

The Messiah's Example of Service

Christ manifested his love for us by bearing our sins. We also show love to each other in his Church by our willingness to "bear one another's burdens, . . . mourn with those that mourn; yea, and comfort those that stand in need of comfort." (Mosiah 18:8-9.) When one has a Christlike love, he cannot help but love the people around him and desire to lighten their burdens, whether physical, emotional, or spiritual.

Jesus served people in numerous ways, healing the sick, raising the dead, and providing for their various needs. King Mosiah, who also epitomized service to his people, likewise commanded us to do the same, "I would that ye should impart of your substance to the poor, every man according to that which he hath, such as feeding the hungry, clothing the naked, visiting the sick and administering to their relief, both spiritually and temporally." (Mosiah 4:26.)

One of the ready opportunities that Latter-day Saints have to serve their fellowman comes through membership in the Church. The lay priesthood and leadership of the restored church, upheld by the common consent of members, gives all Saints an opportunity to teach, serve, and support one another. The Church provides many structured opportunities for service through its teachings and programs. In addition, if we are sensitive to the Spirit, we will find many opportunities for service aside from formal Church service. If we keep our lives and service centered around Christ, we will ultimately succeed in helping others. In one of the greatest sermons on discipleship, Jesus calls himself the vine and identifies us as the branches bringing forth the necessary gospel fruits. (See John 15.) With Heavenly Father's nurturing care and Christ's power, we will develop love one for another that will spiritually strengthen everyone it touches. (See John 15:1, 10-16.)

Fellowship with Every Saint

In our introduction, we stated that people may become disillusioned with an organization if it ceases to meet their needs or if they don't feel they make an important contribution to the group. Sometimes a large organization is too large and impersonal; on the other hand, a smaller society might make too many demands on its members. To try to avoid these problems, most Church operations take place in individual branches and wards, usually comprised of a few dozen to several hundred people. In this way, the responsibilities of leadership, teaching, organization, and fellowship are shared, and the differing needs of members can be addressed at a personal level and yet have access to the resources of the greater Church organization.

The LDS community is both large enough to provide wide cultural and human diversity and localized enough to provide ample opportunities for social bonding. As people become involved in an LDS ward, they soon recognize that Latter-day Saints have different personalities and varying levels of testimony, Church activity, and religious behavior. Each member is at different stages of spiritual progression, spiritual understanding, and religious devotion. Members find too that evaluating their own spiritual barometers of faith, obedience, and righteousness is difficult, much less being able to measure them in the lives of others.

Although diversity in the Church may disillusion some and frustrate others, it is actually beneficial. As we observe ourselves and others on the paths of spiritual struggle and progress, we learn the nature of mortality and come to appreciate the helps that a loving Heavenly Father has given us. The diverse gifts of the membership furthermore edify the whole: some may have the gift of faith, others the gift of teaching, others the gift of discernment, others the gift of wisdom, and so on. "To some is given one [gift], and to some is given another, that all may be profited thereby." (D&C 46:12; see vv. 9-27.) In addition, devout and spiritually mature members can help strengthen the spiritual convictions of those who are struggling. We look to this type of faithful, active, and wholesome disciple and say, "If God's celestial kingdom is made up of people like this, I want to be there in such good company."

In our efforts to be perfect even as Christ is perfect, we will find ourselves strong in some areas of discipleship but weak or struggling in others. We may have a solid gospel understanding and doctrinal foundation but still experience times of questioning and concern. We may be active in our Church callings, willing to fulfill their religious obligations but struggling with some particular commitment or commandment. We may be loving, genuine, and helpful while working to overcome some personal weaknesses or character flaws. Comprised of many members, the spiritually maturing group of Saints in LDS wards and branches provide a solid core. Assisting others while receiving strength themselves, the Saints work together to build the human soul. [^11]

Some Latter-day Saints with a mixture of good attributes but a variety of minor deficiencies may be involved members who nevertheless feel limited in what they can contribute to the ward or branch. Basically believing, concerned, and decent people, their involvement with the Church may be based more on social contacts and family traditions than on a solid spiritual foundation. Other members at times may experience disappointments in their Church callings or frustration with keeping some commandments. Recent converts, young adults, or individuals who have recently been less active in the Church may feel challenged in their attempt to conform to gospel expectations.

All these members want to build their testimonies, desiring to serve in the Church while developing a more Christlike life, but wanting and needing help to overcome their spiritual deficiencies. [^12] In experiencing these frailties, all members learn the necessity of the Atonement and the value of repentance and forgiveness, relying upon the mercies of the Savior. This common, shared experience forges powerful bonds of kinship in the wards and branches of the Church.

Latter-day Saints with weak spiritual convictions, limited Church activity, or inconsistent religious behavior are struggling to maintain their gospel commitment. Sometimes called "less active" members, they usually sense that their faith and life-style are out of harmony with the gospel, and they might feel awkward around other, more active members. They may even feel isolated from the Church and thus not readily seek for full fellowship with other members, especially if they move to a new location where new LDS contacts are not immediately established. Diligent family members, faithful home and visiting teachers, dedicated bishops, and caring friends who take an interest in their spiritual welfare can help such struggling members. On the other hand, if concerned friends, families, missionaries, or other members do not maintain some type of religious contact with them, the less-active members may fall into complete inactivity. [^13]

When spiritual weaknesses prevail and one loses the desire to live the gospel, the natural tendency is to completely disassociate oneself from the Church and become inactive. Such a person may keep some belief, but many problems weaken it. Some social and cultural ties may remain, and he or she may attend Church meetings on rare occasions, especially for special religious or family events (such as the blessing of an infant, a missionary farewell, or a Christmas program involving a family member), but the person feels little attachment to the Church or the Saints. Standards of behavior may still fit general social norms, but they will be out of harmony with the commandments of the restored gospel. In essence, this person feels, acts, and lives more like an outsider than like a Latter-day Saint. Unless the hand of God or the concerted efforts of other Church members turns this person around, he or she is well on the path of personal apostasy. [^14]

Although few in number, Church members who completely apostatize by committing gross sins, turning against Church leaders, or teaching doctrinal heresies can do immense damage to the Church. They set poor examples to the world and weaken the faith of new or less secure members. If they continue such patterns of wickedness, they soon find themselves outside the Church through the process of excommunication. They are welcome to attend most Church meetings, but because of the seriousness of their offenses, they may not partake of the sacrament, nor are they allowed to give talks or prayers, fill any callings, or contribute financially to the Church. To come back into the Church, they must bring forth fruits of faith and repentance and seek for readmission.

The Church is a God-given vehicle for perfecting the imperfect Saints through instruction, fellowship, support, and love. It will not fail us. Rather we will fail ourselves if we do not become fully involved in God's kingdom on earth. When we strive to lift others, we all become unified and strengthened in Christ's work. As Paul told the Hebrews, "Both he that sanctifieth and they who are sanctified are all of one." (Heb. 2:11.) This "unity is the hallmark of the true Church of Christ. It is felt among our people throughout the world. As we are one, we are his." [^15] Thus, we must overcome diversity and weakness and help our fellow Saints to grow if we wish to be true members of Christ's fold.

To help build one another, we are commanded to magnify our callings and responsibilities in the Church, giving of our time, talents, and financial resources to build the kingdom of God. The responsibilities of discipleship are great and require considerable sacrifice, but the rewards of fellowship with the Saints are greater. In the Church, members find a true sense of belonging to an extended family of many brothers and sisters as they prepare for a similar, though far more perfect society in the world to come. Such fellowship brings us together until we indeed become "spiritually begotten" sons and daughters of Christ in his eternal family. (See Mosiah 5:7.) Of course, we should not help and fellowship only those in the Church; Christ reached out to anyone he could. Genuine fellowship with the Saints provides purpose and confidence in building a relationship of trust and friendship with others in the world.

"Ye Are the Light of the World"

We never know how effective the examples of our individual lives can be in spreading the gospel. More than mass media communication or the extensive distribution of literature, our sincere testimonies and devout lives are an open declaration of Christianity in action. The Master told us, "Ye are the light of the world." (Matt. 5:14.) Countless stories are related of people who have seen the righteousness of the Lord's disciples and sought for the same gospel blessings in their lives. Disciples of Christ fulfill his admonition to let their light so shine that others, seeing their good works, will give glory to God. (See Matt. 5:16.)

The best act of service one can perform for another is to give one's most priceless possessions—time and things of eternal value. Parents give this kind of service as they rear their children. As LDS children are brought up in the gospel light, they become the next generation's missionaries, who will perform a different kind of service by sharing the precious religious truths through preaching the gospel to others. A major part of Jesus' own mission on earth was to teach his gospel and help others find their way back to our Father.

A strong desire to share the gospel is the natural consequence of anyone who has been fully converted to the truth. For example, after Alma the Younger and the sons of King Mosiah were themselves converted to the gospel, "they were desirous that salvation should be declared to every creature, for they could not bear that any human soul should perish." (Mosiah 28:3.) So they embarked for the most difficult mission field of their day—preaching among the Lamanites. There they enjoyed great success.

Modern disciples are likewise called to take the gospel "unto all nations, kindreds, tongues and people." (D&C 42:58.) A major portion of missionary work is accomplished by the tens of thousands of full-time missionaries in hundreds of missions throughout the world. Informal missionary work through exemplary members who share gospel teachings with their friends also yields many convert baptisms. Together, members and missionaries bring hundreds of thousands of new members into The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints each year. Convert baptisms, coupled with the increase in membership through the baptisms of eight-year-olds in LDS families, make the Church the fastest-growing major religion in the world.

The Rolling Stone Gains in Strength

Any member of a group or society should hope that the organization he or she belongs to has such value that others would also want to belong to it. A strong, steady growth rate should characterize a dynamic group, especially over the course of time. Such a growth rate is found in The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, symbolized in Nebuchadnezzar's famous dream as a massive stone "cut out without hands," which Daniel prophesied would become "a great mountain, and [fill] the whole earth." (Dan. 2:34-35.)

Starting with six men in 1830, the Church grew to six hundred and seventy thousand by 1930. By 1990, over six hundred and fifty thousand names a year were being added to the Church rolls annually. Of course, a number of names were taken off the Church rolls each year as people died or left the Church, but the rate of those coming in was so much greater than those leaving that the Church grew by five hundred and eighty thousand in 1988 alone. [^16]

Even more important than the count of babies and baptisms is the establishment of LDS stakes, which is a sign of genuine Church growth because it indicates Melchizedek priesthood strength, membership stability, and leadership maturity in any given area. For example, enough members come into the Church every two-and-a-half days to fill a stake of three thousand eight hundred members, but the spiritual maturity rate is slower, with a new stake being organized every four days or so. [^17]

In first century following the Restoration, the first one hundred stakes were organized over a period of ninety-eight years. After World War I and during the Great Depression, the rate of growth quickened to about one new stake every six to eight months. For example, in the decade surrounding the one hundredth birthday of the Church (from 1926 to 1935), a total of twenty-two new stakes were organized. All of these stakes were formed in the Rocky Mountains alongside the Mormon pioneer colonies from Alberta, Canada, and northern Mexico. After 1950, the rate increased to almost one new stake monthly, with the two hundredth stake being organized in 1952. In the 1960s, usually two new stakes were created each month, with the three hundredth stake being established in 1960, the four hundredth in 1964, and the five hundredth in 1970. [^18]

By the late 1980s, however, the Church was growing at a phenomenal pace—up to 126 stakes in a year (1980). For example, in the decade from 1976 to 1985, eight hundred and fifty stakes throughout the world were established. [^19] Whereas fifty years earlier, General Authorities were organizing a new stake every six months, they are now creating one every few days. In other words, the restored Church now grows each year as fast as it did in its first century of existence. Furthermore, new stakes are being formed in numerous non-English-speaking countries, with the greatest number of these in Central and South America and a smaller number in the Pacific islands, Asia, Europe, and Africa.

If the rate of growth continues at the same pace, neither accelerating nor decelerating, by the time the Church reaches its two hundredth birthday, over sixty new stakes will be organized each week, or one every few hours. Every country of the world open to missionaries could feasibly add at least one or two new stakes every month. To perform this work, hundreds of General Authorities, including many quorums of Seventies, would be required to organize and set apart the new stake presidencies and to reorganize the increasing numbers of older stake presidencies. In short, what took almost 130 years for the Church to accomplish at the outset of this dispensation would be achieved every few weeks, as over two hundred and seventy new stakes would be created each month.

The stone foreseen by Nebuchadnezzar and Daniel is the restored church of Jesus Christ. (See D&C 65:2.) It is literally rolling forth—gaining mass and momentum—to fill the whole earth in preparation for the second coming of Christ, whose kingdom or Church will replace the kingdoms and nations of men when he governs during the millennial era. (See Dan. 2:44-45). [^20]

The Rewards of Discipleship

As stated earlier, though the pathway is hard to follow at times, the rewards of latter-day discipleship are great. In addition to the feelings of kinship and joy in belonging to a strong, growing international church, three of the most obvious blessings in following Christ are an ever-increasing testimony, fellowship with the saints, and progress toward eternal life.

Our testimonies grow as we chase the darkness of ignorance and apostasy from us and gain more light of truth and understanding within us. Whatever comes from God is light, and those who receive God's light and continue in his service will receive more light. Thus, our testimonies continue to grow as "that light groweth brighter and brighter until the perfect day." (D&C 50:24.) Christ encourages us as his followers to be lights to the world, and he admonishes us to avoid hiding our lights under baskets of fear or uncertainty. (See Matt. 5:14-15.) The sure way to strengthen our testimonies is to share them with others, and we have many opportunities to do this as we serve in Christ's church and in our communities.

Strong fellowship with the Saints develops primarily through living in righteousness and helping one another. Here again we can be a light to the world, demonstrating the nature and bonds of true Christian discipleship. Bible wisdom tells us that "the path of the just is as the shining light, that shineth more and more unto the perfect day." (Prov. 4:18.) In addition, the bond of love forged in fellowship is a trademark of Christ's church (see John 13:35), and we benefit from the feelings of unity and strength that accompany the forging of that love.

Another great blessing of following Christ is one that we do not always see, but one we may more fully perceive in the future. As Christ admonishes us to lay up spiritual treasures and to serve God rather than the world, he tells us to keep our eyes single to God's glory, so that our "whole body shall be full of light." (Matt. 6:22.) When we come into the light of Christ and follow his precedent, we become baptized members of his Church and are known as his spiritually begotten children. As we rear our own children and serve other brothers and sisters in our Church family, we encourage their spiritual growth. And as we share the light of gospel truths with others, we spread and build Christ's kingdom.

These efforts strengthen us all and solidify the whole Church community. Eventually, our service flows back to us and our families as we are appreciated, loved, taught, and served. In this manner, Christ's church is the vehicle that God has chosen to help his children perfect themselves and others. The full results of our faithful discipleship will become obvious to us as we enjoy celestial light and life with our fellow disciples.

In conclusion, LATTER-DAY SAINTS become spiritual children and valuable disciples of Christ as they develop faith, adhere to gospel laws, and live righteously while helping others, thus becoming like a shining light (radiating the gospel) and a rolling stone (building his kingdom) that will fill the earth. Only when we are focused on the light of Christ do we become children of his kingdom. Only when we emulate his example do we become his true disciples. The more we follow the Savior, the more knowledge we gain of him, his doctrine, and his nature. And then, as we become like him, we join with him and Heavenly Father in celestial glory. As followers of Christ, we need to recognize and heed the voice of the Good Shepherd so we can remain in his flock and join our efforts with his until all people on earth become "one fold, and one shepherd." (John 10:16.)

For further study, refer to the following entries:

TG: BD: EM: Disciple Disciple Discipleship Example Saint Latter-day Saints (LDS) Righteousness Life-Style Saints Peculiar People Saints Unity

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] JD, 5:187
[^2] GD, 208.
[^3] "Obeying the Right Voice," Ensign, Nov. 1977, p. 43.
[^4] LF, 7:13.
[^5] SY, 1986-87, 39.
[^6] CR, April 1953, 40.
[^7] CR, Oct. 1976, 7.
[^8] "Ethics and Honesty," Ensign, Nov. 1987, p.15.
[^9] "The Great War," IE, Sep. 1914, pp. 1074-75.
[^10] The preliminary steps and conditions of millenial peace are discussed in Chapters 37 and 38.
[^11] TPJS, 50.
[^12] "BP" 287-88.
[^13] TPJS, 147.
[^14] Charles Krauthammer, "Rectifying the Border," Time, Sep. 24, 1984, pp. 79-80.
[^15] TPJS, 316.
[^16] You and Your Congressman, (New York: G. P. Putnam, 1976), 200, 206.
[^17] HC, 5: 286.
[^18] Excellent comments on the values and responsibilities of good citizenship are found in TETB, 596-706.
[^19] "More Nations Than One," in The Expanding Church, (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1978), 70.
[^20] Ibid.
