Victor L. Ludlow, Principles and Practices of the Restored Gospel ( 1992)

Chapter 37

The Signs of the Times

Imagine a young married couple, close friends of yours. They have tried for years to have children, and the wife has finally become pregnant. But the very week the baby is due, the husband is unavoidably detained in a foreign land. They ask you to assist her at the time of delivery, and you gladly agree. You become excited as she calls, telling you her labor has begun, and you rush to her side to take her to trained medical personnel. However, you cannot take her place to deliver the child for her; she has to do it herself. Wishing you could do more, you nevertheless give whatever help and assistance you can while waiting for the new infant to come into the world.

In a similar relationship, we will observe and assist mother earth and her inhabitants to bring forth the long-awaited millennial era when the Messiah comes to rule and reign over a world of peace and righteousness. We have been invited to help in preparing ourselves and those in our circle of influence for this glorious era, but we do not actually bring it about—it is an act of God.

God has planned and prepared for the Savior's millennial reign from the very beginning of this earth's history. He knows the day and hour of its arrival, and although he has not shared this information with us, he has revealed promises of its sure coming in these latter days. (See D&C 49:7; cf. Matt. 24:36 and D&C 110:16.) As we study the words of the many prophets who foretold the prophecies and signs of the last days, we come to understand the general framework of what must happen to bring it into existence. [^1]

The scriptures reveal guidelines about the major events of the last days and how we should prepare for them. Of all topics dealing with the last days, three stand out with repeated emphasis: repentance, judgment, and signs of the Lord's power. These themes center on the Savior, directing us toward a personal relationship with him and emphasizing his promises for the righteous and the wicked. While the ungodly may be confused and terrified by the events of the last days, the spiritually sensitive who respond to gospel truths and turn to God through repentance enhance their spirituality and anticipate the events surrounding the coming of the Messiah. Indeed, the repentance afforded through Christ's atonement inspires us to live righteously so we, as the "wheat" of Christ's harvest, can separate ourselves from the "tares" of the world in anticipation of mankind's great preliminary judgment. Righteous living qualifies us to be with him at his coming when his great manifestation of power and glory will be seen by all the earth's inhabitants.

We further prepare by knowing "the signs of the times" (Matt. 16:3) as outlined in the scriptures and then learning to recognize them as they occur. The Old Testament, from the first book of Genesis to the last one of Malachi, contains many prophesies concerning the last days. Prophesies dealing with the coming of the Messiah to establish his millennial reign are also found throughout the New Testament, Book of Mormon, and Doctrine and Covenants. Additional volumes of commentary have been written outlining and speculating on the precise nature and order of events preceding the Second Coming. In this chapter, we will discuss how the message of repentance leads to an inevitable polarization between the righteous and the wicked and identify a few specific, major events that must precede the millennial reign of our Lord.

Separating the Wheat from the Tares

The repetitious urgency of prophesies concerning the last days serves to remind us that our time for repentance is limited, for when Christ comes again, the earth will be elevated from a worldly telestial state to a more just terrestrial order, and all the wicked will be destroyed. Furthermore, just as each individual must receive baptism by the cleansing immersion of water and the purging fire of the Holy Spirit to be saved, so the earth must undergo a cleansing and purging prior to receiving her Creator when he comes in glory. The ancient apostle, Peter, and the modern prophet, Joseph Smith, both taught that the deluge in the time of Noah was the earth's baptism by water, and that the destruction and burning of the wicked in the last days will be her baptism by fire as a spiritual purging or separation of the righteous and wicked takes place. [^2] (See 2 Pet. 2:4-5; 3:5-7.)

In the parable of the wheat and the tares, the Savior himself taught that before the great harvest day of gathering and burning, the righteous and wicked will be intermixed, not easily discernible from each other. As the harvest approaches, however, a great polarization will reveal who is to be gathered in and who is to be burned. (See Matt. 13:24-30.) Christ will direct and empower his servants to spread gospel truths and ordinances among all people as his kingdom spreads abroad. The primary message to the world will be that of repentance. (See D&C 18:6, 10-16, 40-44.)

Many will respond to the gospel invitation and join Christ's church. Others will continue in good, righteous behavior in their respective religions, seeking to live just, decent lives. Still others will be uncertain or indifferent toward religious commitment. Many will follow their selfish desires, and Satan will openly ridicule and persecute what is good. The gulf between the church of the Lamb and the church of the devil will widen and deepen as pressure builds upon people to chose either a way leading to righteousness or a path sliding toward wickedness.

How shall we distinguish the righteous from the wicked? The Savior succinctly answered that when he explained that the disciples of Christ "have love one to another" (John 13:35), but "because iniquity shall abound, the love of many shall wax cold." (Matt. 24:12.) People filled with iniquity no longer have place in their hearts for the influence of the Holy Spirit, which has the capacity to fill them with love for their fellowman.

The Apostle Paul clearly described the frightening state of those who are left to themselves without love and the influence of the Spirit: "Being filled with all unrighteousness, fornication, wickedness, covetousness, maliciousness; full of envy, murder, debate, deceit, malignity; whisperers, backbiters, haters of God, despiteful, proud, boasters, inventors of evil things, disobedient to parents, without understanding, covenant breakers, without natural affection, implacable, unmerciful: who knowing the judgment of God, that they which commit such things are worthy of death, not only do the same, but have pleasure in them that do them." (Rom. 1:29-32.) One need only look at a daily newspaper to find nearly every one of these manifestations of love that has waxed cold.

The problem of evil has always existed, but it seems more open and frequent, and people seem to have less feeling toward others. The most telling of the list is perhaps the last item—when people knowingly take pleasure in wickedness. "The fatal symptom of our day," says LDS scholar Hugh Nibley, "is not that men do wrong—they always have—and commit crimes, and even recognize their wrongdoing as foolish and unfortunate, but that they have no intention of repenting, while God has told us that the first rule that he has given the human race is that all men everywhere must repent." [^3] Since the Book of Mormon is given as a type and foreshadowing of our day, it is well to remember that gross sin and a lack of remorse for sin were precisely what characterized the Nephite society in the years just prior to its extinction. (See Morm. 2:12-14; 5:16-18; 9:5, 18-23.)

When the weeds, or tares, of the field are large enough to be easily distinguished, they are often so strong that they crowd out the wheat and drastically lessen the field's productivity. In a similar pattern, the wicked in the last days will persecute the righteous and make missionary work more difficult. Latter-day Saints, on the other hand, can counter the power of wickedness by increasing their spiritual power through righteous living and missionary success. As one apostle has instructed us, "The Latter-day Saints in every part of the globe are commanded to gather out from the midst of wickedness, corruption and priestcraft, and every abomination that exists. . . . For what purpose? That we may be separated from the world and its corruptions, which would otherwise work our temporal and spiritual destruction." [^4] The wicked will be destroyed by Christ at his second coming when he claims his rightful rule on earth and redeems the righteous. (See D&C 133:50-52.) As we separate ourselves from the wicked world, we prepare for his advent by drawing nearer to God and helping others to do likewise.

John's Signs of the Times

Though we do not know exactly when the Messiah will come, we do know from the scriptures the sequence of certain events leading up to his great advent, particularly as recorded in the Revelation of John. The importance of this revelation to Mormons is accentuated by Nephi's visions of the last days. (See 1 Ne. 14:18-27; cf. Ether 4:16.) In the New Testament book of Revelation, the Apostle John records events he saw in vision concerning seven seals, or key periods of the earth's history. According to modern revelation, "we are to understand that the first seal contains the things of the first thousand years, and the second also of the second thousand years, and so on until the seventh." (D&C 77:7.) Within this timetable, the first seal began with the fall of Adam and Eve, and we are now nearing the end of the sixth thousand years since then.

The Sixth Seal

The sixth seal is an important time during which three major series of events must take place: the gospel going to all nations, unusual natural events, and special priesthood callings. In the last days, angels will be sent forth who will "have the everlasting gospel to commit to every nation, kindred, tongue, and people." (D&C 77:8; see also v. 10 and Rev. 7:1.) The laborers of this last dispensation have constantly been admonished to share the gospel with others. Through Joseph Smith, the Lord foretold the testifying power of the Latter-day Saints and the significance of their missionary work within the context of the signs recorded by John the Revelator. The members of Christ's church have been called to teach one another and then to warn their neighbors. Elders and missionaries are to preach among the people and warn the nations of God's forthcoming judgment. (See D&C 88:81-92.) Begun in 1830, this process of taking the truths of the everlasting gospel to more and more nations, kindreds, tongues, and peoples is currently taking place at an ever-increasing rate. [^5]

The two other major series of events mentioned in relation to the sixth seal have not yet occurred, but must happen before the seventh seal can be opened to usher in the last events before the Second Coming. One series of events deals with natural phenomena on and above this earth, and the other deals with important ceremonies and responsibilities for 144,000 priesthood holders.

As John describes the events of the sixth seal, he mentions a great earthquake such as the world has never seen. Also, he describes great manifestations in the heavens: a darkened sun, a reddish moon, and falling stars. Phenomena in the heavens are rolling together like a scroll while mountains and continents are moving on the earth. (See Rev. 6:12-14; cf. Joel 2:1-11; D&C 88:87.) These occurrences in nature may be related and could originate either on earth or in the heavens.

For example, major shifts along the continental plates may generate earthquakes, volcanic eruptions, and other supernatural events on earth that would cause atmospheric pollution and distortions in the heavens. Or, massive cosmic storms, meteors, or comets may come from outer space and cause major earth tremors and unusual activities in the skies. Some of these unusual phenomena may even be caused by humans as they disrupt nature and shower flaming stars of nuclear missiles upon each other. In any case, these observable events will bring fear into the hearts of many, especially the proud and the wicked, as they seek to hide from the Lord, believing that his coming is imminent. (See Rev. 6:15-17; cf. Isa. 2:10-21; D&C 88:91.)

The other series of events deals with a select group of individuals. John foretells of 144,000 righteous high priests, all of whom have honored the law of chastity, who will receive a special ordinance. (See Rev. 7:3-4; 14:3-4; D&C 77:11.) These 144,000 will be organized into groups or quorums of twelve thousand each according to the twelve tribes of Israel. (See Rev. 7:4-8.) As of the middle of 1992, there were over two hundred and fifty thousand ordained high priests within the Melchizedek Priesthood. It is uncertain, however, how many of them would spiritually qualify for this ordinance and be physically able to fulfill the tasks and callings that await this group when they are called to administer the everlasting gospel throughout the earth. (See D&C 77:11.) Also, it appears that these 144,000 might be gathered from the actual scattered Israelite tribes. (See D&C 77:9.)

Depending upon the earth's population when the Millennium is established, each of these 144,000 high priests could have responsibility for many thousands of people. For example, if the earth population were only three billion, there would be over twenty thousand people for each of the 144,000. In other words, they could be like Regional Representatives today, with responsibility over a number of stakes and the nonmembers living in that region. With the dramatic change of political and social events in eastern Europe and Asia, perhaps great numbers of converts and priesthood holders in these areas will help supply this body of leaders needed to help the Messiah govern his kingdom on earth. (See D&C 133:18.)

These three signs (the gospel spreading to all nations, the extraordinary natural phenomena, and the special calling of the 144,000 high priests) need to be fulfilled before the end of the sixth thousand years of this earth's temporal history, which should come around the year 2000 A.D. if our calendaring system is accurate. As the gospel is spread among the nations, and when these other signs have been fulfilled, then the way is prepared for the opening of the seventh seal, which will be accompanied by further great signs, including manifestations of God's power and increasing desolations throughout the earth.

The Seventh Seal

While the events highlighted by John in the sixth thousand years will be occurring at the very end of that time period, the events described in the seventh seal take place shortly after it is opened. After a short period of silence, seven trumpets shall sound forth, announcing seven signs or plagues that will prepare the way before the time of the Savior's coming. (See D&C 77:12.)

As the seventh seal is opened, there is to be silence in heaven for about the space of half an hour. (See Rev. 8:1.) Unfortunately, Joseph Smith did not ask about this verse as he did others in Revelation (see D&C 77), so we do not know if the silence is physical (meaning silence in the atmosphere) or spiritual (referring to a lack of revelation or communication from God). Also, we do not know if the time span refers to our earthly thirty-minute period or, in the ratio of one year with God being like a thousand years on earth, whether it could refer to twenty-one years of our time. This sign is significant enough, though, that those with ears to hear, both physical and spiritual, will be aware of its occurrence. [^6] (Cf. D&C 88:95; 38:12.)

In the seventh seal, a time will come when the world as a whole needs to receive further, more dramatic proclamations of God's intentions than during the sixth seal. The Prophet Joseph Smith reveals an important reason why the manifestations in the seventh seal are more severe and intense. He records the Lord's admonition that after the testimonies of the elders and missionaries will come "wrath and indignation upon the people. For after your testimony cometh the testimony of earthquakes, . . . thunderings, . . . lightnings, . . . tempests. . . . And all things shall be in commotion; and surely, men's hearts shall fail them; for fear shall come upon all people." (D&C 88:88-91.) While God's angels sound seven trumpets, representing a series of seven plagues, and send forth the prophesied signs, the fear felt throughout the world will motivate some to seek for truth and understanding and others to pursue selfish ambitions. (See Rev. 8:1-6; D&C 49:23; 88:92.)

The Seven Trumpets (Plagues)

The first four trumpets or plagues seem to be major physical phenomena that afflict the earth without discriminating between the righteous and wicked. John uses graphic images to describe these events. The first seems to be a major electric/lightning hailstorm that burns up one-third of the trees and grass in the affected area. (See Rev. 8:7.) The second, described by John as a great burning mountain plunging into the sea, seems to be a great meteor that will destroy one-third of the ships and animal life in that sea. (See Rev. 8:8-9.) The third is harder to identify: John calls it "Wormwood," a great star falling from heaven and burning like a lamp, perhaps a comet, which disintegrates and falls upon one-third part of the waters and turns them poisonous and bitter like wormwood. (See Rev. 8:10-11.) Only the effects, and not the cause, of the fourth plague are mentioned as the sun, moon and stars are darkened by one-third. (See Rev. 8:12.) This darkness might be caused by the earlier signs or by other phenomena, such as volcanoes or gigantic dust storms.

Some have speculated that these plagues might even be caused by man as nations send intercontinental missiles descending upon each other with burning, destruction, radiation, and pollution following. In any case, the plagues devastate by one-third wherever they strike, bringing much woe and calamity to the earth.

Besides some obvious similarities with the plagues in Egypt, two patterns similar to how the Lord demonstrated his power in Egypt begin to emerge here. First, the plagues become more severe, and then they begin to afflict only the wicked. In ancient Egypt, the first three plagues (polluted water, an overabundance of frogs, and irritating body lice) afflicted people throughout the country, but starting with the fourth plague (stinging insects), there was a separation between the Hebrews in Goshen and the rest of Egypt. The Hebrews were preserved while the Egyptians suffered the later plagues (livestock disease, festering boils, destructive hail and fire, ravaging locusts, and three days of darkness.) The last of the ten plagues (the death of the firstborn children) only came upon those households, either Egyptian or Israelite, that did not have the blood of a lamb on its doorposts. (See Ex. 8:19—12:13.)

Returning to John's list of plagues, he indicates that the next three woes or plagues are much more severe than the first four. (See Rev. 8:13.) As a distinction between the righteous and the wicked, the fifth plague afflicts only those who do not have the "seal of God in their foreheads," an ordinance or symbol received originally by the 144,000 high priests. (Rev. 9:4; see also 7:3-4.) People without the seal of God will suffer severely when a plague of strange locusts strikes and torments them for five months with the sting or pain like that of a scorpion. (See Rev. 9:1-12.)

The sixth woe also separates the righteous from the wicked, as a great army of "two legions of legions" of cavalry gather for battle while bringing much destruction and death to the world. (See Rev. 9:13-21; 16:14-16.) Since a full Roman legion contained ten thousand soldiers, the King James translators interpreted the phrase as "two ten-thousand ten thousand," or, keeping the same total number, "two hundred thousand thousand." Since actual numbers are not a part of John's record, the phrase "two legions of legions" should probably be translated as "two armies of armies" instead of being seen as representing a specific number, such as two hundred million soldiers.

In the meantime, John completes his special latter-day mission among the Ten Tribes. At this time, two prophets in Jerusalem will seal the heavens, pronounce plagues, and hold enemies at bay for three-and-one-half years, after which they will be martyred. Their bodies will lie in the streets for three days before they will be resurrected as a great earthquake hits the Holy City. (See Rev. 10:1-11:13; D&C 77:13-15.)

The seventh and final woe highlights the great conflict between the forces of evil and good, with seven powerful punishments, depicted as seven vials of judgment, befalling the wicked who refuse to repent. (See Rev. 16.) The signs and events culminate with the desecration of the temple in Jerusalem, the battle of Armageddon, and the glorious appearance of the resurrected Christ on the Mount of Olives. (See Rev. 11:15-19:21.) Satan and his hosts will then be cast into the depths of hell's pit as the millennial reign of a thousand years of peace and righteousness on earth is ushered in. (See Rev. 20.) It is unknown how quickly these events will follow in succession after the seventh seal is opened, though if the second coming of Christ is anything like the signs and events surrounding his appearance in the Americas, they could transpire within just a few years.

The Model of Third Nephi

The events recorded in Helaman and Third Nephi serve as a useful model for comparison. From the preaching of Samuel the Lamanite, the Nephites knew how many years they had in which to prepare before signs would be given of the birth of the Savior. Only a few repented, however, and prepared themselves for the long-awaited event. In the meantime, the unrepentant made plans to kill all these believers if the sign of the Savior's birth did not come to pass in the appointed year. However, the promised sign was fulfilled, and a day, a night, and a day passed without darkness. Thereafter all the people repented, and lived righteously, but only for a short period. The majority returned to wickedness within a few years. By the time of Christ's crucifixion and resurrection, all the people had demonstrated their righteousness or wickedness, and they were ready to be judged. Thus, the sign of his death was a signal for their preservation or their destruction. (See Hel. 14-16; 3 Ne. 1-8.)

Likewise, many who witness prophesied signs in the last days will be unprepared when the Savior comes. Some will confuse the timing of world events within the sixth and seventh seals of John's revelation. Particularly as the earthquakes at the end of the sixth seal come forth, many will think the Lord's judgment is coming. (See Rev. 6:16-17.) For example, some evangelical Christians anticipate Christ's second coming with the year 2000. The opening of the seventh seal will mark the intensification of tumultuous events and prophesied signs—so much so that many will think the end of days has arrived. But when the years pass without his arrival, they will quickly revert to their former ways, and the people will separate themselves toward goodness or evil.

The righteous will continue their faithful watchfulness and call others to repentance. (See D&C 88:68; cf. Luke 17:20-36; Matt. 24; JS-M.) The wicked will not repent before the Second Coming, saying "that Christ delayeth his coming." (D&C 45:26.) Others may say that the Messiah "comes not at all" as they seek to justify their gross behavior. John saw such types in vision, describing many people who witnessed the signs but "neither repented . . . of their murders, nor of their sorceries, nor of their fornication, nor of their thefts." (Rev. 9:21.) Like the Nephites before, many will return with vigor to their wickedness after the initial scare.

Thus, the church of the devil will continue to grow in power and opposition to the church of the Lamb until the telestial world is completely destroyed and replaced by the terrestrial world of the Millennium. Though the signs preceding the Second Coming will have been abundantly manifest, Jesus will surprise many like "a thief in the night" when he returns in power and glory, destroying the wicked so only those of at least a terrestrial nature will be allowed to live on the millennial earth.

The Second Comings of Christ

Before the final appearance of Christ at the end of the world's telestial state, he will make major appearances in his temple and among two select groups—one near the New Jerusalem in the New World and another near the Old Jerusalem in the Old World.

Appearance at the Temple

One significant appearance of the Lord in the last days was foretold by both Malachi and Joseph Smith. They prophesied that the Lord will "suddenly come to his temple." (Mal. 3:1; D&C 36:8.) This prophecy may have already been fulfilled when Jesus Christ appeared to Joseph Smith and Oliver in the Kirtland Temple on April 3, 1836. (See D&C 110.) Or perhaps it will be fulfilled just prior to the Lord's appearance to the whole world by a visit to either the temple in Jackson County, Missouri, or the one in Jerusalem, Israel.

Under Christ's direction, faithful saints will build on the American continent a righteous city called the New Jerusalem, located in Independence, Missouri. (See D&C 57:1-5; 84:2-5; 124:44-54.) [^7] The holy city of Jerusalem will also be restored with a temple before the Second Coming. The Prophet Joseph Smith taught, "Judah must return, Jerusalem must be rebuilt, and the temple, . . . and all this must be done before the Son of Man will make His appearance." [^8] Jerusalem will be sanctified with a temple of the Lord in the last days. (See Zech. 2:12; D&C 77:15.) [^9] The sudden appearance of the Lord to his temple in either Jackson County or Jerusalem could easily accompany important prophesied events near both areas.

Appearance at Adam-ondi-Ahman

In another event, Christ and all the great prophets of the seven dispensations will gather at Adam-ondi-Ahman, the site where Adam anciently gathered his posterity to bless them before he died. (See D&C 107:53-57.) Through modern revelation we know that Adam-ondi-Ahman, which originally was near the Garden of Eden, is located in Daviess County, Missouri. (See D&C 116.) There will be a significant latter-day reunion or conference at this place when a select assemblage of Latter-day Saints will join these resurrected leaders. [^10] At this great gathering, the modern prophets will return their priesthood keys to the apostles and prophets from whom they received the keys. The ancient prophets, in turn, will return the keys to their predecessors until all keys are delivered to Adam himself. Adam, as the Ancient of Days, will then restore the keys to Christ, who will use them to personally establish his kingdom here on earth as it is in heaven. [^11] (See Dan. 7:9-14.)

Appearance at Jerusalem

Christ's other and more spectacular series of appearances will be in eastern Jerusalem on the Mount of Olives. In a revelation to Zechariah concerning the Second Coming, the Lord says, "I will gather all nations against Jerusalem to battle." (Zech. 14:2.) As the great army of Armageddon descends from the north under the leadership of Gog of Magog, half of Jerusalem will be conquered, and its inhabitants will be cut off from an escape to the more populated areas of the western coastal plains. Then an earthquake will divide the Mount of Olives to create a valley passageway. (See Zech. 14:1-7; Ezek. 38; Matt. 24.)

As the people flee east into this valley, the Savior will meet them there. The Lord described this scene: "Then shall the Jews look upon me and say: What are these wounds in thine hands and in thy feet? Then shall they know that I am . . . Jesus that was crucified." (D&C 45:51-52.) After twenty centuries, the Jews, as a people, will finally accept their true Lord when he delivers them from their enemies at Armageddon.

Elder Bruce R. McConkie has commented upon the words of the ancient prophet Zechariah to describe the effect of this visitation: "Then comes this gladsome word: 'In that day there shall be a fountain opened to the house of David and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem for sin and for uncleanness.' They shall be baptized and receive the Holy Ghost! . . . And thus cometh the day of the conversion of the Jews. It is a millennial day, a day after the destruction of the wicked, a day when those who remain shall seek the Lord and find his gospel. And, for that matter, so shall it be with reference to the gathering and triumph of all Israel." [^12] The Prophet Joseph also revealed some details about this appearance of the resurrected Lord upon the Mount of Olives, when the Messiah will return to the place of his ascension centuries earlier as he descends out of the clouds, clothed with power and great glory. (See D&C 45:43-44.) Thus, before the world as a whole knows that Jesus has returned to the earth, the Jews in Jerusalem will recognize and accept their Messiah, who will then utterly destroy their enemies and all the wicked upon the earth.

His Glorious Appearance—The Second Coming

Christ and his angelic forces will then go out from Jerusalem and destroy the enemy army, leaving so many dead that it will take seven months to bury them all. For seven years afterward, the inhabitants of the land will use fuel from the instruments of war to light their homes, cook their meals, and for other purposes. (See Ezek. 39:9-14.)

In the meantime, the most glorious and spectacular appearance of the resurrected Lord will take place. The Messiah will circle the earth in a manifestation of power and glory so that all will know that he has come to establish his millennial reign throughout the earth. Those still left on the earth will be good, honorable, and just people, who will be preserved as the Messiah establishes his heaven-like kingdom here.

As Christ appears in glory to the remaining inhabitants of the earth, no one will doubt that the Savior has come again. As Isaiah promised, he will come from the east in robes stained red, representing both his atoning sacrifice and his terrible destruction of the wicked. (See Isa. 63.) The angel's trump will sound "to all people, both in heaven and in earth, and that are under the earth—for every ear shall hear it, and every knee shall bow, and every tongue shall confess, while they hear the sound of the trump, saying: Fear God, and give glory to him . . . forever and ever." (D&C 88:104.) Just as among the Nephites after Christ's appearance, missionary work will accelerate after the Second Coming since it will meet no more opposition. Similar to the pattern of building an ideal Zion society as recorded in Third Nephi, within a few years his kingdom will spread throughout all the inhabitants. At this time "shall the heathen nations be redeemed," for "Satan shall be bound, that he shall have no place in the hearts of the children of men." (D&C 45:54-55.)

Before the Second Coming of the Lord in full glory, the righteous will be watching for the prophesied signs and be aware of their fulfillment. The Lord's preliminary appearances before the Second Coming will be to the righteous in special assemblies or under unusual circumstances, and these earlier comings certainly will not find their way into the major evening news broadcasts or the front page of the world's newspapers. To the unprepared, the increasing signs of physical phenomena and social disorder will seem as intensifications of what has happened in other chaotic times, until the Savior comes in the brightness of his glory.

Prepared Laborers Needed to the Last Hour

The Lord has spent centuries preparing the world for his glorious coming, and it has been promised by nearly all the prophets, ancient and modern. To be ready, we need to set our temporal affairs in order through food storage, emergency preparedness, elimination of debt, and so on. But even more important is the need for spiritual preparation. Whether our spirits are living in bodies on the earth, or without bodies in the spirit world, or as resurrected beings is not as important as the spiritual state of our righteousness and preparedness. Our inner lamps must be lit and have oil in reserve like those of the five wise virgins. (See Matt. 25:1-13.) The valiant, both on earth and in the spirit world, will have the great blessing of being laborers for the last time in the Lord's vineyard: "The field is white already to harvest; therefore, whoso desireth to reap, let him thrust in his sickle with his might, and reap while the day lasts, that he may treasure up for his soul everlasting salvation in the kingdom of God." (D&C 6:3; cf. D&C 88:51-61, 70-73.)

But lest we put too much importance upon being on the earth as it enters its millennial era, we should ask ourselves: "Which is more important for me personally—the first or the second coming of the Savior?" For us as children of God, the first coming is infinitely more important because without the atonement and resurrection that Christ brought about with his first coming, nothing would be worth living for, and we could never enjoy a glorious celestial world here or anywhere else. The events near the end of the first coming of Christ, particularly the last few hours of his mortality and the opening of his resurrection ministry, transcend any other event that has happened on this earth before or afterward. Although the terms B.C. and A.D. of the common Christian calendar refer to the years before or after the birth of Jesus, the events of his atonement and resurrection are the true "meridian of time" against which all things will be measured and to which all God's children look for their individual redemption from spiritual and physical death.

The first coming of Christ, with its spiritual and heavenly rewards, is more significant for us personally. However, as far as the general history of this earth is concerned, the events surrounding the Second Coming will be more splendid and exciting because of the mighty signs that precede the earth's elevation from an evil, telestial existence to a paradisiacal, terrestrial order.

The Fulfillment of God's Promises

Why do we have so many prophesies about repentance, judgment, and signs of God's power surrounding this particular period of time immediately preceding the Second Coming? One response is that Heavenly Father wants to teach, warn, and edify us while demonstrating his capacity to plan and fulfill his good and eternal plan.

In teaching us, there is a need for repetition because the more we read or hear certain prophecies, the more we should understand them. As we are more aware of the prophecies, we should then appreciate the importance of key events as they transpire. Also, prophecies are a warning to us that as the earth is elevated to a millennial glory, we must be at a certain spiritual level to be worthy to remain on the earth. All need to be warned as to what is required of them so that they may repent and be ready to receive their judgment and reward—either preservation in a millennial world for the righteous or a removal from the face of the earth for the wicked. In addition, while the trials and tribulations of the last days may test our faith and righteousness, the promised signs give us hope to persevere through the difficult times.

Ultimately, the pattern of early prophecy (as recorded by the ancient writers) and later fulfillment (as witnessed in these last days) demonstrates God's ability to plan and then to complete promises that affect this earth and its inhabitants. The completion of an earth cycle with an establishment of a paradisiacal world is the pinnacle of world history. Of the many things that our Heavenly Father, Christ, and others have prepared and anticipated through the ages, this promised new world gives us a utopia for which we can yearn and work. Our Heavenly Father talked about these times in the premortal councils, revealing to us the beginning from the end as he outlined his plan. Thus, key signs and promises of the last days have been revealed from the beginning as various prophets through the ages recorded many events that must precede the millennial era. The fulfillment of God's plan verifies his premortal perspective and his universal power.

Of course, some major conflicts will occur before all is prepared for the Messiah's advent. Satan will disperse confusion and seek control because he does not want to lose his dominion. The proud and the selfish will perpetuate their evil deeds, causing many to suffer before the wicked experience their own agony and destruction. (See Isa. 27:7.) An increasing gulf between the church of the Lamb and the great and abominable church, or the church of the devil, will open up, creating stress, suffering, and anguish for many. Turmoil, earthquakes, wars and rumors of wars, fear, sickness, tests of faith, oppression, and challenges to God's authority will spread across the land. Knowing this, God has forewarned us about these challenges leading to the Millennium.

Heavenly Father wants us to be more than casual observers as a new paradise is born on earth under the direction of his Son. With the Lord's direction and power, we can assist in bringing about these marvelous prophecies. Like the pregnant friend in labor and in need of our support, many of God's children need our assistance in fulfilling his promises. Different from the personal, private relationship we develop with the Savior through the Atonement, the Lord's efforts in the last days require our public involvement as workers in the vineyard, missionaries in the field, and servants in the kingdom. Our help is needed as he calls for more and more to assist, even in the last hours. Those who have partaken of the personal redemption offered by Christ feel an obligation and excitement in assisting in the preparations for his second coming.

Indeed, in these last days, a widening gulf is separating the righteous from the wicked as the Lord Jesus Christ expects continued obedience to his commandments (in spite of worldly pressures and persecution), and as he sends prophesied SIGNS OF THE TIMES prior to his coming in power and glory. Every person should hear the gospel call to repentance before the Millennium begins.

As the Messiah comes to rule over the earth, he will not separate us according to where we are (in New Jerusalem or Old Jerusalem or elsewhere; in mortality or the postmortal spirit world or somewhere as a resurrected being). Instead, it will be how we are (our level of spirituality, commitment, and righteousness) that will determine whether we view the events of his great and dreadful day from a vantage point of peace and joy or from a position of fear and anxiety. Especially for those of us who appreciate what Christ did in Gethsemane, at Golgotha, and in the garden tomb, we naturally look forward to the signs of his imminent return. We want others to join with us as we share the ushering in of his glorious reign, when the whole world will finally recognize and accept him as the Lord of lords and the King of kings.

For further study, refer to the following entries:

TG: BD: EM: Jesus Christ, Second Coming Abomination of Desolation Armageddon Last Days Armageddon Great and Abominable Church Millennium, Preparing a People Revelation of John Jesus Christ, Second for Signs Coming Tares Last Days World, End of Signs of the Times

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] The second coming of Jesus Christ is discussed in the previous chapter.
[^2] See Man: His Origin and Destiny (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1954), 380-97.
[^3] See JD, 15:138; MM, 608; DS, 2:251-52.
[^4] See HC, 5:212; TPJS, 268.
[^5] See chapters 34 and 35 for further facts of missionary success and Church growth.
[^6] See also TG, Silence.
[^7] See EM, ''New Jerusalem,'' 3:1009-10.
[^8] HC, 5:337.
[^9] See also HC, 4:456; EM, ''Jerusalem,'' 2:722-23.
[^10] See TPJS, 157.
[^11] See MD, 492-93, 500, 694; DS, 3:13; NWAF, 640.
[^12] MM, 230-31.
