Victor L. Ludlow, Principles and Practices of the Restored Gospel ( 1992)

Chapter 38

Zion's Millennial Paradise on Earth

Most religions contain the hope of some ultimate heavenly realm where an eternal state of joy and blessedness will exist. A few also anticipate a golden age when ideal conditions will prevail on this earth. The idea of an ideal earthly era is particularly attractive since many people want a taste of heaven on earth. History and literature reveal that humans have an inherent longing for a utopian society, known by such names as Paradise, Shangri-la, Bali Hai, or Nirvana. Perhaps such hopes are rooted in the early biblical account recorded by Moses of Adam and Eve living in such a paradise. Many readers of Genesis have yearned to go back in time to join our first earthly ancestors in their paradisiacal Garden of Eden. But since such trips back in time are impossible, we search elsewhere for our utopia.

Recognizing that an ideal state does not yet exist on earth, we hope that it can be created in the near future. Although secular literature expresses some utopian ideas, the scriptures contain the divine promises of such a time when the whole earth will become a millennial paradise. Studying the prophecies, we join the prophets and apostles in looking forward to a time when the earth will be restored to a paradisiacal glory—a time when God's children will live long lives filled with abundance, harmony, peace, and love.

Hopes for a Millennial Era

Many ancient prophets looked forward to the latter periods of this earth's history, especially its messianic era when the Savior will reign for a thousand years. Indeed, the blessings of his righteous rule are a recurrent topic in the scriptures, from the first to the last books of the Bible—from Genesis, which promises a time when every family of the earth will be blessed (Gen. 12:3; 28:14), to the book of Revelation, which prophesies concerning the last days and the Messiah's millennial glory.

Interestingly, the actual terms millennium or millennial do not appear in the Bible. The concept derives from the writings of John the Beloved in Revelation 20, especially verse 4, where the thousand-year reign of Christ is prophesied. The term millennium is mentioned twice in the Doctrine and Covenants, and that volume of scripture and the Book of Mormon provide helpful additional prophecies concerning the last days and the Lord's righteous reign. All these scriptures indicate that prophets through the ages, including those of our own dispensation, have foreseen this epic period of the earth's history.

Why do we have so many prophecies dealing with this particular period of time? Some passages give hope to mortals struggling in the challenges of a wicked world and wondering if peace will ever rule on earth. Through repeated emphasis of the events leading up to the Millennium, people looking for a better day understand and appreciate its importance and reality. In addition, the scriptures challenge the readers to personally prepare for the time when the earth will be elevated to its terrestrial state, a time of millennial glory when people, in order to qualify to be on the earth at that time, will have to live at a certain spiritual level.

Although readers in all generations have been motivated to greater spiritual commitment by anticipating this paradise on earth, the prophecies have special significance to those who will help usher in the Millennium. They give the signs of the times and provide insight about the preparations and requirements for such a paradise. The scriptures highlight how the ushering in of the millennial era will be one of the most spectacular events in the history of the world, an occurrence that our Heavenly Father, Christ, and others have been preparing for since the fall of Adam and Eve.

Why a Millennial Era?

The purposes of the Millennium are at least fivefold. First, the establishment of a promised millennial era demonstrates that God the Father has a plan for his children and that he can bring it into fulfillment in spite of opposition. The occurrence of the Millennium will vindicate his knowledge, vision, goodness, and power.

Second, the millennial reign verifies Jesus as the true Christ or Messiah for all mankind. Eventually, every knee will bow and every tongue confess that he is the Lord of this earth.

Third, this peaceful epoch gives the Holy Ghost opportunity to seal all declarations of faith and the saving ordinances, including those of the temple, with his Holy Spirit of promise. He will be free to spread truth and knowledge among all the children of God.

Fourth, the thousand-year period provides each child of God a full, equitable, and just opportunity to learn truth, choose allegiance, and receive ordinances—in short, to prepare themselves for God's final judgment. Thus every person will receive, justly, that eternal resurrected state commensurate to his or her true desires, capacities, and worthiness.

Finally, the Millennium gives mother earth an opportunity to rest as corruption, pollution, and abuse will cease and the earth's paradisiacal glory will return. Plants, animals, and humans will live in peace and harmony as all forms of life enjoy a latter "garden of Eden" throughout the world.

Christ Prepares His Disciples Prior to His Second Coming

Naturally, many prophesied signs of the times and essential preparations for Christ's reign must precede his coming in power and glory. In many ways, his efforts with the Latter-day Saints will mirror his labors among the early saints during his ministry after his resurrection. After his resurrection, Jesus appeared to several groups of his disciples and to others of scattered Israel on at least two continents during the course of many weeks. He gave instructions, initiated ordinances, and prepared his apostles and disciples to lead his church. He then ascended to heaven, and his disciples were told by an angel that in a like manner he would return to the earth. Shortly before his second coming with its dramatic signs, and prior to revealing himself to the whole earth, Jesus Christ will visit select groups of his followers and segments of the House of Israel. He will come suddenly to his temple and appear both in Missouri of the New World and at Jerusalem of the Old World. [^1]

In addition to receiving the keys of his kingdom and revealing himself to the remnants of Israel, Jesus will undoubtedly give important instruction and training to his followers and the leaders of his kingdom. (Cf. 3 Ne. 11-26.) He will prepare his disciples for all that is to follow when he establishes his millennial reign. Ultimately, Jesus will circle the earth in a manifestation of power and glory so that everybody remaining on the face of the land will know that he has come. The survivors of the tribulations and judgments will be elevated to a terrestrial order of life and will know that Jesus reigns as Lord and King over the whole earth. Missionary work will progress like never before, and within a few years, his kingdom will spread throughout all the inhabitants of the earth. (See 4 Ne. 1:1-5.)

The Nature of Millennial Life

Many scriptural passages prophesy of key signs and events that precede the Millennium, but relatively few tell what life will be like in that golden era. They do indicate, however, that there will be major physical, social, and religious differences from present life on earth. Careful readers of the scriptures recognize that major physiological changes will take place as the earth is transformed back into its paradisiacal order. They also understand that political peace and social stability will dominate during the millennial era and that a strong Christian community will spread throughout the world. They watch for any movement toward the fulfillment of these prophecies and wish that they could witness more of them. But some positive experiences are already available that provide a taste of what millennial life might be like.

As Latter-day Saints travel throughout the world, and as their families relocate to new areas, they take comfort in knowing that wherever they go, other members of the Church are usually close by. The gospel and the church of Jesus Christ are available as a source of stability and strength in an often-troubled world. While waiting for the redemption of the world at the Savior's second coming, the association with the Church is often the closest experience to what life will be like during the Millennium. The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is already the kingdom of God on earth, and when all its telestial members, or "tares," have been "weeded out," it will be prepared to have the kingdom of God come from heaven to join with it.

The scriptures contain at least three models from earlier dispensations that help us understand the nature of the forthcoming Millennium, when "Christ will reign personally upon the earth" and "the earth will be renewed and receive its paradisiacal glory." (A of F 10.) The paradisiacal glory of the earth in its natural, physical state will parallel Eden, the garden of paradise; the millennial political and social order will compare with Zion, the city of Enoch; the personal reign of Christ will mirror his postresurrection righteous community established at Bountiful, the Nephite utopia founded in the temple courtyards.

A Return to Eden

The natural, physical conditions of millennial life. One outstanding feature of the original paradise in Eden was that there was no death: Adam and Eve were immortal (though not perfected) beings. To achieve a similar state during the Millennium, the reign of Christ will commence with the resurrection of all the righteous who have died since his own resurrection. (See D&C 63:49.) From that time forward, everyone will be instantaneously resurrected when they reach the end of their mortality. (See Isa. 65:20; D&C 45:58.) There will be neither death nor the sorrow of separation through death as we know it: "In that day an infant shall not die until he is old; . . . and when he dies he shall not sleep, that is to say in the earth, but shall be changed in the twinkling of an eye, and shall be caught up, and his rest shall be glorious." (D&C 101:30-31.) Disease, illness, physical and mental handicaps, and other restrictive elements of physical life will be overcome so that all can live a long, productive life.

Also as in Eden, the plant and animal kingdoms will be elevated above their telestial state. The land will return to the pristine condition it had before being cursed to bring forth thorns and thistles, briars and noxious weeds. (See Gen. 3:18.) Springs and streams will burst forth in the deserts to provide life-sustaining waters in previously barren and unproductive regions. (See Isa. 35:7.) Many rugged mountains and steep valleys will be transformed into land areas more accessible for human occupation and agricultural pursuits. (See Isa. 40:4; 55:13; D&C 63:21.) The harshness of the climates will be moderated, and the devastation of catastrophic weather phenomena will be abated so that seasonal and weather varieties can exist without destroying lives and crops. The soil of the earth will produce abundant grains, fruits, and vegetables for human consumption, instead of being devoured by insects and animals or lost, destroyed, or wasted before people can consume them. (See Isa. 41:19; 55:13; 65:17-19.)

As in the beginning, the whole face of the earth will be a delightful garden, with the major land surfaces joined together instead of separated by oceans. [^2] (See D&C 133:23-24.) The transfiguration of the earth will be so radical and complete, that it will be "a new earth." (Isa. 65:17.) Animals of the earth will live together in harmony as the natural cycle of predator and prey will be broken: "In that day the enmity . . . of beasts, yea, the enmity of all flesh, shall cease from before my face." (D&C 101:26.) Instead of animals eating animals, they will eat straw and other natural by-products of plant life. (See Isa. 11:6-7; 65:25; Hosea 2:18.) Thus, a harmonious relationship will exist on earth between nature, animals, and humans.

Peace and Prosperity in Zion

The millennial social and political conditions. As equally miraculous as the new harmonious physical nature of the earth will be the new peaceful social and political order established during the Millennium. The physical, national, and ideological demarcations that now divide mankind will be swept away, and all people will be united under one kingdom and one king, the Lord Jesus Christ: "Ye shall have no laws but my laws when I come, for I am your lawgiver, and what can stay my hand?" (D&C 38:22.) A theocratic kingdom will supplant all the governments of men as the Lord's kingdom will reign supreme. (See Dan. 2:44; D&C 38:22; 45:59.) His kingdom will be free of war and bloodshed as nations will not battle against nations and people will not fight against people. (See Micah 4:3; Isa. 26:15; 27:6.) Social peace and political stability will prevail over the whole earth as all humanity will be one large community under the sovereignty of Jesus Christ.

This community will comprise a Zion society, named after the ancient city of Enoch "because they were of one heart and one mind, and dwelt in righteousness; and there was no poor among them." (Moses 7:18.) The Book of Mormon record states that the Nephites living after the advent of Christ lived a similar order and "had all things common among them." (3 Ne. 26:19.) Both these ancient societies lived the law of consecration, a practice of shared abundance, which is actually a celestial law.

While the exact conditions of economic life during the Millennium are uncertain, we are assured that, as with the ancient Zion societies, there will be no "rich and poor, bond and free." (4 Ne. 1:3.) The division between the "haves" and the "have nots" will no longer exist, for each man will share his abundance, and all will receive according to their needs and just wants. (See D&C 82:14-19.) Work and labor will be amply rewarded as all will enjoy the fruits of their own labor: "They shall build houses, and inhabit them; and they shall plant vineyards, and eat the fruit of them. They shall not build, and another inhabit; they shall not plant, and another eat: . . . and mine elect shall long enjoy the work of their hands. They shall not labour in vain." (Isa. 65:21-23.)

After war and contention between the Book of Mormon peoples had ended, the members of their Zion society were able to attend to their daily labors in the full hope of enjoying its fruit. They rebuilt their cities that had been destroyed and reared their families in peace and prosperity: "They were married, and given in marriage, and were blessed according to the multitude of the promises which the Lord had made unto them." (4 Ne. 1:11.) The same sense of security will also prevail during the Millennium when civil and ecclesiastical authority are one.

Furthermore, the abundance and fair distribution of goods under a single government will enable people to concentrate more on education and learning and to devote more time and attention to edifying one another. This they will do without the hindrances we now have in a telestial world. Knowledge and scientific understanding will quickly expand among all peoples. (See Acts 3:21; D&C 101:32-34; 121:28-32.) The learning and communication process will be quickened because all people will speak the same language. (See Zeph. 3:9.)

Note that some conditions and experiences of earth life will be the same during the Millennium as they are today. As in essential stages within our second estate, people will be born, grow, and develop into adulthood. They will eat and drink, wear clothing, gain an education, build and live in homes, work the soil and harvest the fruits of the earth, develop social and family relations, learn to give service, and experience the myriad of opportunities essential for a full, productive earthlife.

Full religious freedom will prevail during the Millennium. Just as Latter-day Saints today feel a sense of comradery and trust with the "goodly and just" people of the earth, the Saints, other devout Christians, and the adherents of other religions will enjoy being good neighbors and fellow citizens. No vile, evil people of a selfish, telestial nature will be on the earth; only those who are honorable people striving to live productive lives will live during the millennial era. However, since all will not yet be celestial people, differences in personality will exist, and disagreements will still arise. These types of problems will be present during the Millennium, but they should not disrupt the overall peace that will reign.

The ideal role model for society will be in the New Jerusalem, the Holy City of Zion that will flourish in Jackson County as a capital of the Lord's righteous kingdom. Those who follow righteousness and truth will gather together from the four corners of the earth. Enoch's ancient city of Zion will join with them as Christ's ideal social and political reign of a thousand years is established. (See Moses 7:62-65.) Together with a new natural environment, there will be a new social order on the paradisiacal earth.

Righteousness in Bountiful

The millennial moral and spiritual conditions. While Christ reigns as the Lord of lords, the current conflicts between religions and contrasting philosophies will end. New scriptures will be brought forth, and the true doctrines of the Messiah will be taught throughout the land. (See 2 Ne. 30:15-18; Isa. 11:9.) No atheists will be on the earth because every knee will bow and all tongues confess Christ to be the Lord of this earth. (See Isa. 45:23; Rom. 14:11; Philip. 2:10; D&C 88:104.) Although some differences of opinion and varied patterns of human behavior will still exist, knowledge of the supreme sovereign and his expectations will be universal.

The closest any people have ever come to such a complete political, social, and religious unity were the Nephites after the resurrected Lord had appeared and preached to them: "The people were all converted unto the Lord, upon all the face of the land, both Nephites and Lamanites, and there were no contentions and disputations among them, and every man did deal justly one with another." (4 Ne. 1:2.) A review of the nature of this ideal society reveals many similarities with what the prophets have said millennial society will be like.

Like among the Book of Mormon peoples, all people living on earth during the Millennium will have the opportunity to become members of Christ's church. (See 4 Ne. 1:1-2.) People living at the beginning of the Millennium will include those of a terrestrial nature, "who are honorable men of the earth, who were blinded by the craftiness of men." (D&C 76:75.) Missionary work will be easier in the Lord's kingdom, so that every person will hear the gospel message: "The earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord, as the waters cover the sea." (Isa. 11:9; see also Hab. 2:14.) Many, if not all people will be converted to the truth.

One reason truth will prevail is that the great liar and deceiver, Satan, will be bound by the power of God and the righteousness of the people. God's power will send the devil to his own spiritual prison where the wicked suffer. (See Rev. 20:1-7; D&C 43:31.) The righteousness of the people on earth will allow Satan no influence on the face of the earth during the Millennium. (See D&C 45:55.) Children born during the Millennium will not be subject to sin, for "Satan shall not have power to tempt any man." (D&C 101:28.) Therefore, the children "shall grow up without sin unto salvation." (D&C 45:58.) Though God had not formally bound Satan during the Nephites' golden age as he will during the Millennium, the Nephites were so righteous that Satan could not get hold on their hearts: "There was no contention among all the people, in all the land; but there were mighty miracles wrought among the disciples of Jesus." (4 Ne. 1:13.)

Through their faith and the people's righteousness, the Nephite apostles were able to "heal the sick, and raise the dead, and cause the lame to walk, and the blind to receive their sight, and the deaf to hear; and all manner of miracles did they work among the children of men." (4 Ne. 1:5.) As mentioned earlier, disease and premature death will be unheard of during the Millennium: "There shall be no more thence an infant of days, nor an old man that hath not filled his days: for the child shall not die, but shall live to be an hundred years old; but the sinner living to be an hundred years old, shall be accursed." (Isa. 65:20, JST.) In other words, nobody will die prematurely—all will live to a ripe full age; to die at a hundred years of age would be considered to have died as a child, or in one's youth.

People can still be righteous or sinful because after they reach the age of accountability, they can commit sins of their own free will and choice—Satan will not be tempting them to do so. They can then choose to either accept Christ's atoning sacrifice or suffer for their own sins. One interpretation of the last part of this verse is that those who accept Christ's atonement will enjoy a long life followed by instantaneous resurrection. On the other hand, the terrestrial beings who will not accept the Savior must pay for their sins—however minor—during mortality since they too will be resurrected without experiencing the postmortal spirit world. Thus the "sinner" will find the last years of a long life to be a curse, rather than a blessing.

One major purpose of the millennial era will be to complete God's plan of salvation for all his children. As we discussed in earlier chapters, the time must come when all people must be taught the gospel and have the opportunity to enter into Christ's church. Vicarious baptisms and other temple ordinances for these individuals must be completed. Thus during the Millennium, temples of the Lord will cover the earth, and worthy saints will be able to perform all the required ordinances of salvation. Genealogy and temple work will be one of the primary activities of Latter-day Saints during this era. [^3] To facilitate this work, mortals will be able to associate and communicate with postmortal spirits not yet resurrected. [^4] A sense of fulfillment and divine destiny will encompass this temple work as mortals work in God's vineyard prior to the end of this temporal earth.

The end of this earth will be similar to the latter history of the Book of Mormon peoples. After nearly two centuries of unprecedented peace, the Nephites' terrestrial society began to disintegrate into a telestial one. People once again divided into different nations, social classes, and churches. (See 4 Ne. 1:20, 26.) Similarly, as the Millennium draws to a close, Satan will be loosed, men will again deny God, and the righteous and wicked will square off for their final confrontation. (See D&C 29:22-23; 88:110-14.) Ultimately the earth will be purified and exalted to an eternal, celestial state where only the righteous can visit or dwell. (See D&C 88:18-19.)

Many books, songs, and poems have been written about utopias, golden ages on this earth, where prosperity abounds, death is not feared, peace prevails, justice rules, and righteousness is the behavioral norm. Mere humans cannot create this perfect world, but with the help of God, the scriptures promise that it will eventually be established. The Lord Jesus Christ will return and establish his perfect kingdom on this world. Evil, wars, and hatred will be removed, while righteousness, tranquility, and serenity will prevail. Satan will be bound for a season so that the children of God on earth can be left to choose and to act without his lies, distortions, and interferences.

In summary, as Christ's kingdom in heaven joins his church and kingdom on earth, he will begin a glorious MILLENNIAL REIGN as Lord of lords and King of kings—fulfilling Heavenly Father's plan, verifying his administration as the true Messiah, enabling the Holy Ghost to seal all sacred ordinances, allowing all Heavenly Father's children opportunity to prepare themselves for God's final judgment, and giving mother earth an opportunity to rest. When the Messiah comes, it really will not matter where we are at that moment—living as mortals on earth, as spirits in the postmortal spirit world, or as resurrected beings. What will count is our state of righteousness, for if we are righteous, we will be among those welcoming in his millennial reign.

Only the righteous will accompany the Savior at that glorious moment. In order to become righteous and pure, we must take advantage of his atoning sacrifice. Thus, for us, what he did in Gethsemane, at Golgotha, and from the garden tomb is much more important than when, where, and how he comes to earth to rule as King of kings. But we should look forward to witnessing the ushering in of his glorious reign when the world will finally recognize and accept him as the Lord of all lords and King of all kings.

In the meantime, we have a unique opportunity to be instruments in the fulfillment of his prophecies and the preparations for his return. We are the servants in the vineyard who are called forth in the last hours of the day. (See Jacob 5:70-72; D&C 33:3; 39:17-22.) We are those going out to gather the seeds of righteousness among the scattered souls of the earth. (See D&C 86:1-7; 101:65.) We are the servants of God, the wise maidens with our trimmed and filled lamps, the children of the prophets in the day of Christ's harvest. (See Matt. 25:1-13; D&C 45:56-57.) May we do our part by staying on the path of righteousness and serving God with our whole soul and all of our gifts, time, and talents. Then we can join Heavenly Father and our Savior in the way of eternal life.

For further study, refer to the following entries:

TG: BD: EM: Day of the Lord Zion Armageddon Earth, Cleansing of Kingdom of God on Earth Earth, Renewal of Millennium Jesus Christ, King New Heaven and New Earth Jesus Christ, Millennial Reign New Jerusalem Jesus Christ, Second Coming Second Coming of Jesus Christ

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] The second coming of Jesus Christ is discussed in the previous chapter.
[^2] See Man: His Origin and Destiny (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1954), 380-97.
[^3] See JD, 15:138; MM, 608; DS, 2:251-52.
[^4] See HC, 5:212; TPJS, 268.
