Daniel H. Ludlow, Marking the Scriptures ( 1980)

Preface

An official of Cambridge University Press, publishers of approximately seventy percent of all the Bibles for Protestants in the world, stated that the publication in 1979 of the new Latter-day Saint edition of the King James Version of the Bible was the most significant event in Bible publication in over a hundred years.

I agree wholeheartedly with this evaluation and feel certain many millions of persons, now and in the future, will acclaim this edition of the Bible as the most important since the King James Version was initially published in 1611.

One of the purposes of this brief publication is to help the reader become acquainted with the contents of this new edition of the Bible.

It is also hoped this publication will—

Special thanks and appreciation are expressed to several people:

To Sharon Kirwan, a careful and competent typist and a good friend of several years.

To Merle Romer, for her friendly help in efficiently typing and retyping—and retyping—major segments of the manuscript.

To Gary Gillespie, a friend and colleague of several years and fellow traveler to Israel for six months, for thoughtfully reading and evaluating the manuscript.

To Eleanor Knowles, who served as editor representing Deseret Book Company, and who was closely associated with the preparation and publication of the Bible.

To Luene, an ideal companion and helpmate, for her deep love and understanding of the scriptures, for her helpful suggestions, and for the many hours she spent in checking and verifying countless references and footnotes.

To Michelle, who at fourteen is the only one of our nine children still living at home full time, for her understanding and help.

And finally and most importantly, to our Heavenly Father, whose words comprise the holy scriptures and who has promised to continue to give his children line upon line, precept upon precept, and example upon example, as they receive and live the truths he has already revealed.
