Daniel H. Ludlow, Marking the Scriptures ( 1980)

1

Extent and Importance of the Scriptures

Literally millions of books exist in the world today, and new books are being published so rapidly that a person could not possibly read them all. Of these innumerable books, four should be of special interest to all Latter-day Saints: Bible (Old Testament and New Testament), Book of Mormon, Doctrine and Covenants, and Pearl of Great Price.

The scriptures are among the most important books and writings on the earth today. Tens of thousands who have read them are firmly convinced and testify that they contain the mind and will of our Heavenly Father as he has revealed his truths to his prophets.

Essentially the scriptures contain teachings from our Heavenly Father as revealed to his prophets by the power of the Holy Ghost. They also contain historical information concerning the reactions of earlier peoples to the teachings of the prophets and the relationship of God to those people.

Not all the truths of our Heavenly Father have been revealed to his prophets, and not everything revealed to the prophets is contained in the scriptures. Thus we should prize highly the relatively few scriptures we have, knowing that as we read and live them he will give us more; as he has promised: "For behold, thus saith the Lord God: I will give unto the children of men line upon line, precept upon precept, here a little and there a little; and blessed are those who hearken unto my precepts, and lend an ear unto my counsel, for they shall learn wisdom; for unto him that receiveth I will give more." (2 Ne. 28:30.)

The reception, publication, and distribution of these materials also await the faithfulness and diligence of the Saints in reading the present scriptures and living their truths.

After the Lord has revealed his truths to his prophets, he holds the prophets responsible for teaching the people and/or recording these revelations for the benefit of future generations. He then holds us responsible for reading and living what is taught and written by the prophets.

The scriptures are sometimes referred to as the "standard works" because they serve as a standard against which the doctrines and teachings may be tested.

All that we teach in this Church ought to be couched in the scriptures. . . . If we want to measure truth, we should measure it by the four standard works, regardless of who writes it. . . . This is the standard by which we measure truth. (Harold B. Lee, Improvement Era, January 1969, p. 13.)

It makes no difference what is written or what anyone has said, if what has been said is in conflict with what the Lord has revealed, we can set it aside. . . . We have accepted the four standard works as the measuring yardsticks, or balances, by which we measure every man's doctrine. (Joseph Fielding Smith, Doctrines of Salvation, Bookcraft, 1977, 3:203.)

By the standard works of the Church is meant the following four volumes of scripture: The Bible, Book of Mormon, Doctrine and Covenants, and Pearl of Great Price.

These four volumes of scripture are the standards, the measuring rods, the gauges by which all things are judged. Since they are the will, mind, word, and voice of the Lord (D&C 68:4), they are true; consequently, all doctrine, all philosophy, all history, and all matters of whatever nature with which they deal are truly and accurately presented. The truth of all things is measured by the scriptures. That which harmonizes with them should be accepted; that which is contrary to their teachings, however plausible it may seem for the moment, will not endure and should be rejected. (Bruce R. McConkie, Mormon Doctrine, Bookcraft, 1966, pp. 764-65.)

Someone has likened the scriptures to a treasure house with numerous rooms, each room containing a treasure to bless our lives. However, we need keys of experience and understanding to help us unlock the secrets of these treasures and appreciate their value.

A remarkable thing about the treasure house of the scriptures is that each time we go back to them we can take additional treasures away with us to bless our lives and the lives of those with whom we associate. Thus, regardless of how many times we have read the scriptures, when we read them again we see principles and truths not seen nor understood before. The principles and truths we learn each time we read the scriptures will help us solve some problems we are facing at the time. Perhaps that is why we did not see nor understand the principles before—we did not have the problems then.

Brigham Young likened the scriptures to "a lighthouse in the ocean, or a finger-post which points out the road we should travel. Where do they point? To the fountain of light. . . . They are of God; they are valuable and necessary: by them we can establish the doctrine of Christ." (Journal of Discourses 8:129.)

All members of the Church know they should read the scriptures of the Church. The Lord has commanded it through both his ancient prophets and modern prophets.

President Spencer W. Kimball has stated: "No father, no son, no mother, no daughter should get so busy that he or she does not have time to study the scriptures." (Ensign, May 1976, p. 47.) He has also suggested an effective way of accomplishing the goal of reading all the volumes of scripture: "I ask all to begin now to study the scriptures in earnest, if you have not already done so. And perhaps the easiest and most effective way to do this is to participate in the study program of the Church. . . . Each of the standard works should be studied intensely in the year it is scheduled for study [in the adult curriculum of the Church]." (Ensign, September 1976, p. 5.)

Reasons why Latter-day Saints should read the scriptures, then, include the following:

Why Are the Scriptures Not Read?

Why, then, do we not read, study, and ponder the scriptures as we ought to? Probably as many reasons exist for not reading the scriptures as there are people. And it is equally probable that few of the reasons are valid.

One possible reason is that we tend to rationalize when we hear our Church leaders urge the members to read and study the scriptures. We conclude that they are surely talking to others, not to ourselves. Concerning this point President Spencer W. Kimball has written: "Let me pause here to point out a common error in the mind of man—that is, the tendency, when someone speaks of faithfulness or success in one thing or another, to think 'me,' and when someone mentions failure or neglect, to think 'them.' But I ask us all to honestly evaluate our performance in scripture study." (Ensign, September 1976, p. 4.)

Another possible reason is that the adversary does not want us to read the scriptures. If we study the scriptures diligently we might learn that God is truly our Heavenly Father and that Jesus is the Christ, the divine Son of God. Also, we might learn from the scriptures principles of happiness and progression that, if applied in our lives, would help us achieve joy and eternal life. The devil does not want us to know and apply these truths, so he does everything he can to prevent us from starting to read the scriptures and to keep us from continuing to read the scriptures once we begin.

However, the major reasons we do not read, study, and ponder the scriptures are within ourselves, and until we resolutely decide to do something about it and then stick firmly to that resolution, we probably will not follow a regular program of daily scriptural study as President Kimball has urged. (See "How Rare a Possession—the Scriptures!," Ensign, September 1976, pp. 2-5.) The next chapter has hints and suggestions on how to commit yourself to an effective program of daily scriptural study.
