Daniel H. Ludlow, Marking the Scriptures ( 1980)

2

Suggestions on Reading and Studying the Scriptures

Following are a few specific hints and suggestions on how one may read and study the scriptures.

Until you definitely decide you are going to read the scriptures through completely, you will not do it. So many other things will seem to have a stronger claim on your time that you will find it easy to put off reading the scriptures. Decide firmly you are going to read everything in all the scriptures.

Commit yourself to a minimum daily schedule. Some recommend reading a certain amount of material each day, such as a chapter, a page, or five pages. Others recommend reading for a certain amount of time, such as ten minutes or a half hour. Suggestions are also made frequently concerning the best time to read—early morning, just before or after a meal, late evening. You know better than anyone else what the demands are on your time and the best time for you to set aside regularly; therefore, recognize that your schedule or the schedule of your family may well be different from the schedules of others. Be realistic when you set your schedule, then keep to it.

The larger the number of people who know of your decision to read the scriptures daily, the more difficult it will be to let them down by not reading the scriptures. Ask a few friends to inquire frequently how you are progressing with your resolution to read the scriptures daily. If you tend at first to procrastinate, you will soon discover it is easier and requires less time to read the scriptures than to explain to your friends why you are not reading them!

As you read, place yourself in the position of the person who originally received or wrote the materials, or put yourself in the position of one of the major personalities in the story. The Book of Mormon came alive for me as a boy when I became Sam and followed my more spiritual brother, Nephi, through the episodes recorded in First and Second Nephi. If you become involved with the story, the material will be more meaningful to you, and you will be able to remember it longer. In general, psychologists say we remember about ten percent of what we read, approximately thirty percent of what we see, and nearly eighty percent of what we do. Although these figures may vary considerably from topic to topic, it is a sound learning principle to involve yourself in the subject. As you read the scriptures, pause occasionally and ask yourself a question such as, How can I relate more fully to this particular incident or principle?

Do not speed-read the scriptures the way you might a novel or other light reading. Pause frequently as you read the scriptures, and think deeply or reflect upon the principles being taught. Ask yourself such questions as, Why did the Lord want Isaiah to record this particular thing? What did John the Revelator see in his vision of the last days that would prompt him to use this analogy?

I find that when I get casual in my relationships to divinity and when it seems that no divine ear is listening and no divine voice is speaking, that I am far, far away. If I immerse myself in the scriptures the distance narrows, and the spirituality returns. (Spencer W. Kimball, address to seminary and institute personnel, Brigham Young University, July 11, 1966.)

Our Heavenly Father has sent prophets into the world to teach us the gospel. Teachings of some of the earlier prophets comprise the scriptures or standard works; these should be searched to obtain the fundamentals of the gospel.

I don't know much about the gospel other than what I've learned from the standard works. When I drink from a spring I like to get the water where it comes out of the ground, not down the stream after the cattle have waded in it. . . . I appreciate other people's interpretation, but when it comes to the gospel we ought to be acquainted with what the Lord says and we ought to read it. . . . (Marion G. Romney, address to seminary and institute coordinators, April 3, 1973.)

The Lord has indicated in this dispensation that what his living prophets speak "when moved upon by the Holy Ghost shall be scripture, shall be the will of the Lord, shall be the mind of the Lord, shall be the word of the Lord, shall be the voice of the Lord, and the power of God unto salvation." (D&C 68:4.) Thus the inspired teachings of the living prophets should be considered as scripture in learning the fulness of the gospel.

The principles learned in the scriptures can be applied to many aspects of life. In actively searching for these relationships, not only do you learn more about the scriptures, but their truths also become more relevant to everything about you. Remember, the gospel of Jesus Christ embraces all truth wherever it may be found.

The Bible, Book of Mormon, Doctrine and Covenants, and Pearl of Great Price, do not contain the wisdom of men alone, but of God. . . . What mattereth it though we understand Homer and Shakespeare and Milton, and I might enumerate all the great writers of the world; if we have failed to read the scriptures we have missed the better part of this world's literature. (George Albert Smith, Conference Report, October 1917, p. 43.)

The Savior has counseled us to "search the scriptures" diligently. (John 5:39.) At least once you will want to read each volume of scripture from beginning to end in order to become acquainted with its historical and cultural context. After that, develop a systematic program for studying the doctrines from the scriptures by focusing on one topic at a time. The Topical Guide section of the Bible will provide references of many related scriptures on particular topics; read these scriptures in context and learn their background so you can see more readily how the truths of that topic relate to other truths. If you have a major teaching position in the Church, the demands of the lessons might help you decide what subjects to study. Otherwise, you might want to review the alphabetical headings in the Topical Guide and study those topics of most interest or importance to you. By following these procedures, it is hoped that you will soon study all the essential doctrines of the gospel.

As you read the scriptures, you will undoubtedly want to mark certain words, verses, or sections to emphasize them or to help find them again quickly. Make certain you mark (and/or color) in such a way that your purpose of marking will be realized; in other words, make certain your system of marking and coloring has special meaning for you. One of the purposes of this publication is to help you think through and implement an effective system of marking the scriptures.

It is not enough to read the scriptures nor even to learn the great principles contained therein. You must learn to apply these principles in your daily life. As the scriptures and our living prophet have said, it is not enough to say—we must also do. Occasionally as you read the scriptures, you might pause and ask, How can I use these principles to become a better person and to solve some of the problems I am now facing?

One cannot receive eternal life without becoming a "doer of the word" (see James 1:22) and being valiant in obedience to the Lord's commandments. And one cannot become a "doer of the word" without first becoming a "hearer." And to become a "hearer" is not simply to stand idly by and wait for chance bits of information; it is to seek out and study and pray and comprehend. (Spencer W. Kimball, Ensign, September 1976, p. 2.)

Become acquainted with the language of the scriptures and the teachings of the scriptures. After you have done that, you have to live it. You can't learn the gospel without living it. (Marion G. Romney, address to seminary and institute coordinators, April 3, 1973, p. 5.)

We have been counseled by the Lord to teach one another the doctrines of the kingdom. (D&C 88:77.) The best way to learn something is to teach it to others. This truism is particularly helpful in learning the scriptures. Someone has suggested that the Church is the "teachingest" organization on the earth. The Church and its many priesthood and auxiliary organizations provide many opportunities for teaching (and thus learning) the scriptures. Also, we must not forget our major responsibility of teaching the gospel and the scriptures to members of our family.

I admonish you, O Israel, search the scriptures; read them in your homes; teach your families what the Lord has said; and let us spend less of our time reading the unimportant and often harmful literature of the day, and go to the fountain of truth and read the word of the Lord. (George Albert Smith, Conference Report, October 1917, pp. 41, 43-44.)

We must study the scriptures according to the Lord's commandment (see 3 Ne. 23:1-5); and we must let them govern our lives and the lives of our children. (Spencer W. Kimball, Ensign, September 1976, p. 5.)

Too many people have never read the scriptures even once; others have read them, but feel their obligation to the Lord has then been fulfilled. The scriptures have been written for many purposes, one of which is to help us learn principles so we can solve our problems. Since we are continually having different problems to solve, we will never outgrow our need for reading and rereading, studying and restudying the scriptures.

I am convinced that each of us, at some time in our lives, must discover the scriptures for ourselves—and not just discover them once, but rediscover them again and again. (Spencer W. Kimball, Ensign, September 1976, p. 4.)
