Daniel H. Ludlow, Marking the Scriptures ( 1980)

3

The Latter-day Saint Edition of the Bible

This publication is not the place to give a detailed history of the new Latter-day Saint edition of the Bible. The Ensign of October 1979 contains a brief account (pp. 9-18), and it is hoped that additional background information will be given in other articles and in future histories of the Church. Perhaps it is sufficient to say here that the First Presidency and the Council of the Twelve directed the project from the very beginning, including the development of all the instructional aids, and approved each section before final printing.

The publication of the Latter-day Saint edition of the King James Version of the Bible has been heralded both within and without the Church as one of the most important publishing achievements of this or any other century.

The major features of the new edition are listed briefly here; most of them will be discussed later in greater detail. A real appreciation and understanding of the significance of this new edition, however, will come only as you read, study, compare, and ponder the contents of this remarkable volume.

a. Footnotes headed by or containing the following capitalized letters: GR, HEB, IE, JST, TG, OR. Such footnotes provide (1) helpful information from other translations of the Bible, including the Greek [GR], the Hebrew [HEB], and the Joseph Smith Translation [JST], (2) explanations of idioms and difficult constructions [IE], (3) references to materials in the Topical Guide [TG], and (4) clarifications of archaic English expressions [OR]. See chapter 7 for suggestions for marking the footnotes containing these capitalized headings.

b. Footnote entries containing cross-references to other scriptures. This edition of the Bible contains, for the first time, cross-references to the Book of Mormon, Doctrine and Covenants, and Pearl of Great Price. Footnotes in previous Bible editions have contained only scriptural cross-references to the Old Testament and New Testament, considerably limiting the value to Latter-day Saint readers. See chapter 8 for suggestions for marking footnotes containing scriptural references.

c. Footnote entries containing editorial notes. Teachings of modern prophets and research of current scholars help clarify some of the more difficult passages in the Bible. Such helpful explanations are included as special editorial notes in many of the footnotes. See chapter 9 for suggestions for marking such notes.
