Daniel H. Ludlow, Marking the Scriptures ( 1980)

4

Principles and Methods of Marking the Scriptures

The words mark, annotate, and cross-reference will be used several times in this publication, so perhaps it would be well to define them here.

Mark. As used in the sense of marking the scriptures, the word mark means "to designate, set apart, identify, distinguish" or "to indicate, express, or show by a mark or symbol." In a general sense, anything added to the printed scripture is considered a mark. Such marks might take the form of lines, circles, letters, numbers, symbols, or anything else tending to designate or distinguish. In this broad sense, annotating and cross-referencing are also forms of marking.

Annotate. Webster's unabridged dictionary lists the following definitions of annotate: (1) to make explanatory or critical notes on; to comment upon; (2) to make notes by way of explanation; to make remarks on a writing. Thus, annotation is "a remark, note, or commentary on some passage of a book, intended to illustrate or explain its meaning: generally used in the plural; as, annotations on the Scriptures."

The basic root word of annotate is note, which suggests the use of words. Therefore, in this publication the term "annotating the scriptures" refers to use of words in marking a particular scripture.

Cross-Reference. Any system that leads a person from one scriptural reference to another is referred to as cross-referencing. This might be accomplished by the use of a mark as simple as a straight line, or it might include the special use of words (annotating). Several methods of cross-referencing are employed in the Latter-day Saint edition of the Bible:

One of the major values of the Bible is that it contains some of the most elaborate and thorough cross-referencing systems of any Bible. These should greatly aid users in relating and associating pertinent scriptures to each other.

How to Begin Marking the Scriptures

If you have not had previous experience in marking and annotating a Bible, it might be worthwhile to read the remainder of this publication before deciding finally how you will mark your copy of the scriptures. It is always easier to add to a marking system later than to erase something inserted too quickly without purpose or reason.

Principles basic to any marking system include (1) determining important items you want to find in the scriptures; (2) organizing (at least in your mind) the important teachings of the scriptures into significant and meaningful groupings; (3) developing a consistent marking system to be used throughout the scriptures so as to facilitate ready identification without undue distraction; and (4) selecting appropriate and distinctive colors if a coloring system is to be used.

A possible place to begin developing an effective marking system for the text of the Bible would be to take several small index cards (about 3 x 5-inch) or blank sheets of paper. Write on each sheet a major principle, ordinance, teaching, doctrine, concept, idea, truth, etc., with notes regarding what is important about each. Your cards might contain such individual entries as the following:

Faith. What it is and how it works.

God. His nature, characteristics, and traits. How he relates to us and why he works this way.

Israel. History and origin of Israel. Story of the Twelve Tribes of Israel. The major kingdoms (and kings) of Israel.

Baptism. What is its purpose? Why is it necessary? How is it performed? Is authority necessary?

Divinity of Christ. Specific significance of Firstborn and Only Begotten. Meaning of Christ and Messiah.

Opposition. Forces of evil. Lucifer, the devil, Satan. The recurring conflict of good and evil.

After you have completed so many of these small cards that you become repetitious or start listing unimportant items, arrange the cards into common groups of related topics.

If you find that you have too few groups (perhaps five or fewer), you may be including widely differing topics within the same group. On the other hand, if you have too many (perhaps ten or more), you may find it difficult to tell exactly which group fits a particular idea. It is hoped that most of your ideas will be included in five to ten groupings.

You might then take larger sheets of paper and outline (with major headings, subheadings, etc.) the materials within the various groups. It might also be well at this point to read the chapter headings in the Bible. Undoubtedly the contents of the chapter headings will suggest other items to place in your outlines.

The actual marking of your scriptures should begin only after you have decided what areas you want to mark and have determined what marking system you plan to use. A fundamental principle to remember in developing a system for marking scriptures is to make certain it is your system. If the system you use does not make sense to you or have special meaning for you, it probably will not be effective.

Several possible systems of marking the scriptures will be suggested in this publication to help you decide which system you might use: underlining, vertical lining, bracketing, boxing or blocking, circling, shading, numbering. It is not anticipated you will use all the systems suggested (in fact, you may not use any of the suggestions); however, if such a listing helps you decide on a system best suited for you, one of the purposes of this publication will have been realized.

Another important principle to keep in mind as you develop your system to mark your scriptures is KEEP IT SIMPLE. Use only those marks which in your mind tend to designate, set apart, identify, or distinguish. Mark only those scriptures or items that you think are important. Using too many marks or too many different marking systems indicates you have not thought through carefully enough exactly what you want to accomplish in the marking of your scriptures. Marking too many scriptures or items on a page leads to confusion and keeps you from achieving one of the major purposes of effective marking: ready identification or setting apart.

Another principle of good marking is to use marking materials that are readily available and yet will permit quick identification and setting apart without drawing undue attention. Several types of materials might be used, including colored pencils, colored pens, colored cellophane paper, and colored adhesive tapes. However, colored pencils seem to be the most effective and yet least expensive method, so this will be the only method discussed.

The use of different distinctive colors contributes significantly to an effective marking system. Following are a few ideas to consider in selecting colored pencils:

a. Colors should be distinctive and relatively bright. As many as eight different colors (and perhaps even as many as twelve) might be used; however, if more than eight are used, it is sometimes difficult to differentiate between the shades.

b. Pencil lead should not contain too much wax; any wax, in time, will bleed through the sheet, discolor the paper, and show through on the other side.

c. Pencil lead should be relatively soft. If lead is too hard, the point tends to rip the paper before a wide enough impression is made to be clearly seen. If lead is too soft, it blurs and spreads out too far. Easily erasable colored pencils often smudge and blur quite easily.

d. Pencil should be regular length (approximately 7 1/2 inches or 19 cm) and standard diameter. Pencils shorter than normal are hard to keep track of and are quickly used up; longer pencils are awkward to use at first; thicker or thinner pencils do not fit standard pencil sharpeners and are also more difficult to use.

e. Quality and cost of the pencil should also be considered. Your purchase of the scriptures represents a considerable investment, and you are also going to invest a good deal of valuable time in marking and annotating the scriptures. Thus, it is hoped that the slight additional cost of quality colored pencils in marking your scriptures should not be a prohibitive factor.

You might want to try out different brands and qualities before deciding which ones to use, but when you decide, you should purchase at least two identical sets of pencils so you can be assured of having enough identical colors to complete your marking project.

Another important principle to consider is to use colors meaningful to you in identifying certain concepts or doctrines. Do not worry too much about what various colors might mean to others, but make certain the colors mean something distinctive to you.

I once purchased a set of eight colored pencils to mark a new copy of the Book of Mormon. I then asked myself, "What color should I use to mark or identify related concepts or doctrines?" I decided that the answer to my question centered on which of the eight colors would likely come to mind when I thought of those particular concepts or doctrines.

I listed the eight colors of pencils in the set. Then, thinking of the major teachings in the Book of Mormon, I wrote next to each color the ideas that immediately came to mind when I thought of that color. The results were as follows:

Purple: I thought of royalty. Since the priesthood is referred to as the "royal priesthood," I decided to underline in purple all references pertaining to such topics as priesthood and Church government; priesthood power, authority, keys, offices, and functions; Church offices and positions; destiny and purpose of the Church.

Blue: I had been in Israel many times, and the blue star of David on the flag of Israel came to mind. Thus, I decided to underline in blue all references pertaining to Israel, including its origin, history, scattering, and gathering; prophetic promises pertaining to Israel as a land, people, and chosen nation; Israel in the latter days.

Yellow: My first thoughts were of light and the sun. Jesus Christ is the Light of the world and the Son of God, and so I decided to mark in yellow all passages pertaining to Jesus Christ, such as both the conditional and unconditional aspects of the atonement, including his suffering for sin in the Garden of Gethsemane and his resurrection.

Orange: No concept came to mind for orange, but since orange is closely related to yellow, I decided to mark in orange those doctrines closely associated with Jesus Christ, such as the eternal plan of life and salvation, beginning with pre-earthly existence, purposes of mortality, life after death, possibility of godhood (including principles of exaltation).

Red: Since this color seemed to be closely associated both with yellow and orange, I decided to mark in red all references to basic principles, ordinances, and covenants of the gospel, such as faith, repentance, baptism, and receiving the gift of the Holy Ghost.

Green: I thought of spring or newness of life. God the Father is the source of all life, and so I decided to mark in green all scriptures pertaining to the nature, characteristics, and roles of the various members of the Godhead. This idea was expanded to include references to the nature, calling, and functions of translated beings and those who have already become gods.

Brown: I thought of the ground or the earth, something basic or fundamental, and so I decided to mark in brown the historical events important or basic to the story being told. Names, dates, places, and other historical pegs on which more important concepts might be hung were marked in brown.

Black: My first thoughts were of evil, wickedness, and the devil. Thus, I marked in black those references pertaining to the devil, Satan, the adversary, and to his nefarious purposes, designs, enticements, temptations, methods, powers, and imitations. Scriptural references to sons of perdition and other followers of Lucifer were also emphasized with black.

Again, I emphasize that it is important for you to decide what colors you are going to use in marking your scriptures. Simply because a particular color works well for one person in identifying certain concepts or ideas does not mean that color will be best for you in identifying those same concepts or ideas.

Methods of Marking the Scriptures

Possible methods of marking the scriptures are listed here to help you determine which method (or combination of methods) might best serve your purpose in marking particular scriptural references or other items, such as footnote and Topical Guide entries. Suggestions for possible use of colors with these marking methods will be discussed in later chapters.

Be selective in determining when you might best use each method or if you should use it at all.

Underlining

Characteristics:

Caution: Do not overuse. Make certain lines do not show through on other side of sheet. Keep lines straight and neat.

13 And God said unto Noah, The end of all flesh is come before me; for the earth is filled with aviolence through them; and, behold, I will destroy them cwith the earth.

14 Make thee an aark of gopher wood; rooms shalt thou make in the ark, and shalt pitch it within and without with pitch.

Vertical Lining

Characteristics:

Caution: This system of marking is so easy to use that it is often overused. It quickly loses its effectiveness unless combined with other methods.

14 The LORD is my astrength and song, and is become my bsalvation.

15 The voice of rejoicing and salvation is in the atabernacles of the righteous: the right hand of the LORD doeth valiantly.

16 The right ahand of the LORD is exalted: the right hand of the LORD doeth valiantly.

17 I shall not die, but live, and declare the works of the LORD.

18 The LORD hath chastened me sore: but he hath not given me over unto death.

19 Open to me the gates of righteousness: I will go into them, and I will praise the LORD:

Shading

Characteristics:

Caution: Scriptures marked with this system often show through on other side of sheet. The system quickly loses effectiveness if used too frequently. It also uses up pencils more quickly!

aAND there shall come forth a rod out of the cstem of dJesse, and a eBranch shall grow out of his roots:

2 And the aspirit of the LORD shall rest upon him, the spirit of wisdom and cunderstanding, the spirit of dcounsel and might, the spirit of knowledge and of the fear of the LORD;

Bracketing

Characteristics:

Caution: This system loses effectiveness when used with large segments of material unless combined with other systems.

29 So ye in like manner, when ye shall see these things come to pass, know that it is nigh, even at the doors.

30 [Verily I say unto you, that this ageneration shall not pass, till all these things be done.

31 Heaven and earth shall pass away: but my awords shall not pass away.]

32 But of that aday and that hour knoweth no man, no, not the angels which are in heaven, neither the Son, but the Father.

Boxing or Blocking

Characteristics:

Caution: This system loses effectiveness if used with large segments.

29 So ye in like manner, when ye shall see these things come to pass, know that it is nigh, even at the doors.

30 Verily I say unto you, that this ageneration shall not pass, till all these things be done.

31 Heaven and earth shall pass away: but my awords shall not pass away.

32 But of that aday and that hour knoweth no man, no, not the angels which are in heaven, neither the Son, but the Father.

33 Take ye heed, awatch and pray for ye know not when the time is.

Verse Circling

Characteristics:

Caution: This system of marking is so easy to use that it is often overused. It quickly loses effectiveness unless combined with other methods. If less than one verse is to be emphasized, this system must be used with another system.

29 So ye in like manner, when ye shall see these things come to pass, know that it is nigh, even at the doors.

30 Verily I say unto you, that this ageneration shall not pass, till all these things be done.

31 Heaven and earth shall pass away: but my awords shall not pass away.

32 But of that aday and that hour knoweth no man, no, not the angels which are in heaven, neither the Son, but the Father.

33 Take ye heed, awatch and pray: for ye know not when the time is.

Word Circling

Characteristics:

Caution: This system is limited in application. It emphasizes, but does not necessarily show relationships.

2 Behold, God is my salvation; I will trust, and not be afraid: for the LORD aJEHOVAH is my strength and my song; he also is become my csalvation.

3 Therefore with ajoy shall ye draw water out of the wells of salvation.

4 And in that day shall ye say, aPraise the LORD, call upon his name, declare his doings among the people, make mention that his name is exalted.

5 aSing unto the LORD; for he hath done excellent things: this is known in all the earth.

6 Cry out and shout, thou ainhabitant of Zion: for great is the Holy One of Israel in the midst of thee.

Numbering

Characteristics:

Caution: This system probably has limited application. Same numbers on different pages might have different meanings, and numbers might be difficult to pick out if they are written in the text.

aAND there shall come forth a rod out of the cstem of dJesse, and a eBranch shall grow out of his roots:

2 And the aspirit of the LORD shall rest upon him, the spirit of wisdom and cunderstanding, the spirit of dcounsel and might, the spirit of knowledge and of the fear of the LORD;
