Daniel H. Ludlow, Marking the Scriptures ( 1980)

5

Marking the King James Text

The methods you select for marking and coloring the King James text probably will affect greatly your later decisions on what to do with the other sections of the new edition of the Bible. Thus, you may want to review and carefully consider the principles and methods of marking and coloring discussed in the preceding chapter before making any further decisions. You may even want to read the remainder of this publication before deciding how to mark and color the KJV text.

Principles of Marking the Text

Let's review some basic principles and thoughts to assist you in your consideration:

The text of the Bible is so long (1,590 pages in the new edition) and contains so many concepts, principles, truths, and ideas, that one of your first tasks should be to organize and group these materials together as much as possible. You might want to follow the suggestion in chapter 4 of listing ideas from the Bible on small separate sheets and then organizing them into larger groups.

To help you start thinking about particular ideas and concepts related to the Bible, consider the following:

After making this suggestion in chapter 4, I decided to try it in relationship to the Bible (I had previously used it for the Book of Mormon). I wrote on small slips of paper different ideas concerning the Bible and its teachings as these ideas came to me—one idea per slip of paper. Then I put related topics together in common piles. In this instance, the ideas seemed to fall into ten different areas, although I plan to go through them again and again to get them down to seven or eight groupings.

Although I hesitate to share with you the ideas in my initial ten groupings for fear it might restrict and structure your thinking, I have decided to list them in Appendix A in case you might want to glance through them for ideas of your own. Don't even look at them, however, if you already have enough ideas of your own to begin your own lists.

If this book were a manual for a class and if I were the teacher and you the student, I would probably ask you to write down your ideas first, organize them into your groupings, and then look at the ideas and concepts grouped in Appendix A. The assignment would then be to organize all of these ideas (your own and the ones in Appendix A) into no more than eight groups. Now that you have your groupings, proceed to the next steps of selecting and developing an effective coloring and marking system for the KJV text.

Marking the Text

Eventually you will probably want to use several methods of marking the voluminous text of the King James Version. At first, however, you might want to restrict yourself to such simple techniques as underlining, vertical lining, and bracketing. These are effective and compatible with each other, but should be used sparingly. Later your underlining may extend into shading, and your bracketing into boxing, but at first reserve shading and boxing for really special scriptures and purposes.

Coloring the Text

After you have organized your ideas pertaining to the Bible into eight or so groupings, a possible next step would be to select a distinctive color for each of these groups. Be sure you have a definite reason in mind for selecting a particular color for a particular group; the one should remind you of the other. In other words, when you think of the group, you should immediately think of the color; and when you think of the color, you should immediately think of the group.

Annotating the Text

The notes used in annotating the scriptures can be placed in any margins on the page: left, right, upper, or lower. Usually the lefthand or righthand margins would be used if the note(s) can be written next to the pertinent word, sentence, or verse.

If a longer note is needed or if the note pertains to a general concept rather than to a specific word or verse, the upper or lower margins might be used. In such instances, it might be well to insert a distinguishing mark in the text itself or in the lefthand or righthand margins that would lead to the note at the top or bottom of the page.

Summary and Review

Personalize your groupings and your systems of marking, coloring, and annotating. The subjects you are most interested in and want to know more about from the Bible are probably not exactly the same as those of your friends or even of other members of your family. Inasmuch as it is your Bible you are marking, make certain the subjects you are emphasizing are organized into groupings that have special meaning and significance for you.

The marks also should have special meaning to you. Remember that it is better to undermark than overmark; you can always add additional marks as you read and re-read the scriptures, but it is very difficult to remove marks once they have been made. Your notes should be legible and should be located in the margins where they can be seen readily. And remember to use distinctive colors that are quickly identifiable.
