Daniel H. Ludlow, Marking the Scriptures ( 1980)

7

Marking Footnote Entries Containing Capitalized Headings

A significant contribution in the footnote section is the inclusion of alternate translations of the Bible, explanations of idioms and difficult constructions, appropriate references to entries in the Topical Guide, and clarification of archaic English expressions. These are discussed on the page opposite the beginning of Genesis as follows:

Cross references to related passages throughout the standard works have self-identifying abbreviations for each book cited. Other abbreviations are as follows:

GR: An alternate translation from the Greek.

HEB: An alternate translation from the Hebrew.

IE: An explanation of idioms and difficult constructions.

JST: Joseph Smith Translation. Excerpts from the Prophet Joseph Smith's translation of the Bible. Short excerpts are provided in the footnotes; longer excerpts are provided in the Appendix. Italic type in these JST excerpts is used for words not found in the King James Version.

TG: Topical Guide. References to the 'Topical Guide with Selected Concordance and Index,' given by topic title. This material is in the Appendix.

The word 'OR' signifies that alternate words follow to clarify the meaning of archaic English expressions.

Each of the footnote entries relates to a superscript (a small superscribed or raised letter thus: a) in the King James text. The verse number and superscript appearing in a particular verse will begin the related footnote entry; you might want to mark and color (a) the superscript in the text, (b) the corresponding letter in the footnote, and (c) the capitalized letters in the footnote. In the following examples, possible colors are suggested to indicate what might be done; however, you should determine which color you feel will work best for you.

GR: An Alternate Translation from the Greek

The New Testament comes to us primarily from the Greek language. Thus, frequently the alternate translations from the Greek add significantly to a better understanding of the New Testament.

In determining what color to use in marking the footnote entries containing the abbreviation GR, let's try word association. What color, if any, comes to mind when you think of Greek and/or GR? Let's suppose your word associations are "Greek—GR—Green." You might then decide to mark all GR (Greek) footnote entries in green. To identify quickly the superscript in the text and the footnote, you might decide to mark them all in green.

A list of pages containing GR footnotes is found in Section 1 of Appendix B. This list should be of great assistance if you decide to mark the alternate translations from the Greek.

HEB: An Alternate Translation from the Hebrew

The Old Testament comes to us primarily from the Hebrew language or languages closely associated with Hebrew. Thus the numerous alternate translations from Hebrew add greatly to a better understanding of the Old Testament.

What color, if any, comes to mind when you think of the word Hebrew? Let's assume you previously decided to mark in blue references to Israel in the text; you might now decide to use blue to mark the Hebrew translations inasmuch as Hebrew and Israel are closely related. The superscript and corresponding letter and the HEB footnote entry then might be marked in blue.

A list of pages containing HEB footnote entries is found in Section 2 of Appendix B. As you mark these entries, read the alternate translations from Hebrew in the appropriate place of the King James text and note the significant contributions.

IE: Idioms and Difficult Constructions

Every language contains idioms or idiomatic expressions that, by definition, indicate the meaning is peculiar to a particular group. Webster's unabridged dictionary defines an idiom as "having a meaning that cannot be derived as a whole from the conjoined meaning of its elements."

In American English, the following expressions (with their real meanings in parentheses) are idiomatic: "Tom had the heart of a lion." (This expression does not mean the heart of a lion has been transplanted into Tom. Rather, it means Tom is brave or courageous.) "Collins died on third base." (Very few baseball players actually suffer physical death while running the bases. The expression means Collins, the runner, did not score from third base before his teammates made three outs in that inning.)

An understanding of the real meaning of idioms in the Bible is critical to a better understanding of that holy scripture. Thus you will want to read in context, and probably will want to mark, all footnotes containing IE headings (in yellow, for "new light" or better understanding?). Remember to color the superscript number as well as the footnote. A list of pages containing IE footnotes is found in section 3 of Appendix B.

JST: Excerpts from the Joseph Smith Translation

Short excerpts from the Joseph Smith Translation of the Bible are provided in the footnotes; longer excerpts are provided in the Appendix of the Bible. Italic type in these excerpts is used for words not found in the King James Version.

You might want to mark these references in a distinctive bright color (red?) to draw attention to their importance. You might want to mark the italic words also. Remember to color the corresponding letter in the superscript and the footnote, and the capitalized letters JST. Verse numbers of JST and KJV are not always identical; thus, you might write in any verse numbers that are different so you can readily cross-reference the two texts.

Appendix C of this publication lists pages of the Bible containing JST footnotes and also has a selection of JST verses not cross-referenced in the new Bible edition.

Chapter 12 has suggestions on marking the longer JST excerpts found in the Appendix of the Bible (pages 797-813).

TG: Topical Guide

An important feature of the new edition of the Bible is the inclusion of the Topical Guide section of the Appendix. This section is discussed more fully in Chapter 10, with suggestions on how to mark entries within the Topical Guide.

Literally thousands of footnote entries on the 1,590 pages of biblical text refer to the Topical Guide. In fact, superscripts and footnotes leading to the Topical Guide are so numerous that you might want only to underline them rather than to use a more extensive marking system. You might also select a color that will not draw undue attention to itself (brown, for "tan ground"—TG?). Because the TG footnote entries are so numerous, a separate listing of them has not been prepared.

OR: Alternate Words to Clarify Archaic English Expressions

Many English words have changed meanings since the King James Version was first printed in 1611. Footnote entries with the capitalized word OR help to clarify in modern English what was meant by a particular English word when it was used originally.

You might want to use orange (for OR) for the superscripts and the footnotes.

A list of pages containing footnotes headed by OR is found in section 4 of Appendix B.
