Daniel H. Ludlow, Marking the Scriptures ( 1980)

8

Marking Footnote Entries Containing Cross-References

Most of the footnote entries include cross-references to other scriptures. Any marking system involving the coloring of such scriptures should be limited; otherwise the footnote sections would have so many colored entries that some of the basic principles of effective marking (quick location and identification) would be lost. Some color marking might be used to accomplish special purposes, however. Following are two suggestions:

One possibility of marking the scriptural references in the footnote entries would be to underline only those scriptural references essential to full understanding of the passage.

As an example, in Genesis 50:25, Joseph had the children of Israel promise they would carry his bones out of Egypt when they returned to the promised land. The footnote entry pertaining to this verse (25b, page 78) refers to Exodus 13:19 Mosestakes Joseph's bones out of Egypt) and Joshua 24:32 (Joseph's bones buried in Shechem). These additional scriptural references are necessary to complete the meaning of Genesis 50:25 and to show that the desires of Joseph were carried out. They might be distinctively marked.

As another example, Numbers 21:9 indicates that Moses, in response to a command from the Lord, "made a serpent of brass and set it upon a pole" in order that his people might look upon it in faith and live. The footnote of the verse (9a, p. 227) refers to Alma 33:18-22, which indicates this act was a symbol or type of the coming of the Son of God, who also would be lifted up (crucified and resurrected) in order that his people might live eternally. The latter scripture both clarifies and completes the former and might be marked in the footnote to indicate its importance.

Another possibility for marking scriptural cross-references would be to mark only those which come from the modern scriptures: Book of Mormon, Doctrine and Covenants, and Pearl of Great Price. Such markings in a different distinctive color for each modern scripture might be justified on the basis that this is the first edition of the Bible to include such cross-references.
