Daniel H. Ludlow, Marking the Scriptures ( 1980)

10

Marking Topical Guide Entries

Traditional methods of marking the scriptures have usually included "link referencing" or "chain referencing." Briefly stated, this system of cross-referencing ties or links one scripture to another until all the major scriptures related to that particular subject are linked together in a chain.

This system has proven to be very effective and still has value in marking the text of the scriptures. For example, the account of Jesus calming the waves and the wind is recorded in three of the Gospels: Matthew 8:23-27; Mark 4:36-41; Luke 8:22-25. The footnotes in the new Bible do not lead you from one of these sources directly to the other two. Thus, you might want to link these references together by noting in the margin near each of these references the book, chapter, and verses of the other sources.

The Topical Guide printed in the Appendix of the Bible already accomplishes for the reader much of what was formerly achieved through a link or chain referencing system. Physically, at least, the major scriptures related to a particular subject often have been brought together. However, publication of the Topical Guide opens up many new and creative possibilities for marking the scriptures. Now that related scriptures have been brought together physically, they can quickly, effectively, and efficiently be organized and reorganized into different relationships.

Organization of Topical Guide Entries

So that you can become acquainted with the various components of TG entries, let's examine various types feature by feature. You will note the following:

Clothe (see also Array; Gird)

Isa. 61: 10 he hath c. me with the garments of salvation; Old Testament Dan. 5: 29 c. Daniel with scarlet; ] Old Testment

Matt. 25: 36 Naked, and ye c. me; Mark 15: 17 c. him with purple; 2 Cor. 5: 2 c. upon with our house which is from heaven; 1 Pet. 5: 5 be c. with humility; Rev. 11: 3 c. in sackcloth; 12: 1 woman c. with the sun; 19: 13 c. with a vesture dipped in blood; 2 Ne. 9: 14 c. with purity; ] New Testament

3 Ne. 11: 8 c. in a white robe; ] Book of Mormon

D&C 45: 44 c. with power and great glory; 65: 5 c. in the brightness of his glory; 88: 125 c. yourselves with the bond of charity; 138: 43 bones...c. upon with flesh; ] Doctrine and Covenants

Moses 4: 27 make coats of skins, and c. them. ] Pearl of Great Price

Arise, Arose (see also Rise)

Isa. 26: 19 together with my dead body shall they a.; 60: 1 A., shine, for thy light is come; Amos 7: 2 by whom shall Jacob a.; Mal. 4: 2 a. with healing in his wings;

Banner

Ps 20: 5 in the name of our God we will set up our b.; 60: 4 Thou hast given a b. to them that fear thee; Isa. 13: 2 Lift ye up a b. upon the high mountain.

Restrain (see also Hinder; Withhold)

1 Sam. 3: 13 his sons made themselves vile, and he r. them not; Isa. 63: 15 thy mercies toward me? are they r.; Acts 14: 18 these sayings scarce r. they the people; 2 Ne. 1: 26 truth, according to that which is in God, which he could not r.; Ether 12: 2 he could not be r. because of the Spirit; D&C 134: 4 civil magistrate should r. crime.

An even more ambitious marking and coloring project would be to circle in different colors the first major reference from each of the standard works. This procedure would help you to determine quickly whether or not a particular standard work (Old Testament, New Testament, Book of Mormon, Doctrine and Covenants, Pearl of Great Price) is represented in the cross-references of an entry.

Marking the Contents of the TG Entries

The extent of your creativity and imagination will be the only limiting factor on how you mark and color the contents of the TG entries. Now that related scriptures are printed together on hundreds of topics, many new, creative, and significant methods for marking the scriptures are possible.

I hesitate to provide even one example for fear it might limit or structure your thinking on how you might mark and/or color the various TG entries. However, to help you start thinking of various possibilities, let's look at the headings associated with baptism, the first basic ordinance of the gospel: Baptism; Baptism, Essential; Baptism, Immersion; Baptism, Qualifications for; Baptism for the Dead (pages 22-23 of the Appendix). Because these five headings are concerned with a common basic subject, you might want to box them in a common color to set them apart from the other headings on those pages.

Now let's list your main interests concerning the ordinance of baptism. We'll assume they include the following:

You might mark scriptures pertaining to your first interest (How long has baptism been performed on the earth?) by identifying, numbering, and circling the scriptures indicating chronologically when baptism was taught on the earth.

Next, you might help set apart scriptures pertaining to your second interest (What are the major purposes of baptism by water?) by writing "Purposes of baptism by water" in the left margin with a colored pencil (yellow, to remind you of a fresh, new life and of the light of the Holy Ghost?). Then read all the scriptural references under all five headings, identify which ones are concerned with the purposes of baptism, and underline those scriptural references and their key words with the same colored pencil.

Scriptural references pertaining to your third interest (Do the scriptures definitely teach baptism must be by immersion?) have already been compiled under the topic Baptism, Immersion. Now all you need to do is identify the scriptures you feel are most important in teaching this concept; then underline those references (in blue, to remind you of water?).

Scriptural references pertaining to your fourth interest (How clearly do the scriptures indicate priesthood authority is necessary for baptism?) might be scattered throughout the five entries. Again, read each reference, identify those that have to do with the authority necessary to baptize, and lightly shade them (in purple, to remind you of the "royal" priesthood and also to indicate how rare and precious the scriptures are on this subject?).
