Daniel H. Ludlow, Marking the Scriptures ( 1980)

13

Marking the Gazetteer

The first two sentences of instructions under the Gazetteer on page 817 are as follows: "in the list of references below, the letters and numbers in bold type refer to the grid squares in which place names are found on the maps in the map section that follows. Numbers in ordinary type refer to the numbers of the maps in which the place names occur in the indicated grid positions."

Many people will be surprised (and perhaps even confused) to find the map number is not listed before the letters and numbers indicating the grid squares of that particular map. After all, you must know the map with which you are working before the grid squares have any significance. To emphasize the importance of the map numbers in each entry, they could be marked with a light color.

The last sentence of instructions under Gazetteer indicates "References marked with an asterisk appear only in the large-print Bible." This sentence might be crossed out and disregarded because all the places marked with an asterisk do appear in the regular-print Bibles. Some differences do exist between the maps in the regular-print Bibles and in the large-print Bibles, but most of those differences are not major and they do not pertain to the entries marked with an asterisk.

Other possibilities for marking Gazetteer entries include the following:

Acco (Ptolemais) on page 817

Ptolemais (Acco) on page 824

However, the listings in the Gazetteer are not always one hundred percent consistent in listing all the possible titles in parentheses, especially when three or more titles are involved. To help complete an otherwise excellent Gazetteer, you might want to write in your Bible the italicized words listed in the following entries:

Alashuja (Cyprus, Kittim) island

Arabs, people (Aribi)

Ararat (Urartu) region

Asphaltitus, Lake (Dead Sea, Salt Sea)

Eastern Sea (Lower Sea, Persian Gulf) (Add entire entry just before Ebal, Mount, on page 820)

Great (Mediterranean, Upper, Western) Sea

Heliopolis, in Egypt (On)

Hittites (Hatti), people

Julias (Livias, Batharamphtha)

Kittim (Alashiza, Cyprus) island (Add entire entry just before Kizzuwatna, region, on page 822)

Libias (Betharamphtha; Julias) (Note that Libias can also be spelled Livias)

Nimrud (Cala) (Add entire entry just before Nineveh, page 823)

Persian Gulf (Eastern Sea, Lower Sea)

Scythopolis (Beth-shan) (Note that Beth-shan can also be spelled Beth-shean)

Susa (Shushan)

Syria (Aram)

Tell en-Nasbeh (Mizpah) (Add entire entry just before Tell Halaf on page 825)

Upper (Great, Mediterranean, Western) Sea

Western (Great, Mediterranean, Upper) Sea (Add entire entry just before Xanthus on page 826)

Emmaus (Nicopolis)

Emmaus

Following is a list of Gazetteer entries where the same word is used at least twice to begin consecutive entries:

Abila, Aijalon, Alexandria, Antioch, Aphek, Apollonia, Aram, Ararat, Arbela, Babylonia, Beth-horon, Beth-shemesh, Bithynia, Caesarea, Chinnereth, Crete, Cyprus, Egypt, Emmaus, Gadara, Galilee, Gath, Gerar, Heliopolis, Herod, Israel, Judah, Judea, Kadesh, Laodicea, Lower, Lydia, Moab, Neapolis, Nicopolis, Nile, North, Persian, Philadelphia, Philistia, Samaria, Seleucia, Sin, Sinai, Succoth, Tell, Temple, Tepe, Tyre, and Upper.

Another possibility for marking the entries in the Gazetteer would be to encircle in one color (blue?) those places primarily associated with the Old Testament, and encircle in another color (green?) the important New Testament places. Nazareth, for example, is not mentioned in the Old Testament but is a prominent New Testament place name, so it would be encircled in the color you select for the New Testament. Following are lists of major place names you might want to mark:

Old Testament Place Names

Ai; Amman (Rabbah); Ammon; Arad; Ararat, Mount; Ashdod; Ashkelon; Assyria.

Babylon; Babylonia; Beer-sheba; Bethel; Beth-shan; Beth-shemesh.

Dan (Laish); Dead (Salt) Sea; Dothan.

Ebal, Mount; Egypt (all entries but Roman province); Ekron; En-gedi; Eziongeber.

Gath; Gaza; Gerizim, Mount; Gibeon; Gilboa, Mount.

Haran; Hazor; Hebron.

Jabbok, river; Jezreel, Valley of.

Kadesh-barnea; Kiriath-jearim; Kishon, river.

Lachish; Lod.

Megiddo; Mizpah (Tell en-Nasbeh); Moab.

Nebo, Mount; Nineveh.

Penuel; Persia; Philistines, people.

Rabbah (Amman); Ramah; Ramoth-gilead; Red Sea.

Salt (Dead) Sea; Shechem; Shur, Wilderness of; Sinai.

Ur.

Ziklag; Zin, Wilderness of.

New Testament Place Names

Antioch (both entries); Arimathea; Athens.

Bethany; Bethesda, Pool of, in Jerusalem.

Caesarea (all five entries); Calvary (Golgotha) in Jerusalem; Capernaum; Carthage; Chorazin; Corinth; Crete, Roman Province; Cyprus, in Palestine; Cyprus, Roman province.

Emmaus (Nicopolis); Ephesus.

Gadara (both entries); Galilee (all entries); Garden Tomb; Gethsemane, in Jerusalem; Golgotha (Calvary), in Jerusalem.

Hinnom Valley, in Jerusalem.

Kidron Valley, in Jerusalem.

Lydda.

Malta.

Nain; Nazareth.

Olives, Mount of.

Pella; Perea; Philippi.

Rome.

Salamis.

Tarsus; Thessalonica; Tiberias; Tyropoeon Valley, in Jerusalem.

Upper room, in Jerusalem.

Water Gate, in Jerusalem.

Place Names in Both the Old Testament and New Testament

Some place names are prominent in the times of both the Old Testament and New Testament. You might want to encircle them in one color (blue?) and shade them in the other color (green?). These places are: Bethlehem; Damascus; Egypt; Jericho; Jerusalem; Jordan, river; Judea, region; Samaria; Sidon; Syria; Tabor, Mount; Tyre.
