Daniel H. Ludlow, Marking the Scriptures ( 1980)

14

Marking the Maps

The twenty-two maps at the end of the Appendix are a valuable addition to this excellent Bible and, in general, should not be marked excessively. In fact, a good principle of marking related to these and other maps would be: do not mark unless necessary for correction or clarification.

However, more marking than usual might be necessary on these maps because in the 1979 edition the maps in the large-print Bible are not the same as the maps in the regular-size Bible, yet both are served by an identical Gazetteer. Unfortunately the different sizes and layouts of the pages in the two editions necessitated the use of different maps, which appear at first glance to be the same but which sometimes differ significantly on closer inspection.

In order to make the two sets of maps as similar as possible and also make them consistent with the Gazetteer entries, at least the following minimum changes should be made. The first set of instructions pertains to marking a large-print edition (6 x 9 inches) of the Bible. The second set of instructions applies to a regular-size (5 x 7 1/4 inches) edition.

a. The places listed in the center column below do not appear on the indicated maps even though Gazetteer entries indicate they should. Place dots and write in the names of those places on the appropriate maps in your copy of the Bible. To help you locate the places more precisely, corresponding sections of maps from the regular-size edition are reproduced on the right:

b. On map 10, write the word "Tribute" before the words "to Assyria 671-651 B.C.," which are found just below the large heading E G Y P T in grid B3.

a. The places listed in the center column below do not appear on the indicated maps of the regular-size Bible, even though the Gazetteer entries indicate they should. Place dots and write in the names of those places on the appropriate maps in your copy of the Bible. To help you locate the places more precisely, corresponding sections of maps from the large-print edition are reproduced on the right:

b. On map 1, write just after the line listing the copyright information: Elevations are given in feet.

c. On map 5, write just after the marks in the legend indicating distances: Red titles represent tribes of Israel.

d. On map 8, the following cities are royal cities of Solomon and, according to the information in the legend, should be underlined: Jerusalem (C6); Gezer (B5); Megiddo (B4); and Hazor (C3).

e. On map 17, add the words "of Jesus' day" to the sentence in the legend (E1) that begins: "Probable location of city walls." Also, two lines below the above sentence, add the words "of the Old City of Jerusalem" to the sentence in the legend that begins: "Present-day walls."

Marking the Titles of the Maps

Another possibility for marking the map section of the Appendix would be to underline in color the titles of the maps listed on page 827. The titles of maps concerned primarily with the Old Testament (maps 2-12) could be underlined in blue, and the titles of maps concerned primarily with the New Testament (maps 13-22) could be underlined in green. Note that map 1 can be used extensively with both the Old Testament and the New Testament.
