Daniel H. Ludlow, Marking the Scriptures ( 1980)

Appendix A

Initial Listing of Topics Related to the Bible

Following are initial groups of materials related to or taken from the Bible, both Old Testament and New Testament. These include principles, ordinances, ideas, thoughts, truths, concepts, customs, traditions, practices, and beliefs. Other essential materials should be added, and they might all then be arranged into seven or eight groups to form the basis of an effective marking and coloring system (pp. 27-28).

Group 1. The eternal plan of progression—salvation, exaltation, and eternal life. Pre-earthly existence, including the role of foreordination and reasons for the veil of forgetfulness in mortality. Purposes of this mortal probationary period: the nature of physical birth, which is also a death from the pre-earthly existence, and the nature of physical death, which is a rebirth to a spiritual condition. The post-earthly spirit world: conditions there; how it differs from the pre-earthly spirit world; major purposes of this stage of existence. The resurrection, of the just and the unjust. The final judgment: its nature and extent; the things for which we will be judged; relationship of justice and mercy to the final judgment. The three degrees of glory: types and characteristics of people who inherit each degree of glory; nature of celestial glory. Godhood: the goal of perfection, and to become as God is.

Group 2. The life and mission of Jesus Christ, and his relationship to other members of the Godhead. His pre-earthly position as the Firstborn Son of God in the spirit. His foreordination. His role as the pre-earthly Jehovah in the Old Testament. His role as the only Begotten Son of God in the flesh. The prophesied Messiah, including Old Testament prophecies of his coming. His birth in Bethlehem; his brief sojourn in Egypt; the boy of Nazareth and of the temple; the man of Galilee and of Jerusalem. His teachings and his example. His atonement, with emphasis on what occurred in Gethsemane and at Calvary. His relationship to the Father. The Godhead: the nature, characteristics, and "oneness" of each member. Functions of the Holy Ghost, including his role as a testifier for Christ.

Group 3. Definition, nature, and extent of the gospel of Jesus Christ. Meaning of gospel. First principles of the gospel: faith in the Lord Jesus Christ; repentance; hope; charity. The next principles and first essential ordinances of the gospel: baptism by immersion for the remission of sins; laying on of hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost. Other ordinances: the sacrament; conferring of priesthood; ordinations to priesthood offices; endowment; celestial marriage; temple ordinances for the living and the dead. Responsibility for teaching the gospel to others; missionary work; characteristics of a good missionary.

Group 4. Definition and nature of the priesthood. Role and functions of priesthood power and authority throughout the centuries. Purpose of the priesthood. Essential differences between priesthood power and authority and priesthood keys. Major offices and groupings in the priesthood. Which Old Testament prophets and leaders held which priesthood. Matters pertaining to conferral of the priesthood and ordaining to priesthood offices. Matters pertaining to Church organization, government, and administration. Covenant and oath of the priesthood. Sacred calling of a priesthood bearer. Priesthood in the various dispensations of the gospel.

Group 5. Principles of revelation and prophecy. Prerequisites to both revelation and prophecy, including the foreknowledge of God and the witnessing function of the Holy Ghost. The means and power by which our Heavenly Father can reveal his mind to his prophets (revelation and the Holy Ghost). Why does the Lord do nothing save he "revealeth his secrets unto his servants and prophets"? Role, function, nature, and characteristics of prophets. Relationship between prophecy and revelation and the scriptures. What the scriptures are and how God reveals them. Responsibility of the prophet in receiving and recording the scriptures. Responsibility of members to read, study, ponder, and live the teachings in the scriptures. How prophecy and revelation tie in to the other gifts of the spirit: healing, speaking in tongues, etc.

Group 6. The origin and history of the house of Israel. Special role of Jacob and his twelve sons. Distinctions between blood Israel, land Israel, and covenant Israel. Story of the Israelites in Egypt. Delivery from Egypt under Moses. Return to the promised land under Joshua. Major events during times of (a) the judges, (b) the united kingdom under Saul, David, and Solomon, and (c) the divided kingdoms of Israel and Judah. The captivity and scattering of the ten tribes. The scattering of the dispersed of Israel (including Lehi and Mulek). The scattering of Judah by the Babylonians; their return under Cyrus of Persia; their later scattering by the Romans. The major aspects of the prophesied gathering of Israel in the last days: the return of Judah to Jerusalem; the gathering of the dispersed of Israel to the church (covenant Israel); the return of the ten lost tribes.

Group 7. Conditions of the last days leading to the millennial reign of Jesus Christ. Calamities to precede the second coming. Wickedness to increase. Great battles at Armageddon and elsewhere. The gatherings to Jerusalem and to Zion; the preparation of the peoples and the temples there. Events directly associated with the second coming of Jesus Christ in power and great glory. Conditions during the millennium.

Group 8. The nature, disposition, and characteristics of mortal, physical man. In what sense(s) is the natural man carnal, devilish, and sensual? Our spiritual relationship to our Heavenly Father, as his sons and daughters. The importance of the family. The role and responsibility of parents. Husband-wife and parentchild relationships.

Group 9. The basic commandments and laws of God. The ten commandments, including keeping the sabbath day holy. Tithing. The law of the fast and of fast offerings. The Word of wisdom. The law of sacrifice. The law of carnal commandments. The symbols, types, and observances under the law of Moses that were to point people toward and prepare them for the coming of Jesus Christ.

Group 10. The role and purpose of opposition in life. The devil: his titles, purposes, methods, characteristics, weaknesses. The place of adversity, sickness, pain disease, death. Reasons for tests and trials. How to develop hope and faith in order to overcome despair and sin. The place of free agency.
