John A. Tvedtnes, Church of the Old Testament ( 1980)

INTRODUCTION

A study of the Old Testament seems a difficult task to most people. Aside from the archaic English version that we have at present in the King James version, [^1] the ancient Israelite system is not well-known in our day. The Old Testament differs from the New Testament in that it covers a longer period of time; moreover, it is not a continuous story because of its multiple authorship. In addition, the books that comprise it are not all in chronological order.

Many parts of the Old Testament may seem boring—e.g., the long lists of genealogy and the details concerning the construction of the tabernacle and its successor, the temple. Yet these were extremely important to the Israelites, for these symbols helped them remember the mercies and greatness of God.

Much of the Old Testament is prophecy, written by men whom the apostle Peter declares to have been inspired of God. (2 Peter 1:20-21.) These prophets announced great things to Israel and to the world. Israel was, they proclaimed, a chosen people destined to save the entire world. God had said to their father Abraham, "In thee shall all families of the earth be blessed." (Genesis 12:3.)

After the time of Christ, the Israelites were scattered throughout the world. They could no longer work together to bring salvation to men, for they had rejected the Christ. But God had promised nearly seven hundred years earlier that he would gather them together in the last days:

Therefore, behold, the days come, saith the Lord, that they shall no more say, The Lord liveth, which brought up the children of Israel out of the land of Egypt;

But, The Lord liveth, which brought up and which led the seed of the house of Israel out of the north country, and from all countries whither I had driven them; and they shall dwell in their own land. (Jeremiah 23:7-8.)

God is not a man, that he should lie; neither the son of man, that he should repent: hath he said, and shall he not do it? or hath he spoken, and shall he not make it good? (Numbers 23:19.)

All that God has promised in the Old Testament, even in regard to Israel in the latter days, must come to pass. Therefore, the Old Testament is relevant to our modern era and has great value for us.

If the Old Testament be true, then why should God change his method in New Testament times? Most religions of today teach that the doctrines (and organizations) of the Old and New Testaments contradict one another. Such was not the opinion of the apostles of Christ, who defended with great vigor the writings of the prophets of old. And such is not the view of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

The apostles and prophets of the restored church have taught, since its inception in 1830, that it is nothing more nor less than a reestablishment of the ancient Church of Christ, which, in turn, was a reestablishment of the church of the time of Moses. In fact, that church existed as early as Adam, the first man. Joseph Smith, the young prophet through whom the church was restored in this last dispensation, taught this:

Perhaps our friends will say that the Gospel and its ordinances were not known till the days of John, the son of Zacharias, in the days of Herod, the king of Judea. But we will here look at this point: For our own part we cannot believe that the ancients in all ages were so ignorant of the system of heaven as many suppose, since all that were ever saved, were saved through the power of this great plan of redemption, as much before the coming of Christ as since; if not, God has had different plans in operation (if we may so express it), to bring men back to dwell with Himself; and this we cannot believe, since there has been no change in the constitution of man since he fell. (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, pp. 59-60.)

Further, he states that "he (Adam) received revelations, commandments and ordinances at the beginning is beyond the power of controversy; how else did they begin to offer sacrifices to God in an acceptable manner?" (Ibid., pp. 168-69.)

Salvation is dependent upon obedience to certain laws and ordinances revealed from God to man. Among these is baptism, which Jesus said was absolutely essential (with the gift of the Holy Ghost) to salvation. (John 3:5-7.) In order for the ancients to have been saved, then, they must have practiced baptism. This work will point out that such is the case and that, indeed, the ancients before Christ practiced all necessary laws and ordinances of the gospel.

The more important parts of this work, however, concern the ecclesiastical organization of the church throughout the many ages that it has existed upon the earth. If we accept God as being perfect, we must accept his own personal organization (the church) as the best social and spiritual system in existence. It would be impossible to improve on the perfection of God's organization; thus, it must always be basically the same. This work will help the reader to see that the Church of God has in all ages been organized in essentially the same manner. The same authority or priesthood that Jesus brought to the earth existed with the ancient prophets and it has been restored in our day to modern prophets.

It is my hope that the present work will help all those who read it to better understand the doctrine, organization, and operation of the kingdom of God, that through this understanding they may better appreciate the love and blessings our Father in heaven has given us.

NOTE

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Be from among the firstborn of the herd or flock. (Jesus in the preexistence was the Firstborn of God's spirit children.) Presentation of the animal at the temple by him for whom the sacrifice was to be made. (This represented the treason of Christ to the chief priests and temple guards. Luke 22:52.) Sin offering. The sinner was required to restore or repair the damage or wrong he had committed. In cases where this was impossible, there could be no pardon, and he was required to give his own life (as in the case of the murderer or the adulterer). According to Jewish rabbinic tradition, this offering signified repentance and atonement, by which pardon was to be received from God. Citing Maimonides, Issure Biah 13. Maimonides's reference to the washing of clothes is a quotation from Exodus 19:10.
