John A. Tvedtnes, Church of the Old Testament ( 1980)

1

THE GOSPEL

"Go ye into all the world, and preach the gospel to every creature. He that believeth and is baptized shall be saved...." (Mark 16:15-16.)

With these words, Jesus took leave of his disciples and ascended into heaven. The apostles were thus commissioned to preach the gospel unto all mankind. The word gospel (Heb. besorab, Gr. euangelion) means "good news." The angel who announced to the shepherds of Bethlehem the coming of their Redeemer used this same word: "Fear not: for, behold, I bring you good tidings of great joy, which shall be to all people. For unto you is born this day in the city of David a Saviour, which is Christ the Lord." (Luke 2:10-11.)

During the three years of his ministry, Jesus converted many people to the way of God. Organizing his disciples, he appointed officers over them and denominated the body of believers a church. These officers, led by the apostles through inspiration from God, were to lead the disciples of Christ in the paths of truth and righteousness until the promised return of their Master.

But Christ knew that the church would be lost before his second coming, for already the devil had begun influencing certain individuals to work for the destruction of the organization established by the Savior. The apostle Paul told the Thessalonian saints that the day of Christ "shall not come, except there come a falling away first." (2 Thessalonians 2:1-3.) The apostle Peter showed that he knew of other events to precede the second coming of the Lord. He declared to his countrymen:

"Repent ye therefore, and be converted, that your sins may be blotted out, when the times of refreshing shall come from the presence of the Lord; and he shall send Jesus Christ, which before was preached unto you: Whom the heaven must receive until the times of restitution of all things, which God hath spoken by the mouth of all his holy prophets since the world began." (Acts 3:19-21.)

The restitution or restoration of the Church of Christ began in 1820, when a young farm boy in the state of New York, Joseph Smith, was visited by God the Father and his Son Jesus Christ. Joseph had inquired of the Lord concerning which was the true church, and was told that none was true and that the true church had been lost from the earth. His mission, he was informed, was to restore that true organization. After ten years of testing, during which time he translated the Book of Mormon, Joseph was authorized to organize again the church, ultimately calling it The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

This new prophet of God declared to the world that the eternal gospel had been restored to the earth. He further declared that this same gospel had existed not only in the time of Christ, but also in the times of the ancient prophets. God does not change, he taught (see Malachi 3:6; James 1:17), and therefore his method—of necessity the best, because God is perfect—must always be essentially the same, unchanging throughout the history of his dealings with men.

Paul had declared that there is but "one Lord, one faith, one baptism." (Ephesians 4:5.) To the Galatians (1:8-9) he emphasized: "But though we, or an angel from heaven, preach any other gospel unto you than that which we have preached unto you, let him be accursed."

Brigham Young, who succeeded Joseph Smith as prophet and president of the restored Church, declared: "The doctrines of salvation are the same now as they were in the days of Adam, or Elijah, or Jesus, when he was upon the earth." (Journal of Discourses 5:229.)

Christ himself had counseled, "Think not that I am come to destroy the law, or the prophets: I am not come to destroy, but to fulfil." (Matthew 5:17.)

The law to which Christ referred was the law of Moses, meaning the Ten Commandments and their associated laws and ordinances. Paul attempted to show that the law actually existed, though perhaps not in written form, even before Moses: "Wherefore, as by one man sin entered the world, and death by sin; and so death passed upon all men, for that all have sinned: For until the law sin was in the world: but sin is not imputed when there is no law. Nevertheless death reigned from Adam to Moses, even over them that had not sinned after the similitude of Adam's transgression, who is the figure of him that was to come." (Romans 5:12-14.)

In other words, "the wages of sin is death" (Romans 6:23), but sin "is not imputed when there is no law." Yet he shows that death, which comes only as the result of sin, existed long before the giving of the law to Moses; therefore, the law itself must also have existed before Moses. John substantiates this by saying, "Whosoever committeth sin transgresseth also the law: for sin is the transgression of the law." (1 John 3:4.)

Several incidents that occurred before Moses received the Ten Commandments (Exodus 20) illustrate that this law was in existence. Adam and Eve, in coveting the forbidden fruit, broke the tenth commandment. Perhaps they broke also the seventh by stealing some of it. Their son Cain broke the commandment "Thou shalt not kill" and was severely punished for it. (Genesis 4.) The second commandment, prohibiting the worship of idols, was given to Jacob in very definite terms. (Genesis 35:1-4.) "Honour thy father and thy mother," reads the fifth commandment. (Exodus 20:12.) Yet Ham's descendants received Noah's curse long before Moses wrote this commandment, because Ham dishonored his father. (Genesis 9:20-25.) Adultery was also forbidden by the Ten Commandments. Several hundred years prior to Moses, however, Joseph had realized the "great wickedness" in this sin and had refused to lie with his master's wife. (Genesis 39:7-12.) And it is quite evident that the children of Israel respected the Sabbath before receiving the commandments at Sinai (Exodus 16:4-5, 22-25, 28-30), for they gathered no manna on the seventh day.

Brigham Young, in speaking of the eternity of the gospel, summed it up thus:

We are safe in saying that from the day that Adam was created and placed in the Garden of Eden to this day, the plan of salvation and the revelations of the will of God to man are unchanged, although mankind have not for many ages been favored therewith, in consequence of apostasy and wickedness. There is no evidence to be found in the Bible that the Gospel should be one thing in the days of the Israelites, another in the days of Christ and his Apostles, and another in the 19th Century, but, on the contrary, we are instructed that God is the same in every age, and that his plan of saving his children is the same.... The plan of salvation is one, from the beginning of the world to the end thereof. (JD 10:324.)

On another occasion, he said: "The Gospel was among the children of men from the days of Adam until the coming of the Messiah; this Gospel of Christ is from the beginning to the end." (JD 13:269.)

Paul corroborates this: "And the scripture, foreseeing that God would justify the heathen through faith, preached before the gospel unto Abraham, saying, In thee shall all nations be blessed." (Galatians 3:8.)

The gospel, then, existed with Abraham. In another epistle Paul, speaking of the children of Israel under Moses (as evidenced in Hebrews 3), says: "For unto us was the gospel preached, as well as unto them: but the word preached did not profit them, not being mixed with faith in them that heard it." (Hebrews 4:2.)

And to the saints at Corinth, speaking of these same ancient Israelites, he said: "Moreover, brethren, I would not that ye should be ignorant, how that all our fathers were under the cloud, and all passed through the sea; And were all baptized unto Moses in the cloud and in the sea; And did all eat the same spiritual meat; And did all drink the same spiritual drink: for they drank of that spiritual Rock that followed them: and that Rock was Christ." (1 Corinthians 10:1-4.)

Entering the Covenant

Baptism, then, was nothing new in the time of Christ. In fact, this ancient ordinance was established in the days of Adam, as is evidenced in the Book of Moses, a revelation of great importance received by Joseph Smith in 1830: "And it came to pass, when the Lord had spoken with Adam, our father, that Adam cried unto the Lord, and was caught away by the Spirit of the Lord, and was carried down into the water, and was laid under the water, and was brought forth out of the water. And thus he was baptized, and the Spirit of God descended upon him, and thus he was born of the Spirit, and became quickened in the inner man." (Moses 6:64-65.)

We find a vague reference to this event in 1 Adam & Eve, a pseudepigraphal work that exists in part in the Koran, the Talmud, the Dead Sea Scrolls, and old Greek and Ethiopic texts. In chapter 1, verses 2-5, of this work we read:

And to the north of the garden there is a sea of water, clear and pure to the taste, like unto nothing else; so that, through the clearness thereof, one may look into the depths of the earth. And when a man washes himself in it, becomes clean of the cleanness thereof, and white of its whiteness—even if he were dark. And God created that sea of His own pleasure, for He knew what would come of the man He should make; so that after he had left the garden, on account of his transgression, men should be born in the earth, from among whom righteous ones should die, whose souls God would raise at the last day; when they should return to their flesh; should bathe in the water of that sea, and all of them repent of their sins. But when God made Adam go out of the garden, He did not place him on the border of it northward, lest he should draw near to the sea of water, and he and Eve wash themselves in it, be cleansed from their sins, forget the transgression they had committed, and be no longer reminded of it in the thought of their punishment. (Rutherford H. Platt, The Lost Books of the Bible and the Forgotten Books of Eden, pp. 4-5.)

In chapters 32 and 33 of 1 Adam & Eve, we find a long account of how Adam and Eve went to the waters and stood in them and prayed God to forgive them of their sins. They were separated by quite some distance. Satan appeared to Adam, telling him to come out of the water, for his sins had been forgiven him. But Adam recognized Satan, though he appeared in the form of an angel of light. (See D&C 128:20.) Adam knew that forgiveness of his sins could not come until he had been immersed in the water, and he rebuked Satan, who went henceforth to tempt Eve. For her part, she was deceived by his masquerade as an angel, and she left the water to find Adam and tell him that their sins had been forgiven. When she came to where Adam was standing in the water, her husband realized that she had once again given in to temptation, and "he saw her, and smote upon his breast; and from the bitterness of his grief, he sank into the water. But God looked upon him and upon his misery, and upon his being about to breathe his last. And the Word of God came from heaven, raised him out of the water, and said unto him, 'Go up the high bank to Eve.'" (Platt, p. 23.) It is possible that we have here a reference to the baptism of Adam, which the Lord explained to him in these words:

If thou wilt turn unto me, and hearken unto my voice, and believe, and repent of all thy transgressions, and be baptized, even in water, in the name of mine Only Begotten Son, who is full of grace and truth, which is Jesus Christ, the only name which shall be given under heaven, whereby salvation shall come unto the children of men, ye shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost, asking all things in his name, and whatsoever ye shall ask, it shall be given you.

And our father Adam spake unto the Lord, and said: Why is it that men must repent and be baptized in water? And the Lord said unto Adam: Behold I have forgiven thee thy transgression in the Garden of Eden. (Moses 6:52-53.)

The descendants of Adam also received the ordinance of baptism and were permitted to become sons of God. This practice existed in the postdiluvian era as well, even among the Israelites:

Israel was admitted into covenant by three things; namely, circumcision, baptism, and sacrifice. Circumcision was in Egypt.... Baptism was in the wilderness before the giving of the Law, for it is said: 'Thou shalt sanctify them...and let them wash their garments....' So, whenever a Gentile desires to enter the Covenant of Israel and place himself under the wings of the Divine Majesty, and take the yoke of the Law upon him, he must be circumcised and baptized, and bring a sacrifice. (Origin of Jewish-Christian Baptism—Maimonides.)

This passage bears directly upon the baptism of Gentile Christians [author's note: in other words, Christian baptism was practiced in the same manner as Jewish baptism]; but it casts light also on the genesis of Jewish Christian baptism; for, apart from circumcision, the cases were largely parallel. Sinful Israelites, too, needed to re-enter the covenant in a deeper sense...so placing themselves 'under the wings of the Shekinah' for protection. (Hastings' Encyclopedia of Religion and Ethics 2:376.) [^1]

Baptism was practised in ancient Judaism, first as a means of penitence, as is learned from the story of Adam and Eve, who, in order to atone for their sin, stood up to the neck in the water, fasting and doing penance. (Jewish Encyclopedia 2:499.)

To receive the spirit of God, or to be permitted to stand in the presence of God (His Shekinah), man must undergo Baptism. (Ibid.) [^2]

This is precisely what Jesus said: "Except a man be born of water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God." (John 3:5.) He was speaking to Nicodemus, a member of the Jewish Sanhedrin, who had come to him by night to ask concerning salvation. His response to Jesus' statement was one of surprise: "Nicodemus answered and said unto him, How can these things be? Jesus answered and said unto him, Art thou a master of Israel, and knowest not these things?" (John 3:9-10.) Jesus was evidently amazed at Nicodemus's ignorance concerning the important subject of baptism and the gift of the Holy Ghost. These ordinances existed long before Jesus, and it was to be expected that any learned Jew knew of them. Even present-day authorities admit the use of the ordinance of baptism in ancient days: "Modern researches have shown positively that Judaism sent forth apostles....Sincerity of motive in the proselyte was insisted upon....from the law that proselyte and native Israelite should be treated alike (Numbers XV: 14 et seq.) the inference was drawn that circumcision, the bath of purification, and sacrifice were prerequisites for conversion." (Jewish Encyclopedia 10:222.)

Ablutions in the temple of Jerusalem were also important to the Israelite community. This is especially significant to Latter-day Saints, for our modern temples are equipped with baptismal fonts resembling that of Solomon's temple (1 Kings 7:23-26; Jeremiah 52:20), i.e., normally on the backs of twelve oxen. The font in Solomon's temple was called the "brazen sea." We read that "the sea was for the priests to wash in." (2 Chronicles 4:6.)

The word wash often served in the Old Testament text in the same manner as did baptize (from a Greek word, baptizo, to immerse) in the New Testament. We have already seen that Jewish scholars sometimes refer to baptism as the "bath of purification." It was not merely skin-deep purification; it referred to the overt sign of an inward repentance on the part of the proselyte: "To sum up: as baptism had in Judaism come to mean purificatory consecration, with twofold reference—from an old state and to a new—so was it in Christianity. It denoted...the convert's attitude towards his past sinful state with its 'dead works,' or towards God as sinned against—repentance.... The practical effect was remission of past sins." (Hastings' Encyclopedia of Religion and Ethics 2:377.)

"Christian baptism is of uncertain origin," wrote Vergilius Ferm. "Possibly the baptism of Jewish proselytes furnished the model followed by the early Christian missionaries." (Encyclopedia of Religion, p. 53.) Other scholars also see a Jewish origin in this New Testament ordinance:

The exhortations of this respectable messenger (John the Baptist) were not without effect; and those who, moved by his solemn admonitions, had formed the resolution of correcting their evil dispositions, and amending their lives, were initiated into the kingdom of the Redeemer by the ceremony of immersion, or baptism. Christ himself, before he began his ministry, desired to be solemnly baptized by John in the waters of Jordan, that he might not, in any point, neglect to answer the demands of the Jewish law. (Johann Lorenz von Mosheim, Ecclesiastical History, vol. 1, Cent. I, p. 27.)

According to rabbinical teachings, which dominated even during the existence of the Temple (Pes. viii. 8), Baptism, next to circumcision and sacrifice, was an absolutely necessary condition to be fulfilled by a proselyte to Judaism. (Jewish Encyclopedia 2:499.)

The only conception of Baptism at variance with Jewish ideas is displayed in the declaration of John, that the one who would come after him would not baptize with water, but with the Holy Ghost (Mark 1:8; John 1:27). Yet a faint resemblance to the notion is displayed in the belief expressed in the Talmud that the Holy Spirit could be drawn upon as water is drawn from a well (based on Isaiah 12:3; Yer. Suk. v. 1, 55a of Joshua b. Levi). And there is a somewhat Jewish tinge even to the prophecy of the evangelists Matthew (3:11) and Luke (3:16), who declare that Jesus will baptize with fire as well as with the Holy Ghost; for, according to Abbahu, true Baptism is performed with fire (Sanh. 39a). Both the statement of Abbahu and of the Evangelists must of course be taken metaphorically. (Ibid.)

Circumcision, baptism, and sacrifice, then, were necessary in order to enter the covenant of Israel. Circumcision, as we know, was declared by the apostles at Jerusalem to be unnecessary to salvation (Acts 15), for it had not existed from the beginning, but was a special covenant-token beginning with Abraham. Baptism, however, began with Adam, as we have seen, and is to exist for all men at all times; it is thus necessary for salvation. Sacrifice also began with Adam. Early portions of the Old Testament demonstrate the practice of sacrifice by Cain and Abel (Genesis 4:3-7), Noah (Genesis 8:20-21), and Abraham (Genesis 22:1-14). After the Exodus, Moses, his father-in-law Jethro, and Aaron and his sons sacrificed (Exodus 17:15; 18:12). Many altars were built in the wilderness by the Israelites for the purpose of offering sacrifices unto the Lord (Exodus 20:24-26; 24:4-8).

The Law of Sacrifice

Sacrifice represented for the ancients punishment for sin. We have already seen that "the wages of sin is death; but the gift of God is eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord." (Romans 6:23.) In other words, Jesus offered his own life in sacrifice for us in order that we might all be saved from death, which came as a result of the fall of Adam, bringing death into the world. "For since by man came death, by man came also the resurrection of the dead. For as in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive." (1 Corinthians 15:21-22) The resurrection, then, is a free gift. But our reward depends upon our own works. For this reason, we are made responsible to Jesus for our own sins, for if we repent, he has the power to forgive us the sins that we have committed. In Old Testament times, it was the shedding of the blood of sacrificial animals that accomplished this purpose. This ordinance was instituted early in the history of the world, as the Book of Moses testifies:

And Adam and Eve, his wife, called upon the name of the Lord, and they heard the voice of the Lord from the way toward the garden of Eden, speaking unto them, and they saw him not; for they were shut out from his presence.

And he gave unto them commandments, that they should worship the Lord their God, and should offer the firstlings of their flocks, for an offering unto the Lord. And Adam was obedient unto the commandments of the Lord.

And after many days an angel of the Lord appeared unto Adam, saying: Why dost thou offer sacrifices unto the Lord? And Adam said unto him: I know not, save the Lord commanded me.

And then the angel spake, saying: This thing is a similitude of the sacrifice of the Only Begotten of the Father, which is full of grace and truth.

Wherefore, thou shalt do all that thou doest in the name of the Son, and thou shalt repent and call upon God in the name of the Son forevermore. (Moses 5:4-8.)

A late (and unfortunately fraudulent) text attributes to Jesus the following words, addressed to Caiaphas, the Jewish high priest, after the Savior's resurrection: "This last lamb you have slain in the one that was appointed before the foundation; this sacrifice is made for all men. Your other lambs were for those who offered them; this is for all, this is the last; it is for you if you will accept it. I died that you and all mankind might be saved." [^3]

Sacrifice, then, is representative of the death of Jesus. Adam had this knowledge and he taught it to his children. This first sacrifice of Adam (cited above) is also mentioned in 1 Adam & Eve. Chapters 22-23 tell how Adam wounded himself accidentally, after which the Word of God appeared to help him. When the Word had left, Adam wiped up his spilt blood with leaves and burned them as a sacrificial offering on an altar that he had built.

Chapter 68 of 1 Adam & Eve mentions another offering, corn that Adam had grown. He placed it upon the altar and "God sent a bright fire upon the offering of Adam and Eve, and filled it with brightness, grace, and light; and the Holy Ghost came down upon that oblation." (Platt, The Lost Books of the Bible and the Forgotten Books of Eden, p. 47.)

When Seth "was seven years old, he knew good and evil." (2 Adam & Eve 5:1; cf. Deuteronomy 1:39.) At that time, we are told, he began to offer sacrifices unto the Lord. Although his baptism is not mentioned, we can probably assume, from modern revelations and practices, that he was also baptized at about this time. He followed the example of his parents and of his elder brother Abel.

In 1 Adam & Eve 69:2-6 is an interesting account of an incident similar to one depicted briefly and without much detail in some of our present-day ceremonies:

Adam was then offering on the altar, and had begun to pray, with his hands spread unto God. Then Satan hastened with the sharp ironstone he had with him, and with it pierced Adam on the right side, when flowed blood and water, then Adam fell upon the altar like a corpse. And Satan fled. Then Eve came, and took Adam and placed him below the altar. And there she stayed, weeping over him; while a stream of blood flowed from Adam's side upon his offering. But God looked upon the death of Adam. He then sent His Word, and raised him up and said unto him, 'Fulfil thy offering, for indeed, Adam, it is worth much, and there is no shortcoming in it.' God said further unto Adam, 'Thus will it also happen to Me, on the earth, when I shall be pierced and blood shall flow blood and water from My side and run over My body, which is the true offering; and which shall be offered on the altar as a perfect offering.' (Platt, op. cit., pp. 48-49.)

Anciently, produce or animals were sacrificed, symbolic of the death of the Messiah. Under Moses, mainly animals were sacrificed. The conditions that the sacrificial animal had to fulfil were as follows:

The sacrifice was offered in the following manner in the days of the temple in Jerusalem:

The three principal types of sacrifice were always offered in the same order in the temple at Jerusalem:

Thus, in these three sacrifices, representative of the supreme and eternal sacrifice of Jesus Christ, we find three of the first four principles and ordinances of the gospel: repentance, baptism, gift of the Holy Ghost, represented symbolically. (Article of Faith 4.) The other of these four principles, faith, is also represented in the very act of sacrifice. (Hebrews 11:4, 17-18.) These first principles existed long before Christ and pointed the way to him.

Clean Animals

It was noted that clean animals, used in sacrifice, represented Israel. (Leviticus 20:24-26; Deuteronomy 14:2-3ff??.) In order to examine this idea, we must note that the Lord prescribed to Moses which animals were clean (edible) and unclean (inedible) in several lists (cf. Leviticus 11). That the prohibition against eating unclean animals was not an eternal law is evident from the fact that God had permitted Noah to eat the flesh of all animals. (Genesis 9:1-2.) And yet it was in the days of Noah that the first distinction between clean and unclean animals was made. (Genesis 7:1-2; 8:18-20.)

In the days before the flood, the gospel was for everyone—for all the children of Adam. This was true also for Noah's children. But God saw that man did not keep his commandments. He chose a certain Chaldean, Abraham, and promised to keep in him and his seed the true religion, by and through which he would bless all the nations of the earth. As a sign of the covenant between God and Abraham, circumcision was instituted. Later God commanded Moses that the Israelites should not eat the meat of unclean animals, indicating that it was not incumbent upon them to spread the gospel to other people as yet, but that they should keep it to themselves, giving it only to those who sought the truth. The gentiles or non-Israelites were to be considered as symbolically unclean.

When Jesus came to offer the great sacrifice for all mankind, it became essential that this great blessing through Abraham's seed be spread throughout the whole earth. The first gentile convert to the faith was a Greek named Cornelius, who had received a visit from an angel instructing him to contact Simon Peter for instruction and baptism. Cornelius sent his servants to Joppa, where the apostle was then staying:

On the morrow, as they went on their journey, and drew nigh unto the city, Peter went up upon the housetop to pray about the sixth hour:

And he became very hungry, and would have eaten: but while they made ready, he fell into a trance,

And saw heaven opened, and a certain vessel descending unto him, as it had been a great sheet knit at the four corners, and let down to the earth:

Wherein were all manner of fourfooted beasts of the earth, and wild beasts, and creeping things, and fowls of the air.

And there came a voice to him, Rise, Peter; kill, and eat.

But Peter said, Not so, Lord; for I have never eaten anything that is common or unclean.

And the voice spake unto him again the second time, What God hath cleansed, that call not thou common.

This was done thrice: and the vessel was received up again into heaven. (Acts 10:9-16.)

Soon after this vision Peter understood its meaning, for he received the visit of Cornelius's servants and discovered that this "unclean" gentile wanted to be baptized. Peter then understood the words of Jesus on the day of his ascension, when he said, "Go ye therefore, and teach all nations"—not just the Israelites. (Matthew 28:19.) And since the time of the Messiah's visit to the earth, the gospel has again been for everyone. Though it disappeared for a period of time, thanks to the restoration, we return again to the ancient order of things, as in the days of our father Adam.

Other Obligations

Many rites and commandments followed in the days of Moses, many of which still exist today as a result of their importance in the life of man. Tithing is an example. The first payment of tithing mentioned in the Bible is that by Abraham: "And Melchizedek king of Salem brought forth bread and wine: and he was the priest of the most high God. And he blessed him, and said, Blessed be Abram of the most high God, possessor of heaven and earth: And blessed be the most high God, which hath delivered thine enemies into thy hand. And he (Abraham) gave him tithes of all." (Genesis 14:18-20. See also Hebrews 7:2-10. Note the reference to the sacrament, which we have also seen in 1 Corinthians 10:1-4.)

Jacob, Abraham's grandson, covenanted with God to pay his tithe or ten percent of his increase. (Genesis 28:22.) This practice existed in much later times under Moses. Tithes were then collected periodically, under a commandment received from the Lord on Mount Sinai. (Leviticus 27:30-34; Deuteronomy 12:5-6.) These tithes were given to the priests and Levites who ministered before the Lord in the tabernacle (Numbers 18:20-28; Deuteronomy 14:22-29), but they were also for the poor, the orphans, and the widows (Deuteronomy 26:12-14).

Malachi (3:8-10) promised great blessings from God to those who would pay their tithing. The practice of offering to God the first ten percent of one's increase continued until the time of Jesus, who approved of the practice. (Luke 11:42.)

Another obligation laid upon certain people in ancient Israel was in regard to alcoholic beverages. This was particularly binding upon the Nazarites, individuals pledged in service to the Lord. Samson was a Nazarite, as were also Elijah and John the Baptist. (Luke 1:15.) The requirements for becoming a Nazarite are given in Numbers 6. Among these requirements, it was forbidden to drink wines, strong drinks, liquors, vinegar of wine, or to even touch the vine or its produce. (Numbers 6:3-4.) We find many such warnings against wine and strong drinks in the Bible. See, for example, Judges 13:13-14; Proverbs 20:1; 23:20-21, 29-32; Isaiah 5:11-12; Habakkuk 2:15; Romans 13:13-14; 1 Corinthians 9:25-27; Ephesians 5:18; 1 Thessalonians 5:5-8.

The priests of the Old Testament were forbidden to drink wine while in service (Leviticus 10:8-11), as were the bishops of the New Testament (1 Timothy 3:1-3; Titus 1:7). Daniel realized that wine defiles the body (Daniel 1:8) and refused to drink it. Paul also tells us to keep our bodies undefiled. (Romans 12:1-2; 1 Corinthians 3:16-17.) Abstaining from alcoholic beverages, according to Isaiah 5:22-24, is a law of God: "Woe unto them that are mighty to drink wine, and men of strength to mingle strong drink; Which justify the wicked for reward, and take away the righteousness of the righteous from him! Therefore as the fire devoureth the stubble, and the flame consumeth the chaff, so their root shall be as rottenness, and their blossom shall go up as dust: because they have cast away the law of the Lord...."

Paul lists drunkenness with the major sins: "Now the works of the flesh are manifest, which are these; Adultery, fornication, uncleanness, lasciviousness, Idolatry, witchcraft, hatred, variance, emulations, wrath, strife, seditions, heresies, Envyings, murders, drunkenness, revellings, and such like: of the which I tell you before, as I have also told you in time past, that they which do such things shall not inherit the kingdom of God." (Galatians 5:19-21.)

It is, then, no surprise that in these last days God has renewed this commandment through the Prophet Joseph Smith in the revelation known as the Word of Wisdom (D&C 89).

NOTES

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] The Hebrew word for keeper is in the masculine in this passage. It may, therefore, refer to Huldah's husband or one of his ancestors listed in the verse. However, it is just as likely that the feminine suffix -t was lost in a manuscript and that it refers to the prophetess.
[^2] The passage cited deals with the division of the land among the tribes of Israel. Note the people involved in that affair: Joshua, Eleazar, and the twelve princes. The presence of Eleazar is important, inasmuch as one of the principal responsibilities of the bishop is to receive and give out stewardships under the law of consecration and stewardship.
[^3] It is interesting that the Sanhedrin had two presidents instead of one. It is possible that this dual presidency was a misunderstood remnant of the original presidency of the seventy, which would have comprised seven men.
