John A. Tvedtnes, Church of the Old Testament ( 1980)

2

THE CHURCH

The church is essentially an organization. Paul compares it to a building, with apostles and prophets for the foundation. (Ephesians 2:19-21.) He also compares it to the body of Christ, Christ himself being the head and the other officers comprising the various members of the body. (Colossians 1:18; Ephesians 1:22-23; 5:23.) In 1 Corinthians 12:12-31, he speaks of this body, showing that its members have various names, such as apostle and prophet. He points out that no one officer in the church can declare that another is unnecessary, for all are necessary in order to have the true perfect organization of Christ.

Our English word church is represented in the New Testament by ecclesia, meaning assembly, congregation, or community. In the Old Testament we find the words 'asepah, assembly, and qehila, congregation or community. Thus, when we read about the assembly or congregation of Israel, it simply means the "church of Israel."

The Church of Christ, being an organization, must of necessity have officers. These officers have a special authority given by God and termed the holy priesthood. Brigham Young said, "This Priesthood has been on the earth at various times. Adam had it, Seth had it, Enoch had it, Noah had it, Abraham and Lot had it, and it was handed down to the days of the Prophets, long after the days of the ancients.... This High Priesthood rules, directs, governs, and controls all the Priesthoods, because it is the highest of all." (JD 9:87.)

The institution of the priesthood in the days of Adam is mentioned in doctrine and Covenants 107:40-52, where the following are named as having been ordained high priests before the flood: Adam, Seth, Enos, Cainan, Mahalaleel, Jared, Enoch, Methuselah, Lamech, and Noah.

We are not to understand that these ten men were the only ones who held the divine authority before the flood, but that they were called to positions of responsibility, or presiding authority, among their fellows. It is hardly reasonable to suppose that these ten men were left in their day and generation to perform all the labor required of men holding the Priesthood. They had a church organization. This we learn through the teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith. (Joseph Fielding Smith, The Way to Perfection, p. 73.)

From the very beginning, then, the priesthood and the Church existed upon the earth, and men were chosen who spoke with God, beginning with Adam. But because of wickedness, God sent the flood, which destroyed all but Noah and his family. Noah recommenced the Church after the flood and gave the priesthood to those of his children who were worthy thereof. Shem, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob presided over the affairs of the Church in the days before the Israelite slavery in Egypt.

Prophets

Probably the first complete organization of the Church in the Old Testament times is under Moses, who had been called as a prophet of God to lead the chosen Israelites from Egypt into Palestine. Moses was not, however, the only Israelite of his day to have prophetic gifts. When two others began to prophesy in the camp one day, a young man ran to tell Moses. "And Joshua the son of Nun, the servant of Moses, one of his young men, answered and said, My lord Moses, forbid them. And Moses said unto him, Enviest thou for my sake? would put his spirit upon them!" (Numbers 11:28-29.)

Many centuries later, Amos wrote: "Surely the Lord God will do nothing, but he revealeth his secret unto his servants the prophets." (Amos 3:7.)

In ancient times, there was a school of the prophets. The members of this school were termed the "sons of the prophets," which is a Hebrew idiom meaning "of the class or group of the prophets." (See 1 Samuel 10:10; 19:20; 1 Kings 20:35; 2 Kings 4:1, 38; 5:22; 6:1; 9:1.) Samuel was perhaps the first head of this school. While his father had not been a prophet (nor had the father of Amos; see Amos 7:14), we find that many of these "sons of the prophets" were actually sons of members of the school. For example, Zechariah's grandfather, Iddo, was also a prophet. (Zechariah 1:1.) Whereas Zechariah's book is found in our present-day Bible, we no longer have the Vision of Iddo, written by his forefather. (2 Chronicles 9:29; 12:15; 13:22.)

It is possible that from among these prophets of the school were chosen members of the First Presidency of the Church (to be discussed below). We find, for example, that Samuel, Nathan, Gad, Joel, and Asaph all lived during the time of David and, with the exception of Samuel and Asaph, also during the time of Solomon. Ahijah the Shilonite, Iddo, and Shemaiah lived and prophesied around 975 B.C. Twenty-five years later, we find the prophets Obed, Azariah, Hanani, and Jehu. At the turn of the century, we have the prophets Elijah the Tishbite (head of the school), Micaiah, Jahaziel, Eliezer, and Elisha (successor to Elijah; 1 Kings 19:16). The latter was not a member of the school until Elijah called him from the field of his father. Joel, Hosea, and Jonah followed. Isaiah and Micah were contemporaries in the latter half of the eighth century B.C. Jeremiah evidently led the prophets at the time of the Babylonian invasion, and we find with him such others as Zephaniah, Ezekiel, Habakkuk, and Lehi (of Book of Mormon fame), as well as young Daniel, who became the prophet of the Exile. Returning from exile, the Jews brought with them the prophets Haggai and Zechariah. However, neither of these two, apparently, was a high priest, and they were not authorized to preside over the Church. This is evidenced by the fact that Nehemiah, the governor, "said unto (certain priesthood claimants), that they should not eat of the most holy things (sacrificial meals), till there stood up a priest with Urim and Thummim." (Nehemiah 7:65; Ezra 2:63.) The existence of the Urim and Thummim and its operation meant revelation from God through the presiding authority of the Church. Apparently this presiding authority did not at that time exist, although there seem to have been priests, elders, Levites, etc. It was through the prophesyings of Haggai and Zechariah that the people of that time were able to finish the rebuilding of the temple and city of Jerusalem. (Ezra 5:1; 6:14.) But Israel was not to see another prophet who would leave his writings with the people until a century later, when Malachi wrote the last of the books of the Old Testament (ca. 432 B.C.).

The school of the prophets greatly diminished after Elijah's time, so that there were fewer and fewer prophets. At the time Elijah was taken into heaven, there were fifty "sons of the prophets" (2 Kings 2), remnants of perhaps hundreds from the previous generation (1 Kings 18:4). What was the difference between all of these prophets and their leader, Elijah, who demonstrated so well the power of God? The answer is that Elijah was not only a prophet, but he also held apostolic authority. What, then, is the difference between an apostle and a prophet? Brigham Young's answer was as follows:

Many persons think if they see a prophet they see one possessing all the keys of the kingdom of God on the earth. This is not so; many persons have prophecied without having any Priesthood on them at all. It is no particular revelation or gift for a person to prophecy. You take a good statesman, for instance, he will tell you what will become of a nation by their actions. He foresees this and that, and knows the results...of any line of policy that may be pursued. To be a prophet is simply to be a foreteller of future events; but an apostle of the Lord Jesus Christ has the keys of the holy Priesthood, and the power thereof is sealed upon his head, and by this he is authorized to proclaim the truth to the people. (JD 13:144.)

Moses

The priesthood is the authority given to men to act on earth in the name of God and to perform the ordinances necessary for salvation. The keys of the priesthood are the authority to govern the priesthood, to pass it on, and to authorize others to use it and pass it on. Moses had these keys in his day, for he was not only a prophet, seer, and revelator, but also an apostle.

While in exile in the desert, before the Exodus, Moses met Reuel or Jethro, a priest of Midian (Exodus 2:15-21; 3:1), whose daughter he married. After the Exodus, Jethro joined the Israelites in the wilderness. (Exodus 18.) Jethro had himself ordained his son-in-law Moses to the priesthood (D&C 84:6) and, because of his own authority as a prophet of Midian, he realized the needs of the Israelite people. When he saw that Moses handled all the affairs of the children of Israel by himself, Jethro told him that it was not good and that there should be other leaders chosen also. "So Moses hearkened to the voice of his father in law, and did all that he had said. And Moses chose able men out of all Israel, and made them heads over the people, rulers of thousands, rulers of hundreds, rulers of fifties, and rulers of tens. And they judged the people at all seasons: the hard causes they brought unto Moses, but every small matter they judged themselves." (Exodus 18:24-26.)

Because Moses' government was a theocracy, these officers would have had both civil and ecclesiastical authority.

Elders

During his stay with the Israelites in Sinai, "Jethro, Moses' father in law, took a burnt offering and sacrifices for God: and Aaron came, and all the elders of Israel, to eat bread with Moses' father in law before God." (Exodus 18:12.)

The Old Testament places particular emphasis on the body of elders and their importance in the Israelite community. All problems and major changes in the community were brought to their attention, oftentimes for a vote, sometimes merely for their counsel. The Jewish Encyclopedia says of them:

ELDER, or ZAKEN: In primitive times age was a necessary condition of authority.... Although the Talmud (Yoma 28b) points to the existence of such an institution in the time of Abraham, no distinct mention is made of it in the Bible until the period of the Exodus.... It is not certain that they were elected by the people, although they were considered their representatives, and were frequently identified with the 'am' (people) itself in the Bible (Ex. iv. 29; xix. 7, 8; xxiv. 1; Josh. xxiii. 2 et al.). The position and function of the elder are nowhere clearly defined.... It is not known whether all the officers of the commonwealth were chosen from the body of elders." (Jewish Encyclopedia 5:92.)

Elders are mentioned also in the New Testament, where they are called, in Greek, presbyteros, which is sometimes translated "presbyter" in English: "And when they had ordained them elders in every church, and had prayed with fasting, they commended them to the Lord, on whom they believed." (Acts 14:23.) Mosheim wrote of elders: "Three or four presbyters, men of remarkable piety and wisdom, ruled these small congregations in perfect harmony...." (Mosheim, Ecclesiastical History, vol. 1, Cent. I, p. 76.) Even today, each ward and branch of the Church is generally governed by three holders of the Melchizedek Priesthood.

In addition, anciently, certain women assisted these presbyters or elders in their work, along with the deacons: "Some, particularly the eastern churches, elected deaconesses, and chose, for that purpose, matrons or widows of eminent sanctity, who also ministered to the necessities of the poor, and performed several other offices, that tended to the maintenance of order and decency in the church." (Ibid.)

These deaconesses performed the functions that are today performed by the sisters of the Relief Society. Note also the title prophetess, used for Huldah in 2 Kings 22:14. We are told that she was "keeper of the wardrobe"-apparently in the temple. [^1] In the New Testament, we find a prophetess named Anna serving in the temple at the time Christ was presented there as a babe. (Luke 2:36-37.) Other "prophetesses" of the Old Testament are Deborah (Judges 4:4) and Miriam, Moses' sister (Exodus 15:20). Although they did not hold the priesthood, it is evident that these women performed vital functions in the Church of ancient times.

We shall discuss the office of deacon later. For the moment, we must concern ourselves more with the higher office of elder, for these elders seem to have directed the Church at all periods of time. Both Peter and John, who were ordained apostles by Jesus Christ himself, declared themselves to be part of the body of elders of the Church (1 Peter 5:1-3; 2 John 1:1; 3 John 1), and the Lord told Joseph Smith that "an apostle is an elder" (D&C 20:38). Moses evidently also chose apostles from the body of elders.

The Council of the Twelve

Under instructions from the Lord, Moses chose twelve men from among the elders of Israel, to form a special council: "And with you there shall be a man of every tribe; every one head of the house of his fathers. And these are the names of the men that shall stand with you.... These were the renowned of the congregation (Church), princes of the tribes of their fathers, heads of thousands in Israel." (Numbers 1:4-5, 16.) "These are those that were numbered, which Moses and Aaron numbered, and the princes of Israel, being twelve men: each one was for the house of his fathers." (Numbers 1:44; see chapters 2 and 7 also.)

This council of twelve princes (note the title, for we shall see it again) or heads was second only to Moses. They were, of course, elderly men and were of necessity replaced as they died. Thus, upon arriving near the promised land, Moses chose others to replace them: "And ye shall take one prince of every tribe, to divide the land by inheritance. And the names of the men are these...." (Numbers 34:18.)

Note that the Lord not only commanded Moses to gather these men together into a council, but he himself also named them, illustrating the importance he placed upon this calling. These twelve, who were next in authority to Moses, remind us of the twelve apostles whom Jesus chose. This is especially true when one thinks of the promise made by Jesus to the twelve: "Verily I say unto you, That ye which have followed me, in the regeneration when the Son of man shall sit in the throne of his glory, ye also shall sit upon twelve thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Israel." (Matthew 19:28; Luke 22:30.)

The existence of apostles in the Church organization was deemed so important that, as some died, others were chosen by revelation to replace them, so that there would always be a quorum of twelve. Matthias, for example, replaced Judas after his suicide. (Acts 1:20-26.) James, the brother of John, was killed by king Herod Agrippa (Acts 12:2) and was apparently replaced by James, the Lord's brother (Galatians 1:19). Still later, Paul and Barnabas became apostles. (Acts 14:14.)

How did Jesus come to call these select men apostles and not princes as Moses had? Apostolos, the Greek word used in the New Testament, means "envoy" or "one sent," sometimes translated as "messenger." It refers to the fact that Jesus "sent" the twelve. (Matthew 10:5.) In a like manner, Moses had "sent" twelve men: "And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying, Send thou men, that they may search the land of Canaan, which I give unto the children of Israel: of every tribe of their fathers shall ye send a man, every one a ruler among them. And Moses by the commandment of the Lord sent them from the wilderness of Paran: all these men were heads of the children of Israel. And these were their names...." (Numbers 13:1-4.)

When these spies returned, ten of them refused to enter Canaan, for their fear of the people they had seen was great. Only two of them, Joshua (or Oshea) and Caleb, reported that the Israelites could easily possess the land and that it was a land flowing with milk and honey. The people chose the opinion of the ten, probably by sheer weight of majority. As a result, the Lord swore that only those under the age of twenty and the two faithful spies would enter the promised land. The other ten men died of a plague. (Numbers 14:37-38.)

It is interesting to note that in Numbers 34 (part of which was cited above), we find another group of twelve princes, of whom only one, Caleb, was among those sent to spy years before. Joshua at that time had another calling, of which we shall soon speak. Caleb, interestingly enough, is first in the list in Numbers 34, indicating his seniority in the quorum or council, for the others would have been appointed after the death of those who perished in the plague.

This council of the twelve tribal leaders continued to function in the days of Joshua, though no names are left to us in the biblical record. (Joshua 14:1; 19:51; 21:1.) [^2]

A comparison of the lists of the twelve princes of Moses' time is most revealing. (See chart, p. 101.) The names capitalized in the list also appear in Jewish traditions as representatives of their respective tribes in the body of the seventy elders, who served with Moses during the exodus period. It would appear that sometimes the body of the twelve was replenished by calls from the quorum of the seventy.

The Seventy

The second presiding quorum in Israel was established by Moses following these instructions from the Lord:

And the Lord said unto Moses, Gather unto me seventy men of the elders of Israel, whom thou knowest to be the elders of the people, and officers over them; and bring them unto the tabernacle of the congregation, that they may stand there with thee. And I will come down and talk with thee there: and I will take of the spirit which is upon thee, and will put it upon them; and they shall bear the burden of the people with thee, that thou bear it not thyself alone. (Numbers 11:16-17; see also vss. 24-30.)

Later, these seventy elders had a very special privilege:

And he said unto Moses, Come up unto the Lord, thou, and Aaron, Nadab, and Abihu, and seventy of the elders of Israel; and worship ye afar off.... Then went up Moses, and Aaron, Nadab, and Abihu, and seventy of the elders of Israel: And they saw the God of Israel: and there was under his feet as it were a paved work of a sapphire stone, and as it were the body of heaven in his clearness. And upon the nobles of the children of Israel he laid not his hand: also they saw God, and did eat and drink. (Exodus 24:1, 9-11.)

These seventy elders constituted what came to be known as the Sanhedrin, which, in the days of Jesus, was the highest ruling body of Judaism (in the absence of revelation). But there were other such quorums of seventy: "In the Talmudic sources the 'Great' Sanhedrin at Jerusalem is so called in contradistinction to other bodies by that name" (Jewish Encyclopedia 11:41.) It comprised 70 or 71 members, two of whom presided. [^3]

That seventies are necessary in the Church organization is evidenced by the fact that Jesus also chose seventy. We read of this appointment in Luke 10:1: "After these things the Lord appointed other seventy also, and sent them two and two before his face into every city and place, whither he himself would come." (Italics added.)

Unfortunately, the term "other seventy" has often been misinterpreted to mean that it refers to a second quorum of seventy. In the original Greek it reads "seventy others." The question most likely to arise over this is, "Seventy other what?" The answer is that it refers to seventy other apostles! These seventy were "sent" just as the apostles were, and Jesus gave them the same instructions. (Cf. Luke 9:1-6 with Luke 10:1-20.) In our day, the Prophet Joseph Smith has told us not only that the First Quorum of Seventy are to assist the Twelve Apostles in their ministry (D&C 107:34-35, 38), but also that the seventy are themselves apostles: "Monday, 28 [February 1836].-... This day the Council of the Seventy met to render an account of their travels and ministry, since they were ordained to that Apostleship." (History of the Church 2:346.)

On the occasion of the Kirtland Temple dedication, the Prophet recorded as follows: "Sunday, March 27 [1836].-... I next called upon the quorums and congregation of Saints to acknowledge the presidents of Seventies, who act as their representatives, as Apostles and special witnesses to the nations, to assist the Twelve in opening the Gospel kingdom among all people, and to uphold them by their prayers, which they did by rising." (HC 2:418.)

Brigham Young confirmed this apostolic role in the following words: "In the first calling of the Seventies the Prophet Joseph (instructed)...to ordain each as one of the seventy apostles." (The Deseret Evening News, June 2, 1877.)

The First Quorum of Seventy are next in authority after the Quorum of the Twelve. But when there is a Quorum of the First Presidency, that body holds the presidency over the Church. (D&C 107:21-27.)

President Brigham Young explained it thus: "The Seventies are Apostles; and they stand next in authority to the Twelve. The First Presidency organize and regulate the affairs of the Church wherever they can go, or they instruct others to do it. When the First Presidency are not here, and the Twelve are here, they then attend to these matters, and their authority, by a unanimous feeling and faith in the gospel, is the same as that of the First Presidency, their decisions and doings are equal to those of the First Presidency. Next in order to them stand the Seventies. If through the providence of God the First Presidency and the Twelve were taken away, then it would be the duty of the Seventies to preach the gospel, build up the Church, and ordain every officer requisite in order to establish the Church; to ordain high priests, bishops, high counsellors, patriarchs, and set in order the whole church in all the world. This is according to the revelations given to us." (Deseret Evening News, June 2, 1877.)

The First Presidency

The President of the High Priesthood and his two counselors constitute the First Presidency of the Church. Moses was the president of the Church in his day, and he was aided by his brother Aaron (who, as we shall soon see, had another important position in the Israelite church or community); Joshua, his minister (Exodus 4:14-16; 33:11; Joshua 1:1); and Hur (Exodus 17:8-12; 24:14.) Whether or not these were his counselors we do not know, but it is evident that they were very closely associated with Moses in governing the Israelites.

Joshua, who had been one of the twelve sent to spy and who was also on the mount with Moses and saw God, was ordained by his mentor: "And the Lord said unto Moses, Take thee Joshua the son of Nun, a man in whom is the spirit, and lay thine hand upon him;...And he laid his hands upon him, and gave him a charge, as the Lord commanded by the hand of Moses." (Numbers 27:18, 23.)

It would appear that, upon the death of Moses, Joshua replaced him as president and prophet of the Israelite nation: "And Joshua the son of Nun was full of the spirit of wisdom; for Moses had laid his hands upon him: and the children of Israel hearkened unto him, and did as the Lord commanded Moses." (Deuteronomy 34:9.)

Thus was the priesthood passed on to the next generation in ancient Israel.

NOTES

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] The Hebrew verbal root from which the term derives—bsr—meant both "to announce good news" and "to prophesy" and is thus very descriptive of the duties of the patriarch.
[^2] Recorded by Elder John A. Tvedtnes, departing for the French East Mission.
[^3] Most scholars believe the Nethinim to be slaves (probably Gibeonites, sworn to the service of the Lord by Joshua in Joshua 9:21-27) given over to be assistants to the Levites. This is based upon the meaning of the name Nethinim, "ones given." However, this is far from conclusive, since there is no direct historical connection between the Gibeonites (or any other slaves) and the Nethinim. Moreover, the term Levite means "one joined" or "one consecrated," most probably because the children of Israel "gave" them to serve the priests. Yet they were neither slaves nor non-Israelites.
