John A. Tvedtnes, Church of the Old Testament ( 1980)

3

THE PRIESTHOOD

Joshua, even before he replaced Moses, was a patriarch. The patriarch was the oldest living man of the family holding the high priesthood and authority to do the ordinances for his family and to bestow blessings. (Genesis 14:18-20; 27:26-39; 48:8-22.) The chief patriarch, or patriarch to the Church, was the firstborn son of the firstborn son, descended from Adam, with the exception of certain individuals who were unworthy of this position and priesthood. Here is Joshua's genealogy and the biblical references thereto:

Adam D&C 107:39-52

Seth Genesis 5:2-3

Enos Genesis 5:6

Cainan Genesis 5:9

Mahalaleel Genesis 5:12

Jared Genesis 5:15

Enoch Genesis 5:18

Methuselah Genesis 5:21

Lamech Genesis 5:25

Noah Genesis 5:28-29

Shem Genesis 5:32

Arphaxad Genesis 10:22 See Genesis11:10-17.)

Salah Genesis 10:24

Eber Genesis 10:24

Peleg Genesis 10:25

Reu Genesis 11:18

Serug Genesis 11:20

Nahor Genesis 11:22

Terah Genesis 11:24

Abraham Genesis 11:26

(Abram)

Isaac Genesis 21:1-5; 17:1-21 (replacing Ishmael)

Jacob (Israel) Genesis 25:21-34; Exodus 4:22

(replacing Esau)

Joseph Genesis 49

Ephraim Genesis 48:11-20 (replacing Reuben, his

uncle, 1 Chronicles 5:1)

Beriah 1 Chronicles 7:23

Resheph 1 Chronicles 7:25

Telah 1 Chronicles 7:25

Tahan 1 Chronicles 7:25

Laadan 1 Chronicles 7:26

Ammihud 1 Chronicles 7:26

Elishama 1 Chronicles 7:26

Nun (Non) 1 Chronicles 7:27

Oshea 1 Chronicles 7:27

(Jehoshua,

Joshua)

Note that Joshua's grandfather, Elishama ben Ammihud, had been a member of the original Council of Twelve under Moses. (Numbers 1:4-16, 44; 2:2-29; 7:12-78.) These twelve were evidently the patriarchs of the tribes, just as Jacob's twelve sons must have formed a similar council when Jacob was president of the Church. We find Joshua listed among the twelve sent out to spy, but he is missing from the later lists, when he left his position in the Council of the Twelve to become president of the Church. However, he evidently continued to exercise patriarchal authority over all Israel as well. (Cf. Joshua 2:1.)

In the early days, the patriarch and president were the same individual (e.g., Adam, Noah, Abraham). This, of course, foreshadows the organization in the celestial world, where government is patriarchal. Joseph Smith even proposed to adopt a similar system in his day: "Sunday, 16. [July 1843]—... Said I would not prophesy any more, and proposed Hyrum to hold the office of prophet to the Church, as it was his birthright. I am going to have a reformation, and the Saints must regard Hyrum, for he has the authority." (HC 5:510.)

Hyrum, the patriarch to the Church, eldest son of Joseph Smith, Sr., and brother of the Prophet Joseph Smith, was a direct descendant of Ephraim. As early as 1842, Hyrum had held the keys of the priesthood, as Assistant President of the Church. (D&C 124:124.) It is because both Hyrum and Joseph had the keys that the shedding of the blood of both is a valid testimony to the truthfulness of their mission in restoring the true church to the earth.

The New Testament speaks of patriarchs (Hebrews 7:4; Acts 2:29), but normally by the title evangelist. This word—as also its Hebrew counterpart mebasser—means "publisher of good tidings," and refers to the patriarchal blessings [^1] given by these "evangelical ministers," as they are sometimes called. (D&C 107:39.)

Joshua, the presiding patriarch of Moses' time, was not the only patriarch, however, as we have noted. Each tribal leader, each clan leader, and each father was, in a sense, a patriarch. Which of these was formally ordained to a priesthood office cannot be ascertained for the Old Testament period, but we may assume that few actually held priesthood authority after Moses' day.

Three Priesthoods

In the days of Adam, there was but one priesthood, holding authority to perform both spiritual and temporal ordinances. It was patriarchal—i.e., it passed from father to son. Normally, the eldest son of the family replaced his father as patriarch and he, through the revelation he received from God, governed the priesthood in that family unit. However, the right to hold the priesthood or to have a governing position within it was contingent upon the faithfulness and worthiness of the individual. Thus, the firstborn of the family had a right to the priesthood because of his descent, but he could be ordained to his office only by revelation from God.

Out of respect to the name of the Lord, and to avoid too frequent repetition of his name, the Holy Priesthood after the Order of the Son of God was called by the ancients the Melchizedek Priesthood, which title it still bears. (D&C 107:1-4.) "All other authorities or offices in the church are appendages to this priesthood." (D&C 107:5.) This priesthood holds "the keys of the Kingdom of God in all ages of the world to the latest posterity on the earth, and is the channel through which all knowledge, doctrine, the plan of salvation, and every important matter is revealed from heaven. Its institution was prior to 'the foundation of this earth.'... [It] is the highest and holiest Priesthood, and is after the order of the Son of God." (HC 4:207.) The "priesthood continueth in the church of God in all generations, and is without beginning of days or end of years." (D&C 84:17.)

Despite the fact that there is in reality but one priesthood, it is divided into three main groups, known as "orders." On August 17, 1843, the Prophet Joseph Smith gave a magnificent discourse on this subject, using Hebrews 7 as his text. Here are extracts of what he said:

There are three grand orders of priesthood referred to here. 1st. The King of Shiloam. (Salem) had power and authority over that of Abraham, holding the key and the power of endless life.... God cursed the children of Israel because they would not receive the last law from Moses.... The Israelites prayed that God would speak to Moses and not to them; in consequence of which he cursed them with a carnal law. What was the power of Melchizedek? 'Twas not the Priesthood of Aaron which administers in outward ordinances, and the offering of sacrifices. Those holding the fullness of the Melchizedek Priesthood are kings and priests of the Most High God, holding the keys of power and blessings. In fact, that priesthood is a perfect law of theocracy, and stands as God to give laws to the people, administering endless lives to the sons and daughters of Adam. Abraham says to Melchizedek, I believe all that thou hast taught me concerning the priesthood and the coming of the Son of Man; so Melchizedek ordained Abraham and sent him away. Abraham rejoiced, saying, Now I have a priesthood..... "Without father, without mother, without descent, having neither beginning of days nor end of life, but made like unto the Son of God, abideth a priest continually." The Melchizedek Priesthood holds the right from the eternal God, and not by descent from father and mother.... The 2nd Priesthood is Patriarchal authority. Go to and finish the temple, and God will fill it with power, and you will then receive more knowledge concerning this priesthood. The 3rd is what is called the Levitical Priesthood, consisting of priests to administer in outward ordinance, made without an oath; but the Priesthood of Melchizedek is by an oath and covenant. The Holy Ghost is God's messenger to administer in all those priesthoods. (HC 5:554-55.)

Interestingly enough, in order to hold the patriarchal priesthood, one must also hold the Melchizedek Priesthood. The patriarchal order descends from the fathers by birthright, whereas the Melchizedek order is the high priesthood, administering eternal life and spiritual ordinances without regard to descent. Elijah, when he came to the Kirtland Temple (D&C 110) in 1836 to "turn the heart of the fathers to the children, and the heart of the children to their fathers" (Malachi 4:5-6), restored this patriarchal authority. Moroni cited Malachi's prophecy as follows: "Behold, I will reveal unto you the Priesthood, by the hand of Elijah the prophet...." (JS-H 1:38.) This family-oriented order of the priesthood is referred to in Doctrine and Covenants 131:2, where we learn that a couple sealed by the authority of the priesthood hold this right to preside over their family.

Elijah, as we shall see later, was the last prophet in Israel to hold all of the keys before the coming of the Christ, and it was he who restored the authority to do temple work in 1836. It is entirely possible that this Elijah, for whom the Bible gives no genealogy, was not only president of the Church in his day, but also the patriarch.

On another occasion, Joseph Smith spoke of the three orders of the priesthood:

The spirit of Elias is first, Elijah second, and Messiah last. Elias is a forerunner to prepare the way, and the spirit and power of Elijah is to come after, holding the keys of power, building the Temple to the capstone, placing the seals of the Melchisedec Priesthood upon the house of Israel, and making all things ready; then Messiah comes to His Temple, which is last of all. Messiah is above the spirit and power of Elijah, for He made the world, and was that spiritual rock unto Moses in the wilderness. Elijah was to come and prepare the way and build up the kingdom before the coming of the great day of the Lord, although the spirit of Elias might begin it." (HC 6:254.)

All three of these offices—Elias, Elijah, and Messiah—were represented in the Kirtland Temple on April 3, 1836, when keys pertaining to these three priesthoods were restored to Joseph Smith. (D&C 110.) Messiah personifies the Melchizedek Priesthood, Elijah the patriarchal priesthood and Elias the Aaronic Priesthood. And yet each of these individuals is a high priest after the order of Melchizedek. Their positions differ in the authority of the keys they restored. Elijah himself, be it noted, held the keys of the Melchizedek Priesthood also, but as with all presidents of the Church, it was under the power and direction of Messiah or Jesus Christ.

"There are two Priesthoods spoken of in the Scriptures," said Joseph Smith, "viz., the Melchisedek and the Aaronic or Levitical. Although there are two Priesthoods, yet the Melchisedek Priesthood comprehends the Aaronic or Levitical Priesthood, and is the great head, and holds the highest authority which pertains to the Priesthood, and the keys of the Kingdom of God in all ages of the world to the latest posterity on earth, and is the channel through which all knowledge, doctrine, the plan of salvation, and every important matter is revealed from heaven." (HC 4:207.)

Moses, in his day, held the Melchizedek Priesthood, which he desired to give to the Israelites in general, but of which they were not all worthy: "If they had been sanctified and holy, the children of Israel would not have travelled one year with Moses before they would have received their endowments and the Melchisedec Priesthood." (Brigham Young, in JD 6:100.)

One of the greatest privileges that can come to a bearer of the Melchizedek Priesthood is to see and converse with God, as did Moses: "And without the ordinances thereof, and the authority of the priesthood, the power of godliness is not manifest unto men in the flesh; For without this no man can see the face of God, even the Father, and live." (D&C 84:21-22.) Later, we shall see more on this subject.

But the children of Israel did not want this privilege, for they were afraid on account of their sins. Therefore, they "said unto Moses, Speak thou with us, and we will hear: but let not God speak with us, lest we die." (Exodus 20:19.) This incident is explained in much greater detail in a revelation given to Joseph Smith:

Now this Moses plainly taught to the children of Israel in the wilderness, and sought diligently to sanctify his people that they might behold the face of God; But they hardened their hearts and could not endure his presence; therefore, the Lord in his wrath, for his anger was kindled against them, swore that they should not enter into his rest while in the wilderness, which rest is the fulness of his glory. Therefore, he took Moses out of their midst, and the Holy Priesthood also; And the lesser priesthood continued, which priesthood holdeth the key of the ministering of angels and the preparatory gospel. (D&C 84:23-26.)

It was in this manner that the Israelites as a whole were deprived of the privilege of holding the Melchizedek Priesthood. In lieu thereof, God chose the descendants of Levi (the tribe of which Moses and Aaron were members) to hold the lesser or Aaronic Priesthood, sometimes called the Levitical Priesthood. This order of the priesthood consists of the offices of priest, teacher, and deacon, with presiding authority in the bishop; all other offices of which we have read in the scriptures are bearers of the higher or Melchizedek Priesthood. Even though Moses was taken from among the Israelites and they had to depend mostly upon the Aaronic Priesthood, there were certain individuals who continued in the Melchizedek Priesthood. Joseph Fielding Smith explained:

The Lord had taken Moses from Israel and with him the Melchizedek Priesthood, because of the unpreparedness of the children of Israel to receive it. However, we are informed by the Prophet Joseph Smith, that the prophets in Israel, such as Samuel, Isaiah, Jeremiah and Elijah, held the Melchizedek Priesthood. In fact Elijah was the last of the prophets in Israel to hold the fulness of the Melchizedek Priesthood with its sealing powers, which authority he bestowed upon Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery. (The Way to Perfection, p. 75.)

And on Friday, June 30, 1961, President Smith said, speaking to departing missionaries in the Salt Lake Mission Home: "Never was there a time when the Lord did not have a person on the earth holding the Melchizedek Priesthood." [^2]

The Aaronic Priesthood

The lesser priesthood, which God left to the descendants of Levi, administered the temporal laws and ordinances of the gospel. It was named the Aaronic Priesthood, after Aaron, the brother of Moses, who became the first president (bishop) of this priesthood during the Exodus (his ordination is in Exodus 28). Only the descendants of Aaron could be priests; the other descendants of Levi, Aaron's ancestor, were the Levites, and they had lesser responsibilities in the same priesthood. It must be noted, however, that priests of the lower order existed even before the Aaronic Priesthood was separated from the Melchizedek. (Exodus 19:22, 24.)

LEVITES HELD AARONIC PRIESTHOOD. The Aaronic Priesthood is divided into the Aaronic and the Levitical, yet it is but one priesthood. This is merely a matter of designating certain duties within the priesthood. The sons of Aaron, who presided in the Aaronic order, were spoken of as holding the Aaronic Priesthood; and the sons of Levi, who were not sons of Aaron, were spoken of as the Levites. They held the Aaronic Priesthood but served under, or in a lesser capacity, than the sons of Aaron. (Joseph Fielding Smith, Doctrines of Salvation 3:86.)

The matter can be summed up by noting that, in the Aaronic Priesthood, only the priests were able to perform ordinances, while their brethren the Levites (corresponding to teachers and deacons in the Church today) performed manual duties related directly to the Lord's work.

Levi himself, the ancestor of Moses, Aaron, and the other Levites whom God chose to hold the lesser priesthood, had, according to apocryphal literature, received the priesthood from angels:

And I saw seven men in white raiment saying unto me: Arise, put on the robe of the priesthood, and the crown of righteousness, and the breastplate of understanding, and the garment of truth, and the plate of faith, and the turban of the head, and the ephod of prophecy. And they severally carried these things and put them on me, and said unto me: From henceforth become a priest of the Lord, thou and thy seed for ever. And the first anointed me with holy oil, and gave to me the staff of judgment. The second washed me with pure water, and fed me with bread and wine even the most holy things, and clad me with a holy and glorious robe. The third clothed me with a linen vestment like an ephod. The fourth put round me a girdle like unto purple. The fifth gave me a branch of rich olive. The sixth placed a crown on my head. The seventh placed on my head a diadem of priesthood, and filled my hands with incense, that I might serve as priest to the Lord God. And they said to me: Levi, thy seed shall be divided into three offices, for a sign of the glory of the Lord who is to come. (Testament of Levi 3:14-23, in The Lost Books of the Bible and the Forgotten Books of Eden, p. 229.)

The three offices of the Aaronic Priesthood, spoken of here, are apparently those of priest, teacher, and deacon. The Levites were often divided into two groups, though they had a single title anciently. It is therefore possible that the offices are bishop (president of the Aaronic priesthood), priest and Levite. Clement spoke of the office of bishop: "The office of bishop is no new thing. Many years ago it was written: I shall establish their bishops in righteousness and their deacons in faith." (1 Clement, sect. 72.)

In this passage, he is quoting Isaiah 60:17 from the Septuagint (Greek) translation of the Old Testament, made in the third century B.C. The Greek word used in the original text is episkopos, which means "overseer." This same Greek word is used in the New Testament and is the origin of our English word bishop.

In the Hebrew (original) of Isaiah 60:17, the word used is pequddatek, meaning "thine overseers." The word that Clement interprets as deacon (a Greek word that itself means "servant") is the Hebrew nogesayik, "thine exactors (collectors)," apparently from the idea that the Levites collected the offerings from the people of ancient Israel.

There are many bishops in the Church, but one of them serves as presiding bishop. Were he a descendant of Aaron, he would probably always be president of the Aaronic Priesthood. (D&C 68:14-22; 107:13-17, 68-76.) During the Exodus, Aaron was the presiding bishop or overseer of the priesthood that bears his name. This office was hereditary and was reserved for Aaron's sons, the firstborn wherever possible. (The office of priest was also reserved for Aaron's sons.) Many have understood, however, that Aaron was only a priest, holding uniquely the lesser priesthood. This belief has become widespread because of the revelation given to Joseph Smith that authorizes a literal firstborn descendant of Aaron to hold the office of bishop without counselors and without having the Melchizedek priesthood. (D&C 68:14-22.)

However, this does not exclude a descendant of Levi or Aaron from holding the Melchizedek Priesthood. Indeed, Samuel the prophet, himself a descendant of Levi, held the higher or Melchizedek Priesthood, as we saw earlier. Harold B. Lee has given us some additional light on the subject of descendants of Aaron who are authorized to hold the position of bishop in the Church: "The bishop of the ward as a literal descendant of Aaron, as you read, could preside as a bishop holding only the Aaronic Priesthood, but in order to hold an ecclesiastical position to preside over all the activities of the ward, he must be ordained a high priest and have his counselors who are high priests." (Church News, August 26, 1961, p. 10.)

Thus Aaron, for example, could preside over the Aaronic Priesthood as a priest of the lesser order of priesthood, being ordained a bishop. But in order to preside over the general membership of the Church (some of whom held the higher Melchizedek Priesthood), he would have had to have been ordained a high priest after the order of Melchizedek. We have already seen evidence that such was the case, perhaps without recognizing it. Aaron and two of his sons, Nadab and Abihu, accompanied Moses and the seventy elders on the mountain where they saw the Lord. (Exodus 24:9-11.) It has already been shown that one of the privileges of the Melchizedek Priesthood is that those who hold it may see and converse with God. This is further explained in D&C 107:18-20:

The power and authority of the higher, or Melchizedek Priesthood, is to hold the keys of all the spiritual blessings of the Church—To have the privilege of receiving the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven, to have the heavens opened unto them, to commune with the general assembly and church of the Firstborn, and to enjoy the communion and presence of God the Father, and Jesus the mediator of the new covenant. The power and authority of the lesser, or Aaronic Priesthood, is to hold the keys of the ministering of angels, and to administer in outward ordinances, the letter of the gospel, the baptism of repentance for the remission of sins, agreeable to the covenants and commandments.

Since Aaron and his sons saw the Lord on the mount even before their ordination into the presiding bishopric, it is evident that they already held the Melchizedek Priesthood and that they were high priests.

Speaking of the ordination of high priests to the office of bishop, Brigham Young said, "There is no retrograde movement in ordaining a High Priest to the office of a Bishop, for, properly speaking, he is set apart to act in that office. (i.e., he remains a high priest)." (JD 10:96.) This, then, is apparently what happened in the case of Aaron, a high priest of the tribe of Levi: he was chosen to preside over the lesser priesthood as presiding bishop.

After the death of Moses, very few high priests were ordained in Israel. Some of the prophets, especially those who presided over the Church, are exceptions. Other exceptions were those who held the office corresponding to presiding bishop. For this reason, we find that the president of the lesser priesthood was anciently called the "chief priest" and often simply the "high priest" because there were very few high priests besides him. (See 2 Kings 22:8; 25:18; Jeremiah 52:24.) The distinction between high priests after the order of Melchizedek and Levitical or Aaronic priests is apparently what is meant by 2 Kings 23:4: "Hilkiah the high priest, and the priests of the second order."

Aaron was evidently aided in his duties as presiding bishop by his sons Nadab and Abihu, whom we may call his counselors. We note that they were with him on the mount when God appeared to the nobles of Israel. Misfortune overcame them and they died in the wilderness as a result of disobedience to God. (Leviticus 10:1-2.) They were replaced by their two younger brothers, Eleazar and Ithamar. (Leviticus 10:12.) "And these are the names of the sons of Aaron; Nadab the firstborn, and Abihu, Eleazar, and Ithamar. These are the names of the sons of Aaron, the priests which were anointed, whom he consecrated to minister in the priest's office. And Nadab and Abihu died before the Lord, when they offered strange fire before the Lord, in the wilderness of Sinai, and they had no children: and Eleazar and Ithamar ministered in the priest's office in the sight of Aaron their father." (Numbers 3:2-4.)

Only the high priest was anointed (Leviticus 21:10) in ancient Israel, and yet we see here that Aaron's sons were also anointed along with their father. Thus, they too were high priests. But they were not the presiding bishop; they were counselors to him who held this office—Aaron. Not all of Aaron's sons and direct descendants were high priests, however. Some of them (the majority) were priests of the Aaronic order. All of them, despite the fact that these offices were reserved to them, had to be called by revelation and ordained, for "no man taketh this honour unto himself, but he that is called of God, as was Aaron." (Hebrews 5:4.) Aaron, we must remember, was called of God by a direct revelation given to his brother, the prophet Moses. The importance of this call by revelation was stressed in later years, when Simon the Hasmonaean, a descendant of Aaron (but probably not of the firstborn line), was chosen by the Jews as high priest (which, in those days, meant president of the Aaronic Priesthood as well as civil ruler). We read that "the Jews, with the priests, had thought it well that Simon should be prince and high priest for ever until there should appear an accredited prophet." (1 Maccabees 14:41.)

The Levites

The Levites, descendants of Levi but not of Aaron, helped the priests in the lesser (usually manual) duties of the priesthood—those that did not require the actual performance of ordinances. However, the Levites had to be ordained to their office, just as were the priests, for they held authority from God:

And thou shalt bring the Levites before the tabernacle of the congregation (Church): and thou shalt gather the whole assembly (Church) of the children of Israel together: And thou shalt bring the Levites before the Lord: and the children of Israel shall put their hands upon the Levites: And Aaron shall offer the Levites before the Lord for an offering of the children of Israel, that they may execute the service of the Lord. (Numbers 8:9-11.)

That the Levites were ordained is clear also from 1 Chronicles 9:22: "All these [Levites] which were chosen to be porters in the gates were two hundred and twelve. These were reckoned by their genealogy in their villages, whom David and Samuel the seer did ordain in their set office."

The Levites were divided into three groups, according to their ancestry, as being descendants of Merari, of Gershon, and of Kohath, sons of Levi. Each of these groups had its own chief or president, while the sons of Aaron supervised the activities of these chiefs.

And the chief of the house of the father of the families of Merari was Zuriel the son of Abihail: these shall pitch on the side of the tabernacle northward. And under the custody and charge of the sons of Merari shall be the boards of the tabernacle, and the bars thereof, and the pillars thereof, and the sockets thereof, and all the vessels thereof, and all that serveth thereto, And the pillars of the court round about, and their sockets, and their pins, and their cords. (Numbers 3:35-37.)

This is the service of the families of the sons of Merari, according to all their service, in the tabernacle of the congregation, under the hand of Ithamar the son of Aaron the priest. (Numbers 4:33; 7:8.)

Zuriel, then, was president over the children of Merari; Ithamar was also over them, representing the bishopric. The Gershonites were likewise supervised:

And the chief of the house of the father of the Gershonites shall be Eliasaph the son of Lael. And the charge of the sons of Gershon in the tabernacle of the congregation shall be the tabernacle, and the tent, the covering thereof, and the hanging for the door of the tabernacle of the congregation, And the hangings of the court, and the curtain for the door of the court, which is by the tabernacle, and by the altar round about, and the cords of it for all the service thereof. (Numbers 3:24-26.)

This is the service of the families of the sons of Gershon in the tabernacle of the congregation: and their charge shall be under the hand of Ithamar the son of Aaron the priest. (Numbers 4:28.)

As can be seen, each of these groups had specific responsibilities in regard to the tabernacle, which, being portable, had to be carried during the Exodus. Each part of the tabernacle was assigned to a different group of Levites. Here are the duties and organization of the Kohathites:

And the chief of the house of the father of the families of the Kohathites shall be Elizaphan the son of Uzziel. And their charge shall be the ark, and the table, and the candlestick, and the altars, and the vessels of the sanctuary wherewith they minister, and the hanging, and all the service thereof. And Eleazar the son of Aaron the priest shall be chief over the chief of the Levites, and have the oversight [or the bishopric] of them that keep the charge of the sanctuary. (Numbers 3:30-32.)

Later, Eleazar replaced his father, Aaron, as presiding bishop. (See Numbers 20:23-28). As a result, one of his sons became his counselor in the bishopric and was placed over the Kohathites in the place of his father: "And Phinehas the son of Eleazar was the ruler over them in time past, and the Lord was with him." (1 Chronicles 9:20.)

It has already been noted that the three offices of the Aaronic Priesthood are priest, teacher, and deacon. We have seen two titles thus far—priest and Levite. The Levites corresponded anciently to the offices of teacher and deacon. Certain of the Levites were in fact teachers. (2 Chronicles 30:22; 35:3; Nehemiah 8:9.)

It is possible that the Nethinim, mentioned with the priests and the Levites, were the deacons of ancient times. (See 1 Chronicles 9:2; Ezra 2:43; 7:7, 24; Nehemiah 10:28; 11:3.) [^3] We read of them in Ezra 8:20: "Also of the Nethinims, whom David and the princes (apostles?) had appointed [ordained] for the service of the Levites, two hundred and twenty Nethinims: all of them were expressed by name."

NOTES

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] This prophecy has also been interpreted as referring to the precedence of Zadok over the sons of Eli, in the days of King David and his son Solomon.
[^2] There are other indications that David held the priesthood. For example, the New Testament authors frequently quote his psalms as prophecies (a function also ascribed to them by the people who wrote the Dead Sea Scrolls). Modern revelation has made it clear that David was sealed to his wives, whom he subsequently lost through sin. (D&C 132:39.) He could not have been so sealed, nor promised an "exaltation," had he not possessed the higher priesthood.
[^3] From time to time, other General Authorities have been called to fill special offices needed at the time (e.g., counselors to the First Presidency or the Quorum of the Twelve. Assistants to the Quorum of the Twelve). The calling to such offices is authorized in D&C 107:98.
