John A. Tvedtnes, Church of the Old Testament ( 1980)

4

ORGANIZATION AND GOVERNMENT

The ancient Israelite church, in general, did not have the Melchizedek Priesthood. It operated under the carnal law of Mount Sinai, offering burnt offerings through the Aaronic Priesthood. However, certain of the ancient prophets did hold the higher priesthood; Elijah, Amos, Isaiah, Jeremiah, and Samuel are examples.

The prophet Samuel was a descendant of Levi but not of Aaron. He could not, therefore, have been a priest of the Aaronic order. And yet he offered sacrifice. (1 Samuel 7:9-10.) He was, therefore, a high priest of the Melchizedek order and was apparently president of the church.

The choice of Samuel as prophet and president was foreseen by another prophet, who came to Eli, the high priest or presiding bishop, and spoke against Eli's wicked sons, threatening their destruction. (1 Samuel 2:34.) He added this prophecy:

And I will raise me up a faithful priest, that shall do according to that which is in mine heart and in my mind: and I will build him a sure house; and he shall walk before mine anointed for ever. And it shall come to pass, that every one that is left of thine (Eli's) house, shall come and crouch to him for a piece of silver and a morsel of bread, and shall say, Put me, I pray thee, into one of the priests' offices, that I may eat a piece of bread. (1 Samuel 2:35-36.) [^1]

We can see by this scripture that even though Eli's descendants would have a right by lineage to the Aaronic Priesthood, they could receive it only through revelation given through the properly chosen channels of the Lord. (See 1 Samuel 3.)

Samuel (also spelled Shemuel, from the Hebrew pronunciation) was a descendant of Kohath (1 Chronicles 6:33-38), to whom the right of the office of priest was not given. Here, then, is a Levite who became a high priest of the Melchizedek order. Other high priests, not of the tribe of Levi, who offered sacrifices (thus showing that they held the higher priesthood) were Gideon (Judges 6:24-28) of the tribe of Manasseh (Judges 6:15) and Solomon of the tribe of Judah, who dedicated the temple of Jerusalem (1 Kings 8; 1 Chronicles 6, 7). In the apocryphal Odes of Solomon (20:1), we find Solomon declaring, "I am a priest of the Lord, and to Him I do priestly service: and to Him I offer the sacrifice of His thought." (The Lost Books of the Bible and the Forgotten Books of Eden, p. 130.)

Solomon's father, King David, also held the Melchizedek Priesthood, as evidenced by the fact that he organized the church in his day and that he wore the ephod of prophecy and offered sacrifice. (2 Samuel 6:12-18.) [^2] One of the descendants of David and Solomon, Uzziah by name, assumed that he, as king, had the priesthood rights automatically. He attempted to perform some ordinances in the temple and the Lord severely punished him because he lacked the necessary authority possessed by his two illustrious ancestors. (2 Chronicles 26:16-21.)

Organization

In order to understand the organization of the Israelite religious community, we must be able to compare it to the Church of Jesus Christ as it was set up by revelation through the Prophet Joseph Smith and his successors. There are three basic levels of officers in the Church: General Authorities, stake officers, and ward officers. (As the Church has grown rapidly in recent years, Regional Representatives have been appointed and some General Authorities have taken over area responsibilities. We should not be surprised to see further growth produce more revelation on these matters.)

The General Authorities include the First Presidency (the President of the High Priesthood and his counselors), the Council of the Twelve Apostles, and the First Quorum of Seventy, as the presiding councils of the Church. Also included among the General Authorities are the Patriarch to the Church and the Presiding Bishopric (the Presiding Bishop and his two counselors, generally also bishops). [^3]

The Church is divided into geographic areas called stakes, each of which has a presidency (three high priests who preside over the holders of the Melchizedek Priesthood in the stake), a patriarch, and a high council (twelve high priests who assist the presidency). Serving in the stake under the presidency are quorums comprising those holding the three offices of the Melchizedek Priesthood: high priests (presided over by the stake presidency), seventies (presided over by seven presidents and patterned after the First Quorum of Seventy), and elders (with a president and two counselors).

Each stake is divided into wards, which are local administrative units or congregations. The wards are directed by a bishopric, consisting of a bishop and two counselors (generally high priests, though where there are no other high priests in the ward, elders may so serve—D&C 42:31). The bishopric presides over the quorums of the Aaronic Priesthood, which are priests (with the bishop as president), teachers, and deacons (each of the latter having a president with two counselors).

Stakes

Stakes are mentioned in the Bible. Isaiah compares the headquarters of the ancient Israelite church to a tabernacle or tent, the cords of which are held down by "stakes" or "tent-pins." This is exactly what the term means. "Look upon Zion, the city of our solemnities: thine eyes shall see Jerusalem a quiet habitation, a tabernacle that shall not be taken down; not one of the stakes thereof shall ever be removed, neither shall any of the cords thereof be broken." (Isaiah 33:20.)

This type of ecclesiastical division apparently did not exist in earlier times, e.g., in the days of the Exodus when the Israelites were organized along tribal lines. Yet the Bible speaks of the elders, officers, and judges of Israel. (Joshua 8:33; 23:2.) It is possible that these judges were bishops (or high councilors), for the bishop is a judge in Israel. (D&C 64:40.)

During the Exodus, the tabernacle or tent of the congregation had to be constantly moved from place to place. This meant removal and replantation of its stakes or tent-pins. Isaiah, however, prophesied of a day when Jerusalem would be a "quiet habitation," a "tabernacle that shall not be taken down," the "city of our solemnities." And "not one of the stakes thereof shall be removed." In another place he speaks of the church as a tent: "Enlarge the place of thy tent, and let them stretch forth the curtains of thine habitations: spare not, lengthen thy cords, and strengthen thy stakes." (Isaiah 54:2.)

We have already seen that Paul compared the church to things other than a tent—such as the human body or a perfectly constructed building. Jesus, John, Peter, and Paul all compared the church to a flock, as a flock of sheep, with Christ as the "good Shepherd." Paul used this title when speaking to the brethren of the priesthood at Ephesus:

Take heed therefore unto yourselves, and to all the flock, over the which the Holy Ghost hath made you overseers [episkopoi, "bishops"], to feed the church of God, which he hath purchased with his own blood. For I know this, that after my departing shall grievous wolves enter in among you, not sparing the flock. (Acts 20:28-29. See also John 10:11-18; 21:15-17; 1 Peter 5:2-3.)

Paul, then, foresaw the day when certain unrighteous men would enter into the church, resulting in a complete apostasy from the truth. Jeremiah and others saw this same apostasy:

Woe be unto the pastors that destroy and scatter the sheep of my pasture! saith the Lord. Therefore thus saith the Lord God of Israel against the pastors that feed my people: Ye have scattered my flock, and driven them away, and have not visited [^4] them: behold, I will visit upon you the evil of your doings, saith the Lord. And I will gather the remnant of my flock out of all countries whither I have driven them, and will bring them again to their folds; and they shall be fruitful and increase. And I will set up shepherds (pastors) over them which shall feed them: and they shall fear no more, nor be dismayed, neither shall they be lacking, saith the Lord. (Jeremiah 23:1-4; see Ezekiel 34; Zechariah 10:3.)

In this manner, the prophets saw not only the apostasy, but also the restoration and gathering, when pastors would be chosen in the last days. Whether these pastors are bishops (as Paul seems to indicate) or stake presidents is not known for sure. Bishops rightfully should be descendants of Aaron, as well as the priests, but God promised that this would be changed in the last days, when he would gather Israel from among "all nations and tongues" (Isaiah 66:18) and "among the Gentiles" (vs. 19). "And they shall bring all your brethren for an offering unto the Lord out of all nations upon horses, and in chariots, and in litters, and upon mules, and upon swift beasts, to my holy mountain Jerusalem, saith the Lord, as the children of Israel bring an offering in a clean vessel into the house of the Lord. And I will also take of them for priests and for Levites, saith the Lord." (Isaiah 66:20-21.)

Wards

In the time of David, the church was fairly well organized, insomuch that it was possible to plan a temple for Jerusalem. The people were, it seems, divided into wards (meaning "charge" or "duty" [^5]). The priests and Levites were assigned to these wards by lot, to accomplish their work:

And they cast lots, ward against ward, as well the small as the great, the teacher as the scholar. Now the first lot came forth for Asaph to Joseph: the second to Gedaliah, who with his brethren and sons were twelve: The third to Zaccur, he, his sons, and his brethren, were twelve: The fourth to Izri, he, his sons, and his brethren, were twelve: The fifth to Nethaniah, he, his sons, and his brethren, were twelve...." (1 Chronicles 25:8-12 ff.)

In all, we have twenty-four quorums of Levites (deacons) listed here, each one having twelve members, as in all present-day quorums of deacons. (D&C 107:85.) Twelve Levites, presumably deacons, forming a quorum, are also mentioned in 2 Chronicles 31:12-13.

Upon returning from the captivity in Babylon, Ezra, a priest (and evidently high priest), and Nehemiah, the Jewish governor, also appointed the priests and Levites to officiate in "wards": "Thus cleansed I them from all strangers, and appointed the wards of the priests and the Levites, every one in his business." (Nehemiah 13:30. See also 12:24.)

In addition, they chose other officers in the church organization: "The overseer also of the Levites at Jerusalem was Uzzi the son of Bani, the son of Hashabiah." (Nehemiah 11:22.) The grandfather of Uzzi, Hashabiah, is mentioned further on: "And the chief of the Levites: Hashabiah, Sherebiah, and Jeshua the son of Kadmiel, with their brethren over against them, to praise and to give thanks, according to the commandment of David the man of God, ward over against ward." (Nehemiah 12:24.)

This scripture probably refers to the presidency of the Levites, three in number, of David's time or later. David also had a temple president in his day: "And of the priests: Jedaiah, and Jehoiarib, and Jachin, And Azariah the son of Hilkiah, the son of Meshullam, the son of Zadok, the son of Meraioth, the son of Ahitub, the ruler of the house of God." (1 Chronicles 9:10-11.)

Later, we read of an entire temple presidency of three: "And his princes gave willingly unto the people, to the priests, and to the Levites: Hilkiah and Zechariah and Jehiel, rulers of the house of God, gave unto the priests." (2 Chronicles 35:8.)

During the time of the Babylonian captivity, when the temple—having been destroyed—was no longer used, there was no need for a temple presidency. This, then, is why Ezra and Nehemiah were required to choose such a presidency when they reconstructed the temple. Ezra appointed other officers as well, including a council of twelve: "So we fasted and besought our God for this: and he was intreated of us. Then I separated [ordained] twelve of the chief of the priests [i.e., high priests], Sherebiah, Hashabiah, and ten of their brethren with them." (Ezra 8:23-24.)

That these were high priests of the Melchizedek order is evidenced by the fact that the two named (Sherebiah and Hashabiah) are listed in Ezra 8:18-19 as descendants of Merari (son of Levi), to whom the honor of the priest's office in the Aaronic Priesthood was not accorded.

Meetings and Assemblies

Many people are surprised to find that The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, although claiming divine authority in the priesthood, has no paid clergy. It is actually a lay church. Each officer of the organization has employment apart from his church calling and by which he supports his family. Moreover, all worthy male members of the Church may hold the priesthood. Many are surprised to find that anyone in the Church may be called upon to pray, to speak, or to do a number of other things in the course of services, depending upon priesthood calling. This, however, should not be so astounding, for it was so in ancient days too. Let us examine what various non-Mormon writers have had to say about the subject of the Church in the time of Christ and its operation.

Besides the elders who had the general direction of the affairs of the congregation, special officers were appointed for special purposes. But the peculiarity here is, that just for the acts proper to public worship—the reading of the Scriptures, preaching and prayer—no special officials were appointed. These acts were, on the contrary, in the time of Christ still freely performed in turn by members of the congregation, on which account e.g. Christ was able, whenever He came into a synagogue, to immediately address the congregation. (Schurer: History of the Jewish People in the Time of Jesus Christ 2:62-63.)

It appears incontestable, from the most authentic records, and the best histories of this century, that, in the larger cities, there was, at the head of each church a person to whom was given the title of bishop, who ruled this sacred community with a certain sort of authority, in concert, however, with the body of presbyters, and consulting, in matters of moment, the opinion and the voices of the whole assembly. (Mosheim, Ecclesiastical History, vol. 1, Cent. III, p. 193.)

In those early times, every Christian church consisted of the people, their leaders, and the ministers, or deacons; and these, indeed, belong essentially to every religious society. The people were, undoubtedly, the first in authority; for the apostles showed, by their own example, that nothing of moment was to be carried on or determined without the consent of the assembly, and such a method of proceeding was both prudent and necessary in those critical times. [Note refers us to Acts 1:15; 6:3; 15:4; 21:22.] It was, therefore, the assembly of the people which chose their own rulers and teachers, or received them by a free and authoritative consent, when recommended by others. The same people rejected or confirmed, by their suffrages, the laws that were proposed by their rulers to the assembly; excommunicated profligate and unworthy members of the church, restored the penitent to their forfeited privileges, passed judgment upon the different subjects of controversy and dissension, that arose in their community; examined and decided the disputes which happened between the elders and deacons; and, in a word, exercised all that authority which belongs to such as are invested with the sovereign power. (Ibid., vol. 1, Cent. I, pp. 72-73.)

It is thus even today in the Church: the leaders present officers, who are then sustained by the vote of the congregation. All major actions of the Church, even when called for by revelation, are put before the congregation for acceptance, in order to ensure that all will support the proposed program. The equality of members of the Church is stressed even today by the titles "brother" and "sister." Such was so anciently too: "There reigned among the members of the Christian church, however distinguished they were by worldly rank and titles, not only an amiable harmony, but also a perfect equality. This appeared...by the names of brethren and sisters, with which they mutually saluted each other." (Ibid., p. 73.)

Thus we can see that our present-day practice of sustaining our leaders by vote is not a new practice, for it existed in Jesus' time and in the time of the Old Testament. It was even required anciently—as today—that the congregation approve all those to be ordained to the priesthood. (D&C 20:65; cf. Leviticus 8:1-6; Numbers 8:9-10; 27:18-23.)

An important part of church practice has always been the weekly sacrament meeting held on Sundays. Mosheim describes how these meetings were conducted anciently:

In these assemblies the holy scriptures were publicly read, and for that purpose were divided into certain portions or lessons. This part of divine service was followed by a brief exhortation to the people, in which eloquence and art gave place to the natural and fervent expression of zeal and charity. If any declared themselves extraordinarily animated by the Holy Spirit, they were permitted to explain successively the divine will, while the other prophets who were present, decided how much weight and authority was to be attributed to what they said. The prayers, which made a considerable part of the public worship, came in at the conclusion of these discourses, and were repeated by the people after the bishop or presbyter, who presided in the service. To these were added certain hymns, which were sung, not by the whole assembly, but by persons appointed for that purpose, during the celebration of the Lord's supper, and the feasts of charity. Such were the essential parts of divine worship which were observed in all Christian churches, though perhaps the method and order in which they were performed were not the same in all. The prayers of the first Christians were followed by oblations of bread, wine, and other things; and hence both the ministers of the church and the poor derived their subsistence. Every Christian who was in an opulent condition, and indeed every one, according to their circumstances, brought with them their gifts, and offered them, as it were, unto the Lord. Of the bread and wine presented in these offerings, such a quantity was separated from the rest as was required in the administration of the Lord's supper; this was consecrated by certain prayers pronounced by the bishop alone, to which the people assented, by saying Amen. The holy supper was distributed by the deacons; and this sacred institution was followed by sober repasts, which, from the excellent end they were designed to promote, were called agapae, or feasts of charity. Many attempts have been made to fix precisely the nature of these social feasts. But here it must be again considered, that the rites and customs of the primitive Christians were very different in different countries, and that consequently these feasts, like other institutions, were not everywhere celebrated in the same manner. This is the true and only way of explaining all the difficulties that can arise upon this subject. (Ibid., pp. 93-94.)

In these times, the sacrament of the Lord's Supper was celebrated, for the most part, on Sundays, and the ceremonies observed upon that occasion were such as follow: A part of the bread and wine, which was presented among the other oblations of the faithful, was separated from the rest, and consecrated by the prayers of the bishop. The wine was mixed with water, and the bread was divided into several portions. A part of the consecrated bread and wine was carried to the sick or absent members of the church, as a testimony of fraternal love, sent to them by the whole society. (Ibid., Cent. II, pp. 154-55.)

Aside from sacrament meetings, there are other important assemblies in the Church. In our day, the Church holds priesthood and other conferences in each stake and ward. (D&C 20:61.) In the time of Moses, such priesthood meetings were also held: "Three times thou shalt keep a feast unto me in the year.... Three times in the year all thy males shall appear before the Lord God." (Exodus 23:14, 17. See also 34:23.)

These three assemblies were general conferences of the entire male membership of the Church. Israel, traveling together in the desert, had no need to meet separately in different stakes (presuming that such could even have existed at that time). Today, we hold both stake and general conferences. [^6] In fact, general conference sessions today are held in the same months in which Moses held his major general conferences—April and October. We may read of these conferences in Leviticus 23:

These are the feasts of the Lord, even holy convocations, which ye shall proclaim in their seasons. In the fourteenth day of the first month [corresponding to beginning of April] at even is the Lord's passover. And on the fifteenth day of the same month is the feast of unleavened bread.... In the first day ye shall have an holy convocation: ye shall do no servile work therein. But ye shall offer an offering made by fire unto the Lord seven days: in the seventh day is an holy convocation: ye shall do no servile work therein. (Leviticus 23:4-8.)

In the seventh month [our September/October], in the first day of the month, shall ye have a sabbath, a memorial of blowing of trumpets, an holy convocation. Ye shall do no servile work therein: but ye shall offer an offering made by fire unto the Lord.... Also on the tenth day of this seventh month there shall be a day of atonement: it shall be an holy convocation unto you; and ye shall afflict your souls, and offer an offering made by fire unto the Lord.... Ye shall do no manner of work: it shall be a statute for ever throughout your generations in all your dwellings.... The fifteenth day of this seventh month shall be the feast of tabernacles for seven days unto the Lord. On the first day shall be an holy convocation: ye shall do no servile work therein. Seven days ye shall offer an offering made by fire unto the Lord: on the eighth day shall be an holy convocation unto you; and ye shall offer an offering made by fire unto the Lord: it is a solemn assembly; and ye shall do no servile work therein. (Leviticus 23:24-25, 27, 31, 34-36. See also Numbers 28:16-31; 29:1-40.)

Upon their return from the Babylonian captivity, in order to rebuild Jerusalem and its temple, the Jews held their holy convocation of the seventh month, with its "solemn assembly." (Nehemiah 8.) At this time, they added another ancient practice, that of fasting, to their celebration of this feast:

Now in the twenty and fourth day of this month the children of Israel were assembled with fasting, and with sackclothes, and earth upon them. And the seed of Israel separated themselves from all strangers, and stood and confessed their sins, and the iniquities of their fathers. And they stood up in their place, and read in the book of the law of the Lord their God one fourth part of the day; and another fourth part they confessed, and worshipped the Lord their God. (Nehemiah 9:1-3.)

There were more frequent fasts in ancient Israel, however, and Isaiah speaks of them (chap. 58). The people of his time were not fasting for the purposes of the Lord; they had deformed the practice, and Isaiah was commissioned to call them to repentance because of it (vss. 3-5). The Lord declared that the purpose of the fast is to "loose the bands of wickedness" (vs. 6) or, in other words, to repent of one's wrongdoings. But, in addition, it is meant "to deal thy bread to the hungry, and that thou bring the poor that are cast out to thy house? when thou seest the naked, that thou cover him; and that thou hide not thyself from thine own flesh" (vs. 7).

This is the way in which the fast should be performed even in our day. The first Sunday of every month has been set apart by the Church as fast Sunday. On that day, we fast and bear testimony in public Church meetings. The money saved by abstaining from two meals in this twenty-four-hour period is donated to a special fund used by the Church for helping the poor and needy members.

NOTES

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] The biblical passage cited here is Isaiah 40:3; it is best known, however, from its use by John the Baptist, in reference to his own mission (e.g., Matthew 3:3).
[^2] Mary, the mother of Jesus, was cousin of Elizabeth (Luke 1:36), who was a descendant of Aaron (Luke 1:5). While we know that Mary was of the tribe of Judah, it is also possible that she had Levite ancestry.
[^3] It would be most fitting indeed if it were Noah (Gabriel, Elias) who instructed John to look for the sign of the dove, for the dove played a significant role in the history of the flood.
[^4] Zechariah and Michaiah, listed here, were prophets. (See 2 Chronicles 18:5-24.) This account is from the time of the prophet Elijah of the northern kingdom. It is not clear whether the prince Obadiah, listed here, is the same as the prophet who wrote the book of that name or if either of these is the Obadiah who, during the persecution led by Ahab and his wife Jezebel, hid one hundred of the prophets in caves. (1 Kings 18:1-16.)
[^5] For more on the priests, see Manual of Discipline 1:18, 21; 2:1, 4, 19; 5:2; 6:3-5, 8, 19; 7:2; 9:1; Zadokite Document 3:21; 4:1-2; 7:1; 9:13, 15; 13:2, 5, 7, etc.
[^6] Same as a "ward."
