John A. Tvedtnes, Church of the Old Testament ( 1980)

5

THE DEAD SEA SCROLLS

Beginning in the middle of the twentieth century, the ancient manuscripts discovered near the Dead Sea at Qumran have cast much light on the origins of the early Christian community and its beliefs. The Dead Sea Scrolls seem to fill many gaps between the Old and New Testaments. These scriptures were written by a group of Jews who lived in the desert regions of the Dead Sea, not far south of Jericho. Who they were and what they believed is very important for our study of the Church of the Old Testament.

Among the Jews, there existed numerous sects. The Dead Sea Covenantors are generally identified with the Jewish group known as the Essenes. The title Essaioi (the Greek word from which we derive our English term Essenes) is considered by many scholars to ultimately derive from the Hebrew word hasidim, meaning saints or pietists. This title was applied to the writers of the Dead Sea Scrolls as well as to members of the Church in all ages of world history.

Josephus wrote of the various Jewish groups: "For there are three philosophical sects among the Jews. The followers of the first of whom are the Pharisees; of the second the Sadducees; and the third sect, who pretends to a severer discipline, are called Essens. These last are Jews by birth, and seem to have a greater affection for one another than the other sects have." (Wars of the Jews II:viii. 2. Josephus: Complete Works, p. 476.)

Philo Judaeus said of them: "Their attachment is not according to race—the word race is not fitting when it concerns volunteers—but it has for cause the zeal and the virtue and the ardent love of men." (Apology 2.)

They have no certain city, but many of them dwell in every city; and if any of their sect come from other places, what they have lies open for them, just as if it were their own; and they go into such as they never knew before, as if they had been ever so long acquainted with them. (Wars of the Jews II:viii.2.)

These men are despisers of riches, and so very communicative as raises our admiration. Nor is there any one to be found among them who hath more than another; for it is a law among them, that those who come to them must let what they have be common to the whole order,—insomuch, that among them all there is no appearance of poverty or excess of riches, but every one's possessions are intermingled with every other's possessions; and so there is, at it were, one patrimony among all the brethren. (Ibid.)

In comparison with what the scrolls tell us about the Dead Sea Covenantors, these descriptions of the Essenes fare well, leading many, if not most, scholars to believe that the Essenes wrote the scrolls. But such descriptions also apply to the Christians of the period. Another similarity between the Essenes and the Dead Sea Covenantors is the fact that the former, according to Josephus, had their own priests with them (the same being true of the Dead Sea Covenantors, as we shall soon see): "When they send what they have dedicated to God into the temple, they do not offer sacrifices, because they have more pure lustrations of their own; on which account they are excluded from the common court of the temple, but offer their sacrifices themselves." (Antiquities of the Jews XVIII:i.5.)

Another important feature of these people is the spirit of prophecy that they possessed: "There are also among them who undertake to foretell things to come, by reading the holy books, and using several sorts of purifications, and being perpetually conversant in the discourses of the prophets; and it is but seldom that they miss in their predictions." (Antiquities of the Jews II:viii.12.)

In order to understand the origin of the Dead Sea Community of Qumran, we must examine the secular and religious history of the period when the community came into being. We return to the time of Alexander the Great and the Greek conquest, when the high priest was both spiritual and political head of the Jewish people. The office of high priest is explained in the Bible Dictionary of the Latter-day Saint edition of the King James Version of the Bible:

The office was hereditary... [and] was usually a lifetime calling.... It was in the family of Eleazar, Aaron's third son, until the time of Eli, a descendant of Ithamar, Aaron's youngest son, into whose family it passed until it was restored to the family of Eleazar in the person of Zadok; it then continued in his family till the time of the Maccabees. During the Maccabean period the high priest was also political head of the nation. After this family was overthrown, high priests were inappropriately appointed and deposed at pleasure by Herod and the Romans alike. (See heading "High Priest," pp. 702-3.)

The Maccabean revolt against Alexander's Greek successors took place in 167 B.C. It was about this time that we find a group of people who, desirous of living more fully the law of Moses, departed into the wilderness. A community was founded at Qumran, near the northwestern shore of the Dead Sea; years later, parts of the community moved to Damascus, it is believed because of persecution. This group opposed the government-established priesthood of the Jews and claimed to have within its own organization the rightful holders of the priesthood. Their firm reliance on the Aaronic Priesthood is evidenced in their writings:

Whoever comes before the Council of the Community, let him enter into the Covenant of God in the presence of all the volunteers, and let him promise, by an oath of obligation, to be converted to the Law of Moses, according to that which He has prescribed, with all his heart and with all his soul, according to all which is revealed of it to the sons of Zadok, the priests who keep the covenant. (Manual of Discipline V:7f., in Dupont-Sommer, Les Ecrits Esseniens decouverts pres de la Mer Morte.

Zadok was high priest in the time of King David, and it was he who remained faithful to the Lord's anointed while others were deposed. The sons of Zadok were to attend to the temple ordinances and to teach the people (Ezekiel 40:46; 43:19; 44:15, 23; 48:11), but as we have seen above, for quite a long period of time the position of high priest passed out of this family (beginning with the Maccabean revolt, when it was retained by the Hasmonaeans). Thus it is true that "for a long season Israel hath been without the true God, and without a teaching priest, and without law." (2 Chronicles 15:3.)

The establishment of the Essenes in the desert was considered by them to be highly symbolic and significant. Their writings reveal that they felt that their removal to the desert was in fulfillment of prophecy:

And when these things shall come to pass for the Community (Church) in Israel, in these determined moments, they shall separate themselves from the midst of the habitation of perverse men to go into the desert in order to make straight the way of "Him", as it is written: In the desert make straight the way of "Him"; make straight in the steppe a highway for our God. This (way) is the study of the Law that He has promulgated through the mediation of Moses in order that we act according to all that which is revealed from time to time and according to that which the Prophets have revealed by His Holy Spirit. (Manual of Discipline VIII:12-16, in Dupont-Sommer, op. cit.) [^1]

The Messiah

Only one passage of the Dead Sea Scrolls gives a hint as to the actual origin of the Qumran community:

And at the time of anger, three hundred fourscore and ten years after that He had delivered them into the hand of Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon, He [God] visited them, and He raised from Israel and from Aaron a root of plantation to possess His land and to fatten themselves of the good of His soil. And they understood their iniquity, and they realized that they were guilty men. But they did as the blind and as men who seek the road by groping during twenty years. And God considered their works, for with a perfect heart they had sought Him; and He raised up unto them a teacher of righteousness to conduct them in the way dear to His heart and to make known to the latter generations that which He (would do) at the last generation, to the congregation of traitors. (Damascus A I:5-22.)

This passage places the visit of God and the raising up of a certain teacher of righteousness at 196 and 176 B.C. respectively. Simon II was high priest of Israel, and under him the temple had been ravaged by Ptolemy Euergetes of Egypt. In 195 B.C., Onias III became high priest. He was deposed in 175 B.C. by Antiochus Epiphanes of Syria, who appointed Jason as high priest. In 172 B.C. Jason's brother Menelaus, in another political move, became high priest; in the same year Onias III was murdered. Jason seized the city of Jerusalem in 169 B.C., but he was deposed by Antiochus in that same year, when the latter returned from a campaign to Egypt (which he lost). In anger, Antiochus plundered the temple, forbade sacrifice and the practice of the Jewish faith, and set about to Hellenize the Jews. This led to the revolt of Mattathias the Hasmonaean, father of Judas the Maccabee, who, in 165 B.C., managed to retake Jerusalem for the Jews and to rededicate the temple. It was then that the authority of the high priest passed out of the hands of the firstborn line of Aaron, insofar as the Jewish community was concerned. Meanwhile, at Qumran, it would appear that priests claiming descent from the authorized line of the high priest Zadok took over leadership.

The teacher of righteousness, whom most authorities consider to be the founder of the Qumran community (his name is never given), was apparently greatly persecuted and forced to flee. He settled, it appears, at Damascus, where another community was begun (though that of Qumran continued). Exactly who this teacher or master of righteousness was, we do not know. But the similarity of his title to the Hebrew name Melchizedek ("king of righteousness"), from whom the higher priesthood is named, is interesting. Most experts assume that he was a descendant of David and of Levi, for from his writings it appears that he was a priest (or perhaps high priest) as well as of the royal line of Judah. He uses as a symbol the Star of David, which is often mentioned in his writings. From Hymn B, 2:13-18, we find that he was a prophet, for he received revelation.

The teacher of righteousness seems to be a forerunner or prefigure of the Christ or Messiah. But it is apparent from the texts of Qumran that he was not the Messiah, for this people still awaited the coming of another person of the same title: "And the Rod [the Legislator], the Seeker of the Law ... And the nobles of the people, these are they who come to dig the wells with the help of the precepts promulgated by the Legislator that they may walk therein during all the times of impiety ... until the coming of the Teacher of Righteousness in the end of days." (Damascus A VI: 9-11.)

Some researchers have thought that this refers to the resurrection of the founder of the community, for other scriptures indicate that this teacher had already come: "The explanation of this concerns the Priest, the Teacher of [Righteousness that... God] has established to build for Him the Congregation (of truth, that shall not fall....)" (First Commentary on Psalm 36, Frag. 1, II:15-16.)

But if this first teacher were simply a prefigure of Christ (as David, in the psalms, prefigures the Messiah), one can see why the Dead Sea scriptures continually speak of the coming of the Messiah who is to rule. The Star of David, used by the first teacher, is also used as a symbol for the coming Messiah. Commenting on Numbers 24:17, the Damascus A text (7:20-21) says: "The sceptre is the Prince of the Congregation, and at his coming, he shall cast down all the sons of Seth." (Ibid.)

In another place we read again of the "Prince of the Congregation": "To bless the Prince of the Congregation, who [...] and for whom He (God) will renew the covenant of the community, in order that he restore the kingdom of His people forever." (Blessings V:20-21.)

The latter passage clearly shows that the Messiah is the Prince of the Congregation, for Christ is to renew the covenant and restore the kingdom, which is to be done in this, the last dispensation of the fulness of times.

Much confusion on this subject arose among the Jews, however. They knew not that Christ would come twice—once to give his life and once to rule and reign. This second coming, which we await, will fulfill the as-yet-unfulfilled prophecies of the Bible concerning him. There was another confusion, this time among the Essenes, regarding the number of Messiahs. We read, for example: "... the coming of the Prophet and the messiahs of Aaron and of Israel." (Manual of Discipline IX:11.) Jesus was both the Messiah and the promised Prophet of Deuteronomy 18. Manual 2:11-21 describes the priestly and kingly Messiahs as separate offices. In the Blessings we find blessings given in this order: (1) for ordinary members of the community, (2) for [evidently] the high priest, (3) for the priests, (4) for the "Prince of the Congregation" (Messiah-King). The second title, however, that of "high priest," thought to apply to the Priestly Messiah, is actually missing in the texts. On the other hand, we read in the Damascus Document: "... the Messiah of Aaron and of Israel." (Damascus A XIII:1.)

Several apocryphal scriptures, including the Testaments of the Twelve Patriarchs, indicate that the Messiah should be at the same time of the tribe of Levi and of the tribe of Judah, hence the titles "Messiahs of Aaron and of Israel" and "Messiah of Aaron and Israel." (Jewish tradition sees two Messiahs, one of Joseph and another of Judah.)

It is not our purpose to discuss whether or not Christ was of the tribe of Levi as well as of Judah, though there are some hints of it in the scriptures. [^2] It is, however, interesting to note that this idea is peculiar to the Testament of the Twelve Patriarchs (of which copies were found in the library at Qumran) and to the Dead Sea Scrolls.

John the Baptist

During the time of the Roman occupation of Palestine, the Jews, hard-pressed by their occidental masters, were particularly expectant in regard to the coming of the promised liberator-Messiah. Any new preacher was regarded as a possible in the search for the Messiah. Thus it was with John the Baptist. John was considered by many to be the Messiah, and he seems to fit the description given in the Dead Sea Scrolls, at least as Messiah of Aaron. Many modern researchers connect John with the Qumran community, thinking that this is the desert in which he lived (and near the Jordan River where he baptized). Just who was this John, whom Jesus considered the greatest of the prophets (Matthew 11:9-11)? According to Luke 1:5-64, he was the son of a "certain priest named Zacharias, of the course of Abia" (vs. 5). His mother, though said to be of the line of Aaron, was a cousin to Jesus' mother Mary, who was of the tribe of Judah.

John himself was ordained to his calling by an angel of God (D&C 84:27-28) while he was yet a small child, being baptized later at the age of accountability. As a descendant of Aaron (though which Abia is uncertain, for there were several Old Testament priests of this name), he was authorized to hold the Aaronic Priesthood; and, from what we learn of his role in restoring the keys of this priesthood to Joseph Smith on May 15, 1829, we find that he was president of the Aaronic Priesthood.

Luke informs us that the archangel Gabriel, identified by Joseph Smith as the prophet Noah (HC 3:386), visited Zachariah to announce the birth of John. The Doctrine and Covenants says it was Elias: "And also with Elias, to whom I have committed the keys of bringing to pass the restoration of all things spoken by the mouth of all the holy prophets since the world began, concerning the last days; And also John the son of Zacharias, which Zacharias he (Elias) visited and gave promise that he should have a son, and his name should be John, and he should be filled with the spirit of Elias." (D&C 27:6-7.)

Whether or not it was Gabriel (alias Elias or Noah) who ordained John is not known for sure. But we can be sure that this particular heavenly messenger would have had such special authority, for he lived in the days when the earth itself was baptized (1 Peter 3:20-21), baptism being the most important ordinance performed by the Aaronic Priesthood. President Brigham Young spoke of the earth's baptism: "This earth, in its present condition and situation, is not a fit habitation for the sanctified; but it abides the law of its creation, has been baptized with water, will be baptized by fire and the Holy Ghost, and by-and-by will be prepared for the faithful to dwell upon." (JD 8:83.)

On wonders if it was Noah of whom John spoke while bearing testimony of Jesus:

Behold the Lamb of God, which taketh away the sin of the world. This is he of whom I said, After me cometh a man which is preferred before me: for he was before me. And I knew him not: but that he should be made manifest to Israel, therefore am I come baptizing with water. And John bare record, saying, I saw the Spirit descending from heaven like a dove, and it abode upon him. And I knew him not: but he that sent me to baptize with water, the same said unto me, Upon whom thou shalt see the Spirit descending, and remaining on him, the same is he which baptizeth with the Holy Ghost. [^3] And I saw, and bare record that this is the Son of God. (John 1:29-34.)

Many modern researchers believe that John is here referring to members (or a member) of the Essene community of Qumran who had sent him to baptize. This is entirely possible, considering the evidence. Following the life of John, we find that he lived "in the deserts" until the time that he started his ministry. (Luke 1:80; Matthew 3:1.) The deserts of Judea are in part Situated on the west coast of the Dead Sea, where the Essenes had established their Qumran settlement, not far from the Jordan River where John baptized.

Jesus himself, after his baptism by John, went into the desert, where he fasted and was tempted. (Matthew 4.) After John was cast into prison, two of his (John's) disciples approached Jesus to ask if he were the Messiah who John had said would follow after him. (Matthew 11:2-11.) Jesus told them that his works spoke for him. After the decapitation of John, Jesus again went into the desert to mourn, followed by a large group of people. (Matthew 14:9-16.) This time, however, it was in the northern part of the country, not far from the Sea of Galilee. The death of John had been stalled by Herod Antipas because the Jews considered John to be a prophet (Matthew 14:5), and Herod feared the people because of his own wrongdoings. John apparently had a rather large following, and yet "the Pharisees had heard that Jesus made and baptized more disciples than John." (John 4:1-2.)

Many of John's disciples were jealous of Jesus, whom John himself had baptized. (John 3:23-31.) It is even possible that some of John's followers considered the Baptist to be the promised Messiah (at least of Aaron). John, indeed, seems to fit the qualifications for the Messiah, as outlined in the Dead Sea Scrolls. He was born of a father of the tribe of Levi and a mother who probably had ties to the tribe of Judah and Levi both. (Luke 1:67-69.) John's testimony of himself, stating that he was neither the Messiah, Elias, nor the prophet to come, was possibly rejected by some. John wished to show that he was only the forerunner and that Jesus was the true Messiah. (John 1:19-28.) He said, "He that cometh after me is preferred before me: for he was before me." (John 1:15.) So strong was his testimony in the presence of two of his disciples (one of them being Andrew, Simon Peter's brother) that they immediately left and followed Jesus. (John 1:36-40.)

Let us assume that John was a member of the Essene or Dead Sea Community of Qumran. We can then understand why it is that Josephus speaks of the Essenes as being apart from the Christians. For it is probable that not all of John's disciples—who may have been Essenes—accepted his testimony that Jesus was the Messiah. We find evidence of this in the Acts of Apostles.

Paul, while sojourning at Ephesus, met certain disciples who said that they had been baptized "unto John's baptism" and they knew not that there was a Holy Ghost. (Acts 19:1-6.) The same is true of Apollos, who had received "only the baptism of John" and was not aware of the fact that Jesus was the Messiah. (Acts 18:24-28.) And yet this was at least three years after the death of Jesus, and probably more! (Paul, after his vision of the risen Christ, spent three years in Arabia before beginning his missionary labors. See Galatians 1:16-18.)

After Christ's death and resurrection, many people among the Jews were converted to the gospel, including about three thousand on the day of Pentecost. (Acts 2:41.) We read also that "the word of God increased; and the number of the disciples multiplied in Jerusalem greatly; and a great company of the priests were obedient to the faith." (Acts 6:7.) Were these perhaps the "sons of Zadok, the priests who keep the Covenant"? It is very possible, and borders on the realm of probability. Let us examine other New Testament scriptural evidence.

Epistle to the Hebrews

It appears that many of the apostles wrote to certain unfaithful members who were in a group. John apparently wrote his Gospel to those who considered John the Baptist to be superior to Jesus, for he begins his work by showing that Jesus, having existed before the creation with God, is superior to John. (John 1:1-14.) He then cites John's testimony of the divinity of Jesus (John 1:29-36) and stresses the fact that John had said, "He that cometh after me is preferred before me: for he was before me" (John 1:15).

This seems to be the case also with the Epistle to the Hebrews. Some scholars have assumed that these "Hebrews" were the Essenes, who joined the Church of Jesus Christ en masse and then slowly drifted back to some of their false ideas after the crucifixion of Christ (perhaps expecting the Messiah to begin his reign immediately). The Epistle to the Hebrews, then, would have been written to show them that Jesus was truly the Messiah. There is evidence to indicate that such is the case.

The epistle begins: "God, who at sundry times and in diverse manners spake in time past unto the fathers by the prophets, Hath in these last days spoken unto us by his Son, whom he hath appointed heir of all things, by whom also he made the worlds." (Hebrews 1:1-2.) The very beginning establishes Jesus' supremacy over the prophets, whose writings were highly esteemed at Qumran. Jesus, as the Son, created the worlds and was thus superior to all the prophets.

The Qumran community also placed great stress on the authority of the angels, and so the second goal of the writer of the epistle is to show that Jesus is also superior to all the heavenly host: "Being made so much better than the angels, as he hath by inheritance obtained a more excellent name than they. For unto which of the angels said he at any time, Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee? And again, I will be to him a Father, and he shall be to me a Son?" (Hebrews 1:4-5.) Further on (vss. 7-8), he writes that the Son is not just a minister of God, but that he is also a king, whereas the angels are ministers to the heirs of salvation. The same subject continues into chapter 2.

The first verse of chapter 3 shows us that these "Hebrews" to whom Paul is writing are actually baptized members of the Church: "Wherefore, holy brethren, partakers of the heavenly calling, consider the Apostle and High Priest of our profession, Christ Jesus." And then, showing that Moses was faithful in the house (Church), he says that it was Christ who built the house, and who should therefore have the greater honor. (Vss. 2-6.) After this, the author points out that Jesus did not bring something new, for the gospel had been preached anciently unto the children of Israel. (4:1-2.) Then, near the end of the chapter, he begins to speak of the High Priesthood of Jesus.

We know that the Essenes placed great stress upon the authority of the Aaronic Priesthood and that they expected the Messiah to be a priest (more likely, originally a high priest); therefore, they assumed that he would be a descendant of Aaron. But, as Paul points out, Jesus was of the tribe of Judah, to whom was committed the right of kingship, but not of the Aaronic Priesthood. Therefore, as Paul shows, Jesus held the Melchizedek Priesthood. (Hebrews 5.) He cites Psalm 110:4 Hebrews5:6) to show that the Messiah was to be a priest after the order of Melchizedek and not of Aaron. Returning to the same subject in chapter 7, he points out the superiority of the Melchizedek Priesthood over the Aaronic, illustrated by the fact that Abraham, father of the Israelites (and hence of Levi and Aaron), paid tithes to Melchizedek, king of Salem, who was a high priest. ( Hebrews 7:1-2, 4-10.) He further shows that the Melchizedek Priesthood (and not Melchizedek himself, as some have misunderstood) is "without father, without mother," etc., that is, that it is not conferred according to descent, as was the Aaronic Priestood. Rather, the higher priesthood is "without descent, having neither beginning of days, nor end of life." (Hebrews 7:3.) It has, therefore, the power of endless life through its spiritual ordinances and its authority thereby surpasses that of the Aaronic Priesthood, which administers temporal blessings and ordinances. (See also vs. 16.)

We must not understand, however, from verses 11-12, which declare the Levitical priesthood imperfect or incomplete, that it need not exist in the Church. Indeed, we find that the Aaronic Priesthood is an "everlasting priesthood." (Exodus 40:15; Numbers 25:13.)

For Jews such as the Essenes to have rejected Jesus means that they would have rejected also his sacrifice and would have returned to offering their animal sacrifices. It is evident from the entire Epistle to the Hebrews that these people were falling away from the truth, and they apparently continued their sacrifices, for chapter 9 explains to them that Jesus was the true and eternal sacrifice and that all others were only symbolic of his sacrifice and thus unnecessary after the great sacrifice had been offered. Paul appeals to the term "new testament" or "new covenant" (Hebrews 9:15) often used in the Dead Sea Scrolls to designate the covenant that the Messiah would establish. Chapter 10 continues the subject of sacrifice.

Chapter 11 enters into the most important subject of faith, which these people apparently lacked. Among those listed as having faith anciently are others who were greatly persecuted, who "wandered about in sheepskins and goatskins" (like John the Baptist), "of whom the world was not worthy." "They wandered in deserts, and in mountains, and in dens and caves of the earth." (Vss. 36-39.) What a perfect description of the Dead Sea Covenantors! Paul appeals to them by speaking of their ancestors.

An interesting statement is contained in Hebrews 13:11-13: "For the bodies of those beasts, whose blood is brought into the sanctuary by the high priest for sin, are burned without the camp. Wherefore Jesus also, that he might sanctify the people with his own blood, suffered without the gate. Let us go forth unto him without the camp, bearing his reproach."

This is indeed a fitting statement to write to those of the Qumran community, were they members of the Church. Whereas Jesus was crucified by those outside the Church (the term "camp" is frequently used in the Dead Sea Scrolls), the Jews at Jerusalem (whose authority was not recognized by those at Qumran), Paul exhorts these "Hebrews" to also leave the camp (Qumran?), perhaps to preach the gospel, rather than staying in seclusion as in the past.

Further Evidence

It is entirely possible then that the Essenes once were part of the Church of Jesus Christ; if so, it is clear that they left the community, for Josephus, writing about A.D. 100, lists them as one of the three major divisions of Judaism and mentions the Christians apart. Even though they were separated, there were striking similarities between the two groups.

The similarities between the early Christians and the Essenes have been a cause of much concern to Christian scholars. No longer can they consider Jesus as an innovator, one who initiated a totally new religion. While this may be disconcerting to others, to the Latter-day Saints the Dead Sea Scrolls have proved a blessing. They confirm the LDS doctrine of the eternity of the gospel and of its period restoration from heaven in the form of "dispensations." Indeed, we may be able to learn much about early Christianity by reading the Dead Sea Scrolls.

One of the essential practices of the Essenes was communal living. It was a sign of acceptance into the community to be asked to mingle one's goods with those of other members of the community: "Then, at the close of the second year, he (the proselyte) shall be examined, according to the decision of the Numerous and if it be that the lot pronounce that he approach the Community [Church], he shall be regularly inscribed in his place amongst his brethren in what concerns the Law and the right and the purification and the mixing of his goods...." (Manual of Discipline VI:16-23, in Dupont-Sommer, op. cit.)

The Christians of the early centuries practiced a sort of communal living (Acts 4:34-37; 5:1-11), as did also the Latter-day Saints under the United Order or law of consecration and stewardship. Actually, though the systems have similarities, they are not identical.

The existence of two types of Jews in the early church (the faithful and the backsliders) reminds us of the difference between the Church at Jerusalem and that of the Qumran community. We read of the Grecians (Hellenes), Jews who lived in the Greek-influenced society (whose influence reached even to Jerusalem), and the "Hebrews," who could be the same people referred to in the epistle by that name. (See Acts 6:1.)

The title "sons of light," which is applied to the Christians and is also used in the Dead Sea Scrolls, helps us to understand why John wrote his Gospel as he did. He begins by saying that Jesus (the Word) was the "light of men." (John 1:4-5.) He speaks of John, "The same came for a witness to bear witness of the Light, that all men through him might believe. He was not that Light, but was sent to bear witness of that Light. That was the true Light, which lighteth every man that cometh into the world. He was in the world, and the world was made by him, and the world knew him not. He came unto his own, and his own received him not." (John 1:6-11.)

Who were "his own" who "received him not"? Were they the Jews in general? Or were they the Qumran community? Jesus fulfilled all of the prophecies that were to be fulfilled by the Messiah except those which would be accomplished at his second coming. It is clear, however, that a great number of people rejected him for not having immediately fulfilled the others also. The main stumbling block to the Essenes would have been their unique reliance on the Aaronic Priesthood, knowing not that the keys of the Melchizedek Priesthood would be restored through the Messiah. And yet, as we have already seen, in the ancient times, especially under kings David and Solomon and the prophet Moses before them, the Melchizedek Priesthood did exist upon the earth and governed the affairs of the Church. The Essenes would have had a tendency to forget that the Aaronic Priesthood is only a division or an incomplete part of the Holy Priesthood after the Order of the Son of God. Had they understood the full meaning of the scriptures, they would have seen how in ancient days the holders of the two types of priesthood worked hand-in-hand. One possible example of this is in 2 Chronicles 17:7-9:

Also in the third year of (Jehoshaphat's) reign he sent his princes, even to Ben-hail, and to Obadiah, and to Zechariah, and to Nethaneel, and to Michaiah, to teach in the cities of Judah. And with them he sent Levites, even Shemaiah, and Nethaniah, and Zebadiah, and Asahel, and Shemiramoth, and Jehonathan, and Adonijah, and Tobijah, and Tobadonijah, Levites; and with them Elishama and Jehoram, priests. And they taught in Judah, and had the book of the law of the Lord with them, and went about throughout all the cities of Judah, and taught the people. [^4]

Organization

Christ did not establish a new church. He merely reestablished the ancient organization. Each time that the Church has been placed upon the earth by the intervention of heavenly messengers, we have received a new dispensation of the same gospel. Previous dispensations have been revealed to Adam, Enoch, Noah, Abraham, and Moses, and at the time of Christ.

The Church today has the same organization that it had in the days when the Savior lived upon the earth. That is, there are apostles, prophets (Acts 13:1-3; 15:22); evangelists or patriarchs, pastors, teachers (Ephesians 4:11-13); bishops (1 Timothy 3:1-7; Titus 1:1-9; Philemon 1:1); high priests (Hebrews 3:1; 5:1-10; 7:1-4, 11-28); seventies (Luke 10:1, 17); elders (Acts 14:23; 20:17-18, 28); and deacons (1 Timothy 3:8-13).

In addition, three of Jesus' early apostles—Peter, James, and John, who restored the Melchizedek Priesthood to Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery in 1829—constituted the First Presidency of the Church upon the death and resurrection of the Savior. It is possible, however, that they retained their positions in the Council of the Twelve, though this need not necessarily be the case, for many more than twelve apostles are named in the New Testament. (See Matthew 17:1-8; 26:36-37; Mark 5:37; Galatians 2:9.)

If the Qumran community were organized in the same manner as the Church of Jesus Christ, or even if it believed, through its scriptures, that such an organization should exist, this fact would greatly assist us in establishing the importance of always having the same basic organization—God's divine organization—in all periods of time. Such is indeed the case. The ecclesiastical organization of the Qumran community is surprisingly Christian.

The importance of priests and Levites (especially of the former) is highly stressed in the Qumran records:

And the sons of Levi shall stand each in his post under the orders of the sons of Aaron, to cause to enter and to leave (the congregation), each according to his order, under the conduct of the heads of the families of the congregation, of the heads and of the judges and of the attendants (counselors?), according to the number of all their hosts,—under the orders of the sons of Zadok the Priests (and all the H)eads of the families of the Congregation. (Manual Annex I:22-25, in Dupont-Sommer, op. cit.)

Such ushering functions were performed by the Levites in the temple at Jerusalem and are today generally performed by teachers, sometimes by deacons.

At that time shall the members of the Community be separated: the house of holiness for Aaron, in order that the highest holiness return, and the House of the Community for Israel, for those who go into perfection. Only the sons of Aaron shall command in matters of right and of goods; and it is under their authority that the lot shall be cast for all decisions concerning the members of the Community. (Manual of Discipline IX:1-5.)

This power to distribute material goods and to judge in Israel was in force in Old Testament times and perhaps also at Qumran, as here indicated. It still exists in the modern church, wherein bishops, under the law of consecration and stewardship and the law of tithing, have authority over the distribution of material goods and also of judging.

Concerning the high priest, Theodor H. Gaster, translator of the Dead Sea Scrolls, has written: "It is noteworthy that the high priest is mentioned only in texts concerned with the eventual state of the Restored Community, e.g. in the War of the Sons of Light and the Sons of Darkness and in The Manual of Discipline for the Future Congregation." (The Dead Sea Scriptures, 3rd ed., p. 554.) [^5]

Whether or not the Essenes actually had bearers of the Melchizedek Priesthood, along with the various offices thereof, is not really known. Their records, as we shall see, speak of these offices, but it is not certain whether they are referring to their own organization or to the idealized future organization that Christ subsequently brought. It is quite clear, however, that they had priests claiming descent from Aaron.

All the priesthood bearers of the Qumran community constituted what is called the Council of the Community, of which we read:

Here [are] the persons convoked for the Council of the Community....all the w[ise] of the congregation and the intelligent and knowing, perfect of conduct and valid men, as well as [the heads of the tri]bes and all their judges and their attendants (counselors?) and the heads of thousands and the head[s of hundreds] and of fifties and of tens, and the Levites, [each one] in the mid[dle of] his [divi]sion of service. [^6] These are the men of fame, convoked to the meeting, united for the Council of the Community of Israel, in the presence of the sons of Zadok the Priests. (Manual Annex I:27-II:3, in Dupont-Sommer, op. cit.)

We are again left to wonder whether the "judges" are high councilors, bishops or another office. A scripture similar to the preceding is found in the Bible:

Take you wise men, and understanding, and known among your tribes, and I will make them rulers over you. And ye answered me, and said, The thing which thou hast spoken is good for us to do. So I took the chief of your tribes, wise men, and known, and made them heads over you, captains over thousands, and captains over hundreds, and captains over fifties, and captains over tens, and officers among your tribes. And I charged your judges at that time, saying, Hear the causes between your brethren, and judge righteously between every man and his brother, and the stranger that is with him. (Deuteronomy 1:13-16.)

The Dead Sea Scrolls give us a few details on certain of these judges:

And here is the rule relative to the Judges of the Congregation. [Let them be] in number ten men, chosen by the congregation periodically: four for the tribe of Levi and Aaron, and of Israel six; they must be learned in the Book of Meditation and in the constitutions of the Covenant, and in age from twenty-five to sixty years. (Damascus A X:4-7. Dupont-Sommer, op. cit.) [^7]

Our modern high councils comprise twelve—and not ten—high priests. In Judaism, the number ten represents the minimum number of adult males required to form a prayer circle or to organize a congregation.

The Sacrament

One of the principal duties of the priests (who appear to be rather numerous) among the Essenes was the blessing of the bread and wine at certain regular community meals, similar to the Lord's last supper and the "love-feasts" of the early Christians:

And in all places where there shall be ten persons of the council of the community, there shall not lack amongst them a man to be priest... When they shall dispose the table to eat or (shall prepare) the wine to drink, the priest shall put forth first his hand to pronounce the blessing on the first part of the bread and of the wine. (Manual of Discipline VI:3-5, in Dupont-Sommer, op. cit.)

The Qumran covenantors also observed a fast day: "... to observe the day of sabbath according to its exact tenure and the feast of the day of fasting according to the [commandments] of those who have entered into the [New Covenant] in the land of Damascus." (Damascus A VI:18-19, in Dupont-Sommer, op. cit.)

Partaking of bread and wine was to be a part of the solemn assembly of the Messianic age: [^8]

[Of the me]eting of the men of fame convoked to the meeting for the Council of the Community, when [Adonai] will have begotten the Messiah amongst them. [The priest] shall enter [at] the head of all the Congregation of Israel, then all [the heads of the sons] of Aaron the priests, convoked to the meeting, men of fame; and they shall sit down be[fore him], each one according to his rank. And then [shall enter the Mess]iah of Israel; and there shall sit before him the Heads of the [tribes of Israel, each] one according to his rank, according to their [position] in their camps and during their marches; all the heads of the fa[milies of the congre]gation as well as the wise [of the holy congregation], shall sit before them, each one according to his rank. And [when] they [shall] meet for the tab[le] of the Community [or to drink the w]ine, and they shall dispose the table of the Community [and shall mix the] wine to drink, that no one [reach forth] his hand upon the first part of the bread and [of the wine] before the Priest; for [it is he who] shall bless the first of the bread and of the w[ine and shall reach forth] his hand upon the bread the first. Then shall the Messiah of Israel reach [forth] his hands upon the bread. [And then] all the Congregation of the Community shall [bless], each [one according to] his rank. And it is according to this rite that they [shall] proceed in all m[eals when they shall be un]ited at least ten persons. (Manual Annex II:11-22.)

This vision of the future is rather interesting, particularly when one considers the order in which the participants must enter: first, the Aaronic Priesthood leaders, followed by the leaders of the Melchizedek Priesthood (in this case, the Messiah himself, followed by the heads of the tribes, who correspond to the Council of the Twelve). This scene is similar to the marriage supper of the Lamb which is to take place when Christ returns. (Revelation 19:9; Luke 14:15.) There is, however, at least one major element missing in the description from the Dead Sea Scrolls—the ordinance of the washing of feet.

Officers of the Community

Let us now examine more in detail the organization described in the Dead Sea Scrolls, in order that we may compare it with the organization which existed with Moses, with Jesus, and with Joseph Smith:

In the Council of the Community, [there shall be] twelve men and three kohens [high priests], perfect in all that is revealed of the Law, to practice truth and righteousness and right and loving charity and modest conduct towards each other, to keep faith on the earth with a firm grip and a contrite spirit, and to atone for iniquity amongst those who practice right and suffer distress of trial and to conduct themselves with all in the measure of the truth and the norm of the time. (Manual of Discipline VIII:1-4, in Dupont-Sommer, op. cit.)

These three high priests would correspond to the First Presidency, while the twelve men, elsewhere called the Twelve Perfect Presbyters (elders), would be apostles. (Ibid., 7:20; 9:8.) In another scripture, these twelve are called "major (or high) priests": "After the high priest and his deputy they shall appoint an order of major priests, twelve in number, to serve constantly before God." (War II: 2, in Gaster, Dead Sea Scriptures, p. 401.)

Another office is that of inspector, which belongs to a priest (or high priest):

And the Priest who shall inspect the Numerous shall be thirty to sixty years of age, learned in the Book [of Meditation] and in the ordinances of the law, to conduct them according to the right which is theirs. And the inspector who is disposed for all the camps shall be from thirty to fifty years of age.... (Damascus XIV:6-8, in Dupont-Sommer, op. cit.)

The inspector seems to fit the description of a bishop, and therefore the inspector for "all the camps" is probably equivalent to the Presiding Bishop. The Hebrew word paqid, which we have already seen translated as "bishop" by Clement, is translated respectively "governor" and "officer" in Jeremiah 20:1 and 29:25-26 in the English; but it is rendered "inspector" in the French Louis Segond version. It therefore apparently applies to the High Priest of Israel, the Presiding Bishop. The title "inspector" was also used by the early Christians:

The form of ecclesiastical government, whose commencement we have seen in the last century, was brought in this to a greater degree of stability and consistence. One inspector, or bishop, presided over each Christian assembly, to which office he was elected by the voices of the whole people. In this post he was to be watchful and provident, attentive to the wants of the church, and careful to supply them. To assist him in this laborious province, he formed a council of presbyters, which was not confined to any fixed number, and to each of those he distributed his task, and appointed a station, in which he was to promote the interests of the church. To the bishops and presbyters the ministers or deacons were subject; and the latter were divided into a variety of classes, as the different exigencies of the church required. (Mosheim, Ecclesiastical History, vol. 1, Cent. II, p. 130.)

The inspector of all the camps, mentioned in the Dead Sea Scrolls, is also called the overseer (bishop) of all the camps or of the general membership. (Gaster, Dead Sea Scriptures, pp. 50, 83.) There are other bishops or overseers mentioned also, such as the overseer of the camp: "This is the rule for the overseer of the camp. It is his duty to enlighten the masses about the works of God,... to bring back all of them that stray, as does a shepherd his flock." (Zadok XIII: 7, 11.)

The camp mentioned here may correspond to a stake, and the bishop or overseer (pastor) of the camp to the stake president. But there are still other bishops or overseers, apparently for local units (wards). (Zadok IX:18, 22; XV:14.)

In the Aaronic Priesthood of the Qumran community, we find the priests and the Levites. (Manual of Discipline I:19, 22; II:4, 11; Zadok III:21; IV:3; XIII.) There is also the office of interpreter or expositor (Ibid., pp. 70, 81), probably like our teachers. It is extremely difficult in the Dead Sea Scrolls and in the Old Testament to distinguish the two grades of Levites (teachers and deacons) because of the fact that their duties are essentially the same. (D&C 20:53-59.) We find, however, a slight indication of two separate offices in Wars 2:2-3: "Furthermore, twenty-six major officials duly assigned to service shall serve in their appointed offices; and after them there shall be twelve major levites, one for each tribe, to serve constantly." (Ibid., p. 283.)

In his notes on this passage, translator Theodor H. Gaster writes: "This diverges from normal Jewish usage, which recognized only 24 courses." (Ibid., p. 315.) He is referring to the twenty-four groups that were appointed service in the temple in Jerusalem. But the occurrence of the numbers twelve and twenty-four here and elsewhere in reference to Levites reminds us that modern deacons quorums comprise twelve members, while teachers quorums comprise twenty-four members. (D&C 107:85-86.)

Conclusion

The various parts of the Appendixes that follow will help to sum up many of the things we have learned in our study of the Church of the Old Testament. Particularly helpful are the charts showing the organization of the Church in various ages.

Our study, however, is far from complete, and we must be prepared to assimilate new textual and archaeological material as it is discovered. It is hoped that this brief study will help all who will read the Old Testament to understand more fully its importance in the scheme of the eternal gospel and Church. It is through that Church and its scriptural and revelatory messages that salvation can be obtained. "If men would acquire salvation, they have got to be subject, before they leave this world, to certain rules and principles, which were fixed by an unalterable decree before the world was." (Joseph Smith, History of the Church 6:50-51.) "(The) ordinances instituted in the heavens before the foundation of the world, in the priesthood, for the salvation of men, are not to be altered or changed. All must be saved on the same principles." (Ibid., 5:423.)

NOTES

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] The biblical passage cited here is Isaiah 40:3; it is best known, however, from its use by John the Baptist, in reference to his own mission (e.g., Matthew 3:3).
[^2] Mary, the mother of Jesus, was cousin of Elizabeth (Luke 1:36), who was a descendant of Aaron (Luke 1:5). While we know that Mary was of the tribe of Judah, it is also possible that she had Levite ancestry.
[^3] It would be most fitting indeed if it were Noah (Gabriel, Elias) who instructed John to look for the sign of the dove, for the dove played a significant role in the history of the flood.
[^4] Zechariah and Michaiah, listed here, were prophets. (See 2 Chronicles 18:5-24.) This account is from the time of the prophet Elijah of the northern kingdom. It is not clear whether the prince Obadiah, listed here, is the same as the prophet who wrote the book of that name or if either of these is the Obadiah who, during the persecution led by Ahab and his wife Jezebel, hid one hundred of the prophets in caves. (1 Kings 18:1-16.)
[^5] For more on the priests, see Manual of Discipline 1:18, 21; 2:1, 4, 19; 5:2; 6:3-5, 8, 19; 7:2; 9:1; Zadokite Document 3:21; 4:1-2; 7:1; 9:13, 15; 13:2, 5, 7, etc.
[^6] Same as a "ward."
[^7] 7. See also Zadok X:1, 4; XIV:13; XV:4, 16; XVI:19 in Dupont-Sommer.
[^8] 8. This topic (the Marriage Supper of the Lamb) and related matters will be presented in my forthcoming work on scriptural symbolism.
