John A. Tvedtnes, Church of the Old Testament ( 1980)

APPENDIX 4

ETERNITY OF THE PRIESTHOOD

The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints has often been criticized on the subject of the priesthood, because of certain misunderstood statements of the apostle Paul in his epistle to the Hebrews. According to popular interpretation, Paul proves that there is no longer need for the Aaronic Priesthood, and that since Christ (according to this interpretation) was to be the last High Priest of the Melchizedek Order, this priesthood can no longer exist among men. We shall examine these claims in Appendix 4. First, let's consider the Aaronic Priesthood.

Paul says: "If therefore perfection were by the Levitical priesthood, (for under it the people received the law,) what further need was there that another priest should rise after the order of Melchisedec, and not be called after the order of Aaron? For the priesthood being changed, there is made of necessity a change also of the law." (Hebrews 7:11-12.)

This scripture actually could well be used to prove that the Melchizedek Priesthood is necessary, since perfection can come only through it. This is evident, for the Aaronic or Levitical Priesthood was but a division or a portion of the Melchizedek Priesthood. Being incomplete, therefore, it certainly could not bring perfection. But does this mean that it is no longer necessary? Of course not. It performs the temporal ordinances of the Holy Priesthood, whereas the Melchizedek Priesthood performs the spiritual ordinances. The Aaronic Priesthood, according to Moses, is an eternal priesthood: "And he shall have it, and his seed after him, even the covenant of an everlasting priesthood." (Numbers 25:13.) "And thou shalt anoint them, as thou didst anoint their father, that they may minister unto me in the priest's office: for their anointing shall surely be an everlasting priesthood throughout their generations." (Exodus 40:15.)

The Lord promised that in the last days he would again give the Aaronic Priesthood: "And I will set a sign among them, and I will send those that escape of them unto the nations, to Tarshish, Pul, and Lud, that draw the bow, to Tubal, and Javan, to the isles afar off, that have not heard my fame, neither have seen my glory; and they shall declare my glory among the Gentiles. And they shall bring all your brethren for an offering unto the Lord out of all nations upon horses, and in chariots, and in litters, and upon mules, and upon swift beasts, to my holy mountain Jerusalem, saith the Lord, as the children of Israel bring an offering in a clean vessel into the house of the Lord. And I will also take of them for priests and for Levites, saith the Lord." (Isaiah 66:19-21.)

Paul speaks of Jesus as having held the Melchizedek Priesthood: "And inasmuch as not without an oath he was made priest: (For those priests were made without an oath; but this with an oath by him that said unto him, The Lord sware and will not repent, Thou art a priest for ever after the order of Melchisedec:) By so much was Jesus made a surety of a better testament. And they truly were many priests, because they were not suffered to continue by reason of death: But this man, because he continueth ever, hath an unchangeable priesthood." (Hebrews 7:20-24.)

The "many priests" spoken of there are the presiding bishops, who, because of death, had to be replaced. But because Jesus is alive, having been resurrected, he need not be replaced. The last verse, in other versions, is often translated "hath a priesthood which passeth not from one to another," or "hath an untransferrable priesthood." There are those who use this scripture to prove that the Melchizedek Priesthood, which Jesus held, could not be given to others after Christ's coming. But let's consider the idea that Paul was not referring to the priesthood itself, but rather to the position that Jesus held—that of Messiah. For, indeed, this is a high and holy office that Jesus alone possesses, and which can be transferred to no one. There are, on the other hand, many scriptures showing that Jesus could and did transfer the Melchizedek Priesthood to others.

Paul spoke of Jesus' priesthood and governing position thus: "Wherefore, holy brethren, partakers of the heavenly calling, consider the Apostle and High Priest of our profession, Christ Jesus." (Hebrews 3:1.)

Apostle means "one sent," and Jesus, after giving the priesthood to his apostles, as his Father had given it to him, said: "As my Father hath sent me, even so send I you." (John 20:21; 17:18.) Praying to his Father, he said: "And the glory [which is the Priesthood] which thou gavest me I have given them; that they may be one, even as we are one." (John 17:22.)

That the apostles had the priesthood, the authority or power to act in God's name, is evident from the fact that they gave the gift of the Holy Ghost: "Then laid they their hands on them, and they received the Holy Ghost. And when Simon saw that through laying on of the apostles' hands the Holy Ghost was given, he offered them money, Saying, Give me also this power, that on whomsoever I lay hands, he may receive the Holy Ghost. But Peter said unto him, Thy money perish with thee, because thou hast thought that the gift of God may be purchased with money." (Acts 8:17-20. Note that Simon was not asking, as is commonly supposed, for the Holy Ghost; he wanted the power to give the Holy Ghost, which power is the priesthood.)

There are other scriptures showing that Jesus gave this power to his apostles, such as this one: "And when he had called unto him his twelve disciples, he gave them power against unclean spirits, to cast them out, and to heal all manner of sickness and all manner of disease." (Matthew 10:1.)

That the priesthood and its powers are to rest always with the true church is evidenced by this promise made by Jesus: "And these signs shall follow them that believe; In my name shall they cast out devils; they shall speak with new tongues; They shall take up serpents; and if they drink any deadly thing, it shall not hurt them: they shall lay hands on the sick, and they shall recover." (Mark 16:17-18.)

Jesus said: "All power is given unto me in heaven and in earth." (Matthew 28:18.) And he gave this power to his apostles, saying that "whatsoever ye shall bind on earth shall be bound in heaven: and whatsoever ye shall loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven." (Matthew 18:18; 16:19.)

Jesus, like the high priests of ancient Israel, had the right to forgive sins. (Matthew 9:6.) And he gave this same power to his apostles, showing that they were high priests. (John 20:23.)

Not only the apostles held the priesthood. Many others had this holy authority also. This was so the Church could truly be a "kingdom of priests." (1 Peter 2:5, 9; Revelation 1:6; 5:10; 20:6.)

There is one other item we must consider, in the epistle to the Hebrews: "Which hope we have as an anchor of the soul, both sure and stedfast, and which entereth into that within the veil; Whither the forerunner is for us entered, even Jesus, made an high priest for ever after the order of Melchisedec." (Hebrews 6:19-20.)

The veil of which Paul speaks is the one that separated the Holy Place from the Holy of Holies in the tabernacle and in the temple. Only bearers of the higher, or Melchizedek, priesthood were allowed to pass beyond this veil into the Holy of Holies. This is why only the high priest went there, for he held this priesthood. (Hebrews 9:2-3, 7.) The Holy of Holies represented the celestial kingdom, and since Christ had ascended to heaven as the High Priest and Mediator of his people, it was said that he passed beyond the veil. (See Hebrews 4:14.)

If we consider that Jesus was the forerunner, then we must admit that after his entry into the holiest of all, the way must now be clear for us to hold the high priesthood and to enter in behind him. This is the case, as Paul explains: "Having therefore, brethren, boldness to enter into the holiest by the blood of Jesus, By a new and living way, which he hath consecrated for us, through the veil, that is to say, his flesh; And having an high priest over the house of God; Let us draw near with a true heart in full assurance of faith, having our hearts sprinkled from an evil conscience, and our bodies washed with pure water." (Hebrews 10:19-22. Paul is not referring here to baptism, but rather to the washing ceremony of the temple.)

Tribe Numbers Numbers Numbers

1:4-16, 44; 13:1-16 34:18-29

2:2-29; 7:12-78

Reuben Elizur ben Shedeur Shammua ben ZACCUR [^1]

Simeon Shelumiel ben Shephat ben Hori Shemuel ben Ammihud

Zurishaddai

Judah NAHSHON ben Caleb ben Jephunneh Caleb ben Jephunneh

Amminadab

Issachar Nethaneel ben ZUAR IGAL ben Joseph Paltiel ben Azzan

(PALTI)

Zebulun Eliab ben HELON Gaddiel ben SODI Elizaphan ben Parnach

Ephraim Elishama ben Oshea ben Nun Kemuel ben Shiphtan

Ammihud (Joshua)

Manasseh Gamaliel ben Gaddi ben Susi Hanniel ben Ephod

Pedahzur

Benjamin Abidan ben Gideoni Palti ben Raphu ELIDAD ben CHISLON

Dan AHIEZER ben Ammiel ben Gemalli Bukki ben JOGLI

Ammishaddai

Asher Pagiel ben Ocran Sethur ben Michael Ahihud ben SHELOMI

Gad Eliasaph ben Deuel Geuel ben Machi [^2]

Naphtali Ahira ben Enan Nahbi ben Vophsi Pedahel ben Ammihud

Footnotes

Note that Joseph had two representatives, through his sons Ephraim and Manasseh, while Levi, because of his calling in the lesser priesthood, had none. The princes named in Numbers 34 are evidently the same ones who are mentioned but unnamed in the days of Joshua. In this list, we have used the Hebrew word ben, or "son," as it occurs in the text.

---
Notas:
[^1] The absence of the names of these two princes is explained in vs. 14.
[^2] Mary, the mother of Jesus, was cousin of Elizabeth (Luke 1:36), who was a descendant of Aaron (Luke 1:5). While we know that Mary was of the tribe of Judah, it is also possible that she had Levite ancestry.
