Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 2 ( 1978)

Appendix A

Definitions And Explanations of Key Words And Terms

Aaronic Priesthood

(see also Priesthood)

There is only one priesthood of God, and it has two major divisions: the Melchizedek and the Aaronic. The Aaronic Priesthood is the "lesser priesthood" in the sense that the members of this priesthood do not have the same keys or directing power as do those who hold the Melchizedek Priesthood. The keys of the Aaronic Priesthood pertain to the preparatory gospel of preaching faith, repentance, and baptism of water for the remission of sins. This division of the priesthood receives its name from Aaron, the brother of Moses.

Selected Quotations

"The Aaronic Priesthood holds the keys of the preparatory Gospel. . . . These keys were conferred upon Aaron and have descended through his posterity from generation to generation until John the Baptist, who held the keys by divine right and through blessing as well as lineage. Had the Church of Jesus Christ been fully organized and properly organized with the Jews in John's day, that is, when he was preaching in the wilderness, instead of the Jews being in a dreadful state of apostasy, John the Baptist would have taken his place by right as the presiding priest of the Aaronic order. But the Jews recognized him not, and failed to understand the nature of his authority, even as they failed to comprehend the authority of our Lord. By right of his authority, John laid the foundation for the overthrow of their power and kingdom, which was based on a false foundation. (D&C 84:28.) Had they accepted John, then also would they have accepted the Savior. There is perfect order in the Kingdom of God, and he recognizes the authority of his servants. It was for this reason John, who acted under the direction of Peter, James and John, came to Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery and restored the Aaronic Priesthood, which John held in the dispensation of the Meridian of Time. (HC 1:40.)" (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:64.)

"After the children of Israel came out of Egypt and while they were sojourning in the wilderness, Moses received a commandment from the Lord to take Aaron and his sons and ordain them and consecrate them as priests for the people. (Ex. 28.) At that time the males of the entire tribe of Levi were chosen to be the priests instead of the first-born of all the tribes, and Aaron and his sons were given the presidency over the Priesthood thus conferred. Since that time it has been known as the Priesthood of Aaron, including the Levitical Priesthood. The males of the tribe of Levi

. . . were to be invested with authority from that time forth in Israel. It should be remembered that the Melchizedek Priesthood was withdrawn from the people when Moses was taken away, so that the Aaronic Priesthood remained with the carnal law, or the law of Moses, until the coming of Jesus Christ. In the calling of Aaron and his sons, the Lord made it known that this presiding authority over this Priesthood should be handed down from father to son. This was true also of the Levitical, which is a division of the Aaronic. All who were of the tribe of Levi were entitled to be priests and to officiate in some capacity in this authority. In making the change and choosing the Levites instead of the first-born of all the tribes, the Lord said: [Num. 3:6, 12-13, 45-58 quoted.]

"The Lord had promised to make Israel a nation of priests, but because of their rebellion and failure to hearken to his word, in his anger, he took the Melchizedek Priesthood away with Moses, and left the people subject to the ministrations of the tribe of Levi. The prophets in Israel, however, received special ordination and were from the several tribes. . . .

"The Levitical Priesthood conferred on the men of the tribe of Levi was subject to the authority of Aaron and was part of the Aaronic Priesthood. It was the duty of the Levites to assist the priests of Aaron. Their duties are stated in the book of Numbers. [Num. 3:5-9 quoted.]" (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:64-65.)

"We should all realize that there is nothing in the world more powerful than the priesthood of God. However, I fear that too often some seem to take it for granted as a right and not a privilege. Many seem to feel that age should determine when they are entitled to receive the priesthood or advance in it.

"Let us just stop and think for a moment of the great importance the Lord placed on the Aaronic Priesthood when it was restored. John the Baptist, who baptized the Savior, was sent to restore the Aaronic Priesthood. Placing his hands upon the heads of Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery, he said: [D&C 13 quoted.]

"We should all realize that great works of righteousness can be and are performed by the Aaronic Priesthood. President Wilford Woodruff said: 'I desire to impress upon you the fact that it does not make any difference whether a man is a Priest or an Apostle, if he magnifies his calling. A Priest holds the keys of the ministering of angels. Never in my life, as an Apostle, as a Seventy, or as an Elder, have I ever had more of the protection of the Lord than while holding the office of a Priest.' (MS 53:629.)" (N. Eldon Tanner, Ensign, May 1976, pp. 41-42.)

Scriptural References:

D&C 13:1; 107:1, 6, 13, 20, 87; JS-H 1:66-72.
