Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 2 ( 1978)

Adam-ondi-Ahman

This term is unique in this dispensation to Latter-day Saints and is a remnant of the Adamic language (the original language taught to Adam by God). In this valley, declared by the Prophet Joseph Smith to be located at Spring Hill, Daviess County, Missouri, Adam called together his children and blessed them three years before his death, and here Adam shall again come to visit his people.

Selected Quotations

"We have then an understanding that [Adam-ondi-Ahman] was the place where Adam dwelt. . . . 'Ondi-Ahman' . . . means the place where Adam dwelt. 'Ahman' signifies God. The whole term means Valley of God where Adam dwelt. It is the original language spoken by Adam, as revealed to the Prophet Joseph." (Orson Pratt, JD 18:342.)

"The valley of Adam-ondi-Ahman . . . was located on the western hemisphere of our globe . . . about fifty miles north of Jackson County, in the State of Missouri. The Lord has revealed to us that Adam dwelt there towards the latter period of his probation. Whether he had lived in that region of country from the earliest period of his existence on the earth, we know not. He might have lived thousands of miles distant in his early days." (Orson Pratt, JD 16:48.)

"I saw Adam in the valley of Adam-ondi-Ahman. He called together his children and blessed them with a patriarchal blessing. The Lord appeared in their midst, and he (Adam) blessed them all and foretold what should befall them to the latest generation." (Joseph Smith, HC 3:388.)

"Wednesday, Oct. 3rd, the camp traveled to Ambrosial Creek where they were visited by the Prophet, his counselors Sidney Rigdon and Hyrum Smith, and Elder Brigham Young. That evening one of the brethren said, by the Spirit of the Lord:

"'Brethren, your long and tedious journey is now ended; you are now on the public square of Adam-ondi-Ahman. This is the place where Adam blessed his posterity, when they rose up and called him Michael, the Prince, the Archangel, and he being full of the Holy Ghost predicted what should befall his posterity to the latest generations.' (See D&C 107:53-55.)" (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 2:106.)

Scriptural References:

D&C 78:15, 20; 95:17; 107:53; 116:1; 117:8, 11; Dan. 7:9-14.
