Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 2 ( 1978)

Adultery

adulterous (see also Sex Sins; Ten Commandments)

The power to procreate or to have children is one of the greatest gifts of God to man in this physical, earthly existence. The Lord through his prophets has given clear and definite instructions concerning the purposes and the conditions for the exercise of this power. Inasmuch as the righteous exercise of these powers has the potential for a great blessing, according to the eternal law of justice that indicates that every law has equal and opposite consequences, the unrighteous use of these powers has the possibility of serious punishment or suffering. Adultery is one of the most serious unrighteous uses of the powers of procreation; it is so serious a sin that, if not repented of, it becomes unforgivable.

Selected Quotations

"A case of adultery is different. That sin is one of impurity where one or both offenders are married. Anciently this wickedness was punished by death so the Lord commanded. (Lev. 20:10.) 'Sexual union is lawful in wedlock, and if participated in with right intent is honorable and sanctifying. But without the bonds of marriage, sexual indulgence is a debasing sin, abominable in the sight of Deity.' (President Joseph F. Smith, Gospel Doctrine pp. 386-7.)

"'We accept without reservation or qualification the affirmation of Deity, through an ancient Nephite prophet: "For I the Lord God, delight in the chastity of women. And whoredoms are an abomination before me; thus saith the Lord of Hosts." (Jacob 2:28.) . . . We hold that sexual sin is second only to the shedding of innocent blood in the category of personal crimes; and that the adulterer shall have no part in the exaltation of the blessed.' (President Joseph F. Smith, Gospel Doctrine, p. 388.)" (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, pp. 236-37.)

"How severe is the judgment on the man who has committed adultery, even though he apparently is repentant? In the Doctrine and Covenants, 42:24-26, the Lord has given us a key to this situation. If a person commits adultery and then repents with all his heart, he may be forgiven. If he repeats the offense, he is not to be forgiven, but is to be cast out. As I read it, the Lord has not provided that, under those circumstances, he can come back again.

"Now this revelation was given before the endowment was made known. Since that time when a man is married in the temple, he takes a solemn covenant before God, angels, and witnesses that he will keep the law of chastity. Then if he violates that covenant it is not easy to receive forgiveness. I call your attention to this statement by the Prophet Joseph Smith: 'If a man commit adultery, he cannot receive the celestial kingdom of God. Even if he is saved in any kingdom, it cannot be the celestial kingdom.' (HC 6:81.)

"Of course, a man may, according to the Doctrine and Covenants, 132:26, receive forgiveness, if he is willing to pay the penalty for such a crime: that is he 'shall be destroyed in the flesh, and shall be delivered unto the buffetings of Satan unto the day of redemption,' which is the time of the resurrection.

"We have been taught that adultery is a crime second only to the shedding of innocent blood. We cannot treat it lightly." (Joseph Fielding Smith, DS 2:93-94, 99.)

"The Lord in His time and in ours has put adultery and fornication side by side. Both are cardinal sins.

"The Church has from the beginning demanded of its youth—male and female—one standard only, absolute continence until proper marriage has legalized and hallowed the sexual relations.

"Yet there is forgiveness for the sinner who truly repents. God's mercy is just as boundless as his justice. To the woman taken in adultery, condemned to death by the Mosaic law, Jesus said: 'Go, and sin no more.' (John 8:11.) But the heart must be ripened in repentance before forgiveness can come, and sorrow alone is not repentance. A new and righteous life must be led.

"Church members, young and old, the Lord demands that you be chaste; the Church requires chastity from you under penalty of disfellowshiping and excommunication. If any have already sinned, your brethren and sisters stand ready and anxious to forgive if you shall come with a repentant heart and contrite spirit." (J. Reuben Clark, CR, October 1938, pp. 136-38.)

Scriptural References:

D&C 42:24-25; Matt. 5:27-28, 32; 12:39; 16:4; 19:9, 18; Alma 23:3; 30:10.
