Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 2 ( 1978)

Adversity

chastening; conflicts; opposition; tribulations; trials

One of the purposes of a physical mortal existence is to learn the differences between opposites—good and evil, pleasure and pain, bitter and sweet, sorrow and joy, disappointment and success, sickness and health, adversity and serenity. The possibility of opposites, then, is part of the plan of progression of our loving merciful Father in heaven for his children.

Selected Quotations

"Just as Jesus had to endure affliction to prove himself, so must all men endure affliction to prove themselves.

"'Abel was slain for his righteousness. . . . Abraham . . . was laid upon the iron bedstead for slaughter; and . . . cast into the fire. . . . Moses . . . was driven from his country and kindred. Elijah had to flee his country. . . . Daniel was cast into a den of lions: Micah was fed on the bread of affliction; and Jeremiah was cast into the filthy hole under the Temple. . . . All the Saints . . . prophets and apostles, have had to come up through great tribulation. . . .' (TPJS, pp. 260-61.)

"From his own experiences, the Prophet Joseph was eminently qualified to talk about affliction, and this he most eloquently did.

"President Brigham Young is quoted as observing that the Prophet was more perfect in 38 years, with the severe tribulation through which he passed, than he would have been in a thousand years without it. . . .

"If we can bear our afflictions with the understanding, faith, and courage, and in the spirit in which they bore theirs, we shall be strengthened and comforted in many ways. We shall be spared the torment which accompanies the mistaken idea that all suffering comes as chastisement for transgression. We shall be comforted by the knowledge that we are not enduring, nor will we be required to endure, the suffering of the wicked who are to 'be cast out into outer darkness [where] there shall be weeping, and wailing, and gnashing of teeth.' (Alma 40:13.)

"We can draw assurance from the Lord's promise that 'he that is faithful in tribulation, the reward of the same is greater in the kingdom of heaven.'" (Marion G. Romney, IE, December 1969, pp. 67-68.)

"The diamond is enhanced and made more valuable with polishing. Steel is made harder and more valuable through tempering. So also opposition builds the character of man. All progress is made by overcoming an opposing force. Lehi said to his son Jacob: 'For it must needs be, that there is an opposition in all things. . . .' (2 Ne. 2:11.) Opposition, then, is good for us as long as we don't seek it for opposition's sake." (Eldred G. Smith, Ensign, January 1974, p. 63.)

"Strength comes by courageously adjusting our lives to our trials, and by so doing we are brought closer to God.

"We cannot afford to meet adversities with impatience or bitterness. President Brigham Young taught that 'if the Saints could realize things as they are when they are called to pass through trials, and to suffer what they call sacrifices, they would acknowledge them to be the greatest blessings that could be bestowed upon them. . . .

"'. . . without the opposite and they could not know enjoyment; they could not realize happiness. . . . If they should not taste the bitter, how could they realize the sweet? They could not!' (JD 2:301-2.)

"If our existence terminated with death, adversities might tend to overwhelm us. But with the gospel as a foundation and with faith in a just God who watches over all, each one may receive the comfort and acquire the fortitude to meet the vicissitudes of life." (ElRay L. Christiansen, IE, June 1969, p. 66.)

"Now, we find many people critical when a righteous person is killed, a young father or mother is taken from a family, or when violent deaths occur. Some become bitter when oft-repeated prayers seem unanswered. Some lose faith and turn sour when solemn administrations by holy men seem to be ignored and no restoration seems to come from repeated prayer circles. But if all the sick were healed, if all the righteous were protected and the wicked destroyed, the whole program of the Father would be annulled and the basic principle of the Gospel, free agency, would be ended.

"If pain and sorrow and total punishment immediately followed the doing of evil, no soul would repeat a misdeed. If joy and peace and rewards were instantaneously given the doer of good, there could be no evil—all would do good and not because of the rightness of doing good. There would be no test of strength, no development of character, no growth of powers, no free agency, only satanic controls. . . .

"It is evident that even the righteous will not always be healed and even those of great faith will die when it is according to the purpose of God. Joseph Smith died in his thirties as did the Savior. Solemn prayers were answered negatively." (Spencer W. Kimball, BYUSY, Dec. 6, 1955 .)

"I don't know all the reasons the Lord tries us in this life, but there are two or three that come to mind. First, I think he wants to know whom he can trust.

"Secondly, the Lord tells us in the Doctrine and Covenants section 122 that adversity came to Joseph Smith to give him experience.

"Thirdly, I believe that only through such experiences can a person develop true charity. And I mean by charity the pure love of Christ." (Loren C. Dunn, Ensign, May 1974, p. 28.)

"As we contemplate these devastating conditions rampant in the world today—the wars, death, suffering, poverty, and disease—and while many question why God permits such troublous conditions to plague us, let us remember that man himself is responsible. Even though the innocent suffer with the wicked in many instances, all the strife and contention and wickedness abroad in the land today is because man has chosen to follow Satan instead of accepting and living according to the teachings of Jesus Christ. From the beginning we have been told that there must be opposition in all things in order that we might progress according to God's plan for us." (N. Eldon Tanner, Ensign, July 1973, p. 10.)

"After some of the persecutions and the evidence of the power of evil over our first missionaries in London, these missionaries returned to the Prophet to seek an answer as to why these experiences with evil spirits had come to them. Had they done some things wrong that the evil had thus tried to overthrow them? And the Prophet replied, 'I rejoiced when I heard of your experiences because I have passed through similar experiences, and I want to say this to you: the nearer a person approaches the Lord, a greater power will be manifested by the adversary to prevent the accomplishment of his purposes.'

"That is what the Master meant when he said: 'Blessed are ye, when men shall revile you, and persecute you, and shall say all manner of evil against you falsely, for my sake. Rejoice, and be exceeding glad: for great is your reward in heaven: for so persecuted they the prophets which were before you.' [Matt. 5:11-12.]" (Harold B. Lee, CR, October 1955, pp. 56-57.)

Scriptural References:

D&C 103:13; 121:7; 128:21.
