Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 2 ( 1978)

Agent of the Lord

agent of the Church

The noun agent has as its basic meanings "to act, to do, to lead—one who acts or exerts power; one who acts for or in the place of another by authority from him; a representative." Thus, an agent of the Lord is one who represents the Lord and acts for and in behalf of the Lord by virtue of the authority given to him by the Lord. In a similar manner, an agent of the Church is authorized by the presiding officials of the Church to act in its behalf and to serve as its representative.

Selected Quotations

"We are the Lord's agents; we represent him; he has given us authority which empowers us to do all that is necessary to save and exalt ourselves as well as his other children in the world.

"We are ambassadors of the Lord Jesus Christ. Our commission is to represent him. We are directed to preach his gospel, to perform the ordinances of salvation, to bless mankind, to heal the sick and perhaps perform miracles, to do what he would do if he were personally present—and all this because we hold the holy priesthood.

"As the Lord's agents we are bound by his law to do what he wants us to do regardless of personal feelings or worldly enticements. Of ourselves we have no message of salvation, no doctrine that must be accepted, no power to baptize or ordain or marry for eternity. All these things come from the Lord, and anything we do with reference to them is the result of delegated authority.

"When we join the Church and receive the priesthood, we are expected to forsake many of the ways of the world and live as becometh saints. We are no longer to dress or speak or act or even think as others too often do. Many in the world use tea. coffee, tobacco, and liquor, and are involved in the use of drugs. Many profane and are vulgar and indecent, immoral and unclean in their lives' but all these things should be foreign to us. We are the saints of the Most High. We hold the holy priesthood." (Joseph Fielding Smith, Ensign, June 1971, p. 49.)

Scriptural References:

D&C 53:4; 57:6; 70:11.
