Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 2 ( 1978)

Apostasy

apostates

The basic meaning of apostasy is "to stand elsewhere," and the word is derived from the two Greek roots that comprise the word.

In a religious sense, apostasy could either refer to an individual or to the religious organization. A person apostatizes from the religious organization when his beliefs differ from the beliefs of the group. A religious organization could apostatize if it changes its beliefs from its original position. The term apostasy from the church refers to an individual or group of individuals leaving the church, whereas apostasy of the church indicates the church itself has changed its position.

Selected Quotations

"How does apostasy come about? By neglect of duty, failing to keep in our souls the spirit of prayer, of obedience to the principles of the Gospel; by failure to pay an honest tithing, or to observe the word of wisdom, and to absent one's self from sacrament meetings where we have been commanded to go and renew our covenants. Apostasy comes through the sins of omission as well as through the sins of commission. Immorality is a deadly sin and those who are guilty, if they do not repent, will lose the spirit and deny the faith. Apostasy does not come upon an individual suddenly, but it is a gradual growth in which darkness through sin crowds out the spirit of light from the soul. When a man who was once enlightened loses the Spirit of truth, the darkness which takes its place is overwhelming. Alma gives us a good example of this. (Alma 12:9-11.)

"How true it is that when the light goes out of a man's soul and darkness takes its place it becomes intense; there is no darkness equal to it." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 2:125, 385.)

"Strange as it may appear at first thought, yet it is no less strange than true, that notwithstanding all the professed determination to live godly, apostates after turning from the faith of Christ, unless they have speedily repented, have sooner or later fallen into the snares of the wicked one, and have been left destitute of the Spirit of God, to manifest their wickedness in the eyes of multitudes. From apostates the faithful have received the severest persecutions. Judas was rebuked and immediately betrayed his Lord into the hands of his enemies, because Satan entered into him. There is a superior intelligence bestowed upon such as obey the Gospel with full purpose of heart, which, if sinned against, the apostate is left naked and destitute of the Spirit of God.

. . . When once that light which was in them is taken from them, they become as much darkened as they were previously enlightened." (Joseph Smith. TPJS, p. 67.)

"I will give you a key which Brother Joseph Smith used to give in Nauvoo. He said that the very step of apostasy commenced with losing confidence in the leaders of this Church and kingdom, and that whenever you discerned that spirit you might know that it would lead the possessor of it on the road to apostasy. . . .

"No man or woman can have the spirit of prophecy and at the same time do evil and speak against their brethren." (Heber C. Kimball, LHCK, p.465.)

"One word and one word alone describes the dismal state that prevailed: apostasy. Generations before, Isaiah had prophesied: 'Darkness shall cover the earth, and gross darkness the people.' (Isa. 60:2.) Amos had foretold of a famine in the land: 'Not a famine of bread, nor a thirst for water, but of hearing the words of the Lord.' (Amos 8:11.) Had not Peter warned of false teachers bringing damnable heresies, and Paul predicted that the time would come when sound doctrine would not be endured?" (Thomas S. Monson, Ensign, May 1975, p. 15.)

Scriptural References:

D&C 85:2, 11; 86:3.
