Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 2 ( 1978)

Kingdom

kingdom of God; kingdom of heaven

Kingdom of God is another term for The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. The Kingdom of God on the earth is the official agency through which the Lord works to bless his children and to provide them with the saving ordinances of the gospel. The Lord also has an organization in heaven (the kingdom of heaven) through which he blesses his Saints there. Sometime in the future these two kingdoms will essentially be one, and the Lord will directly and personally supervise his work both in heaven and on the earth. At that time, he will rule as King of kings and Lord of lords. Thus, the Lord has taught us to pray, "Thy kingdom come, thy will be done, on earth as it is in heaven."

Selected Quotations

"The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints was restored in 1830 after numerous revelations from the divine source; and this is the kingdom, set up by the God of heaven that would never be destroyed nor superseded, and the stone cut out of the mountain without hands that would become a great mountain and would fill the whole earth." (Spencer W. Kimball, Ensign, May 1976, p. 8.)

"We might then ask, what is the kingdom of God? And again we are not left without an answer, for the Lord replied, 'The keys of the kingdom of God are committed unto men on the earth. . . .' Where there are the keys of the kingdom, there is the Church of Jesus Christ.

"The Prophet Joseph Smith makes this definition of the kingdom of God: 'Some say that the kingdom of God was not set up upon the earth until the day of Pentecost, and that John did not preach the baptism of repentance for the remission of sins, but I say to you in the name of the Lord that the kingdom of God was set up upon the earth in the days of Adam to the present time. Whenever there has been a righteous man on earth unto whom God revealed His word and gave power and authority to administer in His name, and where there is a priest of God . . . to administer in the ordinances of the gospel, and officiate in the priesthood of God, there is the kingdom of God. . . . Where there is a prophet, a priest, or a righteous man unto whom God gives His oracles, there is the kingdom of God; and where the oracles of God are not, there the kingdom of God is not.' (TPJS, pp. 271-72.)

"Just as the Master said in his day, the kingdom of God cometh not by observation, meaning that there would be no outward signs or no political changes, so today, it is now among us, as it has been in every dispensation of the gospel since the days of Adam.

"Another statement was made by the prophets of the New Testament which to me has significance. They are quoted as having said that '. . . the kingdom of God is within you.' (Luke 17:21.) A more correct translation probably would have said, 'The kingdom of God is among you or in your midst. . . .'" (Harold B. Lee, CR, October 1953, p.26.)

Scriptural References:

D&C 6:13, 37; 10:55; 15:6; 56:18; 65:2-6; 84:19, 34-38; 106:3; 136:31, 41; Matt. 3:2; 4:17; 5:3; 1 Ne. 13:37; Alma 11:37.
