Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 2 ( 1978)

Knowledge of God

God knoweth all things (see also God)

One of the attributes or characteristics of God the Father is that he "knoweth all things, and there is not anything save he knows it." (2 Ne. 9:20.) Because the knowledge of God is absolute and all things past, present, and future are continually before his eyes (D&C 130:7), he knows what is going to happen in the future and can reveal this information to his prophets as needed.

Selected Quotations

"Without the knowledge of all things, God would not be able to save any portion of his creatures; for it is by reason of the knowledge which he has of all things, from the beginning to the end, that enables him to give that understanding to his creatures by which they are made partakers of eternal life; and if it were not for the idea existing in the minds of men that God has all knowledge it would be impossible for them to exercise faith in him." (Joseph Smith, Lectures on Faith, No. 4.)

"The great Jehovah contemplated the whole of the events connected with the earth, pertaining to the plan of salvation, before it rolled into existence, or ever 'the morning stars sang together' for joy; the past, the present, and the future were and are, with him, one eternal 'now'; he knew of the fall of Adam, the iniquities of the antediluvians, of the depth of iniquity that would be connected with the human family, their weakness and strength, their power and glory, apostasies, their crimes, their righteousness and iniquity; he comprehended the fall of man, and his redemption; he knew the plan of salvation and pointed it out; he was acquainted with the situation of all nations and with their destiny; he ordered all things according to the council of his own will; he knows the situation of both the living and the dead, and has made ample provision for their redemption, according to their several circumstances, and the laws of the kingdom of God, whether in this world, or in the world to come." (Joseph Smith, HC 4:597.)

"Divine revelation of what is to come is proof of foreknowledge. God, therefore, knows, and has known from the beginning, what shall be, even to the end of the world. . . .

"But who will venture to affirm that foreknowledge is a determining cause? God's omniscience concerning Adam cannot reasonably be considered the cause of the Fall. Adam was free to do as he chose to do. God did not force him to obey the divine command. Neither did God's knowledge compel false Judas to betray the Christ, nor the recreant Jews to crucify their Lord.

"Surely the omniscience of God does not operate to make of men automatons; nor does it warrant the superstition of fatalism. The chief purpose of earth life, as a stage in the course of the soul's progression, would be nullified if man's agency was after all but a pretense, and he a creature of circumstance compelled to do as he does. . . .

"The Father of our spirits has a full knowledge of the nature and disposition of each of his children, a knowledge gained by observation and experience in the long ages of our primeval childhood, when we existed as unembodied spirits, endowed with individuality and agency—a knowledge compared with which that gained by earthly parents through experience with their children in the flesh is infinitesimally small. In that surpassing knowledge God reads the future of child and children, of men individually and of men collectively. He knows what each will do under given conditions, and sees the end from the beginning. His foreknowledge is based on intelligence and reason. He foresees the future of men and nations as a state that naturally and surely will be; not as a state of things that must be because he has arbitrarily willed that it shall be." (James E. Talmage, VM, pp. 318-20.)

Scriptural References:

D&C 42:61; 50:40; 84:19; 88:79; 89:19; 93:24, 53; 101:25; 107:71; 109:67; 121:33, 42; 128:14; 130:19; 1 Sam. 2:3; Prov. 14:18; Isa. 33:6; 1 Cor. 12:8; Hel. 15:13; Ether 4:13.
