Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 2 ( 1978)

Law

laws; law of justice; law of mercy

God is a God of law, which essentially means that he knows, understands, and obeys great eternal principles that have certain and definite consequences. Every blessing is predicated upon obedience to a law, and the blessings, joy, and happiness enjoyed by God are the result of his absolute obedience to law. Because God is a God of law, he is also a God of order. If laws did not have definite and definable consequences, then it would be impossible to predict or determine what would happen if the law were either obeyed or disobeyed. In such a situation, chaos would prevail. However, inasmuch as laws do have definite consequences that can and have been determined, these consequences can be predicted and order results.

Selected Quotations

"We believe that everything is ruled by law. We are thankful that it is so, for otherwise we would live in a world of chance, in a fearful uncertainty of what would happen next. I believe that the material laws that can be traced in the creation had an intelligent will behind them, that the laws themselves were never superior to the will of God. He made those laws, and by His power they became effective to accomplish His purposes. It is to Him that we pray, and we know he is almighty and does hear prayers and though He uses material laws to carry out His plans, His will was never subjected to the laws, but the laws have ever been subservient to Him. Let no one think that God is impotent, that the laws He has made stand in the way of His hearing His children and answering their prayers." (Anthon H. Lund, CR, April 1916, p.12.)

"The other day I was talking to a young man who said, in effect, 'I am fed up and tired of being told, "You have to do this," or "You have to do that." I want to be free to decide for myself what I want to do.

"My response was: 'You are free to choose exactly what you want to do, as long as it does not restrict or impose on the rights or liberties of others, but you must be responsible for your acts and prepared to take the consequences.'

"I explained that the Lord's greatest gift to mortal man is threefold: first, the right to immortality and eternal life; second, the plan by which he can gain it; third, his free agency to choose what he will do. The Lord gave us the plan which will bring us the greatest joy and happiness while on this earth, and which will prepare us for eternal life. All we have to do to enjoy this is to obey the law and keep his commandments.

"All the laws of God and the laws of nature and the laws of the land are made for the benefit of man, for his comfort, enjoyment, safety, and well-being; and it is up to the individual to learn these laws and to determine whether or not he will enjoy these benefits by obeying the law and by keeping the commandments. . . . Part of the purpose of our existence, . . . is to rise above . . . animal instincts, and to reach the highest plane of human behavior in our social relations.

"In order that we may accomplish this, God, our Father and our Creator, and his Son Jesus Christ, who want us to be happy and successful, have given us the laws which, if applied in our lives, will improve our social conditions and our relationship to one another. . . .

"Someone has wisely said: 'Woe unto those who consider the laws of God only as forces of convenience, to be ignored or employed at will. Woe unto those individuals, classes, and nations that believe in the might of their wealth, in the strength of their armor, in the invincibility of their positions.'

"No culture can last, no nation or union of nations can survive if they ignore God's laws." (N. Eldon Tanner, IE, June 1970, pp. 30-32.)

Scriptural References:

D&C 29:32; 41:3; 42:2, 59; 88:13, 21, 38, 42; 93:53; 107:84; 130:21; 132:5, 21, 32; Ezra 7:25; Ps. 1:2; 19:7; Isa. 2:3; 51:4; Jer. 31:33; Gal. 5:14; Heb. 8:10; James 1:25; 2 Ne. 2:26; 8:4; 9:25, 27.
