Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 2 ( 1978)

Lie

lying; bearing false witness (see also Honesty; Ten Commandments)

"Thou shalt not lie" has been one of the commandments of God from the beginning. God is a God of truth; God does not and cannot lie. To the degree to which a person lies or deceives, he is removing himself from the influence and presence of God.

Lucifer, or Satan, is the opposite of God. He is referred to as "the father of lies" and as "a liar from the beginning." When a person lies or deceives, he is following the pattern of the devil and is placing himself under the power of Satan. One of the characteristic attributes of followers of Lucifer is that they are liars and lovers of lies.

Selected Quotations

"'Yea, lie a little, take the advantage of one because of his words.' (2 Ne. 28:8.)

"Think of what that means, the whispering of the adversary to lie a little. Whether it be a lie intended to affect a religious organization, a business organization, a political organization, or an individual, the lie will brand the one who tells it, and sooner or later he will have to account for the wrong he has committed.

"'Yea, lie a little, take the advantage of one because of his words, dig a pit for thy neighbor; there is no harm in this; and do all these things, for tomorrow we die; and if it so be that we are guilty, God will beat us with a few stripes, and at last we shall be saved in the kingdom of God.' (2 Ne. 28:8.)

"That is what the adversary of righteousness is saying to the children of men. That is what Lucifer, who goes out defiling the people, is breathing in their souls. That is the kind of doctrine that is being disseminated in the world by some of those who ought to be the leaders of morality and also of righteousness." (George Albert Smith, CR, October 1932, pp. 28-29.)

Scriptural References:

D&C 10:25; 42:21, 86; 62:6; 63:17; 76:103; Moses 4:4; 5:24; Prov. 14:5; Heb. 6:18; James 3:4; Alma 1:17; 5:17; 12:4.
