Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 2 ( 1978)

Love

God of love (see also God)

One definition of God in the scriptures is that "God is love." (1 John 4:8.) The gospel of Christ has also been referred to as the gospel of love. Love, then, is and should be the relationship between man and God and between man and mankind. In his teachings, the Savior indicated that the law of love forms the basis of all the laws and commandments: "Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind. This is the first and great commandment. And the second is like unto it, Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself. On these two commandments hang all the law and the prophets." (Matt. 22:37-40.)

Selected Quotations

"What is the distinguishing characteristic of our Heavenly Father? John gave us a clue when he said: 'Beloved, let us love one another: for love is of God; and every one that loveth is born of God and knoweth God. He that loveth not knoweth not God; for God is love.' (1 John 4:7-8. Italics added.)

"This was so very difficult for me to understand before the missionaries knocked on my door, for, from this scripture and others quite similar, it appeared that God and love were one and the same. Is God, then, just an emotion? You can't see love. You may see the effect of love or the lack of it, but love is not a corporate entity. When I learned the truth—that God is an exalted man of flesh and bone and spirit—then I understood what John was saying: that love is God's distinguishing characteristic.

"God loves us. We know it. The scriptures declare it, and from the experiences of each one of us, we know it to be true. Almost no one doubts this fact. God loves us, but why? Why does God love us when we often do not deserve his love?

"I don't know why God loves us, but I believe the scriptures give us a clue. God doesn't love us because we are good. God loves us because he is good. God is good and so he loves us, and those who are the best love the best. . . .

"I have seen this godlike quality of unselfish love in all the best men I have known or read about. Jesus wept over those who rejected him and prayed for those who crucified him.

"Joseph Smith's heart was filled with love and compassion for all men, even for his persecutors. All the prophets have had this great quality. . . .

"Only as we live in obedience to these commandments will we be able to know real love for others and real joy ourselves." (Hartman Rector, Jr., IE, December 1969, pp. 81-82.)

"It is a time-honored adage that love begets love. Let us pour forth love—show forth our kindness unto all mankind, and the Lord will reward us with everlasting increase; cast our bread upon the waters and we shall receive it after many days, increased to a hundredfold. . . . I do not dwell upon your faults, and you shall not upon mine. Charity which is love, covereth a multitude of sins [1 Pet. 4:8]." (Joseph Smith, HC 5:517.)

"True love is a process. True love requires personal action. Love must be continuing to be real. Love takes time. . . . We must at regular and appropriate intervals speak and reassure others of our love and the long time it takes to prove it by our actions. Real love does take time. The Great Shepherd had the same thoughts in mind when he taught, 'If ye love me, keep my commandments' (John 14:15; italics added) and 'If ye love me feed my sheep' (John 21:16; italics added). Love demands action if it is to be continuing. Love is a process. Love is not a declaration. Love is not an announcement. Love is not a passing fancy. Love is not an expediency. Love is not a convenience. 'If ye love me, keep my commandments' and 'If ye love me feed my sheep' are God-given proclamations that should remind us we can often best show our love through the processes of feeding and keeping." (Marvin J. Ashton, Ensign, November 1975, p. 108.)

"A lonely young Persian student was in Munich, Germany, struggling to find a meaning to life. He was deeply disturbed by the materialism and selfishness that seemed to fill the world, and especially postwar Europe. He heard a knock at the door, and two humble Mormon elders stood before him. He was not the least interested in religion. In fact, cynicism and doubt had filled his soul until he was very nearly persuaded that there was no God nor any real meaning to life. The only thing that interested him about these two young men was their English accent. He had mastered four languages, but English was not one of them.

"He invited them in, but as they started their discussion, he cautioned: 'I don't want to hear about your God, nor do I want to hear about how your religion got started. I only want to know one thing: what do you people do for one another?'

He waited, and a look of doubt crossed his dark features, as the elders exchanged glances.

"Finally, the spokesman for the two said softly, 'We love one another.'

"Nothing he could have said would have been more electrifying than this simple utterance had upon this young Persian, for the Holy Ghost immediately bore testimony to his soul that these missionaries were true servants of the Lord. Shortly thereafter he was baptized, and he presently is in this country receiving his doctorate degree at a local university—all because a young Mormon missionary declared a simple truth, 'We love one another.'

"Virtually all religions tell us to love one another, but the restored Church tells us how to love one another. The home teaching visits, the inspired Welfare Program, the unselfish service performed in the temples, and the worldwide missionary system demonstrate in a very practical way the teaching of the Savior: 'Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself.' (Matt. 22:39.)" (Henry D. Taylor, IE, June 1969, p.64.)

Scriptural References:

D&C 4:5; 12:8; 20:19; 34:3; 38:24; 42:22, 29, 38, 45; 59:5-6; 76:116; 88:123; 95:12; 121:41, 45; Moses 7:33; Lev. 19:18; Deut. 6:5; 30:6; John 3:16; 5:42; 13:34; 14:15; 15:10, 12-13; 2 Ne. 26:30; 31:20; 3 Ne. 12:44.
