Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 2 ( 1978)

Marriage

The first marriage (Adam and Eve) and all subsequent marriages performed on this earth by the power of God are intended to be eternal. Marriage is designed not only for this earth, but for all eternity. Earlier prophets taught the concept of eternal marriage, but unfortunately many ministers of religion do not teach this concept today. In his revelations contained in the Doctrine and Covenants the Lord reemphasized the importance and the eternal nature of the marriage covenant.

Selected Quotations

"Now let us consider the first marriage that was performed after the earth was organized. Adam, the first man, had been created. . . . We then find this recorded: 'And the Lord God said, It is not good that man should be alone; I will make him an help meet for him.' After the Lord had formed Eve, he 'brought her unto the man. And Adam said, This is now bone of my bones and flesh of my flesh; she shall be called woman because she was taken out of man. Therefore shall a man leave his father and his mother, and shall cleave unto his wife and they shall be one flesh.' (Gen. 2:18, 22-24.) These words were undoubtedly just what they sound like. They were very likely the words spoken by Adam reciting the vows of the first marriage upon this earth. . . .

"Here was a marriage performed by the Lord between two immortal beings, for until sin entered the world their bodies were not subject to death. He made them one, not merely for time, nor for any definite period; they were to be one throughout the eternal ages. If you were to say that because Adam and Eve transgressed and became subject to death that this eternal union was broken, then just remember that the purpose of the atonement by Jesus Christ was to restore that which was lost by the fall. Their restoration then to each other after the resurrection would not require a remarriage, for death to them was not a divorce; it was only a temporary separation. Resurrection to immortality meant for them a reunion and an eternal bond never again to be severed. . . .

"If marriage then was for the purpose of the organizing of spirits before the world was formed and for 'multiplying and replenishing the earth' on which we now live, surely there must likewise be a divine purpose in its being continued after the resurrection. This purpose is declared by the Lord to be for 'a continuation of the seeds forever and ever.' (D&C 132:19.)" (Harold B. Lee, Youth and The Church, pp. 128-29.)

"Marriage in the temple for time and eternity should be the goal of every member of the Church, for marriage is ordained of God. Marriage is a commandment. Marriage was instituted by divine edict. [49:15-17 quoted.)

"Marriage is a sacred relationship entered into primarily for the rearing of a family, in fulfillment of the commandments of the Lord. Marriage with children, and the beautiful family relationship which can come of it, is the fulfillment of life. . . . The Lord intended that marriage performed for eternity in the temple should endure forever. This was his plan. . . .

"What therefore God hath joined together, let not man put asunder.' (Mark 10:9.) It is evident from the scriptures that marriage performed in the Lord's way should not be dissolved." (James A. Cullimore, Ensign, June 1971, p. 93.)

"To those who might decry marriage or postpone it or forbid it Paul spoke, condemning them. It is generally selfishness, cold and self-centered, which leads people to shun marriage responsibility. There are many who talk and write against marriage. Even some of our own delay marriage and argue against it. To all who are deceived by these 'doctrines of devils,' we urge the return to normalcy. We call upon all people to accept normal marriage as a basis for true happiness. The Lord did not give sex to man for a plaything. Basically marriage presupposes a family. [Ps. 127:3, 5 quoted.]

"Certainly anyone who purposely denies himself or herself honorable parenthood is to be pitied, for the great joy of parenthood is fundamental in the normal, full life." (Spencer W. Kimball, Ensign, May 1974, p. 6.)

"Not all sins of this permissive world are with the youth. I was shocked recently when I read a movie magazine. The man spoke of marriage as a legalistic, paper-signing institution, and said: 'It should be abolished. Without the social pressures in the state, it could be utopia.' He asked the woman. She said: 'Marriage should be done away with. I already know people who are living quietly together without marriage, but I haven't yet seen the effect of this on children as they grow up in such a society.'

"These are not the only ones who are advocating living together without marriage. We call this to the attention of our people with all the strength we possess.

"We say again: We members of the Church marry. All normal people should marry. (There could be a few exceptions.) All normal married couples should become parents. We remember the scripture which says: 'Whoso forbiddeth to marry is not ordained of God, for marriage is ordained of God unto man. Wherefore, it is lawful that he should have one wife, and they twain shall be one flesh, and all this that the earth might answer the end of its creation.' (D&C 49:15-16.)

"The earth cannot justify nor continue its life without marriage and the family. Sex without marriage, for all people, young or older, is an abomination to the Lord, and it is most unfortunate that many people have blinded their eyes to these great truths." (Spencer W. Kimball, Ensign, November 1974, p. 8.)

Scriptural References:

D&C 49:15; 131:2; 132:16; Gen. 2:24; 6:2; Matt. 19:5-6; 22:30; 1 Cor. 6:16; 7:2; Jacob 3:7.
