Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 2 ( 1978)

Melchizedek Priesthood

(see also Priesthood)

The Holy Priesthood after the Order of the Son of God is the title of the priesthood of God. However, in order to avoid the too-frequent repetition of the name of Deity, the Lord has permitted this priesthood to be referred to as the Melchizedek Priesthood, which comprehends or includes the Aaronic Priesthood.

Melchizedek was a righteous high priest who lived on the earth about 2, 000 years before Christ. He is mentioned in both the Old Testament and the New Testament, but most of our information on Melchizedek comes either from the modern scriptures or from the prophets of this dispensation.

Selected Quotations

"The history of the Melchizedek Priesthood did not begin with this earth. The prophets understood the premortality existence of priesthood. The Apostle Paul expressed it when he said, 'Without father, without mother, without descent, having neither beginning of days nor end of life; but made like unto the Son of God; abideth a priest continually.' (Heb. 7:3.) That men who are called of God to the authority of the ministry on earth may have been selected for such an appointment even before they took mortal bodies is clearly evident from the scriptures. (Articles of Faith, p. 194.) In support of this doctrine, I bring you now three statements: two scriptural quotations and one from the Prophet. [Abr. 3:22-23; Alma 13:3-4 quoted.]

"Now these are made clear by this statement of the Prophet: 'Every man who has a calling to minister to the inhabitants of the world was ordained to that very purpose in the Grand Council of heaven before this world was. (Now note this.) I suppose I was ordained to this very office in that Grand Council. It is the testimony that I want that I am God's servant and this people His people.' (TPJS, p. 365.)" (Harold B. Lee, ASIF, pp. 4-5.)

"Was the Priesthood of Melchizedek taken away when Moses died? All Priesthood is Melchizedek, but there are different portions or degrees of it. That portion which brought Moses to speak with God face to face was taken away; but that which brought the ministry of angels remained. All the prophets had the Melchizedek Priesthood." (Joseph Smith, TPJS, pp. 180-81.)

"The mission and authority of the greater Priesthood are here set forth. It administers in the gospel, and reveals the 'mysteries of the kingdom'—even the knowledge concerning God, without which there would be no eternal life (D&C 84:19). It administers the ordinances of the gospel, in which the power of godliness is manifest (v. 20); and it holds the authority which enables man to see God, even the Father, and live (v. 22). To quote from the History of the Church:

"'President Joseph Smith, Jun., addressed the assembly and said, the Melchizedek High Priesthood was no other than the Priesthood of the Son of God; that there are certain ordinances which belong to the Priesthood, from which flow certain results; and the Presidents or Presidency are over the Church; and revelations of the mind and will of God to the Church, are to come through the Presidency. This is the order of heaven, and the power and privilege of the Priesthood. It is also the privilege of any officer in the Church to obtain revelations, so far as relates to his particular calling and duty in the Church. All are bound by the principles of virtue and happiness, but one great privilege of the Priesthood is to obtain revelations of the mind and will of God. It is also the privilege of the Melchizedek Priesthood, to reprove, rebuke, and admonish, as well as to receive revelation' (HC 2:477)." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 502.)

"There are in this greater priesthood five offices or callings—elder, seventy, high priest, patriarch, and apostle—yet the priesthood is the same; and the priesthood is greater than any of its offices. We are a kingdom of brethren, a congregation of equals, all of whom are entitled to receive all of the blessings of the priesthood. There are no blessings reserved for apostles that are not freely available to all the elders of the kingdom; blessings come because of obedience and personal righteousness, not because of administrative positions.

"I shall speak of these blessings—the ten priesthood blessings—which are available to all of us who hold the holy Melchizedek Priesthood.

"Blessing one: We are members of the one true and living Church upon the face of the whole earth, and we have received the fulness of the everlasting gospel. . . .

"Blessing two: We have received the gift of the Holy Ghost, and we are entitled to receive the gifts of the Spirit-those wondrous spiritual endowments which set us apart from the world and raise us above carnal things. . . .

"Blessing three: We can be sanctified by the Spirit, have dross and evil burned out of us as though by fire, become clean and spotless, and be fit to dwell with gods and angels. . . .

"Blessing four: We can stand in the place and stead of the Lord Jesus Christ in administering salvation to the children of men. . . .

"Blessing five: We have power to become the sons of God, to be adopted into the family of the Lord Jesus Christ, to have him as our Father, to be one with him as he is one with his Father. . . .

"Blessing six: We can enter into the patriarchal order, the order of eternal marriage, the order which enables the family unit to continue everlastingly in celestial glory. . . .

"Blessing seven: We have power to govern all things, both temporal and spiritual, both the kingdoms of the world, and the elements and storms and powers of the earth. . . .

"Blessing eight: We have power, through the priesthood, to gain eternal life, the greatest of all the gifts of God. . . .

"Blessing nine: We have power to make our calling and election sure, so that while we yet dwell in mortality, having overcome the world and been true and faithful in all things, we shall be sealed up unto eternal life and have the unconditional promise of eternal life in the presence of Him whose we are. . . .

"Blessing ten: We have the power—and it is our privilege—so to live, that becoming pure in heart, we shall see the face of God while we yet dwell as mortals in a world of sin and sorrow. . . .

"These, then, are the ten blessings of the priesthood, the Holy Priesthood, after the order of the Son of God, the priesthood which the saints in ancient days called after Melchizedek to avoid the too frequent repetition of the name of Deity." (Bruce R. McConkie, Ensign, November 1977, pp. 33, 35.)

Scriptural References:

D&C 84:17, 19, 25, 40; 86:10; 107:2, 17, 22, 65, 69, 79; 113:6; 121:21; 124:28; 127:8; 131:2; Moses 6:7; JS-H 1:38; Num. 16:10; 1 Pet. 2:9; 2 Ne. 6:2; 3 Ne. 18:37; Moro. 2:2.
