Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 2 ( 1978)

Millennium

The dictionary defines millennium as "a period of 1,000 years." The millennium referred to in Revelation 20 and other scriptures refers to the 1,000-year period when Christ shall reign personally upon the earth and conditions of righteousness and happiness will exist. The gospel and the Church have been restored in this dispensation to help prepare a people to be worthy to live with Jesus Christ when he comes to inaugurate the millennium and rule as King of kings and Lord of lords.

Selected Quotations

"When Christ comes the Saints who are on the earth will be quickened and caught up to meet him. This does not mean that those who are living in mortality at that time will be changed and pass through the resurrection, for mortals must remain on the earth until after the thousand years are ended. A change, nevertheless, will come over all who remain on the earth; they will be quickened so that they will not be subject unto death until they are old. Men shall die when they are an hundred years of age, and the change shall be made suddenly to the immortal state. Graves will not be made during this thousand years, and Satan shall have no power to tempt any man. Children shall grow up 'as calves of the stall' [Mal. 4:2] unto righteousness, that is without sin or the temptations which are so prevalent today. Even the animal kingdom shall experience a great change, for the enmity of beasts shall disappear, . . . and they shall not hurt nor destroy in all my holy mountain: for the earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord, as the waters cover the sea. [Isa. 11:6-9.]" (Joseph Fielding Smith, WP, pp. 288-89.)

"Some members of the Church have an erroneous idea that when the millennium comes all the people are going to be swept off the earth except righteous members of the Church. That is not so. There will be millions of people, Catholics, Protestants, agnostics, Mohammedans, people of all classes, and of all beliefs, still permitted to remain upon the face of the earth, but they will be those who have lived clean lives, those who have been free from wickedness and corruption. All who belong, by virtue of their good lives, to the terrestrial order, as well as those who have kept the celestial law, will remain upon the face of the earth during the millennium." (Joseph Fielding Smith, DS 1:86-87.)

"Christ and the resurrected Saints will reign over the earth during the thousand years. They will not probably dwell upon the earth, but will visit it when they please, or when it is necessary to govern it. There will be wicked men on the earth during the thousand years. The heathen nations who will not come up to worship will be visited with the judgments of God, and must eventually be destroyed from the earth." (Joseph Smith, HC 5:212.)

"But our testimony would not be complete if we did not reaffirm our faith in the second coming of Christ, in the millennium which is to come, when he will reign as King of kings, and Lord of lords. That this climactic event is not far distant is indicated by the signs of the times, by wars and rumors of wars, by the satanic schemes of evil men who would enslave not only the bodies but also the minds of all who dare refuse to subscribe to the ideologies invented by the anti-Christ. [D&C 133.]" (Hugh B. Brown, CR, October 1960, pp. 93-94.)

Scriptural References:

D&C 43:30; 77:6-7; 88:101, 110; Moses 7:64; A of F 1:10; Isa. 65:18-23; Dan. 7:14; Micah 4:1-8; Mal. 3, 4; Rev. 20:1-3, 7.
