Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 2 ( 1978)

Miracles

(see also Gifts of the Spirit)

A miracle is not in violation of natural law; rather it is the application of natural law at a level that man in his present condition is not able to fully understand. Some dictionary definitions of miracle are "an extraordinary event manifesting divine intervention in human affairs" and "an extremely outstanding or unusual event, thing, or accomplishment."

True miracles from God are the result of faith. Therefore, as Moroni has indicated, if miracles are lacking in the world then faith must be lacking. (Moroni 7:37.)

Selected Quotations

"They who doubt the possibility of miracles are indeed without the power to perform them. But this does not prove that believers lack that power. Miracles are the fruits of faith—'These signs shall follow them that believe.' (Mark 16:17.) The gist of the matter is this: These doubters have done away with God, or have tried to do away with him, and consequently are unable to conceive of a higher power than they themselves possess. . . .

"Miracles are extraordinary results flowing from superior means and methods of doing things. When a man wants light he strikes a match, or presses a button, or turns a switch, and lo! there is light. When God wants light, he says: 'Let there be light.' It is simply a matter of knowing how to do things in a superior way, and having the power to do them. Man is gradually acquiring this power. It is a far call from the tallow dip to the electric light. But the end is not yet. Improvements will continue to be made, and some day, perhaps men may be able to make light just as the Lord makes it. Paradoxically, it might be said that the time will come when miracles will be so common that there will be none.

"Miracles belong to no particular time or place. Wherever and whenever there is a legitimate demand for the exercise of divine power, that power will act, and marvels will result. We worship a God of miracles, and he changeth not, but is the same yesterday, today and forever. (Morm. 9:11, 17-20.) There is but one valid reason for the absence of miracles among any people, and that is the absence of faith. 'All things are possible to them that believe.' (Mark 9:23.)" (Orson F. Whitney, CR, April 1925, pp. 17, 20-22.)

"Miracles are not primarily intended, surely they are not needed, to prove the power of God; the simpler occurrences, the more ordinary works of creation do that. But unto the heart already softened and purified by the testimony of the truth, to the mind enlightened through the Spirit's power and conscious of obedient service in the requirements of the Gospel, the voice of miracles comes with cheering tidings, with fresh and more abundant evidences of the magnanimity of an all-merciful God." (James E. Talmage, AF, p. 219.)

"It may be asked, how are we to distinguish between the miracles wrought by the power of God, and those wrought by the power of Satan? We answer in the language of Paul, 'he that is spiritual judgeth all things.' (1 Cor. 2:15.) But as the greater part of the world are not spiritual, we will point out other rules by which to distinguish the two powers. Wherever miracles are wrought by the power of God, there will be found a true and righteous doctrine, unmixed with error: wherever miracles are wrought by the power of the devil, there will be found more or less false doctrine. Wherever miracles are wrought by the servants of God, they will do them in the name of Jesus Christ, after having obeyed the ordinances of the gospel; when the servants of the devil do miracles, if they pretend to do them in the name of Christ, it will be found by examination that they have not obeyed the ordinances of Christ, and therefore He suffers the devil to deceive them; but it is oftener the case that they do not perform them in the name of Christ, neither in the way that He has appointed, as in the case of mesmerism, clairvoyance, etc. Those who do miracles by the power of God, generally have a message to publish to the people by authority from God. The most of those who do miracles by the power of the devil, pretend to no message whatever; or if they pretend to have a message to deliver to the people, it will be found, on inspection, to be mixed with error." (Orson Pratt, MDOP, pp. 256-58.)

"It has been asserted that miracles are impossible, because they are contrary to the laws of nature, and that the supernatural element in the history of religion is, in our enlightened age, the main difficulty in the way of its acceptance. It is assumed that the so-called laws of nature are immutable, and that nothing can take place that appears to be contrary to such laws. To this objection the answer is, that we do not know all the laws of nature. We can, therefore, not maintain that the miracles performed by the servants of the Lord are not in perfect accord with some law of which we are ignorant. All we can say is that they do not belong to any of the classes of ordinary events with which men are familiar. But that is far from saying that they are impossible. As a matter of fact, violations of the best established laws of nature appear to be occurring constantly. We raise a weight from the ground. That seems to be contrary to the law of gravitation. Our bodies, for years, resist decay because of the action of the life-force within. That seems to be contrary to chemical laws governing matter. One force counteracts another; and besides, God's universe is not exclusively controlled by physical forces. Superior to these, directing and controlling them, is the divine will. As a captain, with a word of command, turns his immense ship in whatever direction he chooses, and controls his engines and everything, so God directs and controls His universe and all that pertains thereto, not contrary to, but in conformity with, laws and forces known to Him, even though unknown to us." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 516.)

Scriptural References:

D&C 24:13; 35:8; 45:8; 46:21; Num. 14:22; John 2:11, 23; 3:2; 12:37; Moro. 7:27, 37; 10:12.
