Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 2 ( 1978)

Missionary service

missionary work; every man to warn his neighbor

Any person who is truly converted to the gospel of Jesus Christ will naturally and anxiously want to share these truths with others. Also, the Lord has given commandments to his saints that, inasmuch as they have been warned of the impending destruction preceding the second coming of Jesus Christ, they have the responsibility to warn the others. Missionary service, then, has been one of the distinguishing characteristics of the true Church in this dispensation.

Selected quotations

"I will say as Paul did, 'Woe be unto me if I preach not the Gospel.' (1 Cor. 9:16.) I will say the same for the Apostles, the High Priests, the Seventies, and the Elders, so far as they are called to declare the word of life and salvation to this generation; the judgment of God will rest upon us if we do not do it. You may ask why. I answer, because a dispensation of the Gospel of Jesus Christ has never been given to man in ancient days or in this age, for any other purpose than for the salvation of the human family." (Wilford Woodruff, JD 22:204.)

"When we come into the Church, we covenant in the waters of baptism that we will do missionary work. We enter into a solemn contract with Deity that we will bear testimony of the restoration of the gospel on every appropriate occasion. We agree 'to stand as witnesses of God at all times and in all things, and in all places' that we 'may be in, even until death.' (Mosiah 18:9.) We are also bound by the command that the Lord has given by revelation in this day, that 'it becometh every man who hath been warned to warn his neighbor.' (D&C 88:81.) Thus we have an affirmative, positive, definite obligation resting upon us to do missionary work. This matter of carrying the gospel message to the world is not something that we can choose to do or not, if and when we may find it to be convenient. We are under covenant to do it 'at all times . . . and in all places . . . even until death.' (Mosiah 18:9.)

"We are indebted, each of us individually, to the missionaries who brought the gospel to us or to our ancestors; many of us owe these missionaries more than we owe anyone else. We received from them the pearl of great price. We have an obligation to discharge our debt, and one of the very best ways in which we can do this is to go forth ourselves as missionaries, or otherwise to use our talents and our means to see that others of our Father's children have the opportunity to receive that which has been restored in this day." (Bruce R. McConkie, CR, October 1960, pp. 54-55.)

"It is generally understood that every member of the Church should be a missionary. He is probably not authorized to go from house to house, but he is authorized, by virtue of his membership, to set a proper example as a good neighbor." (David O. McKay, CR, October 1958, p. 93.)

"Perhaps the greatest reason for missionary work is to give the world its chance to hear and accept the gospel. The scriptures are replete with commands and promises and calls and rewards for teaching the gospel. I use the word command deliberately for it seems to be an insistent directive from which we, singly and collectively, cannot escape. . . .

"I wonder if we are doing all we can. Are we complacent in our approach to teaching all the world? We have been proselyting now 144 years. Are we prepared to lengthen our stride? To enlarge our vision? . . ." (Spencer W. Kimball, Ensign, October 1974, pp. 4-5, 13.)

Scriptural References:

D&C 42:11; 50:17; 62:5; 71:1; 75:4; 84:61; 88:81; 90:11; 107:25; 133:8, 38; Moses 8:19; Matt. 28:19; Mark 16:15.
