Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 2 ( 1978)

Armor of the Lord

"take to you the whole armor of God"

The term armor of the Lord was used in biblical times (Eph. 6:10-18) as well as in modern scripture. The Bible lists several offensive and defensive weapons that comprise the armor (or arms) for war, including the following:

The Roman armor in the days of Paul consisted of essentially the same items. Thus, Paul used these elements in urging the former-day saints to put on the "whole armour" of God. (Eph. 6:10-13.)

The Lord uses most of these same terms in urging Latter-day Saints to be valiant in their testimonies:

Armor—27:15.

Breastplate of righteousness—27:16.

Feet shod with preparation of the gospel—27:16; 112:7.

Shield of faith—27:17.

Helmet of salvation—27:18.

Sword of the Lord's spirit—27:18.

The term gird up your loins (27:15; 35:14; 36:8; 38:9; 43:19; 61:38; 73:6; 75:22; 106:5; 112:7, 14) is also used by the Lord in connection with being prepared to defend his work.

Selected Quotations

"We have the four parts of the body that . . . [are] the most vulnerable to the powers of darkness. The loins, typifying virtue, chastity. The heart, typifying our conduct; our feet, our goals or objectives in life; and finally, our head, our thoughts. . . .

"We should have our loins girt about with truth. What is truth? Truth, the Lord said, is knowledge of things as they are, things as they were, and things as they are to come. [D&C 93:24.] . . . 'Our loins shall be girt about with truth,' the prophet said.

"And the heart, what kind of breastplate shall protect our conduct in life? We shall have over our hearts a breastplate of righteousness. Well, having learned truth we have a measure by which we can judge between right and wrong, and so our conduct will always be gauged by that thing which we know to be true. Our breastplate to cover our conduct shall be the breastplate of righteousness.

"By what shall we protect our feet, or by what shall we gauge our objectives or our goals in life? . . . 'Your feet shall be shod with the preparation of the gospel of peace.' [Eph. 6:15.] How fortunate are you if in your childhood in the home of your father and mother you were taught the doctrine of repentance, faith in Christ, the Son of the living God, the meaning of baptism and what you gain by the laying on of hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost. Fortunate is the child who has been taught to pray and who has been given those steps to take on through life. Feet shod with the preparation of the gospel of peace! . . .

"And then finally, the helmet of salvation. . . . What is salvation? Salvation is to be saved. Saved from what? Saved from death and saved from sin.

"[The] armoured man holds in his hand a shield and in his other hand a sword, which were the weapons of those days. The shield was the shield of faith and the sword was the sword of the spirit, which is the Word of God. I can't think of any more powerful weapons than faith and a knowledge of the scriptures, in which are contained the Word of God. One so armoured and one so prepared with those weapons is prepared to go out against the enemy that is more to be feared than the enemies that strike in the darkness of the night, that we can't see with our eyes." (Harold B. Lee, BYUSY, 1954.)

"'Above all, taking the shield of faith, wherewith ye shall be able to quench all the fiery darts of the wicked.' (Eph. 6:10-11, 14-16.)

"We were dressed in our home each morning, not only with hats and raincoats and boots to protect us from physical storm, but even more carefully our parents dressed us each day in the armor of God. As we would kneel in family prayer and listen to our father, a bearer of the priesthood, pour out his soul to the Lord for the protection of his family against the fiery darts of the wicked, one more layer was added to our shield of faith. While our shield was being made strong, theirs was always available, for they were available and we knew it." (L. Tom Perry, Ensign, May 1974, p. 98.)

Scriptural References:

D&C 27:15-18; Eph. 6:11, 13; 2 Ne. 1:23.
