Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 2 ( 1978)

Mysteries

mysteries of God; mysteries of the kingdom

One dictionary definition of mystery is "a religious truth that man can know by revelation alone and cannot fully understand." Actually there are no mysteries to God, because he understands and comprehends all things. Our Heavenly Father would like to reveal all of his truths to his children so they could receive the blessings associated with obedience to his laws. However, in his infinite wisdom, God also knows that some persons not only would not keep these laws, but might also use them for unrighteous purposes to their own damnation. He has indicated that he will reveal his truths "line upon line, precept upon precept, here a little and there a little . . . unto him that receiveth I will give more." (2 Ne. 28:30.)

In this dispensation, the Lord has promised that these unrevealed truths (mysteries) will be revealed as the people learn to faithfully keep the commandments and teachings he has already given.

Selected Quotations

"We are called to hold the keys of the mysteries of those things that have been kept hid from the foundation of the world until now. Some have tasted a little of these things, many of which are to be poured down from heaven upon the heads of babes; yea, upon the weak, obscure and despised ones of the earth. [D&C 128:18.] Therefore we beseech of you, brethren, that you bear with those who do not feel themselves more worthy than yourselves, while we exhort one another to a reformation with one and all, both old and young . . . let honesty, and sobriety, and candor, and solemnity, and virtue, and pureness, and meekness, and simplicity crown our heads in every place; and, in fine, become as little children, without malice, guile or hypocrisy." (Joseph Smith, HC 3:296.)

"The Lord has promised to reveal his mysteries to those who serve him in faithfulness. . . . There are no mysteries pertaining to the Gospel, only as we, in our weakness, fail to comprehend Gospel truth. The Gospel is very simple, so that even children at the age of accountability may understand it. Without question, there are principles which in this life we cannot understand, but when the fulness comes we will see that all is plain and reasonable and within our comprehension. The 'simple' principles of the Gospel, such as baptism, the atonement, are mysteries to those who do not have the guidance of the spirit of the Lord." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:40.)

"Many men will say, 'I will never forsake you, but will stand by you at all times.' But the moment you teach them some of the mysteries of the kingdom of God that are retained in the heavens and are to be revealed to the children of men when they are prepared for them, they will be the first to stone you and put you to death." (Joseph Smith, HC 5:424.)

"A mystery is a truth that cannot be known except through divine revelation—a sacred secret. In the days of Paul the important truth that Gentiles were to be admitted to the Kingdom of God without observing the Law of Moses was a 'mystery' (Eph. 1:9-11; Col. 1:25-27). In our day such great truths as those pertaining to the restoration of the Priesthood, the work for the dead, and the re-establishment of the Church are 'mysteries,' because they could not have been discovered except by revelation.

"It should be noted that when God revealed a truth to anyone, through the Prophet Joseph, President Brigham Young, or any of their successors, that truth was just as true, and just as binding, as if Peter, James, John, Gabriel, or Michael had been sent with the message. He who does not believe the word of God through a mortal messenger, would not believe one from the other side of mortality (Luke 16:31)." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 141.)

Scriptural References:

1 Cor. 2:7; 4:1; 13:2; Eph. 3:9; 5:32; 6:19; Alma 10:5; 12:9; 26:22; 37:4; 40:3.
