Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 2 ( 1978)

New Jerusalem

Both the New Testament and the modern scriptures speak of a New Jerusalem to be built in the latter days. Some have assumed that this refers to only one new city, but a careful reading indicates that there are several "new" Jerusalems, including (l) the city in Enoch's day, which will come with Jesus Christ at the time of his second coming; (2) the old city of Jerusalem in Israel, which will be rebuilt and thus will become new; and (3) a city called New Jerusalem, which will be built in Zion—the Americas. All of these new Jerusalems are mentioned in the revelations of the Doctrine and Covenants.

Selected Quotations

"'. . . What is the interpretation of Revelation 21:1, 2 with reference to the New Jerusalem coming down from God out of heaven?' . . .

"The prevailing notion in the world is that this is the city of Jerusalem, the ancient city of the Jews which in the day of regeneration will be renewed, but this is not the case. We read in the Book of Ether that the Lord revealed to him many of the same things which were seen by John. . . . In his vision, in many respects similar to that given to John, Enoch saw the old city of Jerusalem and also the new city which has not yet been built, and he wrote of them as follows. . . . [See Ether 13:2-11.]

"In the day of regeneration, when all things are made new, there will be three great cities that will be holy. One will be the Jerusalem of old which shall be rebuilt according to the prophecy of Ezekiel. One will be the city of Zion, or of Enoch, which was taken from the earth when Enoch was translated and which will be restored; and the city Zion, or New Jerusalem, which is to be built by the seed of Joseph on this the American continent. [Moses 7:62-64 quoted.]

"After the close of the millennial reign we are informed that Satan, who was bound during the millennium, shall be loosed and go forth to deceive the nations. Then will come the end. The earth will die and be purified and receive its resurrection. During this cleansing period the City Zion, or New Jerusalem, will be taken from the earth; and when the earth is prepared for the celestial glory, the city will come down according to the prediction in the Book of Revelation." (Joseph Fielding Smith, AGQ 2:103, 105-6.)

Scriptural References:

D&C 42:9, 62, 67; 45:66; 84:2, 4; 133:56; Moses 7:62; Rev. 3:12; 21:2; 3 Ne. 20:22; 21:20-25; Ether 13:3-11.
