Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 2 ( 1978)

Oath and covenant of the priesthood

(see also Priesthood)

All members of the Church make covenants with the Lord at the time of baptism, confirmation, and partaking of the sacrament. When worthy and qualified men receive the priesthood—the power and authority to act in the name of and in behalf of God—they take upon themselves the oath and covenant of the priesthood. This term is used in section 84 and has also been thoroughly explained by modern prophets, seers, and revelators.

Selected Quotations

"A covenant is an agreement between two or more parties. An oath is a sworn attestation to the inviolability of the promises in the agreement. In the covenant of the priesthood the parties are the Father and the receiver of the priesthood. Each party to the covenant undertakes certain obligations. The receiver undertakes to magnify his calling in the priesthood. The Father, by oath and covenant, promises the receiver that if he does so magnify his priesthood he will be sanctified by the Spirit unto the renewing of his body (see D&C 84:33); that he will become a member of '. . . the church and kingdom, and the elect of God,' (84:34) and receive the '. . . Father's kingdom; therefore,' said the Savior, 'all that my Father hath shall be given unto him.' (84:38.) . . .

"But these blessings do not come by ordination alone. Ordination to the priesthood is a prerequisite to receiving them, but it does not guarantee them. For a man actually to obtain them, he must faithfully discharge the obligation which is placed upon him when he receives the priesthood; that is, he must magnify his calling.

"It is apparent from this revelation [84:33-34] that the only way a man can make the life, for which mortality is designed, is to obtain and magnify the Melchizedek Priesthood. With '. . . eternal life, . . . the greatest of all the gifts of God' (D&C 14:7) depending upon it, it is of utmost importance that we keep clearly in mind what the magnifying of our callings in the priesthood requires of us. I am persuaded that it requires at least the following three things:

"1. That we obtain a knowledge of the gospel.

"2. That we comply in our personal living with the standards of the gospel.

"3. That we give dedicated service." (Marion G. Romney, IE, June 1962, pp. 416-17.)

"Christ is the great prototype where priesthood is concerned, as he is with reference to baptism and all other things. And so, even as the Father swears with an oath that his Son shall inherit all things through the priesthood, so he swears with an oath that all of us who magnify our callings in that same priesthood shall receive all that the Father hath. This is the promise of exaltation offered to every man who holds the Melchizedek Priesthood, but it is a conditional promise, a promise conditioned upon our magnifying our callings in the priesthood and living by every word that proceedeth forth from the mouth of God. . . . The Aaronic Priesthood is a preparatory priesthood to qualify us to make the covenant and receive the oath that attends this higher priesthood." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CR, October 1970, pp. 90-92.)

Scriptural References:

D&C 84:33-41; 124:47; Num. 25:13; Neh. 13:29; Mal. 2:4; Heb. 7:20-21.
