Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 2 ( 1978)

Obedience

law of obedience

Obedience is a principle of the gospel and is a requirement to gain heaven; in a sense, obedience might be considered a virtue in and of itself. Inasmuch as every blessing—and thus all happiness and joy—is conditioned (predicated) upon obedience to law, it is obvious that a loving, kind, merciful Heavenly Father who wants his children to be happy would hope and expect that they would obey those laws upon which such happiness is based. God requires us to be obedient, but this does not mean that he forces obedience. We are still free to choose wrong, but we must suffer the consequences of such disobedience; also, those who continue to wilfully disobey will never be able to meet the requirements of heaven.

Selected Quotations

"Obedience is a requirement of heaven and is therefore a principle of the gospel. [D&C 82:10; 130:20-21.] Are all required to be obedient? Yes, all. What, against their will? O no, not by any means. There is no power given to man nor means lawful to be used to compel men to obey the will of God, against their wish, except persuasion and good advice, but there is a penalty attached to disobedience which all must suffer who will not obey the obvious truths or laws of heaven." (Joseph F. Smith, JD 19:193.)

"Obedience is the first law of God. It is most important that we should be obedient to the word and will of the Lord. It was that which entitled the Son of God to be anointed above His brethren; for He was in all things most perfect and obedient. . . . The Lord is not going to give us everything without our doing something. He requires of us a broken heart, a contrite spirit, and an obedience to the mind and will of the Lord. [D&C 59:8; 82:10.]" (Francis M. Lyman, CR, October 1899, p. 35.)

"Children must learn obedience, and parents must exact obedience from them. Love your children, let them know that you love them; but remember that it is no favor to a child to let him do things he should not do. . . . We do not suggest blind obedience, but obedience by faith in those things which may not be fully understood by man's limited comprehension, but which in the infinite wisdom of God are for man's benefit and blessing." (N. Eldon Tanner, Ensign, November 1977, pp. 43-44.)

"There are several ways the Lord has set for us to learn obedience, so we may prove ourselves and merit His approval and blessings here and eternal glory with Him in the worlds to come.

"First of all, we have not been left to walk alone. The Lord has clearly revealed His will concerning His children and shown us His plan of redemption. His laws are explicitly recorded in the standard works of the Church. . . .

"A second way we learn obedience is by following the counsel of living prophets and other appointed Church leaders. . . .

"Third, we learn obedience by disciplining our lives in all things. One process by which we discipline ourselves is by repentance. . . .

"Finally, we learn obedience, as the Savior did, by the things which we suffer. . . .

"Keeping the commandments of God is not a difficult burden when we do it out of love of Him who has so graciously blessed us. . . . Our willingness to comply with the commandments of God is a witness of our faith in Him and our love for Him." (Delbert L. Stapley, Ensign, November 1977, pp. 18-21.)

Scriptural References:

D&C 89:18; 105:6; 130:19, 21; 132:50; A of F 1:2; Num. 27:20; 2 Cor. 2:9; Jacob 7:27.
