Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 2 ( 1978)

Patriarch

patriarchal blessings

The word patriarch comes to English from the Latin and the French and essentially means father. Webster's New Collegiate Dictionary (1977 ed.) also includes the following definition: "a Mormon of the Melchizedek priesthood empowered to perform the ordinances of the church and pronounce blessings within a stake or other prescribed jurisdiction."

The word does not appear a single time in the King James Version of the Old Testament and appears in only two books of the New Testament (Acts 2:29; 7:8, 9; and Heb. 7:4). The New Testament word evangelist, which has been given the same meaning as patriarch by some, appears only three times (Acts 21:8; Eph. 4:11; 2 Tim. 4:5).

The Doctrine and Covenants lists patriarch only three times (124:91, 124; 135:1) and patriarchal once (124:92).

Most of the information concerning the office of patriarch and the purposes of patriarchal blessings comes from subsequent quotations and explanations of the Prophet Joseph Smith and others of the General Authorities.

Patriarch

"An Evangelist is a Patriarch, even the oldest man of the blood of Joseph or of the seed of Abraham. Wherever the Church of Christ is established in the earth, there should be a Patriarch for the benefit of the posterity of the Saints, as it was with Jacob in giving his patriarchal blessing unto his sons, etc." (Joseph Smith, HC 3:381.)

"Evangelists are patriarchs and they hold the right to bless and pronounce by the spirit of revelation the lineage of members of the Church. . . . There is in the Church the office of patriarch to, or of, the Church, sometimes called the 'presiding' patriarch. This office was first conferred upon Joseph Smith, Sen., in this dispensation, and was given to him by revelation and right of lineage. This office by divine appointment comes down by lineage and rightfully belongs to the family of Hyrum, son of Joseph Smith, Sen., and descends by the law of primogeniture. Joseph, son of Israel, because of the transgression of his older brethren, received this birthright and it was conferred upon his son, Ephraim, and has continued down through that lineage." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 2:20-21.)

"A Patriarch to the church is appointed to bless those who are orphans, or have no father in the church to bless them. . . . Where the Church is so extensive . . . other patriarchs have been ordained . . . to assist the Patriarch to the church." (John Taylor, Times and Seasons 6:928.)

Patriarchal Blessings

"Patriarchal blessings contemplate an inspired declaration of the lineage of the recipient, and also where so moved upon by the Spirit, an inspired and prophetic statement of the life mission of the recipient, together with such blessings, cautions, and admonitions as the patriarch may be prompted to give for the accomplishment of such life's mission, it being always made clear that the realization of all promised blessings is conditioned upon faithfulness to the gospel of our Lord, whose servant the patriarch is." (First Presidency, Letter to Stake Presidents, June 28, 1958.)

"A patriarchal blessing today, given by an ordained patriarch, should contain a declaration of lineage, that is, the tribe of Israel through which the promises of inheritance shall come, even as assignments of inheritances were given in ancient Israel. . . . It is required that patriarchal blessings be recorded in the Church records." (Eldred G. Smith, CR, April 1952, pp. 38-39.)

"A patriarchal blessing is a sacred document to the person who has received it and is never given for publication and, as all patriarchal blessings, should be kept as a private possession to the one who has received it." (Harold B. Lee, Ensign, January 1973, p. 105.)

"These are happy days, the days of the patriarchs, and it is our great hope that every person, including the older youth, will be given the opportunity of having a patriarchal blessing, which is recorded in the official records of the Church.

"I have great confidence in the patriarchs and in their blessings. When the patriarch is a faithful Latter-day Saint and remains close to the Lord and is a student of the scriptures, the promises which he makes under his special authority and calling will be fulfilled, if the recipient of the blessing is faithful and true.

"Of course, it is the right of every father and his duty as patriarch of his own family to give a father's blessing to his children, and it is our hope that every father will give a sacred blessing to each of his children, especially as they are leaving home to go to school or on missions or to be married, which blessing should then be noted in the individual's private journal." (Spencer W. Kimball, Ensign, November 1977, p.4.)

Scriptural References:

D&C 124:91-96, 124; 135:1; Abr. 1:25-26; A of F 1:6; Acts 2:29; 7:8-9; 21:8; Eph. 4:11; 2 Tim. 4:5; Heb. 7:4.
