Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 2 ( 1978)

Perdition

sons of perdition; Lucifer (see also Satan)

The word perdition means "lost"; when the term is used to refer to a person, it means "the lost one." Lucifer is perdition—the lost one—and the people who follow after him are the sons of perdition. Generally the term son of perdition is used to refer to anyone who is evil or wicked. It is used by Latter-day Saints to refer to those who have committed the unpardonable sin (the sin against the Holy Ghost) and thus will not inherit any degree of glory.

Selected Quotations

"A man cannot commit the unpardonable sin after the dissolution of the body, and there is a way possible for escape. . . .

"No man can commit the unpardonable sin after the dissolution of the body, nor in this life, until he receives the Holy Ghost; but they must do it in this world. Hence the salvation of Jesus Christ was wrought out for all men, in order to triumph over the devil; for he stood up as a Savior. All will suffer until they obey Christ himself. [D&C 19:15-19.]

"All sins shall be forgiven, except the sin against the Holy Ghost; for Jesus will save all except the sons of perdition. [Matt. 12:31-32.] What must a man do to commit the unpardonable sin? He must receive the Holy Ghost, have the heavens opened unto him, and know God, and then sin against him. After a man has sinned against the Holy Ghost, there is no repentance for him. He has got to say that the sun does not shine while he sees it; he has got to deny Jesus Christ when the heavens have been opened unto him, and to deny the plan of salvation with his eyes open to the truth of it; and from that time he begins to be an enemy. [D&C 132:27.] This is the case with many apostates of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints." (Joseph Smith, HC 6:313-14.)

"Commission of the unpardonable sin consists in crucifying unto oneself the Son of God afresh and putting him to open shame. (Heb. 6:4-8; D&C 76:34-35.) To commit this unpardonable crime a man must receive the gospel, gain from the Holy Ghost by revelation the absolute knowledge of the divinity of Christ, and then deny 'the new and everlasting covenant by which he was sanctified, calling it an unholy thing, and doing despite to the Spirit of grace.' (TPJS, p. 128.) He thereby commits murder by assenting unto the Lord's death, that is, having a perfect knowledge of the truth he comes out in open rebellion and places himself in a position wherein he would have crucified Christ knowing perfectly the while that he was the Son of God. Christ is thus crucified afresh and put to open shame. (D&C 132:27.)" (Bruce R. McConkie, MD, pp. 816-17.)

"In many minds there has been a great misapprehension on the question of the resurrection. Some have had the idea . . . that the sons of perdition will not be resurrected at all. They base this idea, and draw this conclusion, from the 38th and 39th paragraphs of Section 76 of the book of Doctrine and Covenants. . . .

"A careful reading of these verses, however, and especially of the preceding paragraphs, will show that the Lord does not, in this language, exclude even the sons of perdition from the resurrection. It is plain that the intention is to refer to them explicitly as the only ones on whom the second death shall have any power: 'for all the rest shall be brought forth by the resurrection of the dead, through the triumph and glory of the Lamb.' This excluded class are the only ones on whom the second death shall have any power, and 'the only ones who shall not be redeemed in the due time of the Lord after the sufferings of his wrath.'

"This is by no means to say that they are to have no resurrection. Jesus our Lord and Savior died for all, and all will be resurrected." (George Q. Cannon, JI 35:123-24.)

"Evidently many among us have made a dreadful mistake, but not unpardonable, in thinking that the sons of perdition will be very few. We have heard it said at times that they will be so few that they probably could be 'counted on the fingers of one hand.' Where this thought originated we may not know. From the reading of the scriptures it appears that there will be a large number; far too many even if there were but one, for their punishment is most severe without any question." (Joseph Fielding Smith, AGQ 1:78.)

Scriptural References:

D&C 76:26, 32, 43; Moses 5:24; Job 17:12; Philip. 1:28; 2 Thes. 2:3; 1 Tim. 6:9; Heb. 10:39; 2 Pet. 3:7; Rev. 17:8, 11; 3 Ne. 27:32; 29:7.
