Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 2 ( 1978)

Post-earthly spirit world

The post-earthly spirit world (the place where the spirit goes when the body dies physically) is not the same place as the pre-earthly spirit world (where the spirit lived before it came to the earth in a physical body). Some Latter-day Saints have wrongly concluded that these two places are the same because of an incorrect interpretation of Alma's words to Corianton that "the spirits of all men, as soon as they are departed from this mortal body . . . whether they be good or evil, are taken home to that God who gave them life." (Alma 40:11.) Several modern prophets have indicated that this scripture does not mean that the spirits of the departed go into the actual physical presence of our Heavenly Father where they existed before their earthly experience; rather, the scripture means that upon death the spirits of the deceased go back into a spiritual existence where they can see, hear, and understand spiritual things, much as they could before the earthly experience while they lived in the presence of God.

There are at least two major divisions in the post-earthly spirit world:

In a general sense, the whole post-earthly spirit world is a spirit prison because no disembodied spirit can enjoy a fulness of joy until it is resurrected with its physical body. (D&C 93:33-34.) Even the spirits of the righteous in paradise are in a spirit prison, and it was to these spirits that the Savior went to preach while his body was in the tomb. (1 Pet. 3:18-21; 4:6; D&C 76:73-74; 138:1-60.)

In a more specific sense the term spirit prison is used to refer to that part of the post-earthly spirit world where the wicked dwell. (Moses 7:37-39.)

Selected Quotations

"As for my going into the immediate presence of God when I die, I do not expect it, but I expect to go into the world of spirits and associate with my brethren, and preach the Gospel in the spiritual world, and prepare myself in every necessary way to receive my body again, and then enter through the wall into the celestial world. I never shall come into the presence of my Father and God until I have received my resurrected body, neither will any other person." (Heber C. Kimball, JD 3:112-l 3.)

"We will take the best men we can find—when they pass through the veil they are in happiness, they are in glory, they go among the disembodied spirits; but they do not go where there are resurrected bodies, for they cannot live there. . . . They also go into the spiritual world to live with spirits. Do they commune with the Father and Son? The Father communes with them as He pleases, through the means of angels, or otherwise the Son and Holy Ghost. . . .

"No spirit of Saint or sinner, of the Prophet or him that kills the Prophet, is prepared for their final state: All pass through the veil from this state and go into the world of spirits; and there they dwell, waiting for their final destiny." (Brigham Young, JD 6:293-94.)

"The great misery of departed spirits in the world of spirits, where they go after death, is to know that they come short of the glory that others enjoy and that they might have enjoyed themselves, and they are their own accusers." (Joseph Smith, HC 5:425.)

Scriptural Reference:

Alma 40:11-14.
