Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 2 ( 1978)

Prayer

ask, seek, knock; communication with God

Before the Lord sent his children upon the earth, he provided means by which he could communicate with them (through the Holy Ghost, prophets, scriptures, etc.) and by which they could communicate with him (prayer). He has counseled us to "ask, seek, knock" and has promised that if we ask in faith with "nothing wavering," he will answer our prayers for our good.

Selected Quotations

"Man's needs are many. He has little, if any, power of himself to supply them. Therefore, he turns to God for the necessary help. This he can properly do, for the Lord, who has placed man on earth with limited powers, has declared Himself ready to assist His children. He has given them the privilege to address Divinity, with the assurance of being heard. Indeed, He has requested them to approach Him in prayer for guidance in solving life's problems.

"Prayer is really the beginning of wisdom. By prayer, communion between man and God is established and maintained. It brings man and his Maker into close association. Earnest, sincere prayer places man in tune with heaven and with the Beings who dwell therein. The knowledge and power thus gained from the unseen world are very real. . . .

"Every prayer is heard, and every sincere prayer is answered. They who pray should be content to await the answer at the time and in the manner comporting with God's wisdom. He knows what is for our good and bestows His blessings accordingly. The testimony of untold millions that their prayers have been heard is a convincing testimony that God hears and answers prayers.

"A prayer is not complete unless gratitude for blessings received is expressed. It is by the power of the Lord that we 'live and move and have our being.' [Acts 17:28.] This should be frankly stated gratefully as we pray to our Father in heaven." (John A. Widtsoe, ER 1:311-13.)

"Henry Ward Beecher once said, 'It is not well for a man to pray cream and live skim milk.' That was a century ago. There is now before us a danger that many may pray skim milk and live that not at all.

"Our modern times seem to suggest that prayerful devotion and reverence for holiness is unreasonable or undesirable, or both. And yet, skeptical 'modern' men have need for prayer. Perilous moments, great responsibility, deep anxiety, overwhelming grief—these challenges that shake us out of old complacencies and established routines will bring to the surface our native impulses. If we let them, they will humble us, soften us, and turn us to respectful prayer.

"If prayer is only a spasmodic cry at the time of crisis, then it is utterly selfish, and we come to think of God as a repairman or a service agency to help us only in our emergencies. We should remember the Most High day and night—always—not only at times when all other assistance has failed and we desperately need help. If there is any element in human life on which we have a record of miraculous success and inestimable worth to the human soul, it is prayerful, reverential, devout communication with our Heavenly Father." (Howard W. Hunter, Ensign, November 1977, p. 52.)

"Learn how to pray and how to receive answers to your prayers. When you pray over some things, you must patiently wait a long, long time before you will receive an answer. Some prayers, for your own safety, must be answered immediately, and some promptings will even come when you haven't prayed at all. Once you really determine to follow that guide, your testimony will grow and you will find provisions set out along the way in unexpected places, as evidence that someone knew that you would be traveling that way." (Boyd K. Packer, CR, April 1976, p. 47.)

"May I be bold enough to suggest that your Heavenly Father knows you personally and can call you by name. . . . This thought itself is admittedly almost beyond the comprehension of mortal understanding, but please, let us not limit the Creator of heaven and earth in any way, for his powers are limitless, and the basic concept must hold that a father knows his children.

"As a child of God kneels to pray, that individual must believe implicitly that his prayer is being heard by him to whom the prayer is addressed. The thought that our Heavenly Father is too busy or that our message is being recorded by celestial computers for possible future consideration is unthinkable and inconsistent with all we have been taught by his holy prophets." (Robert L. Simpson, IE, June 1970, p. 82.)

"Prayer does not consist of words altogether. True, faithful, earnest prayer consists more in the feeling that rises from the heart and from the inward desire of our spirits to supplicate the Lord in humility and in faith, that we may receive his blessings. It matters not how simple the words may be, if our desires are genuine and we come before the Lord with a broken heart and a contrite spirit to ask him for that which we need. . . .

"Do not learn to pray with your lips only. Do not learn a prayer by heart, and say it every morning and evening. . . . A great many people fall into the rut of saying over a ceremonious prayer. They begin at a certain point, and they touch at all the points along the road until they get to the winding-up scene; and when they have done, I do not know whether the prayer has ascended beyond the ceiling of the room or not." (Joseph F. Smith, CR, October 1899, pp. 69, 71-72.)

"May I . . . suggest some ways to improve our communication with our Heavenly Father.

"1. We should pray frequently. . . .

"2. We should find an appropriate place where we can meditate and pray. . . .

"3. We should prepare ourselves for prayer. . . .

"4. Our prayers should be meaningful and pertinent. . . .

"In all of our prayers it is well to use the sacred pronouns of the scriptures—Thee, Thou, Thy, and Thine—when addressing Deity in prayer, instead of the more common pronouns of you, your, and yours. In this arrangement we show greater respect to Deity. . . .

"5. After making a request through prayer, we have a responsibility to assist in its being granted. We should listen. Perhaps while we are on our knees, the Lord wants to counsel us." (Ezra Taft Benson, Ensign, May 1977, pp. 32-33.)

Scriptural References:

D&C 29:2;42:14; 43:12; 52:9; 59:14; 63:64-65; 81:3; 84:61; 88:76, 119; 93:51-52; Matt. 5:44; 6:7; Alma 34:39; 58:10; Moro. 2:2.
