Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 2 ( 1978)

Pre-earthly existence

council in heaven; from the foundation of the earth

According to the Inspired Version of the Bible, the Bible at one time clearly and definitely taught the pre-earthly existence of all mankind. Unfortunately, many of the plain and precious references concerning this subject in the book of Genesis have either been lost or deleted from the biblical text.

Modern scriptures, particularly the Pearl of Great Price, but also the Doctrine and Covenants, have helped to restore the truth that we are all spirit children of our Heavenly Father and we lived with him before we came to the earth. Life on this earth (our second estate) is simply the continuation of our pre-earthly existence (our first estate). Life will continue after our death from this earth, first in the post-earthly spirit world and then in the resurrected state.

Selected Quotations

"The mind or the intelligence which man possesses is co-equal with God Himself. . . . I am dwelling on the immortality of the spirit of man. Is it logical to say that the intelligence of spirits is immortal and yet that it had a beginning? The intelligence of spirits had no beginning, neither will it have an end. That is good logic. That which has a beginning may have an end. There never was a time when there were not spirits; for they are co-equal (co-eternal) with our Father in heaven. . . . Intelligence is eternal and exists upon a self-existent principle. It is a spirit from age to age, and there is no creation about it." (Joseph Smith, TPJS, pp. 353-54.)

"'The spirit of man is not a created being; it existed from eternity, and will exist to eternity. Anything created cannot be eternal; and earth, water, etc., had their existence in an elementary state, from eternity.' (HC 3:387.) We learn by this that the intelligent part of man always existed. We are all born sons and daughters of God in the spirit. . . .

"It is a glorious thing to know that we are in very deed the begotten children of God, the Father, in the spirit and that Jesus Christ is the first born in the spirit and the only begotten of the Father in the flesh." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 2:221-23.)

"The doctrine of the pre-existence,—revealed so plainly, particularly in latter days, pours a wonderful flood of light upon the otherwise mysterious problem of man's origin. It shows that man, as a spirit, was begotten and born of heavenly parents, and reared to maturity in the eternal mansions of the Father, prior to coming upon the earth in a temporal body to undergo an experience in mortality. It teaches that all men existed in the spirit before any man existed in the flesh, and that all who have inhabited the earth since Adam have taken bodies and become souls in a like manner. . . . Man is the child of God, formed in the divine image and endowed with divine attributes, and even as the infant of an earthly father and mother is capable in due time of becoming a man, so the undeveloped offspring of celestial parentage is capable, by experience through ages and aeons, of evolving into a God." (First Presidency, Messages of the First Presidency 4:205-6.)

"Man is a dual being; and his life, a plan of God. Man has a natural body and a spiritual body. Man's body is but the tabernacle in which his spirit dwells. Too many, far too many, are prone to regard the body as the man, and consequently to direct their efforts to the gratifying of the body's pleasures, its appetites, its desires, its passions. Too few recognize that the real man is an immortal spirit, which 'intelligence or the light of truth,' animated as an individual entity before the body was begotten, and that this spiritual entity with all its distinguishing traits will continue after the body ceases to respond to its earthly environment." (David O. McKay, Instructor 100:122.)

"During the ages in which we dwelt in the pre-mortal state we not only developed our various characteristics and showed our worthiness and ability, or the lack of it, but we were also where such progress could be observed. . . . Under such conditions it was natural for our Father to discern and choose those who were most worthy and evaluate the talents of each individual. He knew not only what each of us could do, but what each of us would do when put to the test and when responsibility was given us. Then, when the time came for our habitation on mortal earth, all things were prepared and the servants of the Lord chosen and ordained to their respective missions." (Joseph Fielding Smith, WP, pp. 50-51 )

"We have no scriptural justification . . . for the belief that we had the privilege of choosing our parents and our life companions in the spirit world. This belief has been advocated by some, and it is possible that in some instances it is true, but it would require too great a stretch of the imagination to believe it to be so in all, or even in the majority of cases. Most likely we came where those in authority decided to send us. Our agency may not have been exercised to the extent of making choice of parents and posterity." (Joseph Fielding Smith, WP, pp. 44-45.)

Scriptural References:

D&C 29:36-38; 38:1; 49:7; 76:25-27; 93:29; 138:53; Moses 3:5; 4:1-4; 6:36; Abr. 3:22-28; Job 12:10; Eccl. 12:7; Jer. 1:4-5; Luke 10:17-20; John 1:2; 8:58; 9:1-2; 16:28; 17:5; Eph. 1:4; Heb. 12:9; Jude 1:6; Rev. 12:7-9; 3 Ne. 26:5; Ether 3:16.
