Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 2 ( 1978)

Priesthood

priesthood of God (see also Aaronic Priesthood; Keys of priesthood; Melchizedek Priesthood; Oath and covenant of the priesthood; Priesthood offices)

The priesthood of God is the power and authority to act for and in the name of God. The revelations of the latter days provide detailed definitions and explanations of this priesthood, list many of the offices in the priesthood, and explain many of the duties of priesthood members.

Selected Quotations

"The priesthood of the Son of God is the law by which the worlds are, were, and will continue for ever and ever. It is that system which brings worlds into existence and peoples them, gives them their revolutions—their days, weeks, months, years, their seasons and times and by which they . . . go into a higher state of existence." (Brigham Young, JD 15:127.)

"It is nothing more nor less than the power of God delegated to man by which man can act in the earth for the salvation of the human family, in the name of the Father and the Son and the Holy Ghost, and act legitimately; not assuming that authority, not borrowing it from generations that are dead and gone, but authority that has been given in this day in which we live by ministering angels and spirits from above, direct from the presence of Almighty God." (Joseph F. Smith, CR, October 1904, p. 5.)

"The Holy Priesthood is the channel through which God communicates and deals with man upon the earth; and the heavenly messengers that have visited the earth to communicate with man are men who held and honored the priesthood while in the flesh; and everything that God has caused to be done for the salvation of man, from the coming of man upon the earth to the redemption of the world, has been and will be by virtue of the everlasting priesthood." (Wilford Woodruff, MS 51:657.)

"Women do not hold the priesthood. Some have thought that they might and do to some extent. I shall read two statements to indicate what the Church's position is with reference to the place of woman as she relates to the Priesthood. President Joseph Fielding Smith, quoting from his father [Joseph F. Smith], says:

Does a wife hold the priesthood of her husband, and may she lay hands on the sick with him, with authority? A wife does not hold the priesthood with her husband, but she enjoys the benefits thereof with him; and if she is requested to lay hands on the sick with him . . . she may do so with perfect propriety. . . . When this is done the wife is adding her faith to the administration of her husband. The wife would lay on hands just as would a member of the Aaronic Priesthood, or a faithful brother without the priesthood, she in this manner giving support by faith to the ordinance performed by her husband. (Joseph Fielding Smith, DS 3:177.)

"I want you to get the distinction that he makes there—the husband performs the ordinance by the authority of the priesthood, and she (if she joins with him in such an experience) would do it only to add her faith to his, but not by any authority of the priesthood. Brother Widtsoe has added another note to this matter when he says:

By divine fiat, the Priesthood is conferred on the men. This means that organization must prevail in the family, the ultimate unit of the Church. The husband, the Priesthood bearer, presides over the family; the Priesthood conferred upon him is intended for the blessing of the whole family. Every member shares in the gift bestowed, but under a proper organization. No man who understands the gospel believes that he is greater than his wife, or more beloved of the Lord, because he holds the Priesthood, but rather that he is under the responsibility of speaking and acting for the family in official matters. It is a protection to the woman who, because of her motherhood, is under a large physical and spiritual obligation. Motherhood is an eternal part of Priesthood. (John A. Widtsoe, ER, pp. 307-8.)" (Harold B. Lee, ASIF, BYU, July 17, 1958.)

Scriptural References:

D&C (check index for subject); Moses 6:7; Abr. 1:4, 18, 26-27, 31; 2:9, 11; JS-H 2:38, 69-74; Ex. 40:15; Num. 25:13; Heb. 7:24; 1 Pet. 2:9; Alma 13:8.
