Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 2 ( 1978)

Priesthood offices

(see also Church offices and presiding quorums; Priesthood)

Several offices in the priesthood have been identified in the revelations of this dispensation. In the Aaronic Priesthood are the offices of deacon, teacher, priest, and bishop; the first two of these comprised the Levitical Priesthood in ancient times. In the Melchizedek Priesthood are the offices of elder, seventy, high priest, patriarch, apostle, and president of the Church.

Terminology used in regard to the bestowal of the priesthood and its keys indicates that a person has the priesthood conferred upon him (Aaronic Priesthood, etc.); he is ordained to an office in the priesthood (deacon, etc.); and he is set apart to a particular position (president of the deacons quorum, etc.).

Apostle

"The title 'Apostle' is one of special significance and sanctity; it has been given of God, and belongs only to those who have been called and ordained as 'special witnesses of the name of Christ in all the world, thus differing from other officers in the Church in the duties of their calling.' (D&C 107:23.) By derivation the word 'Apostle' is the English equivalent of the Greek 'apostolos,' indicating a messenger, an ambassador, or literally 'one who is sent.' It signifies that he who is rightly so called, speaks and acts not of himself, but as the representative of a higher power whence his commission issued; and in this sense the title is that of a servant, rather than of a superior. Even the Christ, however, is called an Apostle, with reference to His ministry in the flesh (Heb. 3:1); and this appellation is justified by His repeated declarations that He came to earth to do not His own will but that of the Father by whom He was sent. [John 4:34; 5:30; 6:38-39.]

"So great is the sanctity of this special calling, that the title 'Apostle' should not be used lightly as the common or ordinary form of address applied to living men called to this office. The quorum or council of the Twelve Apostles as existent in the Church today may better be spoken of as the 'Quorum of the Twelve,' the 'Council of the Twelve,' or simply as the 'Twelve,' and not as the 'Twelve Apostles,' except as particular occasion may warrant the use of the more sacred term. It is advised that the title 'Apostle' be not applied as a prefix to the name of any member of the Council of the Twelve; but that such a one be addressed or spoken of as Brother _______ or Elder ______, and when necessary or desirable, as in announcing his presence in a public assembly, an explanatory clause may be added, thus, 'Elder__________ one of the Council of the Twelve.'" (James E. Talmage, Liahona or Elders' Journal 11:580-81.)

"What ordination should a man receive to possess all the keys and powers of the Holy Priesthood that were delivered to the sons of Adam? He should be ordained an Apostle of Jesus Christ. That office puts him in possession of every key, every power, every authority, communication, benefit, blessing, glory, and kingdom that was ever revealed to man. That pertains to the office of an Apostle of Jesus Christ." (Brigham Young, JD 9:87.)

Patriarch

"The calling of a patriarch or an evangelist is to bless the people or members of the Church. We read of evangelists in the New Testament but find nothing there to indicate what the particular duties of this calling in the priesthood are. [Acts 21:8; Eph. 4:11; 2 Tim. 4:5.] This information has come to us only through the revelations of the Lord to the Prophet Joseph Smith. The Lord instructed the Twelve Apostles of his Church in this dispensation 'to ordain evangelical ministers, as they shall be designated unto them by revelation' in all large branches of the Church. (See D&C 107:39.)" (LeGrand Richards, MWW, p. 125.)

High Priest

"A High Priest is a member of the same Melchizedek Priesthood with the Presidency, but not of the same power or authority in the church." (Joseph Smith, HC 2:477.)

"The duty of a High Priest is to administer in spiritual and holy things, and to hold communion with God." (Joseph Smith, HC 1:338.)

"We have in each stake of Zion an organization called the High Priests' quorum, to which all High Priests of the Church belong, including the presidency and high councilors of the stake, and also the Bishops and their counselors, all the Patriarchs and all others who have been ordained to the office of High Priest in the Church." (Joseph F. Smith, CR, October 1904, pp. 3-4.)

Seventy

"Seventies are primarily traveling elders, especially ordained to promulgate the Gospel among the nations of the earth, 'unto the Gentiles first, and also unto the Jews.' . . . A full quorum comprises seventy members, including seven presidents." (James E. Talmage, AF, p. 207.)

"Effective immediately, stake presidents may ordain seventies and set apart presidents of seventy in their stakes . . . This should eliminate many long delays and create a good working relationship between the stake leaders and their seventies, and we hope that new emphasis may come to missionary work." (Spencer W. Kimball, Ensign, May 1974, p. 86.)

Elder

"A person who is ordained to the office of an Elder in this kingdom has the same Priesthood that the High Priests, that the Twelve Apostles, that the Seventies, and that the First Presidency hold . . . but every man in his order and place, possessing a portion of the same Priesthood, according to the gifts and callings to each." (Brigham Young, JD 9:89.)

"The duty of the Elder is to be a standing minister in Zion, to administer in spiritual things, to administer the sacrament, to baptize, to lay on hands for the reception of the Holy Ghost, to take the lead of all meetings when no higher authority is present, and to conduct them under the influence and power of the Holy Ghost." (Rudger Clawson, CR, April 1902, p. 29.)

"The First Presidency and the Council of the Twelve have approved the organization of an elders quorum in every ward and independent branch. The elders, regardless of number, up to 96, residing in a particular ward or independent branch, may be constituted as an elders quorum, with a presidency. Where there are more than 96 elders, the quorum should be divided. It is felt by the Brethren that this great reservoir of power and strength can best be used to its greatest value to have strong, active quorums of elders in the more local jurisdictions." (Spencer W. Kimball, Ensign, May 1974, p. 86.)

"Elder is a title comprising all who hold the Melchizedek Priesthood. (1 Tim. 5:17.) Apostles are elders, as are also bishops. (Tit. 1:5-7.)" (Brigham Young, JD 9:89.)

Bishop

"The Bishop, as such, is a Priest who presides over the Aaronic Priesthood, and his duty is to administer in temporal affairs." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 710.)

"I conceive it to be the duty of a Bishop to be the executive officer of the ward, to deal in temporal affairs, and to be a common judge in Israel, and to sit in the Bishop's court and adjudicate and regulate the affairs of his ward, with his counselors. It is the duty of the Bishop particularly to see that the presidencies of the quorums of the Lesser Priesthood are active and faithful. Let him see also that the presidencies of the auxiliary organizations are faithful in the performance of their duty." (Rudger Clawson, CR, April 1902, p. 30.)

"There is no retrograde movement in ordaining a High Priest to the office of a Bishop, for, properly speaking, he is set apart to act in that office. . . .

". . . The duties and powers of a Bishop cease the very moment he steps over the Aaronic Priesthood, which is to officiate in temporal things; when he passes this he immediately begins to officiate by the authority and power of the Melchizedek Priesthood, though he may not know it." (Brigham Young, JD 10:96-97.)

"Each ward should have one or more quorums of priests (forty-eight), teachers (twenty-four), and deacons (twelve), each with a presidency of three [except the priests quorum]. The ward bishopric presides in a general way over all the quorums of the Aaronic Priesthood in the ward, and over all church members, as individuals, residing therein. The bishop of the ward is ex-officio president of the priest's quorum." (Orson F. Whitney, SNT, p. 228.)

Priest

"The duties of a Priest are here enumerated. His office is the most advanced in the Aaronic Priesthood. In the Mosaic dispensation the Priests were ordained to instruct and pray for the people, and to offer sacrifices for them." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 108.)

"The duty of the Priest is to preach, teach and expound the scriptures, to baptize, to administer the sacrament, to visit the homes of the people, to pray with them vocally, and to teach them all family duties." (Rudger Clawson, CR, April 1902, p. 29.)

"From a retrospect of the requirements of the servants of God to preach the Gospel, if a Priest understands his duty, his calling, and ministry, and preaches by the Holy Ghost, his enjoyment is as great as if he were one of the Presidency; and his services are necessary in the body, as are also those of Teachers and Deacons." (Joseph Smith, HC 2:478.)

Teacher

"The duty of the Teacher is to watch over the Church, to be with the Church constantly, and strengthen it, to see that iniquity doth not abound, to see that there is no evil-speaking, or backbiting, and to preach, teach, exhort, and expound; and he is to be assisted in his duties by the Deacon; but the Teacher and the Deacon have no authority to baptize, or administer the sacrament. They do have the authority, however, to preach the gospel, to show forth a good example, to warn the people and invite all to come unto Christ." (Rudger Clawson, CR, April 1902, p. 29.)

Deacon

"The duty of Deacons is to assist the Teachers. A Deacon holds the power and authority first bestowed in the Aaronic Priesthood. One who performs those duties well, thereby qualifies himself for the more advanced positions.

"It was customary in Paul's days to ordain mature men to the office of Deacons, because the conditions of the Saints were such that only elderly people could be used to advantage. The Church was new, and adults were converted; perhaps only few, if any, were born and educated in the Church. . . . In our day . . . the Priesthood is conferred on boys of twelve and thirteen who are found faithful and worthy. . . . The appointment of boys to the Deaconship is done under the direction of the constituted authority of the Lord, though the exact date of its beginning is perhaps not on record." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 108.)

Scriptural References:

D&C (check index for subject); JS-H 2:72; Ex. 3:16; Philip. 1:1; 1 Tim. 3:8, 10, 12-13; 2 Ne. 5:26; Jacob 1:18, Jarom 1:11; Moro. 4:1.
