Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 2 ( 1978)

Prophecy

(see also Gifts of the Spirit)

The gift of prophecy from God is one of the unfailing signs of the true church. There are at least three prerequisites to prophecy:

Selected Quotations

"There is no office growing out of this Priesthood that is or can be greater than the Priesthood itself. It is from the Priesthood that the office derives its authority and power. No office gives authority to the Priesthood. No office adds to the power of the Priesthood. But all offices in the Church derive their power, their virtue, their authority, from the Priesthood. . . .

"The office of an Elder, of a High Priest, of a Seventy—all the offices in the Church are simply appendages to the Melchizedek Priesthood, and grow out of it." (Joseph F. Smith CR, October 1903, pp. 82, 87.)

"The first office held in this dispensation was that of Elder. Joseph Smith was ordained by Oliver Cowdery to be the first Elder of the Church, and Oliver Cowdery was ordained to be the second Elder of the Church on the 6th day of April, 1830. Following this ordination, as the Church increased in membership, deacons, teachers, and priests were ordained, also other elders. On the third day of June, 1831, the first high priests were ordained. Among this number was Joseph Smith the Prophet. He was ordained at his request to the office of high priest, under the hand of Lyman Wight, who had been previously ordained to the office by Joseph Smith the Prophet." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:61-62.)

"As Joseph F. Smith clearly stated regarding the President of the church: 'Every officer in the Church is under his direction, and he is directed of God.' (Gospel Doctrine, p. 174.) Let us always remember this. The President of the Church holds the keys of the Melchizedek Priesthood, and there is no business or office in the Church that the President of the Church may not fill. In fact, every office in the Church belongs to the President. The Lord, in speaking to the Prophet Joseph Smith, said: 'And again, the duty of the President of the office of the High Priesthood is to preside over the whole church, and to be like unto Moses—Behold, here is wisdom; yea, to be a seer, a revelator, a translator, and a prophet, having all the gifts of God which he bestows upon the head of the church.' (D&C 107:91-92.)" (N. Eldon Tanner, Ensign, January 1973, p.103.)

"The President of the Church has a . . . special spiritual endowment . . . for he is the prophet, seer, and revelator for the whole Church.

"Here we must have in mind—must know—that only the President of the Church, the Presiding High Priest, is sustained as prophet, seer, and revelator for the Church, and he alone has the right to receive revelations for the Church, either new or amendatory, or to give authoritative interpretations of scriptures that shall be binding on the Church, or change in any way the existing doctrines of the Church. He is God's sole mouthpiece on earth for The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, the only true Church. He alone may declare the mind and will of God to his people. No officer of any other Church in the world has this high right and lofty prerogative.

"So when any other person, irrespective of who he is, undertakes to do any of these things, you may know he is not 'moved upon by the Holy Ghost,' in so speaking unless he has special authorization from the President of the Church. [D&C 20:9-11; 90:1-4, 9, 12-16; 107:8, 65-66, 91-92; 115:19; 124:125; HC 2:477; 6:363.]" (J. Reuben Clark Jr., ASIF, BYU, July 7, 1954.)

"Now what authority does President Kimball have? As President of the Church, he holds all of the keys and powers ever given by the angels to the Prophet Joseph Smith in the restoration of the gospel in this last dispensation. He has received these powers by the laying on of hands of those in authority. . . . The powers given by the angels to the Prophet Joseph Smith remained with the Church, and they still remain with the Church. They are centered always in one man, the President of the Church, the prophet, seer, and revelator. It could not be any other way. This is the Lord's pattern. This is the way he directs and conducts his work." (Mark E. Petersen, Ensign, May 1974, p. 56.)

"Prophecy does not come to us simply that we may know that which is to transpire. The Lord sends inspired men to outline to us the future in order that, having that knowledge, we may be brought to repentance; that we may avoid, by repentance, the inevitable judgments which come to men because of their wickedness, that we may become partakers of the blessings which are vouchsafed to all those who repent and serve the Lord. This is the purpose of prophecy, this is the spirit of prophecy, and the prophets have always been with God's children from the beginning of time, and they are with them today to warn and admonish them and to point out to them the way in which they should walk. A prophet is not only one who foretells events that are to come, but one who, inspired of the Lord, instructs people in that which they ought to do in the day of their own probation, that they may be brought back into the presence of the Lord." (Anthony W. Ivins, CR, October 1914, p. 92.)

"The Gift of Prophecy distinguishes its possessor as a prophet—literally, one who speaks for another, specifically, one who speaks for God. . . . To prophesy is to receive and declare the word of God, and the statement of His will to the people. The function of prediction, often regarded as the sole essential of prophecy, is but one among many characteristics of this divinely given power. The prophet may have as much concern with the past as with the present or the future; he may use his gift in teaching through the experience of preceding events as in foretelling occurrences." (James E. Talmage, AF, p. 228.)

Scriptural References:

D&C 1:38; 11:25; 20:26; 21:5; 46:22; 131:5; A of F 1: 5, 7; Amos 3:7; 7:15; 1 Cor. 12:10; 13:2; 14:3, 5, 22; 1 Tim. 4:14; 2 Pet. 1:10-21; Rev. 19:10; 1 Ne. 22:2; 2 Ne. 25:4; Jacob 4:6: Alma 45:9.
