Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 2 ( 1978)

Prophet

President of the Church; President of the High Priesthood (see also Priesthood offices; Prophecy)

A prophet of God is one who speaks for God. There could be many prophets in the true church if they are worthy and qualified to speak for God in their respective areas of responsibility. There is only one prophet at a time upon the earth who is qualified to speak for the entire church. When the definite article the is used before the word prophet to designate a person now living on the earth, this title could appropriately refer to only one person: the prophet of the Church. Other titles that could also be used to refer to this person are the President of the Church or the President of the High Priesthood.

Selected Quotations

"The word Prophet defined in the Hebrew language means one who has been called to denounce sin and foretell the consequences and punishment of it. He is to be above all else a preacher of righteousness, to call the people back from idolatry to faith in the living God, and when moved upon by the Spirit of the Lord, to foretell coming events. But more particularly a prophet is to be an expounder of present duties and an interpreter of the meaning and application of the written word." (Anthony W. Ivins, CR, October 1933, p.84.)

"To be a prophet of the Lord, one does not need to 'be everything to all men.' He does not need to be youthful and athletic, an industrialist, a financier, nor an agriculturist; he does not need to be a musician, a poet, an entertainer, nor a banker, a physician, nor a college president, a military general, nor a scientist. He does not need to be a linguist to speak French and Japanese, German and Spanish, but he must understand the divine language and be able to receive messages from heaven.

"He need not be an orator, for God can make his own. The Lord can present his divine messages through weak men made strong. He substituted a strong voice for the quiet, timid one of Moses, and gave to the young man Enoch power which made men tremble in his presence, for Enoch walked with God as Moses walked with God. . . .

"What the world needs is a prophet-leader who gives example-clean, full of faith, godlike in his attitudes with an untarnished name, a beloved husband, a true father. A prophet needs to be more than a priest or a minister or an elder. His voice becomes the voice of God to reveal new programs, new truths, new solutions. I make no claim of infallibility for him, but he does need to be recognized of God, an authoritative person. He is no pretender as numerous are who presumptuously assume position without appointment and authority that is not given. He must speak like his Lord: '. . . as one having authority, and not as the scribes.' (Matt. 7:29.)

"He must be bold enough to speak truth even against popular clamor for lessening restrictions. He must be certain of his divine appointment, of his celestial ordination, and his authority to call to service, to ordain, to pass keys which fit eternal locks. He must have commanding power like prophets of old: '. . . to seal both on earth and in heaven, the unbelieving and rebellious . . . unto the day when the wrath of God shall be poured out upon the wicked without measure' (D&C 1:8-9), and rare powers: '. . . that whatsoever you seal on earth shall be sealed in heaven; and whatsoever you bind on earth, in my name and by my word, saith the Lord, it shall be eternally bound in the heavens; and whosesoever sins you remit on earth shall be remitted eternally in the heavens; and whosesoever sins you retain on earth shall be retained in heaven' (D&C 132:46).

"What is needed is more a Moses than a Pharaoh; an Elijah than a Belshazzar; a Paul than a Pontius Pilate. He needs not be an architect to construct houses and schools and highrise buildings but he will be one who builds structures to span time and eternity and to bridge the gap between man and his Maker.

"When the world has followed prophets, it has moved forward; when it has ignored them, the results have been stagnation, servitude, death." (Spencer W. Kimball, IE, June 1970, pp. 93-94.)

"The Prophet Joseph Smith writes in his journal, 'This morning . . . I visited with a brother and sister from Michigan, who thought that "a prophet is always a prophet"; but I told them that a prophet is a prophet only when he was acting as such.' (Joseph Smith, History of the Church, 5:265.)

"That statement makes a clear distinction between official and unofficial actions and utterances of officers of the Church. In this recorded statement the Prophet Joseph Smith recognizes his special right and duty, as the President and Prophet of the Church, under the inspiration of the Lord, to speak authoritatively and officially for the enlightenment and guidance of the Church. But he claims also the right, as other men, to labor and rest, to work and play, to visit and discuss, to present his opinions and hear the opinion of others, to counsel and bless as a member of the Church." (John A. Widtsoe, ER, p. 236.)

Scriptural References:

D&C 20:67; 102:9; 107:65, 76, 82.
