Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 2 ( 1978)

Purse or scrip

Modern dictionaries indicate that the word scrip is archaic, meaning "a small bag or wallet." Modern usage lists another definition as "paper currency." Thus, when a missionary is instructed to go forth without purse or scrip, he is not to be burdened by taking excessive money with him, but is to rely upon the Lord and those whom he teaches to supply him with the necessities of life. The custom of traveling without purse or scrip was followed in New Testament times and in the early part of this dispensation.

Selected Quotations

"To go without 'purse and scrip' is, in modern language, to travel without money and trunk. 'Scrip' is a 'satchel,' a 'knapsack.' When our Lord sent His Apostles on their first missionary journey, He charged them not to take with them money or money belts; nor 'scrip,' such as David carried when he went to meet Goliath; nor a change of clothes. Simplicity was to be one of their characteristics." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 126.)

"When I went out first as a boy I took nothing with me but the clothes I had on, except a bundle of tracts and a pair of pants and a shirt to use in baptizing. I had faith I could bring people into the Church, and I wanted something I could put on to baptize them in. . . . Indeed, all my ministry among the people of the world was literally 'without purse or scrip.' Now I do not say that this should be done now. I believe that as circumstances change, the Lord changes his commandments, to correspond therewith. As Jesus taught, a great many of you who went out in the world took 'neither brass nor gold nor silver in your purses nor scrip for your journey, nor two coats' [Matt. 10:9-10], 'for the labourer is worthy of his hire,' but afterwards he said: 'When I sent you out without purse or scrip, did you lack anything?' And they said, Nay, Lord—but now he said, 'He that has no purse let him get one and he that hath no sword let him buy one.' [Luke 22:36.] Circumstances had changed and so the word was changed. He didn't change, but the circumstances being changed the word of the Lord was different. So in these times conditions have changed very much from those times." (Charles W. Penrose, CR, October 1921, p. 17.)

Scriptural References:

D&C 24:18; 84:78, 86; Luke 22:35.
