Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 2 ( 1978)

Records

importance of record keeping; personal records

From the early days of the Church, the Lord has taught the importance of keeping complete and accurate records so far as the Church is concerned. Also, in recent times the prophets have stressed the importance of keeping family and personal records. Good records serve several useful functions. Not only do they provide reference to past decisions and actions, but they also provide valuable information to later generations.

Selected Quotations

"The matter of record keeping is one of the most important duties devolving on the Church. In the early days of the Church, because of lack of experience, this duty was neglected, therefore many important historical events were not recorded. Even today it is difficult to impress upon clerks in stakes, wards and missions the importance of proper record keeping. There has, however, been a vast improvement in recent years. The Church today endeavors to keep a record of each individual member and file that record in the archives where it may be preserved. On the day of the organization of the Church the Lord impressed the small body of members with the importance of record keeping, and this duty the Church has endeavored to perform truthfully ever since." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:103.)

"I have never spent any of my time more profitably for the benefit of mankind than in my journal writing, for a great portion of the Church history has been compiled from my journals and some of the most glorious gospel sermons, truths, and revelations that were given from God to this people through the mouth of the Prophets Joseph and Brigham, Heber and the Twelve could not be found upon the earth on record only in my journals and they are compiled in the Church history and transmitted to the saints of God in all future generations. Does not this pay me for my troubles? It does." (Wilford Woodruff, Diary, Mar. 17, 1857.)

"We urge our young people to begin today to write and keep records of all the important things in their own lives and also the lives of their antecedents in the event that their parents should fail to record all the important incidents in their own lives. Your own private journal should record the way you face up to challenges that beset you. Do not suppose life changes so much that your experiences will not be interesting to your posterity. Experiences of work, relations with people and an awareness of the rightness and wrongness of actions will always be relevant. . . .

"No one is commonplace, and I doubt if you can ever read a biography from which you cannot learn something from the difficulties overcome and the struggles made to succeed. These are the measuring rods for the progress of humanity.

"As we read the stories of great men, we discover that they did not become famous overnight nor were they born professionals or skilled craftsmen. The story of how they became what they are may be helpful to us all.

"What could you do better for your children and your children's children than to record the story of your life, your triumphs over adversity, your recovery after a fall, your progress when all seemed black, your rejoicing when you had finally achieved?

"Get a notebook, . . . a journal that will last through all time, and maybe the angels may quote from it for eternity. Begin today and write in it your goings and comings, your deepest thoughts, your achievements and your failures, your associations and your triumphs, your impressions and your testimonies. Remember, the Savior chastised those who failed to record important events." (Spencer W. Kimball, NE, October 1975, pp. 4-5.)

"A word about personal journals and records: We urge every person in the Church to keep a diary or a journal from youth up, all through his life. Would every family, as they now hold their home evenings, train their children from young childhood to keep a journal of the important activities of their lives, and certainly when they begin to leave home for schooling and missions?" (Spencer W. Kimball, Ensign, November 1977, p.4.)

Scriptural References:

D&C 127:9; Enos 1:15-16; 3 Ne. 23:7-13.
