Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 2 ( 1978)

Religion

ethics

In the First Vision, the Lord indicated that the creeds of the churches were an abomination in his sight because the professors of these creeds drew near unto the Lord "with their lips, but their hearts" were far removed from him. (JS-H 1:19.) Many of these creeds are built on ethical considerations, but too often they do not deal with the truly religious life.

Selected Quotations

"We have had in the world throughout the ages two opposing types of guides for human conduct. One we call ethics and the other we call religion. An ethical man is good because it pays him to be good; because it promotes the peace of the community. An ethical man is virtuous because otherwise he contracts disease, and disease, personal or community, is not desirable. Such is ethics—calculating, selfish. Religion tells another story: I must be good because in the great economy of God, in the great program laid out for the salvation of human kind, in which I am involved with all my brethren and sisters, it is required that I must be righteous and virtuous. Obedience to the law leads to infinite results, both on earth and in the life to come. I must be virtuous, not merely because I protect my self, but because I live then in harmony with the greater law that proceeds from the author of law." (John A. Widtsoe, CR, April 1934, pp. 115-16.)

"There is a great difference between ethics and religion. There is a distinction between one whose life is based on mere ethics and one who lives a truly religious life. We have a need for ethics, but true religion includes the truths of ethics and goes far beyond. True religion has its roots in the belief in a supreme being. Christian religion is based upon a belief in God the Eternal Father and in his Son Jesus Christ and in the word of the Lord as contained in scripture. Religion also goes beyond theology. It is more than just a belief in Deity; it is the practice of the belief. James E. Talmage said, 'One may be deeply versed in theological lore, and yet be lacking in religious and even moral character. If theology be theory then religion is practice; if theology be precept, religion is example.' (Articles of Faith, p. 5.) . . . This encompasses the choosing of right over wrong, following good, and abstaining from evil. Ethics alone will not accomplish all these things for us, but an active religion will add to ethics the principles and ordinances of the gospel, which, if obeyed, will open the doors of eternal salvation, provided such religion is ordained of God and not of man's creation." (Howard W. Hunter, IE, December 1969, pp. 96-97.)

Scriptural Reference:

James 1:26-27.
