Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 2 ( 1978)

Repent

repentance; "preach nothing but repentance to this generation"

The principle of repentance is basic to all of the other principles and ordinances of the gospel. The basic meaning of the word repent is "to change" or "to turn from." Often only one side of repentance is stressed—the turning away from doing those things that are wrong. Another important aspect of repentance is to start doing those things that are right; this also involves a change, or repentance. All a missionary need preach is repentance. The investigator should stop doing those things he has been doing that are wrong and start doing those things he has not been doing that are right.

Selected Quotations

"The Prophet Joseph Smith specified as the first principles and ordinances of the gospel, 'first, Faith in the Lord Jesus Christ; second, Repentance; third, Baptism by immersion for the remission of sins; fourth, Laying on of hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost.' (A of F 1:4.)

"These four principles and ordinances form the arch to the entrance of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Compliance with them is the process by which one receives that rebirth of the water and of the Spirit without which, as Jesus taught Nicodemus, a man can neither see nor enter into the kingdom of God. In one sense, repentance is the keystone in that arch. Unless followed by repentance, professed faith in the Lord Jesus Christ is impotent; unless preceded by repentance, baptism is a futile mockery, effecting no remission of sins; and without repenting, no one actually receives the companionship of the Holy Spirit of God, notwithstanding the laying on of hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost." (Marion G. Romney, IE, March 1956, p. 88.)

"Repentance is a glorious principle. It also is a gift of God. True repentance cannot come without the exercise of faith. It is possible for a man to get so deeply saturated in sin that he cannot repent. This is the condition of Lucifer and those who followed him. This is likewise the condition which overtakes sons of Perdition in this life. . . .

"What a terrible thing it would be if there was no principle of repentance and forgiveness for sin, and if we had to go through eternity with the weight of our transgressions upon us. Through the free gift of God and the atonement of Jesus Christ, all may repent and receive remission of their sins through obedience to the Gospel." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 2:210-11.)

"The call to repentance from sin is to all men and not to the members of the Church only, and not to those only whose sins are considered major ones. And the call promises forgiveness of sin to those who respond. What a farce it would be to call people to repentance if there were no forgiveness, and what a waste of the life of Christ if it failed to bring the opportunity for salvation and exaltation!

"Sometimes a guilt consciousness overpowers a person with such a heaviness that when a repentant one looks back and sees the ugliness, the loathsomeness of the transgression, he is almost overwhelmed and wonders, 'Can the Lord ever forgive me? Can I ever forgive myself?' But when one reaches the depths of despondency and feels the hopelessness of his position, and when he cries out to God for mercy in helplessness but in faith, there comes a still, small, but penetrating voice whispering to his soul, 'Thy sins are forgiven thee.'" (Spencer W. Kimball, MF, p. 344.)

"How wonderful that God should endow us with this sensitive yet strong guide we call a conscience! Someone has aptly remarked that 'conscience is a celestial spark which God has put into every man for the purpose of saving his soul.' Certainly it is the instrument which awakens the soul to consciousness of sin, spurs a person to make up his mind to adjust, to convict himself of the transgression without soft-pedaling or minimizing the error, to be willing to face facts, meet the issue and pay necessary penalties—and until the person is in this frame of mind he has not begun to repent. To be sorry is an approach, to abandon the act of error is a beginning, but until one's conscience has been sufficiently stirred to cause him to move in the matter, so long as there are excuses and rationalizations, one has hardly begun his approach to forgiveness. . . .

"Often people indicate that they have repented when all they have done is to express regret for a wrong act. But true repentance is marked by that godly sorrow that changes, transforms, and saves. To be sorry is not enough." (Spencer W. Kimball, MF, pp. 152-53.)

Scriptural References:

D&C (check index); Book of Mormon (check index).
