Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 2 ( 1978)

Respecter of persons

"God is no respecter of persons"

The scriptural statement "God is no respecter of persons" does not mean that God does not have respect for persons; rather it emphasizes that he is absolutely impartial in his judgments, just as he counseled Moses: "Ye shall not respect persons in judgment." (Deut. 1:17.) Every person who keeps a law is entitled to the blessing attending such obedience; in a similar manner, every person who breaks a law must either repent of his disobedience or suffer the penalty attached to that law. God does not and cannot allow mercy to rob justice. God can have respect for one person over another only to the degree that the first person is more righteous (obedient to law) than the other.

Selected Quotations

"The Lord is no respecter of persons. However, let us not misinterpret this saying. It does not mean that the Lord does not respect those who obey him in all things more than he does the ungodly. Without question the Lord does respect those who love him and keep his commandments more than he does those who rebel against him. The proper interpretation of this passage (1:35) is that the Lord is not partial and grants to each man, if he will repent, the same privileges and opportunities of salvation and exaltation. He is just to every man, both the righteous and the wicked. He will receive any soul who will turn from iniquity to righteousness, and will love him with a just love and bless him with all that the Father has to give; but let it not be thought that he will grant the same blessings to those who will not obey him and keep his law. If the Lord did bless the rebellious as he does the righteous, without their repentance, then he would be a respecter of persons. His justice and his mercy are perfect. Justice, says Alma, 'exerciseth all her demands, and also mercy claimeth all which is her own; and thus, none but the truly repentant are saved. What, do ye suppose that mercy can rob justice? I say unto you, Nay; not one whit. If so, God would cease to be God.' (Alma 42:24-25.)" (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:255.)

Scriptural References:

D&C 1:35; 38:16, 26; Acts 10:34; Moro. 8:12.
