Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 2 ( 1978)

Resurrection

first resurrection; resurrection of the just

The resurrection (rising from the dead) of Jesus Christ is one of the most important events that has ever happened or that will ever happen on this earth. It not only provided proof that Jesus Christ was and is the divine Son of God, but it burst the chains of physical death for all mankind. "As in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive." (1 Cor. 15:22.) Jesus Christ was the first person on this earth to be resurrected from the dead; hence, the scriptures refer to him as the firstfruits of them that sleep. (1 Cor. 15:23.) All those who were resurrected immediately after the resurrection of Jesus Christ came forth in the first resurrection, because it was the first opportunity they had of being resurrected. The righteous and the just will come forth the first opportunity they will have to be resurrected. Thus, the terms "first resurrection" and "resurrection of the just" mean essentially the same.

Selected Quotations

"Though all men are assured of a resurrection, all will not be resurrected at the same time, and there will be varying degrees of glory for immortal persons. All will come forth from the grave. 'But every man in his own order' (1 Cor. 15:23), as Paul expresses it. Joseph Smith said: 'In the resurrection, some are raised to be angels, others are raised to become gods.' (TPJS, p. 312.)

"Two great resurrections await the inhabitants of the earth: one is the first resurrection, the resurrection of life, the resurrection of the just; the other is the second resurrection, the resurrection of damnation, the resurrection of the unjust. (John 5:28-29; Rev. 20; D&C 76.) But even within these two separate resurrections, there is an order in which the dead will come forth. Those being resurrected with celestial bodies whose destiny is to inherit a celestial kingdom, will come forth in the morning of the first resurrection. Their graves shall be opened and they shall be caught up to meet the Lord at his Second Coming. They are Christ's, the first-fruits, and they shall descend with him to reign as kings and priests during the millennial era. (D&C 29:13; 43:18; 76:50-70; 88:97-98; 1 Thess. 4:16-17; Rev. 20:3-7.)

"'And after this another angel shall sound, which is the second trump; and then cometh the redemption of those who are Christ's at his coming; who have received their part in that prison which is prepared for them, that they might receive the gospel, and be judged according to men in the flesh.' (D&C 88:99.) This is the afternoon of the first resurrection; it takes place after our Lord has ushered in the millennium. Those coming forth at that time do so with terrestrial bodies and are thus destined to inherit a terrestrial glory in eternity. (D&C 76:71-80.)

"At the end of the millennium, the second resurrection begins. In the forepart of this resurrection of the unjust those destined to come forth will be 'the spirits of men who are to be judged, and are found under condemnation; And these are the rest of the dead; and they live not again until the thousand years are ended, neither again, until the end of the earth.' (D&C 88:100-101.) These are the ones who have earned telestial bodies who were wicked and carnal in mortality, and who have suffered the wrath of God in hell 'until the last resurrection, until the Lord, even Christ the Lamb, shall have finished his work.' (D&C 76:85.) Their final destiny is to inherit a telestial glory. (D&C 76:81-112.)

"Finally, in the latter end of the resurrection of damnation, the sons of perdition, those who 'remain filthy still' (D&C 88:102), shall come forth from their graves. (2 Ne. 9:14-16.)" (Bruce R. McConkie, MD, pp. 639-40.)

"As concerning the resurrection, I will merely say that all men will come from the grave as they lie down, whether old or young; there will not be 'added unto their stature one cubit,' neither taken from it; all will be raised by the power of God, having spirit in their bodies, and not blood. Children will be enthroned in the presence of God and the lamb with bodies of the same stature that they had on earth, having been redeemed by the blood of the Lamb; they will there enjoy the fulness of that light, glory and intelligence, which is prepared in the celestial kingdom. 'Blessed are the dead who die in the Lord, for they rest from their labors and their works do follow them.' [Rev. 14:13.]" (Joseph Smith, HC 4:555-56.)

"Those from whom we have to part here, we will meet again and see as they are. We will meet the same identical being that we associated with here in the flesh—not some other soul, some other being, or the same being in some other form, but the same identity and the same form and likeness, the same person we knew and were associated with in our mortal existence. . . . Deformity will be removed; defects will be eliminated, and men and women shall attain to the perfection of their spirits, to the perfection that God designed in the beginning." (Joseph F. Smith, GD, p. 23.)

"I want to impress . . . the fact that the resurrection will prove to be just as natural as birth; that the coming together of those particles that belong to us and belong to one another, each in a distinct organization, although similar in many respects to others, and the formation or reformation of our own personality, is just as sure as that we lay down our lives. As we rise in the morning from our night's rest, so it will be with us in the resurrection." (Charles W. Penrose, IE, July 1919, pp. 752, 754.)

"Joseph Smith taught the doctrine that the infant child that was laid away in death would come up in the resurrection as a child; pointing to the mother of a lifeless child, he said to her: 'You will have the joy, the pleasure, and satisfaction of nurturing this child, after its resurrection, until it reaches the full stature of its spirit.' There is growth, there is development, after the resurrection from death. . . . The body remains undeveloped in the grave, but the spirit returns to God who gave it. Afterwards, in the resurrection, the spirit and body will be reunited; the body will develop and grow to the full stature of the spirit; and the resurrected soul will go on to perfection." (Joseph F. Smith, GD, pp. 455-56 )

Scriptural References:

D&C 76:22-23 (also check index); Job. 14:14; 19:25-27; Matt. 27:52-53; Acts 1:1-3; 26:22-23; 1 Cor. 15:3-8, 19-23; 2 Ne. 9:4-9; Hel. 14:15-18; Morm. 9:11-14.
