Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 2 ( 1978)

Banners

"terrible as an army with banners, '

A banner is a standard, an ensign, or a flag; the word is used in both ancient and modern scriptures as a means of identification or of rallying support. (Num. 2:2; Ps. 74:4; Isa. 5:26.)

The term terrible as an army with banners is found in only one book of the Bible. (Song of Solomon 6:4, 10.) It appears three times in the Doctrine and Covenants (5:14; 105:31; 109:73), where it is used in conjunction with the terms fair as the sun and clear as the moon, symbols of the great power and glory that will be associated with the true church when it becomes sanctified.

Selected Quotations

"We believe in the sanctification that comes by continued obedience to the law of heaven. I do not know of any other sanctification that the Scriptures tell about, of any other sanctification that is worth the consideration of rational beings. If we would be sanctified then, we must begin to-day, or whenever the Lord points out, to obey his laws just as far as we possibly can; and by obedience to these laws we continually gain more and more favor from heaven, more and more of the Spirit of God, and thus will be fulfilled a revelation given in 1834, which says that before Zion is redeemed, let the armies of Israel become very great, let them become sanctified before me; that they may be as fair as the sun, clear as the moon, and that their banners may be terrible unto all the nations of the earth—not terrible by reason of numbers, but terrible because of the sanctification they will receive through obedience to the law of God. Why was Enoch, and why were the inhabitants of the Zion built up before the flood terrible to all the nations around about? It was because, through a long number of years, they observed the law of God, and when their enemies came up to fight against them, Enoch, being filled with the power of the Holy Ghost, and speaking the word of God in power and in faith, the very heavens trembled and shook, and the earth quaked, and mountains were thrown down, rivers of water were turned out of their course, and all nations feared greatly because of the power of God, and the terror of his might that were upon his people. [Moses 7:12-17.]

"We have this account of ancient Zion in one of the revelations that God has given. What was it that made their banners terrible to the nations? It was not their numbers. If, then Zion must become great it will be because of her sanctification." (Orson Pratt, JD 17:112.)

Scriptural References:

D&C 5:15; 105:31; 109:73.
