Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 2 ( 1978)

Revelation

spirit of revelation (see also Gifts of the Spirit)

The principle of revelation is one of the major means employed by God to communicate with man. God may reveal things directly to a person, or he may reveal truths to a prophet who then may teach the people. Continuous revelation is one of the signs of a living God communicating with his living church.

Selected Quotations

"The Spirit of Revelation is in connection with these blessings. A person may profit by noticing the first intimation of the spirit of revelation; for instance, when you feel pure intelligence flowing into you, it may give you sudden strokes of ideas, so that by noticing it, you may find it fulfilled the same day or soon; (i.e.) those things that were presented unto your minds by the Spirit of God, will come to pass; and thus by learning the Spirit of God and understanding it, you may grow into the principle of revelation, until you become perfect in Christ Jesus. (Joseph Smith, TPJS, p. 151.)

"The things of God can only be understood by the Spirit of God and the Spirit of God is a revealing spirit. The Master promised before he left the earth to send another Comforter which would lead men into all truth. [John 15:16; 16:7.] Divine revelation has always been a characteristic of the living Church—it is absolutely essential to its continued existence in an organized state on the earth." (Hugh B. Brown, CR, September 1961, pp. 93-94.)

"Would you like a formula to tell you how to get personal revelation? It might be written in many ways. My formula is simply this: (1) Search the scriptures. (2) Keep the commandments. (3) Ask in faith. Any person who will do this will get his heart so in tune with the Infinite that there will come into his being, from the 'still small voice,' the eternal realities of religion. And as he progresses and advances and comes nearer to God, there will be a day when he will entertain angels, when he will see visions, and the final end is to view the face of God. Religion is a thing of the spirit. Use all your intellectuality to help you, but in the final analysis, you have to get in tune with the Lord." (Bruce R. McConkie, BYUSY, 1966, p. 8.)

"Of all things, that for which we should be most grateful today is that the heavens are indeed open and that the restored church of Jesus Christ is founded upon the rock of revelation. Continuous revelation is indeed the very lifeblood of the gospel of the living Lord and Savior, Jesus Christ. . . .

"How this confused world of today needs revelation from God. With war and pestilence and famine, with poverty, desolation, with more and more graft, dishonesty, and immorality, certainly the people of this world need revelation from God as never before. How absurd it would be to think that the Lord would give to a small handful of people in Palestine and the Old World his precious direction through revelation and now, in our extremity, close the heavens.

"However, it is the sad truth that if prophets and people are unreachable, the Lord generally does nothing for them. Having given them free agency, their Heavenly Father calls, persuades, and directs aright his children, but waits for their upreaching hands, their solemn prayers, their sincere, dedicated approach to him. If they are heedless, they are left floundering in midnight's darkness when they could have the noonday sun. . . .

"I bear witness to the world today that more than a century and a half ago the iron ceiling was shattered; the heavens were once again opened, and since that time revelations have been continuous. . . .

"The foreverness of this kingdom and the revelations which it brought into existence are absolute realities. Never again will the sun go down; never again will all men prove totally unworthy of communication with their Maker. Never again will God be hidden from his children on the earth. Revelation is here to remain. . . .

"I say, in the deepest of humility, but also by the power and force of a burning testimony in my soul, that from the prophet of the Restoration to the prophet of our own year, the communication line is unbroken, the authority is continuous, and light, brilliant and penetrating, continues to shine. The sound of the voice of the Lord is a continuous melody and a thunderous appeal. For nearly a century and a half there has been no interruption. Man never needs to stand alone. Every faithful person may have the inspiration for his own limited kingdom. But the Lord definitely calls prophets today and reveals his secrets unto them as he did yesterday, he does today, and will do tomorrow: that is the way it is." (Spencer W. Kimball, Ensign, May 1977, pp. 76-78.)

Scriptural References:

D&C 8:2-3; 9:7-9; 43:2-7; 76:5-10; 82:2-4; 121:26-32; A of F 1:7, 9; Prov. 29:18; Amos 3:7; Matt. 16:13-19; 1 Cor. 2:9-11; 12:3; Jacob 4:8-10; Mosiah 8:13-18; Alma 5:43-47; Moro. 10:4-5.
