Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 2 ( 1978)

Riches

riches of this earth

The Lord created the heavens and the earth and all things that are in the heavens and the earth. All material things essentially belong to God, as he is the Creator of the basic elements from which all things are made. "The earth is the Lord's, and the fulness thereof." (Ps. 24:1.) God could create additional things for the blessing of his church and his saints if this were necessary. He has given man the opportunity of creating things out of the elements He has provided. Man should not place his major attention or interest upon such material things, however, for the major purpose of man's existence is to develop spiritually so he can regain the presence of our Heavenly Father. Thus, if man is blessed with an abundance of material riches, he should use these for the blessing of others.

Selected Quotations

"Remember . . . the greatest gift that God can bestow upon us [is] eternal life, and it is worth more than all the houses and lands or the gold and the silver upon the earth. For by and by we will go to the grave, and that puts an end to worldly possessions, as far as our using them is concerned. The grave finds a home for all flesh, and no man can take his houses and lands, his gold and silver, or anything else of a worldly character with him. We brought none of these things with us when we came from our previous state. . . . All the knowledge that we can accumulate from experience and observation, and from the revelations of God to man, goes to show that the riches of this world are fleeting and transitory; while he that has eternal life abiding in him is rich indeed. [D&C 6:7.]" (Wilford Woodruff, JD 22:234.)

"As for gold and silver, they are of very little account compared with eternal life. When we die we must leave the riches of this world behind. We were born naked and we will go out of the world in the same condition. We cannot take with us houses, gold, silver, or any of this world's goods. [Alma 39:14.] We will even leave our tabernacles for somebody to bury." (Wilford Woodruff, JD 21:127.)

"We do not look upon wealth in itself as a curse. We believe that those who can handle means rightly can do much to bless their fellows. But he who is ruled by the love of money is tempted to commit sin. The love of money is the root of all evil. [1 Tim. 6:10.] There is hardly a commandment but is violated through this seeking for riches." (Anthon H. Lund, CR, April 1903, p. 24.)

Scriptural References:

D&C 6:7; 11:7; 38:39; 56:16; Luke 8:14; Jacob 2:18; Mosiah 11:14; 12:29; Alma 39:14; Hel. 13:21-23.
