Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 2 ( 1978)

Riches of eternity

The term "riches of eternity" refers to the attainment of eternal life and everything associated with this type of life in the presence of our Heavenly Father: "Behold, he that hath eternal life is rich." (D&C 6:7; 11:7; 43:25.)

Selected Quotations

"All those who wish to possess true riches, desire the riches that will endure. Then look at the subject of salvation, where you will find true riches. They are to be found in the principles of the Gospel of salvation, and are not to be found anywhere else. . . . The only true riches in existence are for you and me to secure for ourselves a holy resurrection; then we have command of the gold and the silver, and can place it where we please, and in whose hands we please. . . .

"The power which belongs to the true riches is gained by pursuing a righteous course, by maintaining an upright deportment towards all men, and especially towards the household of faith, yielding to each other, giving freely of that which the Lord has given to you.

"Remember, that true riches—life, happiness, and salvation, is to secure for ourselves a part in the first resurrection, where we are out of the reach of death, and him that hath the power of it; then we are exalted to thrones, and have power to organize element. Yes, they that are faithful, and that overcome, shall be crowned with crowns of eternal glory. They shall see the time when their cities shall be paved with gold; for there is no end to the precious metals, they are in the native element, and there is an eternity of it. If you want a world of the most precious substance, you will have nothing to do but say the word, and it is done. You can then say to the elements, 'produce ye the best oranges, lemons, apples, figs, grapes, and every other good fruit.'" (Brigham Young, JD 1:269, 272-73, 276.)

"To those who live for tomorrow, the rewards are beyond their conception. And even though some of the blessings are for future enjoyment, is it not far better to enjoy the spiritual luxuries of tomorrow, which is an eternity, rather than to revel in the physical comforts of today?

"Peace, joy, satisfaction, happiness, growth, contentment, all come with the righteous living of the commandments of God. The one who delights in all of the worldly luxuries of today, at the expense of spirituality, is living but for the moment. His day is coming. Retribution is sure. . . .

"When one realizes the vastness, the richness, the glory of that 'all' [Luke 15:31] which the Lord promises to bestow upon his faithful, it is worth all it costs in patience, faith, sacrifice, sweat and tears. The blessings of eternity contemplated in this 'all' bring to men immortality and everlasting life, eternal growth, divine leadership, eternal increase, perfection, and with it all—Godhood." (Spencer W. Kimball, CR, April 1952, pp. 23-24.)

Scriptural References:

D&C 38:39; 67:2; 68:31; 78:18.
