Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 2 ( 1978)

Sabbath

Sabbath day; the Lord's day (see also Ten Commandments)

The basic Hebrew root of the word sabbath is "seventh," and until the time of Jesus Christ the Sabbath day was also the seventh day of the week—Saturday. In time sabbath came to mean "day of rest." Since the time of the Savior, most Christians have observed their day of rest on the first day of the week, Sunday, which has also become known as the Lord's day. It was on the first day of the week, Sunday, that the Lord was resurrected, and on the following Sunday he also appeared to his apostles.

From at least the time of creation, one day of the week has been designated as a holy day, a day of worship when appropriate attention should be given to the Lord of creation and to the principles of righteousness taught by him. Sabbath observance is an eternal principle, and the commandments of the Lord pertaining to its observance apply as much today as they did anciently.

Selected Quotations

"Sunday is worship day. It is holy. This is a Christian nation, and the Lord has promised that as long as we keep him in mind and worship him this country will stand—this Government will stand. No other nation can take it or destroy it. But if we forget him, God's promises are not binding.

"Why should Sunday be observed as a day of rest? First, Sunday is essential to the true development and strength of body. . . .

"A second purpose for keeping holy the Sabbath day is: 'That thou mayest more fully keep thyself unspotted from the world.' . . .

"There is a third reason. Keeping holy the Sabbath Day is a law of God, resounding through the ages from Mount Sinai. You cannot transgress the law of God without circumscribing your spirit." (David O. McKay, CR, October 1956, pp. 90-91.)

"The Sabbath is not a day for indolent lounging about the house or puttering around in the garden, but is a day for consistent attendance at meetings for the worship of the Lord, drinking at the fountain of knowledge and instruction, enjoying the family, and finding uplift in music and song. 'It is a day for reading the scriptures, visiting the sick, visiting relatives and friends, doing home teaching, working on genealogy records, taking a nap, writing letters to missionaries and servicemen or relatives, preparation for the following week's church lessons, games with the small children, fasting for a purpose, writing devotional poetry, and other worthwhile activities of great variety." (Spencer W. Kimball, FPM, pp. 270-71.)

"We note that in our Christian world in many places we still have business establishments open for business on the sacred Sabbath. We are sure the cure for this lies in ourselves, the buying public. Certainly the stores and business houses would not remain open if we, the people, failed to purchase from them. Will you all please reconsider this matter. Take it to your home evenings and discuss it with your children. It would be wonderful if every family determined that henceforth no Sabbath purchase would be made.

"When we love the Lord, why do we still break his laws? We implore you, then, earnestly, to discontinue the purchase of things on the Sabbath day." (Spencer W. Kimball, Ensign, November 1975, p. 6.)

" I wonder if money earned upon the Sabbath, when it is unnecessary Sabbath earning, might not also be unclean money. I realize that some people must work on the Sabbath; and when they do, if they are compelled, that is, of course, a different situation. But men and women who will deliberately use the Sabbath day to develop business propositions, to increase their holdings, to increase their income, I fear for them. . . . There are people who work on the Sabbath, not through compulsion, but because the income is attractive, and others who work voluntarily to get the 'time and a half' that Sabbath work gives them. . . . The Savior knew that the ox gets in the mire on the Sabbath, but he knew also that no ox deliberately goes into the mire every week." (Spencer W. Kimball, CR, October 1953, pp. 54-56.)

Scriptural References:

D&C 59:9; 68:29; 127:10; Ex. 20:8-11; Isa. 56:2; 58:13; Jer. 17:21; Matt. 12:8; Mark 2:27; 3:4; Luke 6:5; 14:5; Jarom 1:5; Mosiah 13:16; 18:23.
