Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 2 ( 1978)

Sacrament

sacrament of the Lord's Supper; fruit of the vine

A sacrament is a sacred event. The sacrament of the Lord's Supper is that sacred event or ordinance which was instituted in remembrance of the atoning sacrifice of Jesus Christ.

Jesus Christ accomplished two major things in his atonement. He atoned (or paid for) the spiritual death that was first introduced into this world when Adam and Eve transgressed the law of God and that comes upon each of us whenever we commit sin. This part of the atonement was performed in the Garden of Gethsemane when Jesus Christ bled at every pore in his agony and suffering. In order to help us remember this part of the atonement, we have been commanded to partake of a liquid to remind us of the blood Jesus Christ shed for us. In New Testament times, the former-day saints used the "fruit of the vine" ("fruit of the cup")—evidently grape juice—as this liquid. In our day the Lord has indicated that "it mattereth not what ye shall eat or what ye shall drink when ye partake of the sacrament, if it so be that ye do it with an eye single to my glory—remembering unto the Father my body which was laid down for you, and my blood which was shed for the remission of your sins." (D&C 27:2.)

Jesus Christ also atoned for the physical death that was the consequence of Adam and Eve partaking of the tree of life. This part of the atonement was accomplished at Calvary and at the tomb at the time of the resurrection. To remind us of this aspect of the atonement, the Lord has instructed us to partake of bread to remind us of his resurrected body.

Selected Quotations

"The covenant made by members of the Church each time they partake of the Sacrament, should constantly be uppermost in their minds. Never should they eat the bread or drink the water without a full realization of just what they are doing and what it means to them. The covenant made embraces the following:

"First, that through the sanctified bread and water, we too, sanctify ourselves in partaking of it before our Heavenly Father, and in the name of Jesus Christ.

"Second, that we eat in remembrance of his broken body and of his blood which was shed for us.

"Third, that we are willing to take upon us the name of the Son, and not be ashamed of him. We belong to the Church of Jesus Christ, and if faithful have taken upon us his name.

"Fourth, we covenant that we will always remember him. This embodies the willingness to love and honor him.

"Fifth, that we will keep his commandments which he has given us.

"These things we covenant to do when we partake of these emblems; moreover, we renew the covenant each week, if we perform our duty. The promise made to us, if we will do these things, is that we shall always have his Spirit to be with us.

"No member of the Church can fail to make this covenant and renew it week by week, and retain the Spirit of the Lord. The Sacrament meeting of the Church is the most important meeting which we have, and is sadly neglected by many members. We go to this service, if we understand the purpose of it, not primarily to hear someone speak, important though that may be, but first, and most important, to renew this covenant with our Father in heaven in the name of Jesus Christ. Those who persist in their absence from this service will eventually lose the Spirit, and if they do not repent will eventually find themselves denying the faith." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:131-32.)

"Now partaking of the sacrament is not to be a mere passive experience. We are not to remember the Lord's suffering and death only as we may remember some purely secular historical event. Participating in the sacrament service is meant to be a vital and a spiritualizing experience. Speaking of it, the Savior said: 'And it shall be a testimony unto the Father that ye do always remember me.' (3 Nephi 18:7.)

"In order to testify, one's mind has to function, and it must be concentrated upon the thing to be testified. And we are not only to partake of the emblems of the sacrament in remembrance of the Redeemer, testifying that we do always remember him, but we are also thereby to witness unto the Father that we are willing to take upon us the name of his Son and that we will keep his commandments. This amounts to a virtual renewal of the covenant of baptism." (Marion G. Romney, CR, April 1946, pp. 39-40.)

"All little children virtually belong to the Church until they are eight years of age. Should they die before that age, they would enter the celestial kingdom. [D&C 29:46-47; 74:6.] The Savior said: 'Of such is the kingdom of heaven.' (Matt. 19:14.) Then why should they be deprived of the sacrament?

"Non-members cannot comply with the covenants embodied in the blessings of the sacrament and, therefore, should not partake of it. They are old enough to reason and should understand that the sacrament, so far as adults are concerned, is for those who have repented of their sins in the waters of baptism.

"It would be proper in a meeting to say, 'The sacrament will now be administered to the members of the Church,' in cases where there are non-members present; otherwise nothing need be said of this nature. If non-members are present and partake of the sacrament, we would not do anything to prevent it, for evidently they would take it in good faith, notwithstanding the nature of the covenant.

"The Lord has said that we should not permit anyone to partake of the sacrament unworthily. This means, as I understand it, anyone in the Church who has been in transgression of some kind and who has not repented. It would also apply to the apostate." (Joseph Fielding Smith, DS 2:350.)

Scriptural References:

D&C 20:46, 58, 68, 75, 78; 27:2, 5; 46:4; 59:9; 62:4; 89:6, 16; Matt. 26:26-29; John 6:54; Acts 2:42; 20:7; 1 Cor. 11:26-30; 3 Ne. 18:7, 29; 20:3; 26:13; Moro. 4:3; 5:2; 6:6.
