Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 2 ( 1978)

Baptism

baptism for the dead; baptism of the Spirit; baptism of water

Baptism is the third principle (following faith in the Lord Jesus Christ and repentance) and the first essential ordinance of the gospel of Jesus Christ. It has been the required doorway to the church and kingdom of God in both ancient and modern times.

As an ordinance, baptism must be performed by one who is ordained according to a prescribed pattern. This pattern was established on this earth in the days of Adam (Moses 6:64-67) and has been followed wherever the true church has existed upon the earth (D&C 20:23-28; 84:26-28).

Baptism of water is for the remission of sins and is to be performed by immersion by one holding the proper authority in the Aaronic Priesthood. Immersion represents the death, burial, and resurrection of Jesus Christ (Rom. 6:1-12), and is also symbolic of the death of the old life of sin and the birth of a new life of righteousness on the part of the person being baptized.

Baptism of the Spirit (of the Holy Ghost, or of fire) is for the sanctification of the person and is to be performed by one holding the Melchizedek Priesthood.

Baptism of the water and of the Spirit is required to be performed for every person who has lived on earth and committed sin before that person can enter the celestial kingdom regardless of when the person may have lived upon the earth. Thus, baptisms for the dead are performed by proxy as a means whereby the worthy dead of all ages can become heirs of the celestial kingdom. This vicarious baptismal work for the dead was performed in the days of Paul and used in a discussion by him to prove the resurrection of Jesus Christ. (1 Cor. 15:29.)

Selected Quotations

"Baptism is a sign to God, to angels, and to heaven that we do the will of God, and there is no other way beneath the heavens whereby God hath ordained for man to come to him to be saved, and enter into the Kingdom of God, except faith in Jesus Christ, repentance, and baptism for the remission of sins, and any other course is in vain; then you have the promise of the gift of the Holy Ghost." (Joseph Smith, HC 4:444.)

"Baptism by immersion symbolizes the death and burial of the man of sin; and the coming forth out of the water, the resurrection to a newness of spiritual life. After baptism, hands are laid upon the head of the baptized believer, and he is blessed to receive the Holy Ghost. Thus does the one baptized receive the promise or gift of the Holy Ghost . . . by obedience to whom one so blessed might receive the guidance and direction of the Holy Ghost in its daily walks and talks. . . . To receive such guidance and such direction from the Holy Ghost is to be spiritually reborn." (Harold B. Lee, CR, October 1947, p. 64.)

"Every child born into this world comes by the water; the blood and the Spirit. The unborn babe is cradled in water, the blood enters its body and by blood it is born and the spirit which the Lord created enters its body, thus there are three witnesses in birth, the water, the blood and the spirit of the child. So likewise we must be born again, by a burial in water, 'for by the water ye keep the commandment; by the Spirit ye are justified and by the blood ye are sanctified.' (Moses 6:60.) John the Beloved understood this principle thoroughly and he said: 'For there are three that bear record in heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost; and these three are one. And there are three that bear witness in earth, the spirit, and the water, and the blood: and these three agree in one.' (1 John 5:7-8.) . . .

"In relation to the false doctrine of 'baptizing' infants, the Prophet said: 'The doctrine of baptizing children, or sprinkling them, or they must welter in hell, is a doctrine not true, nor supported in Holy Writ, and is not consistent with the character of God. All children are redeemed by the blood of Jesus Christ, and the moment that children leave this world, they are taken to the bosom of Abraham.' (HC 4:554.)" (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 2:211, 298.)

"That immersion was the form of ordinance introduced by John the Baptist, submitted to by the Savior, and perpetuated by his Apostles, is a plain and reasonable inference from the teachings of the New Testament. Jesus, when about to be baptized, must have gone down into the water; for after baptism, he 'went up straightway out of the water.' (Matt. 3:16.) When Philip baptized the Eunuch, 'they went down both into the water.' (Acts 8:38.) John baptized in Aenon, near to Salim, because there was much water there (John 3:23)—another proof presumptive of immersion, the only mode requiring 'much water' for its performance.

"If this had not been the proper form, Paul would not have compared baptism to burial and resurrection (Rom. 6:3-5; Col. 2:12) nor would he have recognized as baptism the passage of the Israelites through the Red Sea. (1 Cor. 10:1, 2.) Note also his words to the Corinthians relative to vicarious baptism and in support of resurrection, a doctrine that some of them denied: 'Else what shall they do which are baptized for the dead, if the dead rise not at all? Why are they then baptized for the dead?' (1 Cor. 15:29.) In other words, why use the symbol of the resurrection if there be no resurrection—if the symbol does not symbolize?" (Orson F. Whitney, SNT, pp. 251-53.)

Scriptural References:

D&C 13:1; 33:11; 127:5, 10; 128:1-18; 2 Ne. 9:23-24; 31:5-9; 31:17.
