Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 2 ( 1978)

Salt and savor

"salt of the earth and the savor of men"

Salt played an important role in the diet, customs, and practices of ancient Israel. It was not only used as an appetizing condiment in the food of man and beast (Job 6:6), but was also frequently used in the various religious offerings of the Israelites. An inferior type of salt was used in the decomposition of waste (Matt. 5:13; Luke 14:35), and an excess of salt was sowed on the soil of a destroyed city to cause sterility (Judg. 9:45). The "covenant of salt" (Lev. 2:13; Num. 18:19;2 Chr. 13:5) indicates that anciently salt was a symbol of faithfulness, steadfastness, and purity.

The word savor refers to the physical senses of tasting and smelling; it also means "to have experience of" and "to delight in." In some of his parables, the Savior referred to the righteous saints as "the salt of the earth" and as "the savor of men."

Selected Quotations

"How do we lose the savor that followers of the Lord should have? We lose it as we cease to serve Him, or even by becoming casual in our obedience. For example, if we become careless about attending our meetings, do we not lose some of the savor that good salt should have? If we neglect our prayers, our tithes and offerings, what becomes of our savor? . . .

"If we do not share the gospel with our neighbors, what becomes of our savor? If we violate God's holy Sabbath day, does that cause a sweet savor to arise from us, or do we cast a stench into His face? If we are dishonest, unkind, or vengeful, do we not offend the Deity? And if we lose our virtue— that priceless gift of chastity—what becomes of our savor? Is not cleanliness next to godliness? Does not filth banish purity? Does not unchastity insult the Lord? Is it not a 'savor that stinketh'?

"If we are guilty of infidelity in our family, or are otherwise cruel in our home, do we exude a sweet savor or a stench? If we oppose Church policies and defy our chosen leaders, what becomes of our 'sweet savor'? Can there be any sweetness in disloyalty? If we withdraw from the Church and accept the destructive teachings of false prophets, do we not abdicate our place in the Lord's kingdom? And does that give the Lord a sweet savor?" (Mark E. Petersen, Ensign, November 1976, pp. 50-51.)

Scriptural References:

D&C 101:39, 40; 103:10; Matt. 5:13; Mark 9:49-50; Luke 14:34; 3 Ne. 12:13; 16:15.
