Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 2 ( 1978)

Sanctify

sanctification; sanctification through the grace of Jesus Christ

0Sanctify means "to free from sin, to purify." Sanctification is a state of purity, holiness, and saintliness that comes through the cleansing power of the Holy Ghost. It can only be obtained by keeping the principles and ordinances of the gospel as indicated in the following statement by the Savior: "Repent, all ye ends of the earth, and come unto me and be baptized in my name, that ye may be sanctified by the reception of the Holy Ghost, that ye may stand spotless before me at the last day. Verily, verily, I say unto you, this is my gospel." (3 Ne. 27:20-21.)

Selected Quotations

"I will put my own definition to the term sanctification, and say it consists in overcoming every sin and bringing all into subjection to the law of Christ. God has placed in us a pure spirit; when this reigns predominant, without let or hindrance, and triumphs over the flesh and rules and governs and controls as the Lord controls the heavens and the earth, this I call the blessing of sanctification. Will sin be perfectly destroyed? No, it will not, for it is not so designed in the economy of heaven.

"Do not suppose that we shall ever in the flesh be free from temptations to sin. Some suppose that they can in the flesh be sanctified body and spirit and become so pure that they will never again feel the effects of the power of the adversary of truth. Were it possible for a person to attain to this degree of perfection in the flesh, he could not die, neither remain in a world where sin predominates. Sin has entered into the world, and death by sin. [Rom. 5:12.] I think we shall more or less feel the effects of sin so long as we live, and finally have to pass the ordeals of death. . . . We should so live as to make the world and all its natural blessings subservient to our reasonable wants and holy desires." (Brigham Young, JD 10:173.)

"To be sanctified is to become clean, pure, and spotless; to be free from the blood and sins of the world; to become a new creature of the Holy Ghost, one whose body has been renewed by the rebirth of the Spirit. Sanctification is a state of saintliness, a state attained only by conformity to the laws and ordinances of the gospel. The plan of salvation is the system and means provided whereby men may sanctify their souls and thereby become worthy of a celestial inheritance." (Bruce R. McConkie, MD, p. 675.)

Scriptural References:

D&C 20:31, 34, 77, 79 (also check index for sanctified); 100:15; John 17:17, 19; 3 Ne. 27:20; 28:39.
