Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 2 ( 1978)

Satan

devil; Lucifer; buffetings of Satan; Satan to be bound; Satan to tremble (see also Perdition)

Satan is the adversary to the great eternal plan of progression of our Heavenly Father and of Jesus Christ. In the pre-earthly existence, Satan was known as Lucifer; he is also called the devil. He is described as being a liar from the beginning and is called the father of lies. He is an evil personage of spirit who is trying to destroy the plans and works of God.

Selected Quotations

"Lucifer was from the 'the beginning.' In the great Council in heaven he proposed to redeem mankind by compulsion, if God would give him His honor. That proposition was rejected by the Council, and another, made by the Beloved Son, was adopted. Satan, instead of yielding to the majority, in accordance with the rule of the kingdom of heaven, rebelled and, at the head of other rebellious spirits, endeavored to carry out his plan, in opposition to that which had been accepted. Then he was 'cast down' and became Satan (Pearl of Great Price, Book of Moses, 4:1-4)." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p.51.)

"When the devil and his host were sent from heaven because of disobedience, they came to this world. And wherever the children of men are, there also those evil spirits exist to tempt the children of men to do evil, and everything that leads to destruction and misery, and woe originates from that source, but everything that leads to exaltation, virtue, holiness, goodness, glory, immortality, and eternal life is from the hand of God. The Lord is the strongest power, and He will prevail at last." (Wilford Woodruff, JD 11:66.)

"We came to this earth that we might have a body and present it pure before God in the celestial kingdom. The great principle of happiness consists in having a body. The devil has no body, and herein is his punishment. He is pleased when he can obtain the tabernacle of man, and when cast out by the Savior he asked to go into the herd of swine, showing that he would prefer a swine's body to having none.

"All beings who have bodies have power over those who have not. . . . The devil has no power over us only as we permit him. The moment we revolt at anything which comes from God, the devil takes power." (Joseph Smith, TPJS, p. 181.)

"Satan is trying to keep us from the full enjoyment which comes from keeping the commandments of God. We must never forget, and we must teach our children to know, that Satan is real and determined to destroy us. He knows the importance and significance of the family unit. He knows that entire civilizations have survived or disappeared depending on whether the family life was strong or weak. We can keep him out of our homes by living and teaching our children to live the principles of the gospel of Jesus Christ, thereby resisting temptation when it comes, as it surely will." (N. Eldon Tanner, Ensign, January 1974, p. 10.)

"Satan and his forces were never more strongly arrayed than today. He is cunning. He is successful. One of the most subtle and effective tools he is using among us today is the convincing of some that they have arrived, they have reached their destination, they have earned a rest, they aren't needed anymore, they are out of danger, they are beyond temptation, and they can take pride in their accomplishments." (Marvin J. Ashton, CR, April 1972, p. 61.)

Scriptural References:

D&C (check index for devil and satan); Job 1:6-12; 2:1-7; Ps. 109:6; Zech. 3:1-2; Mark 1:13; 3:23, 26; 4:15; 8:33; Rev. 2:9, 13, 24; 3:9; 12:9; 20:2, 7.
