Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 2 ( 1978)

Saviors

saviors of men; saviors on mount Zion

The basic meaning of the word saviors is "to save someone from something." The Savior of all mankind did something for all men that we could not do for ourselves: he broke the bands of physical death and thus provided for the resurrection of all.

Every blessing is predicated upon obedience to a law. However, many people have lived on the earth when some of the laws of the gospel were not available to them. For example, baptism by immersion for the remission of sin by one holding the proper authority is required of every person who has arrived at the age of accountability in order to enter into the kingdom of heaven. (John 3:5.) Some people have lived and died without ever having the opportunity of being baptized.

Because of the principle of ordinance work for the dead, including baptism (see 1 Cor. 15:29), it is possible today for worthy members of the Church to go into the temple and be baptized for and in behalf of a deceased person. The member of the Church is doing something for the deceased person that the departed cannot do for himself; thus, in a real and vital sense the member of the Church is a savior of the deceased person in that particular thing. In this and other ways, worthy members of the Church can become "saviors of men."

Selected Quotations

"'And saviors shall come up on mount Zion to judge the mount of Esau; and the kingdom shall be the Lord's.' (Obadiah 21.) [Note: Obadiah was a contemporary of Elijah.] . . . The keys are to be delivered, the spirit of Elijah is to come, the Gospel to be established, the Saints of God gathered, Zion built up, and the Saints to come up as saviors on Mount Zion.

"But how are they to become saviors on Mount Zion? By building their temples, erecting their baptismal fonts, and going forth and receiving all the ordinances, baptisms, confirmations, washings, anointings, ordinations and sealing powers upon their heads, in behalf of all their progenitors who are dead, and redeem them that they may come forth in the first resurrection and be exalted to thrones of glory with them; and herein is the chain that binds the hearts of the fathers to the children, and the children to the fathers, which fulfills the mission of Elijah. . . .

"The Saints have not too much time to save and redeem their dead, and gather together their living relatives, that they may be saved also, before the earth will be smitten, and the consumption decreed falls upon the world.

"I would advise all the Saints to go with their might and gather together all their living relatives to this place, that they may be sealed and saved, that they may be prepared against the day that the destroying angel goes forth." (Joseph Smith, TPJS, p. 330.)

Scriptural References:

D&C 103:9-10; Obad. 1:21.
