Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 2 ( 1978)

Second Coming

(see also Calamities before Second Coming)

According to the Angel Moroni, one of the major reasons for the "great and marvelous works" of the last days is to prepare a people to be worthy to live with Jesus Christ when he comes again. The second coming of Jesus Christ has been prophesied from the beginning of this earth and will inaugurate the millennial conditions of peace and righteousness upon the earth.

Lucifer does not want the second coming to take place, for at that time all of the wicked on the earth will be destroyed and Lucifer will lose his power. Thus, he is doing and will continue to do everything he can to prevent the second coming. This opposition, together with the general wickedness of people upon the earth, will result in great calamities and destructions before the second coming.

Concerning these impending calamities, the Lord has said: "I the Lord, knowing the calamity which should come upon the inhabitants of the earth, called upon my servant Joseph Smith, Jun., and spake unto him from heaven . . . and also . . . others, that they should proclaim these things unto the world." (D&C 1:17-18.) One specific calamity mentioned is that "the hour . . . is nigh at hand, when peace shall be taken from the earth, and the devil shall have power over his dominion." (1:35.)

Other warnings of calamities are included in other revelations, including a desolating scourge that will cover the land (5:19; 45:31), wars in the United States and in other lands (45:26, 63; 63:33; 87:1-8), the sea will heave itself beyond its bounds, engulfing mighty cities (88:90), great destructions will be caused by lightnings, thunders, and earthquakes (43:25; 45:33; 87:6; 88:89-90), the sun will be darkened and the moon turned into blood (29:14; 34:9; 45:42; 88:87; 133:49), a great hailstorm will be sent forth to destroy the crops of the earth (29:16; 43:25; 109:30), and flies and maggots shall eat the flesh of the inhabitants of the earth (29:18).

"I was once praying earnestly upon this subject [time of the coming of the Son of Man], and a voice said unto me, 'My son, if thou livest until thou art eighty-five years of age, thou shalt see the face of the Son of Man.' I was left to draw on my own conclusions concerning this; and I took the liberty to conclude that if I had lived to that time, He would make His appearance. But I do not say whether He will make his appearance or I shall go where He is. I prophesy in the name of the Lord God, and let it be written—the Son of Man will not come in the clouds of heaven till I am eighty-five years old. . . . It is not the design of the Almighty to come upon the earth and crush it and grind it to powder but he will reveal it to His servants the prophets. . . .

"Judah must return, Jerusalem must be rebuilt, and the waters of the Dead Sea be healed. [Ezek. 47:8-12.] It will take some time to rebuild the walls of the city and the temple, &c.; and all this must be done before the Son of Man will make His appearance. There will be wars and rumors of wars, signs in the heavens above and on the earth beneath, the sun turned into darkness and the moon to blood, earth-quakes in divers places, the seas heaving beyond their bounds. [D&C 29:14-20; 34:9; 45:31-42; 88:87-91]; then will appear one grand sign of the Son of Man in heaven. [D&C 88:93.] But what will the world do? They will say it is a planet, a comet, &c. But the Son of Man will come as the sign of the coming of the Son of Man, which will be as the light of the morning cometh out of the east. [D&C 43:20-27.]" (Joseph Smith, HC 5:336-37.)

"Men profess to prophesy. I will prophesy that the signs of the coming of the Son of Man are already commenced. One pestilence will desolate after another. We shall soon have war and bloodshed. The moon will be turned into blood. I testify of these things, and that the coming of the Son of Man is nigh, even at your doors." (Joseph Smith, HC 3:390.)

"By the 'second advent' we understand not the personal appearing of the Son of God to a few, such as His visitation to Saul of Tarsus [Acts 9:3-6; 26:13-16], to Joseph Smith in 1820 [Joseph Smith-History 1:11-20], and again in the Kirtland Temple in 1836 [D&C 110-111]; nor later manifestations to his worthy servants as specifically promised [D&C 35:20-21; 67:11-14; 88:67-68; 76:22-24]; but His yet future coming in power and great glory, accompanied by hosts of resurrected and glorified beings, to execute judgment upon the earth and to inaugurate a reign of righteousness." (James E. Talmage, JS, p. 780.)

"Before the end shall come, the sun shall be darkened, and the moon be turned to blood, and the stars shall refuse their shining, and some shall fall, and great destruction awaits the wicked. There are some, even in the Church, unfortunately, who think that such expressions are cruel, and they are not willing to accept them as coming from a 'merciful God.' However, man brings the punishment upon himself and the judgments of the Almighty are bound to follow. 'Yea, wo be unto the Gentiles except they repent; for it shall come to pass in that day, saith the Father, that I will cut off the horses out of the midst of thee, and I will destroy thy chariots. And I will cut off the cities of the land, and throw down all thy strongholds. . . . For it shall come to pass, saith the Father, that at that day whosoever will not repent and come unto my Beloved Son, them will I cut off from among my people, O House of Israel; and I will execute vengeance and fury upon them, even as upon the heathen, such as they have not heard.' (3 Nephi 21:14-21. Compare Micah 5:9-15.) Again the Lord has said that the elders should go forth in power, 'Yea, verily, to seal them up (i.e., the wicked) unto the day when the wrath of God shall be poured out upon the wicked without measure.' (D&C 1:9.)

"We are promised that one of the great signs preceding the coming of the Lord will be that the sun shall be darkened and the moon turned to blood. Of course, the turning of the moon to blood is a figure, and it will appear as a body of blood. The earth, likewise, will reel to and fro as a drunken man and then shall appear the sign of the Son of Man in the heavens. (Matt. 24:29-30.) It will then be the time of the gathering of the righteous 'from one end of heaven to the other.' It will be at this time, most likely, when the great city of Enoch will return. . . .

"The prophets all through the ages, when predicting the time of the second coming of our Lord, have spoken of the destruction of the wicked. Isaiah, in his twenty-fourth chapter, said: 'Therefore hath the curse devoured the earth, and they that dwell therein are desolate; therefore the inhabitants of the earth are burned, and few men left.' Malachi speaks of the day coming that shall burn as an oven; 'and all the proud, yea, and all that do wickedly, shall be stubble; and the day that cometh shall burn them up, saith the Lord of hosts, that it shall leave them neither root nor branch.' (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:156-57.)

Scriptural References:

Check the index of Doctrine and Covenants for Coming of the Son of Man and Coming, the Lord's Second.
