Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 2 ( 1978)

Bishop

Presiding Bishop (see also Priesthood offices; Church offices and presiding quorums)

The office of bishop is an office in the Aaronic Priesthood and, as is true with all other such offices, a person is ordained to that office; he may then be set apart to function as the bishop of a particular ward. The Presiding Bishop of the Church is considered to be a General Authority.

Selected Quotations

"The first bishops were called at an early day in the Church. The presiding bishop, if he is a literal descendant of Aaron, has a legal right to the office. He must be the firstborn among the sons of Aaron. 'For the firstborn holds the right of the presidency over this priesthood, and the keys of authority of the same.' (D&C 86:16-18.) If a man could prove by lineage or revelation that he is the firstborn to Aaron, he could claim his anointing, but he would have to be worthy, and his anointing, or ordination, would have to be done under the hands of the Presidency of the Church. Since high priests may officiate in all the ordinances of the Gospel, they can officiate as bishops, when they are called and ordained by proper authority to that office.

"The bishop is a common judge in Israel, and members are amenable to his jurisdiction." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 2:21.)

"A bishop is the presiding officer of his ward, and where the bishop is in the ward, his counselors and those who are members of his ward are subject to his presidency. . . .

"The presiding officer is the head, should be regarded in his place, and his place should be held sacred in the minds of his associates. . . .

"The work of the bishop is both temporal and spiritual. The average bishop gives all his time and efforts for the betterment of the people over whom he presides." (Joseph F. Smith, GD, pp. 185, 188.)

"The laws defining the duties of the Bishopric were not yet fully revealed, but in a general way it was understood that the gathering of the Saints was commanded for their temporary salvation, and that the office was instituted with this end in view. The Revelation concerning gathering (Sec. 38) also contained more than an intimation of the United Order (vv. 24-27). Orson F. Whitney well remarks:

"'An order of unity and equality, a system of consecration and stewardships, the abolition of fraud and monopoly in all their phases, a sinking of individual into and for the purpose of the common good, the sacrifice of self at the shrine of principle—of pure religion, whose incense—call it charity, philanthropy, or what we will, is the pure love of God and humanity. It was to the establishment of such an order, —one object of which, in the arcane of the faith, was to pave the way for the Zion of Enoch, which the Saints believe will yet descend to Earth, the planet whence it was taken, —that Joseph Smith, as early as February, 1831, more than fifty years before Edward Bellamy and his ingenious book "Looking Backward" were heard of, directed his thoughts and labors. A movement to that end was the organization of the Bishopric, representing the temporal wing of the Mormon Church government. The Apostleship, which pertains to the Priesthood of Melchizedek, through possessing general powers, has a special calling to minister in spiritual things; while the Bishopric, which is the presidency of the Priesthood of Aaron, administers, under the direction of the higher authority, in things temporal' (History of Utah 1:85). See also Secs. 42:30-32; 51:3-6 and 13-17.

"The controversy over the meaning of 'Bishop' has never been settled satisfactorily in the world. The New Testament has no office into which the Bishops of the various churches fit, and therefore they are at a loss to explain their duties. They notice that the Bishops in the Bible are sometimes called Elders and sometimes Bishops, and they are confused because they cannot understand how a Bishop can be an Elder. In Eph. 4:11, the Bishops are 'Pastors,' or Shepherds, and are placed next to the teachers. This is another puzzle. The fact is, that the Apostles appointed some to superintend the spiritual, and others to have charge of the temporal wants of the churches. The latter were called 'Bishops,' which means 'overseers.' To the Latter-day Saints, the controversy, in the light of modern revelation, is meaningless." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 217.)

"There is no position in the Church that will bring a greater blessing to any man than the office of a bishop if he will honor that office and be a real father to the flock over whom he is called to preside. Do not forget that. . . . I want to say to you that there is no bishop, nor has there been a bishop in the Church, who has given the time that the Lord expected him to give in looking after the flock and teaching his people and preparing them to do the work, that has not received one hundred percent of the blessings that he labored for, and they will extend to him throughout the ages of eternity.

"He may not have had wealth, may not have had distinction. He may not have had the honor of presiding over clubs and things of that kind, but if he has done his duty as a bishop, he has been hand in hand with the Father of us all, and everything that he has done to bless his kind is laid up as a treasure in heaven and nobody can take the blessing from him." (George Albert Smith, CR, October 1948, pp. 186-87.)

"He [bishop] was to be a common judge among the inhabitants of Zion, or in a Stake of Zion, or in a branch of the Church, when he shall be set apart unto his ministry. His Bishopric is sufficient for any of these places when set apart: and he can only fill those offices for which he is set apart. But a literal descendant of Aaron has a legal right to the Presidency of this Priesthood, to the keys of this ministry, to act in the office of Bishop, without Counselors. . . . The Bishopric is the Presidency of the Aaronic Priesthood, which is 'an appendage to the greater or Melchizedek Priesthood,' and that no man has a legal right to hold the KEYS of the Aaronic Priesthood, which presides over all Bishops and all the lesser Priesthood, except he be a literal descendant of Aaron. But, that 'as a High Priest of the Melchizedek Priesthood has authority to officiate in all the lesser offices, he may officiate in the office of Bishop,' . . . if called, set apart, and ordained unto th is power 'by the hands of the Presidency of the Melchizedek Priesthood.' [D&C 107:17.] The power and right of selecting and calling of the Presiding Bishop and general Bishops is vested in the First Presidency, who also must try those appointed by them in case of transgression.

"That the Presiding Bishop, who presides over all Bishops, and all of the lesser Priesthood, should consult the First Presidency in all important matters pertaining to the Bishopric." (John Taylor, Items on Priesthood, pp. 29, 31-32.)

"The Lord has so organized His Church that there is accessible to every member—man, woman, and child—a spiritual advisor, and a temporal counselor as well, who knows them intimately and who knows the circumstances and conditions out of which their problems come, and who, by reason of his ordination, is entitled to an endowment from our Heavenly Father of the necessary discernment and inspiration of the Lord to enable him to give the advice which the one in trouble so much needs. We refer to the Bishop or Branch President. If the Bishop or Branch President needs assistance, he may go to the Stake or Mission President. These brethren may in turn seek counsel from one of the General Authorities, should such be necessary." (First Presidency, letter to members, Jan. 29, 1973.)

Scriptural References:

D&C 20:67; 72:2-25; 107:17-88; 1 Tim. 3:1-2; Tit. 1:7; 1 Pet. 2:25.
