Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 2 ( 1978)

Seer

prophet, seer, and revelator (see also Prophet)

A seer is one who sees, a see-er. The Book of Mormon indicates that a seer is a person who has the right to use the "holy interpreters" or the Urim and Thummim. (Mosiah 8:13-17; Mosiah 28:10-16.) Ammon also testified that "a seer is a revelator and a prophet also; and a gift which is greater can no man have." (Mosiah 8:16.) The members of the First Presidency and Council of the Twelve Apostles, together with the Patriarch to the Church, are sustained by members of the Church as "prophet, seers, and revelators."

Selected Quotations

"The President of the Church is sustained by the people as 'Prophet, Seer, and Revelator, and President of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.' This is in compliance with the revealed word of God. The first revelation received by Joseph Smith after the organization of the Church on April 6, 1830, specifically declares that 'there shall be a record kept among you; and in it thou shalt be called a seer, a translator, a prophet, an apostle of Jesus Christ, an elder of the church through the will of God the Father, and the grace of your Lord Jesus Christ.' (D&C 21:1.) . . .

"The counselors to the President and the Council of the Twelve Apostles and, usually, the Patriarch to the Church, are also sustained as 'prophets, seers, and revelators.' This conforms to the Priesthood conferred upon them, and to their official calling in the Church. . . .

"When others besides the President of the Church hold the title 'prophet, seer, and revelator,' it follows that the 'power and authority' thus represented are called into action only by appointment from the President of the Church, otherwise there might be a conflict of authority. This is well illustrated in the practice of the Church. For example, a man may be ordained a High Priest, an office in which the right of presidency is inherent, but he presides only when called to do so. It is even so with the exercise of authority under these sacred titles. . . .

"A seer is one who sees with spiritual eyes. He perceives the meaning of that which seems obscure to others; therefore he is an interpreter and clarifier of eternal truth. He foresees the future from the past and present. This he does by the power of the Lord operating through him directly, or indirectly with the aid of divine instruments such as the Urim and Thummim. In short, he is one who sees, who walks in the Lord's light with open eyes. (Mosiah 8:15-17.) . . .

"A revelator makes known, with the Lord's help, something before unknown. It may be new or forgotten truth, or a new or forgotten application of known truth to man's need. Always, the revelator deals with truth, certain truth (D&C 100:11) and always it comes with the divine stamp of approval. Revelation may be received in various ways, but it always presupposes that the revelator has so lived and conducted himself as to be in tune or harmony with the divine spirit of revelation, the spirit of truth, and therefore capable of receiving divine messages. . . .

"In summary: A prophet is a teacher of known truth; a seer is a perceiver of hidden truth, a revelator is a bearer of new truth. In the widest sense, the one most commonly used, the title, prophet, includes the other titles and names of the prophet, a teacher, perceiver, and bearer of truth.

"One who bears the title of prophet, and they who sustain him as such, are first of all believers in God, and in a divine plan of salvation for the human family; and secondly, they commit themselves to the task of bringing to pass the purposes of the Almighty. They believe that the children of men are capable of receiving and obeying truth. Were it not so, the title 'prophet, seer, and revelator' would be empty, hollow words. As it is, they are clarion calls of the Church of Christ to a world walking in the dim shadows of misunderstanding." (John A. Widtsoe, ER, pp. 256-59.)

"A seer is greater than a prophet. [Mosiah 8:15.] One may be a prophet without being a seer; but a seer is essentially a prophet—if by 'prophet' is meant not only a spokesman, but likewise a foreteller. Joseph Smith was both prophet and seer.

"A seer is one who sees. But it is not the ordinary sight that is meant. The seeric gift is a supernatural endowment. Joseph was 'like unto Moses'; and Moses, who saw God face to face, explains how he saw him in these words: 'Now mine own eyes have beheld God; but not my natural, but my spiritual eyes, for my natural eyes could not have beheld; for I should have withered and died in his presence; but his glory was upon me; and I beheld his face, for I was transfigured before him.' (Moses 1:11.) Such is the testimony of the ancient seer, as brought to light by the seer of the latter days." (Orson F. Whitney, SNT, p. 39.)

Scriptural References:

D&C 21:1; 107:92; 124:94, 125; 127:12: 135:3; Moses 6:36, 38; JS-H 1:35; 2 Chr. 9:29; 12:15; 16:7, 10; 19:2; 29:25, 30; 35:15; 2 Ne. 3:6-7, 11, 14; Mosiah 8:13, 15-17; 28:16.
