Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 2 ( 1978)

Signs

(see also Miracles, for related material)

Signs are not given to replace faith; they are given to help in the development of faith that is already present. "Signs shall follow them that believe." (Mark 16:17.) One of the major purposes for our mortal existence is to give us the opportunity to learn to walk by faith. A veil of forgetfulness is placed over our minds when we are born into this world so that we will not remember our previous existence with our Father in heaven. Therefore, we must exercise faith in him and in his prophets and his scriptures before we can come to know him as we did before we came to the earth.

If man should arrive at a knowledge of God only through signs rather than through faith, one of the major purposes of our mortal existence would not be realized. Also, when we ask for signs we are trying to change, modify, or adulterate the eternal plan of our Heavenly Father. It is indeed a wicked and adulterous generation which seeks for a sign. (Matt. 12:39.)

Selected Quotations

"I will give you one of the Keys of the mysteries of the Kingdom. It is an eternal principle, that has existed with God from all eternity: That man who rises up to condemn others, finding fault with the Church, saying that they are out of the way, while he himself is righteous, then know assuredly, that that man is in the high road to apostasy; and if he does not repent, will apostatize, as God lives. The principle is as correct as the one that Jesus put forth in saying that he who seeketh a sign is an adulterous person; and that principle is eternal, undeviating, and firm as the pillars of heaven; for whenever you see a man seeking after a sign, you may set it down that he is an adulterous man." (Joseph Smith, HC 3:385.)

"When the voice of the Good Shepherd is heard, the honest in heart believe and receive it. It is good to taste with the inward taste, to see with the inward eyes, and to enjoy with the sensations of the ever-living spirit. No person, unless he is an adulterer, a fornicator, covetous, or an idolator, will ever require a miracle; in other words, no good, honest person ever will." (Brigham Young, DBY, p. 340.)

"It is a wicked and adulterous generation that seeketh after a sign. Show me Latter-day Saints who have to feed upon miracles, signs and visions in order to keep them steadfast in the Church, and I will show you members of the Church who are not in good standing before God, and who are walking in slippery paths. It is not by marvelous manifestations unto us that we shall be established in the truth, but it is by humility and faithful obedience to the commandments and laws of God." (Joseph F. Smith, CR, April 1900, pp. 40-41.)

Scriptural References:

D&C 63:7-12; 68:10-11; 84:65; 124:98; Mark 16:17-20; John 4:48; Acts 2:19-22; Jacob 7:13-14; Alma 30:43-51.
