Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 2 ( 1978)

Spirit of revelation

(see also Gifts of the Spirit; Revelation)

The spirit of revelation is a gift of the Holy Spirit, which can be given to man to help him discern when he is receiving revelation from God. It can be a valuable guide to man to help direct him throughout his life.

Selected Quotations

"A person may profit by noticing the first intimation of the spirit of revelation; for instance, when you feel pure intelligence flowing unto you, it may give you sudden strokes of ideas, so that by noticing it, you may find it fulfilled the same day or soon; (i. e.) those things that were presented into your minds by the Spirit of God [D&C 85:6; Enos 10], will come to pass; and thus by learning the Spirit of God and understanding it, you may grow into the principle of revelation, until you become perfect in Christ Jesus." (Joseph Smith, HC 3:381.)

"Revelation may be given to every member of the Church. The Prophet said that every man should be a prophet; that the testimony of Jesus is the spirit of prophecy. It is not only the privilege but the duty of each member of the Church to know the truth which will make him free. This he cannot know unless it is revealed to him. Moroni has promised every person who humbly and sincerely reads the Book of Mormon that he may know by revelation that it is true. The gift of the Holy Ghost is given to the members of the Church so that they may have the spirit of prophecy and revelation. Let it be understood however, that they will not receive revelation for the guidance of the Church. That gift is reserved for and vested in the man who holds the keys of the Priesthood. But the members of the Church are entitled to receive revelation which is needful for their progress, and if they will hearken to the Spirit of truth and walk humbly before the Lord, they will not fall short of this spiritual guidance. Members of the Church, who neglect their duty and who are indifferent to the commandments, place themselves in danger of being deceived. Failing to obtain the guiding influence of the Holy Ghost, they become liable to the enticing influence of deceivers because they lack the ability to discern between truth and error. Alma called attention to this in his instruction to Zeezrom. These words it is well for us all to heed. [Alma 12:9-11.]" (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 2:217-18.)

"The Lord would not permit me to occupy this position one day of my life, unless I was susceptible to the Holy Spirit and to the revelations of God. It is too late in the day for this church to stand without revelation. Not only the President of the Church should possess this gift and give it unto the people, but his counselors and the Apostles and all men that bear the Holy Priesthood, if they magnify their calling, should possess that gift for themselves and to assist them in their duties, although they may not be called to give revelations to lead and direct the Church. The spirit of revelation belongs to the Priesthood." (Wilford Woodruff, MS 56:324.)

Scriptural References:

D&C 8:3; 11:25; Eph. 1:17; Alma 4:20; 5:46; 8:24; 9:21; 17:3; 23:6; 43:2; 45:10; Hel. 4:12, 23; 3 Ne. 3:19.
