Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 2 ( 1978)

Book of life

book of the law of God; the Lamb's book of life

The book of life is a record kept in heaven which contains the names of the righteous and an account of their covenants with the Lord and their righteous deeds. It is also referred to in the scriptures as the Lamb's book of life and the book of the names of the sanctified. It is possible for the names of righteous saints yet living to be included in the book of life (see TPJS, p. 9), but such names will be blotted out if such a person reverts to wickedness.

Selected Quotations

"The Lord knew that there would be some who would falter; some who would come to Zion not willing to enroll themselves and their property to the welfare of Zion, and therefore could not be given stewardships in the covenant which the Lord had made with the saints. . . . The Lord said 'Their names shall not be found, neither the names of the fathers, nor the names of the children written in the book of the law of God, saith the Lord of Hosts.' The book of the law of God was the book to be kept by the Lord's clerk. There is also another book which is kept in heaven, and the one kept by the Lord's clerk should be accurately kept so that it would agree with the Lamb's Book of Life. In the Lamb's Book of Life only the names are received of those who have washed their garments white 'in the blood of the Lamb.' This is in harmony with the word of the Lord to John: 'And there shall in no wise enter into it anything that defileth, neither whatsoever worketh abomination, or maketh a lie: but they which are written in the Lamb's Book of Life.' (Rev. 21:27.)" (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:349.)

"We are not going to be saved in the kingdom of God just because our names are on the records of the Church. It will require more than that. We will have to have our names written in the Lamb's Book of Life, and if they are written in the Lamb's Book of Life then it is an evidence we have kept the commandments. Every soul who will not keep the commandments shall have his name blotted out of that book." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CR, September 1950, p. 10.)

"There is a special record which is called the 'Book of God,' or the 'Book of Life,' which contains the names of those who shall rise from the dead in the first resurrection. Moses, on one occasion, asked the Lord to forgive; 'and if not,' he said, 'blot me, I pray thee, out of the book which thou hast written.' The Lord's reply was, 'Whosoever hath sinned against me, him will I blot out of my book' (Ex. 32:32-3). The disciples of our Lord, after their first missionary journey, returned to their Master full of enthusiasm, and reported that even demons were subject to them in His name. Jesus replied, 'Notwithstanding in this rejoice not . . . but rather rejoice, because your names are written in heaven' (Luke 10:20). In the Revelation by John it is stated that all who dwell on Earth, 'whose names are not written in the Book of Life of the Lamb' shall worship the 'beast' with seven heads and ten horns. (Rev. 13:8.)" (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 459.)

Scriptural References:

D&C 76:68; 85:5, 7; 88:2; 128:6, 7; 132:19; Ps. 69:28; 2 Chr. 17:9; Philip. 4:3; Rev. 3:5; 13:8; 17:8; 20:12-15; Alma 5:58.
