Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 2 ( 1978)

Stealing

(see also Ten Commandments)

The commandment against stealing has been deemed so important by the Lord that it was not only included in the Decalogue (the Ten Commandments), but also unrepentant thieves are not to remain as members of the Church: "Thou shall not steal; and he that stealeth and will not repent shall be cast out." (D&C 42:20; 59:6; Ex. 20:15; Matt. 19:18; 2 Ne. 26:32.) The ownership of all good things can eventually be traced to the Lord, for he is the Creator of "the heavens and the earth, and all things which in them are." (3 Ne. 9:15.) Thus, the thief steals not only from his fellowman, but from God.

Selected Quotations

"It is astonishing how many men and women who have always lived good lives will yield to temptation to take that which does not belong to them. For the past few years we have been passing through a change. There seems to have been a letting down in the matter of honesty. Our Heavenly Father knew that we would need this commandment when he gave it. . . .

"'Thou shalt not steal.' This commandment was given to ancient Israel and punishment was meted out to those in that day who were dishonest. It is binding upon us today and I want to say to you that the punishment that is meted out to those who are dishonest in our day, when they are apprehended and hailed before the courts of the land and punished for their crimes, is insignificant when compared with the spiritual punishment that befalls us when we transgress the law of honesty and violate that commandment of God." (George Albert Smith, CR, October 1932, pp. 24-26.)

"Our faith has been greatly strained, as we have learned of the profligate stealing in some communities, where millions of dollars are taken by shoplifters from our merchants. In the end, the public must eventually pay. Why would any man, woman, or child steal from the friendly merchants and his folks and neighbors? This is unbelievable. And great losses are sustained with the incredible amount of vandalism. It was the Lord who gave us the injunction: 'Thou shalt not steal.' (Ex. 20:15.)" (Spencer W. Kimball, Ensign, November 1977, pp. 4-5.)

Scriptural References:

D&C 42:20, 85; 59:6; Ex. 20:15; Matt. 19:18; Mosiah 2:13; 13:22; 29:14.
