Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 2 ( 1978)

Storehouse

bishop's storehouse

Scriptural references to the bishop's storehouse include the idea of a system of taking care of the physical needs of the poor as well as to a building where necessary commodities might be stored. At the present time, the system of bishop's storehouses is part of the welfare services plan of the Church.

Selected Quotations

"The Church storehouse system is an organization of physical warehouses and transportation facilities, with operating and managing personnel. This system is set up to receive, store, transport, exchange, and distribute food and nonfood commodities to those in need.

"A fundamental unit of the Church storehouse system is the local bishops storehouse. Bishops storehouses are Church-owned facilities from which local bishops obtain food, clothing, and other commodities to care for the poor and needy who are unable to care for themselves. Deseret Industries are used as storehouses to provide nonfood commodities. Each bishop in the Church should have access to a local storehouse stocked with essential commodities produced in the program to meet the needs of his people.

"The Lord, by revelation, has commanded that storehouses be established. The surpluses, or 'residue,' from the consecrated properties under the united order were to be kept in the storehouses 'to administer to the poor and the needy.' (D&C 42:34.) Later, the Lord instructed that the Presiding Bishop 'appoint a storehouse unto this church; and let all things both in money and in [food], which are more than is needful for the wants of this people, be kept in the hands of the bishop.' (D&C 51:13.)

". . . Our bishops storehouses are not intended to stock enough commodities to care for all the members of the Church. Storehouses are only established to care for the poor and the needy. For this reason, members of the Church have been instructed to personally store a year's supply of food, clothing, and, where possible, fuel. By following this counsel, most members will be prepared and able to care for themselves and their family members, and be able to share with others as may be needed." (Ezra Taft Benson, Ensign, May 1977, p. 82.)

"Storehouses bless the members of the Church by helping them live their covenants of sacrifice and consecration. Indeed, the Lord states in the eighty-third section of the Doctrine and Covenants that 'the storehouse shall be kept by the consecrations of the church.' (D&C 83:6.) President Clark reminds us: 'Our storehouses today under the welfare plan are kept, in fact, by the consecrations of the Church, that is, of the membership of the Church. The storehouses we have now are . . . stocked by the produce raised and materials fabricated for the purpose by the Church members. These contributions are truly consecrations, for they are freely and gratuitously given, with no claim back by the donor either as to the contributions themselves or to compensations therefor.' (President J. Reuben Clark, Jr., address at bishops' meeting, Oct. 6, 1944.)" (Victor L. Brown, Ensign, November 1976, p. 114.)

Scriptural References:

D&C 42:34, 55; 51:3; 58:24, 37; 70:7, 11; 72:10; 78:3; 82:18; 83:5, 6; 90:23; 101:96; Mal. 3:10; Luke 12:24; 3 Ne. 24:10.
