Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 2 ( 1978)

Succession to the office of President

The procedure is well established that upon the death of the President of the Church, the President of the Council of the Twelve Apostles becomes the presiding officer of the Church on the earth. He continues in this position until the Quorum of the First Presidency is reorganized and until the new President of the Church is ordained and set apart to his new position.

It is also a well-established procedure in the Church that the President of the Council of the Twelve will become the new President of the Church. In fact, he is already the presiding officer of the Church in his position as President of the Twelve as long as there is no Quorum of the First Presidency organized above him; as President of the Quorum of the First Presidency, he continues in the role of the presiding officer.

The prophets, seers, and revelators of this century have clearly and definitely taught that this order of succession to the presidency of the Church is the will of the Lord and will continue. Thus the Council of the Twelve Apostles provides important training opportunities for future presidents of the Church.

Selected Quotations

"To those who ask the question: How is the President of the Church chosen or elected? the correct and simple answer should be a quotation of the fifth Article of Faith: 'We believe that a man must be called of God, by prophecy, and by the laying on of hands, by those who are in authority, to preach the Gospel and administer in the ordinances thereof.'

"The beginning of the call of one to be President of the Church actually begins when he is called, ordained, and set apart to become a member of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles. Such a call by prophecy, or in other words, by the inspiration of the Lord to the one holding the keys of presidency, and the subsequent ordination and setting apart by the laying on of hands by that same authority, places each apostle in a priesthood quorum of twelve men holding the apostleship.

"Each apostle so ordained under the hands of the President of the Church, who holds the keys of the kingdom of God in concert with all other ordained apostles, has given to him the priesthood authority necessary to hold every position in the Church, even to a position of presidency over the Church if he were called by the presiding authority and sustained by a vote of a constituent assembly of the membership of the Church.

"The Prophet Joseph Smith declared that 'where the president is not, there is no First Presidency.' Immediately following the death of a President, the next ranking body, the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles, becomes the presiding authority, with the President of the Twelve automatically becoming the acting President of the Church until a President of the Church is officially ordained and sustained in his office.

"Early in this dispensation, because of certain conditions, the Council of Twelve continued to preside as a body for as long as three years before the reorganization was effected. As conditions in the Church became more stabilized, the reorganization was effected promptly following the passing of the President of the Church.

"All members of the First Presidency and the Twelve are regularly sustained as 'prophets, seers, and revelators,' as you have done today. This means that any one of the apostles, so chosen and ordained, could preside over the Church if he were 'chosen by the body [which has been interpreted to mean, the entire Quorum of the Twelve], appointed and ordained to that office, and upheld by the confidence, faith, and prayer of the church,' to quote from a revelation on this subject, on one condition, and that being that he was the senior member, or the president, of that body. (See D&C 107:22.)

"Occasionally the question is asked as to whether or not one other than the senior member of the Twelve could become President. Some thought on this matter would suggest that any other than the senior member could become President of the Church only if the Lord reveals to that President of the Twelve that someone other than himself could be selected. The Lord revealed to the first prophet of this dispensation the orderly plan from the Church leadership by a predetermined organization of the earthly kingdom of God. [D&C 107:22-24 quoted.]

"With reference to this subject, the fourth President of the Church, Wilford Woodruff, made a few observations in a letter to President Heber J. Grant, then a member of the Twelve, under date of March 28, 1887. I quote from that letter: '. . . when the President of the Church dies, who then is the Presiding Authority of the Church? It is the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles (ordained and organized by the revelations of God and none else). Then while these Twelve Apostles preside over the Church, who is the President of the Church[?] It is the President of the Twelve Apostles. And he is virtually as much the President of the Church while presiding over Twelve men as he is when organized as the Presidency of the Church, and presiding over two men.' And this principle has been carried out now for 140 years—ever since the organization of the Church." (Harold B. Lee, IE, June 1970, pp. 28-29.)

"Do you know of any reason in case of the death of the President of the Church why the Twelve Apostles should not choose some other than the President of the Twelve to be the President of the Church?

"I know of several reasons why they should not. First, at the death of the President of the Church the Twelve Apostles become the presiding authority of the Church, and the president of the Twelve is really the President of the Church, by virtue of his office as much while presiding over the Twelve Apostles as while presiding over his two counselors.

. . . Second, in case of the death of the President of the Church it takes a majority of the Twelve Apostles to appoint the President of the Church, and it is very unreasonable to suppose that the majority of that quorum could be converted to depart from the course marked out by inspiration and followed by the Apostles at the death of Christ and by the Twelve Apostles at the death of Joseph Smith." (Wilford Woodruff, in Matthias F. Cowley, Wilford Woodruff, p. 561.)

"We frequently hear discussions in our classes and between brethren to the effect that any man could be called, if the authorities should choose him, to preside over the Church, and that it is not the fixed order to take the senior apostle to preside, and any member of that quorum could be appointed. The fact is that the senior apostle automatically becomes the presiding officer of the Church on the death of the President. If some other man were to be chosen, then the senior would have to receive the revelation setting himself aside. President John Taylor has made this very plain. Says President Taylor, speaking of the time following President Young's death: 'I occupied the senior position in the quorum, and occupying that position which was thoroughly understood by the quorum of the twelve, on the death of President Young, as the twelve assumed the presidency, and I was their president, it placed me in a position of president of the Church, or, as expressed in our conference meeting: "As president of the quorum of the twelve apostles, as one of the twelve apostles, and of the presidency of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints." In this manner, also, was President Brigham Young sustained, at the general conference held in Nauvoo, in October following the martyrdom of the Prophet Joseph Smith.' (Gospel Kingdom, p. 192.) The counselors in the presidency cease to be counselors when the President dies and take their regular place among their brethren." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:189-90.)

Scriptural References:

D&C 107:22-30; 112:14-32.
