Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 2 ( 1978)

Book of Mormon

The Book of Mormon is accepted by Latter-day Saints as sacred scripture and as one of the standard works of the Church. Faithful Saints accept wholeheartedly the testimony of Joseph Smith regarding this book, including his statement that "the Book of Mormon [is] the most correct of any book on earth, and the keystone of our religion, and a man would get nearer to God by abiding by its precepts than by any other book." (HC 4:461.)

According to Latter-day Saints, the Book of Mormon has many credentials, including the following, some of which are unique.

Selected Quotations

'"The authenticity of the Book of Mormon and the restoration of the gospel rest upon the same two fundamentals: first, the reality of modern revelation, and second, the fact that Joseph Smith was a prophet of God. These two verities are inseparably connected in their relationship to the Book of Mormon and the restored gospel. To accept one of them is to accept the other." (Marion G. Romney, CR, October 1971, p.27.)

"Robert B. Downs wrote a book entitled Books That Changed America. He listed the Book of Mormon as one of twenty-five such books. In his comments he said, 'Throughout the history of Mormonism, the Church's most powerful and effective weapon has been the Book of Mormon.' (Robert B. Downs, Books That Changed America, New York: Macmillan Co., 1970, p. 35.)

"It is a powerful book!

"Many individuals have read it. It has caused them to leave their churches in which they have been active members. It has caused them to give up their fathers, mothers, and families. Their faith in the book and the truths it teaches was so strong they still believed even though they were told they would be disowned if they joined the Church.

. . . There is a special power about the Book of Mormon. It bears a strong, silent witness of its truth as one reads it.

"Parley P. Pratt stated, 'The Spirit of the Lord came upon me, while I read [The Book of Mormon], and enlightened my mind, convinced my judgment, and rivetted the truth upon my understanding, so that I knew that the book was true, just as well as a man knows the daylight from the dark night.' (JD 5:194.)

"Brigham Young said as he read the book, 'I knew it was true, as well as I knew that I could see with my eyes, or feel by the touch of my fingers, or be sensible of the demonstration of any sense.' (JD 3:91.)" (James A. Cullimore, Ensign, May 1976, pp. 84-86.)
