Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 2 ( 1978)

Swearing

taking the name of God in vain (see also Ten Commandments)

Swearing or taking an oath can either be used for righteous or for unrighteous purposes. In a good sense, the making of a covenant is a form of taking an oath or making a promise with God. However, as is so often the case, wicked people, often with the encouragement and help of the devil, have prostituted or changed the original good intent of the taking of a sacred oath by swearing or taking an oath in vain or in a profane way. As in ancient times, the Lord has warned against blaspheming the name of Deity: "Thou shalt not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain; for the Lord will not hold him guiltless that taketh his name in vain." (Ex. 20:7; D&C 63:61-62.) Profanity makes common, degrades, and shows contempt for the things of God.

Selected Quotations

"To take the name of God in vain, . . . is to use that name lightly, to use it emptily, to use it without effect, so far as the intent is concerned—but nevertheless, with awful effect upon the profane user. We are apt to think that this has reference to the speaking of the name of God only, and in that particular respect the commandment [Exod. 20:7] is sufficiently weighty and important to us. . . .

"I listen with horror to profane swearing. One cannot escape it wholly, go where one will; that is to say, as one has to meet diverse associations one is sure to encounter it. Of profanity I have not yet heard one word of defense. It is wholly demoralizing, wholly base, to say nothing of the sacrilege and blasphemy ofttimes associated in the linking of the name of Deity with our perverse expressions. . . .

"But another phase of taking the name of God in vain is that referred to in the scripture . . . 'And ye shall not swear by my name falsely.' [Lev. 19:12.] How that is disregarded in the world we know. In the courts of the land, yes, . . . in the courts of justice, the oath is administered, 'So help you God,' and we witness every day practically, instances of such solemn adjuration being disregarded as soon as spoken; we see men perjuring themselves, defiling, polluting the name of God even on the witness stand. We have come to think that perjury in our courts is something to be condoned, palliated, and in some minds extolled, if by it some personal advantage can be gained.

"I ask your attention to another way which the name of God is taken in vain, and that by the presumption of men who profess to speak in his name without authority. The Lord has been particularly careful as to those whom he commissions to use his name, . . . and having thus commissioned a man . . . to speak in his name, he, the Lord, holds himself bound by what is done by that agent if it is done righteously in his holy name. [D&C 1:38.] . . .

"And now there is yet another instance, method, way by which we are too prone to take the name of God in vain and in this connection, I call your attention to the thirtieth chapter of Proverbs, verses seven to nine inclusive . . .

"'Two things have I required of thee; deny me them not before I die:

"'Remove far from me vanity and lies: give me neither poverty nor riches; feed me with food convenient for me:

"'Lest I be full and deny thee, and say, Who is the Lord? Or lest I be poor, and steal, and take the name of my God in vain.'

"What association is there between the crime of theft and that of taking the name of God in vain, so closely brought together here? . . . Do we take the name of God in vain by stealing? Latter-day Saints, this applies to us. Is not the name of the Lord written in our foreheads? Where can a Latter-day Saint go without bearing the name of the Lord with him? And if he steal, he is stealing before the Lord and with his name displayed, thus polluting the name of the Lord, for he has taken that name upon himself.

"By way of summary:

"1. We may take the name of God in vain by profane speech.

"2. We take it in vain when we swear falsely, not being true to our oaths and promises.

"3. We take it in vain in a blasphemous sense when we presume to speak in that name without authority.

"4. And we take his name in vain whenever we willfully do aught that is in defiance of his commandments, since we have taken his name upon ourselves." (James E. Talmage, CR, October 1931, pp. 50-53.)

"Sometimes good-hearted people are in the habit of joking a good deal about sacred things, and there is scarcely anything that is held by them too sacred to speak lightly of in some form. They do this in the presence of their children, and their children take advantage of it; and while they go but an inch, so to speak, their children go the full length. They see that their parents do not hold sacred things which are sacred; they joke about them and speak lightly of them in the presence of their children, . . . The children grow up to feel that even their parents . . . do not hold sacred those things that they call sacred. The parents joke about these things and speak lightly of them and the children take advantage of it." (Joseph F. Smith, CR, October 1909, p. 5.)

Scriptural References:

Ex. 20:7, Lev. 18:21, 19:12, Matt. 5:34; Mark 6:23; James 5:12; 1 Ne. 20:1; Alma 49:27; 3 Ne. 12:33; 24:5; Morm. 3:10; Ether 8:14.
