Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 2 ( 1978)

Sword

sword of God; "sword is bathed in heaven"; "sharper than a two-edged sword" (see also Armor of God)

The sword was an effective weapon of offense during many of the wars fought in Old Testament times. It became a symbol of power and might. Some swords even had sharp edges on both sides of the blade, making them more fearsome weapons of war. The word of the Lord is powerful and great, and all of his words shall be fulfilled. The Lord cautions us to pay attention to and be careful with his words, for they are "quick and powerful, sharper than a two-edged sword." (D&C 11:2.)

The term that the sword of the Lord "is bathed in heaven" is used in both ancient and modern scriptures. Isaiah recorded the words of the Lord as follows: "For my sword shall be bathed in heaven: behold, it shall come down upon Idumea, and upon the people of my curse, to judgment." (Isa. 34:5.)

John recorded in the book of Revelation that the Savior will bring a sharp sword to "smite the nations" when he comes to judge the world. (Rev. 19:11-21.)

Selected Quotations

"'For the word of the Lord is quick and powerful, and sharper than any two-edged sword, piercing even to the dividing asunder of soul and spirit and of the joints and marrow, and is a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart.' [Heb. 4:12.]

"The truth of this may seem difficult to realize, but when the 'still small voice' of the Lord speaks to men it is overwhelming. We have the story of Elijah, who withstood the great wind when the Lord passed by; that rent the mountains, likewise the earthquake which shook the earth, and then fire, but the Lord was not in the fire, and then the Lord spoke by the 'still small voice.' Then Elijah wrapped his face in his mantle, for the fear of the Lord came upon him. When the Lord comes he will speak, and the rocks will be rent, the mountains will be laid low, and the valleys exalted, and men will try to hide themselves from his presence. They will not be able to stand the piercing of the 'still small voice,' unless the Spirit of the Lord is upon them." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:56.)

Scriptural References:

D&C 1:13; 6:2; 11:2; 12:2; 14:2; 27:18; 33:1; 35:14; 110:10; 121:5; Heb. 4:12.
