Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 2 ( 1978)

Teaching

teachers; "teach one another" (see also Gifts of the Spirit)

The teacher has a great and awesome responsibility, for he is helping to determine the thoughts and frequently the actions of present and of future generations. He has influence over many people, and this influence may have eternal consequences.

Selected Quotations

"What is a teacher? The teacher is a prophet. He lays the foundation of tomorrow. The teacher is an artist. He works with the precious clay of unfolding personality. The teacher is a friend. His heart responds to the faith and devotion of his students. The teacher is a citizen. He is selected and licensed for the improvement of society. The teacher is an interpreter. Out of his mature and wider life, he seeks to guide the young.

"The teacher is a builder. He works with the higher and finer values of civilization. The teacher is a culture-bearer. He leads the way toward worthier tastes, saner attitudes, more gracious manners, higher intelligence. The teacher is a planner. He sees the young lives before him as a part of a great system that shall grow stronger in the light of truth. The teacher is a pioneer. He is always interpreting and attempting the impossible, and usually winning out.

"The teacher is a reformer. He seeks to improve the handicaps that weaken and destroy life. The teacher is a believer. He has an abiding faith in God and in the improvability of the race. It was James Truslow Adams who said, 'There are obviously two educations. One should teach us how to make a living, and the other how to live.'

"We are engaged in teaching people how to live. Elbert Hubbard said, 'You can't teach anybody anything. You can only help him find himself.' That was the genius of the Savior. He taught us divine principles we could apply to ourselves and thus solve our personal problems. The Savior had no peer as a teacher." (Paul H. Dunn, Ensign, December 1971, p. 119.)

"A wise man, when asked to list three cardinal points that exemplified the lives of the great teachers of all time and that would be a guide to new teachers, said: 'First, teach by example. Second, teach by example. Third, teach by example.' Our Savior, Jesus Christ, is the greatest example the world has ever known, and his teachings endure throughout the ages because the precepts he taught were emphasized by the example of his own life." (Delbert L. Stapley, IE, June 1969, p. 69.)

"May I challenge you in the words from the epistle of James to be 'doers of the word, and not hearers only' (Jas. l:22), remembering:

I hear and I forget, I see and I remember; I do and I learn.

"Others then will follow your example. Commandments will be lived. Lives will be blessed.

"In Galilee there taught a master teacher, even Jesus Christ the Lord. He left his footprints in the sands of the seashore, but he left his teaching principles in the hearts and in the lives of all whom he taught. He instructed his disciples of that day, and to us he speaks the same words, 'Follow thou me.' Then, as now, foolish, unwise persons will stop their ears, close their eyes, and turn away their hearts. Let us remember, there is no deafness so permanent as the deafness which will not hear. There is no blindness so incurable as the blindness which will not see. There is no ignorance so deep as the ignorance that will not know." (Thomas S. Monson, IE, December 1970, pp. 102-3.)

"What miracles an impact teacher can achieve by giving honest appreciation and a sense of self-worth! The parent or teacher who honestly satisfies this heart hunger will hold a child or a class in the palm of his hand.

"Some years ago when Aldin Porter was president of the Boise North Stake, he dropped by the home of Glen Clayton, who was the Scoutmaster in his ward. Glen and his son were working together repairing a bicycle. President Porter stood and talked to them for a few minutes and then left. Several hours later he returned and the father and son were still working on the bike together. President Porter said, 'Glen, with the wages you make per hour you could have bought a new bike, considering the time you have spent repairing this old one.'

"Glen stood up and said, 'I'm not repairing a bike, I'm training a boy!'

"That year twenty-one boys achieved the rank of Eagle Scout in Glen's troop. Impact teachers do not teach lessons, they teach souls. . . .

"Ezekiel said that the fathers have eaten sour grapes and it hath set the children's teeth on edge. (See Ezek. 18:2.) Paraphrasing Presiding Lee's statement, 'The greatest teaching we will ever do is within the walls of our own home.' We have a sacred trust to teach our children the principles of truth; but equally important is to love and care in following the way of the Master.

"Impact teachers are not cast in a certain mold in the spirit world and introduced on earth's scene at just the proper time. Every leader in the kingdom can become an impact teacher. Your notoriety may not reach much past the quorum or class, but your influence may be felt in the eternities. . . . The impact teacher cares with an attitude of pure charity. The impact teacher asks, 'What would the Savior do when faced with this problem?'" (Vaughn J. Featherstone, Ensign, November 1976, pp. 103-5.)

Scriptural References:

D&C 20:53; 42:14, 70; 43:15-16; 68:28; 88:77, 118; Ps. 32:8; Prov. 9:9; 22:6, Mosiah 4:15; 23:14.
