Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 2 ( 1978)

Telestial

(see also Degrees of glory)

The telestial is the lowest of the three major degrees of glory.

Selected Quotations

"The adjective 'telestial' has not become current in the language; its use is at present confined to the theology of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. It is applied as a distinguishing term to the lowest of the three kingdoms of glory provided for the redeemed. The only English word approaching it in form is the adjective 'telestic,' which is defined thus: 'tending toward the end or final accomplishment; tending to accomplish a purpose.'

"In this connection the following note, from Elder J. M. Sjodahl to the author may be profitably studied: 'Paul speaking of the several times of resurrection (1 Cor. 15:22-25) says of the last: "then cometh the end, when he shall have delivered up the kingdom of God," etc. The word translated end is telos, and the glory of those who are resurrected last may therefore properly be called telestial, as related to telos. Their resurrection is the end, the finish, the completion, of the resurrection series.'" (James E. Talmage, AF, p. 521.)

"Those who partake of the telestial kingdom are the unclean inhabitants of the earth; those who have defiled themselves with immoral practices, the liars, sorcerers, thieves, blasphemers, and all who have loved wickedness. Because of their evil practices they bring down upon themselves the wrath of God. These are turned over to Satan and become subject to his rule and suffer his buffetings until the day of the earth, or their redemption which is the resurrection which will not come until the end of the earth, or the 'fulness of times,' or when our Savior has finished his work; then they shall be brought forth after they have paid the 'uttermost farthing,' and have learned by the things they have suffered that 'crime does not pay.'" (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 465.)

"Can they [people of the telestial glory] come where God and Christ dwell? No, worlds without end they cannot come there. Can they go into the presence of the heathen where the glory is that of the moon? No, they cannot even come there. When they are delivered from the power of Satan and endless death and brought forth, where do they go? If they do not go into the presence of God the Father, if they are not counted worthy to enter into the terrestrial world among the heathens, where will they go? God has provided mansions for them according to their works here in this world. Having suffered the vengeance of eternal fire for the space of a thousand years and upwards, and suffered the extreme penalty of the law of God, they can now be brought forth to inherit a place where they can be administered unto by terrestrial beings and by Angels holding the Priesthood, and where they can receive the Holy Ghost." (Orson Pratt, JD 15:322-23.)

Scriptural References:

D&C 76:81-98, 109; 88:21-24, 31; 1 Cor. 15:40.
