Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 2 ( 1978)

Temple

temples; "the Lord will come suddenly to his temple"

The Lord's house (temple) is a holy sanctuary where sacred ordinances and ceremonies are performed and where eternal truths are taught pertaining to the exaltation and eternal life of man. It is literally a House of the Lord upon the earth where the Lord's Spirit may be in attendance, where he can personally appear, or where he can send heavenly messengers. Ancient prophets testified that one of the signs before the second coming of Jesus Christ is that the Lord would come suddenly to His temple.

Selected Quotations

"Temple work . . . gives a wonderful opportunity for keeping alive our spiritual knowledge and strength. The mighty perspective of eternity is unraveled before us in the holy temples; we see time from its infinite beginning to its endless end; and the dream of eternal life is unfolded before us. Then I see more clearly my place amidst the things of the universe, my place among the purposes of God; I am better able to place myself where I belong, and I am better able to value and to weigh, to separate and to organize the common, ordinary duties of my life, so that the little things shall not oppress me or take away my vision of the greater things that God has given us." (John A. Widtsoe, CR, April 1922, pp. 97-98 )

"President Young said: 'To accomplish this work there will have to be not only one temple, but thousands of them, and thousands and tens of thousands of men and women will go into those temples and officiate for people who have lived as far back as the Lord shall reveal.' (JD 3:372.) . . .

"Then the Prophet Wilford Woodruff said: 'When the Savior comes, a thousand years will be devoted to this work of redemption and temples will appear all over this land of Joseph—North and South America—and also in Europe and elsewhere.' (JD 19:230.)" (LeGrand Richards, Ensign, November 1974, p. 54.)

Scriptural References:

D&C 36:8; 42:36; 133:2; Mal. 3:1-3; 3 Ne. 24:1.
