Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 2 ( 1978)

Ten Commandments

The Ten Commandments were given in ancient times [Ex. 20:3-17] but have been repeated and reemphasized by the Lord in this dispensation [D&C 42:18-29].

Selected Quotations

"Some people hold that the Ten Commandments belong to a by-gone age. That cannot be so, for I remember that the Lord in this generation reiterated to the Prophet Joseph Smith the principles that are found in the Ten Commandments as reported by Moses; and he made them more emphatic, for he said not only, 'Thou shalt not steal; thou shalt not lie'; but added, that 'he who steals or lies shall be cast out unless he repents.' [Sec. 42:20-21.]" (John A. Widtsoe, CR, April 1937, p. 67.)

"There is a cure for the earth's illness, an infallible one.

. . . The diagnosis is sure, and the remedy certain. Today's prophet stands in the same position between God and the people as did Isaiah, Samuel, and even Moses who gave to the world the Ten Commandments. But a controlling majority of the people of this world have relegated them to the past.

"'Thou shalt have no other gods before me.' (Ex. 20:3.) Yet today we worship the gods of wood and stone and metal. Not always are they in the form of a golden calf, but equally real as objects of protection and worship. They are houses, lands, bank accounts, leisure. They are boats, cars, and luxuries. They are bombs and ships and armaments. We bow down to the god of mammon, the god of luxuries, the god of dissipation.

"'Thou shalt not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain. . . .' (Ex. 20:7.) Yet on the corner, in public places, on work projects, at banquet tables, there come ringing into our ears the sacred names of Deity without solemnity.

"'Remember the sabbath day, to keep it holy.' (Ex. 20:8.) Yet work goes on, merchandise is sold, athletic entertainments, fishing, hunting go forward without regard to commandments. Conventions, unnecessary travel, family picnics, the Sabbath is violated generally. . . . The taverns are full, the beaches crowded, the grandstands packed, man servants and maid servants hired to duty, the ski lifts busy, canyon picnic tables loaded. Scriptures are read little, and the holy day becomes a holiday.

"'Six days shalt thou labour. . . .' (Ex. 20:9.) Yet ever-increasing hours of leisure provide ever-increasing opportunities for Sabbath breaking and commandment ignoring, and strikes and lobbying go on to increase damaging leisure and decrease work hours further.

"'Thou shalt not commit adultery.' (Ex. 20:14.) Yet common sin and idolatry run hand in hand. Free love and indiscretions and deviations of every nature are common in our day. Illegitimate births are said to reach as high as one in ten, yet promiscuity far exceeds illegitimacy. This ugly deviation is found among youth and married people. Divorce, ever on the increase, jumping from one divorce for thirty-six weddings in Civil War days now has reached somewhere near one to four. Flirtations, rationalized to be innocent ones, are the root of numerous of the divorces and other ills.

"'Thou shalt not steal.' (Ex. 20:15.) Yet in high places and in low, in government office and in business, in everyday life, men have rationalized until consciences seem to have been seared in the matter of honesty. Yet here are bribery, fraud, deceit, theft, padding of expense accounts, tax evasions, installment buying beyond ability to pay, and gambling running into the billions.

"The outlook is bleak, but the impending tragedy can be averted. But it can be only through a great repentance and transformation." (Spencer W. Kimball, CR, September 1961, pp. 30-34)

"These directions and warnings have not been the arbitrary edicts of a vindictive tyrant. They are the teachings, counsels, and pleadings of a solicitous, loving Heavenly Father. They prescribe the one and only means to peace and happiness in this earth. They declare irrevocable law, compliance with which is indispensable to peace and progress: the earth itself responds to man's obedience or disobedience to the teachings of God, who made the earth." (Marion G. Romney, Ensign, May 1977, p. 52.)

Scriptural References:

D&C 42:18-29; Ex. 20; Deut. 5.
