Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 2 ( 1978)

Bridegroom

Jesus Christ as the bridegroom (see also Second Coming; Jesus Christ; Virgins)

The Old Testament prophets often compared the spiritual relation between God and his people to a betrothal or marriage; apostasy, through idolatry or other sin, was likened to unfaithfulness on the part of the marriage partner. (Isa. 1:21; Jer. 3:1-20; Ezek. 16, 23; Hosea 2.)

The New Testament writers also occasionally referred to Christ as "the bridegroom in the supper of the Lamb," which has been identified by prophets in this dispensation to refer to his second coming. It is usually in this setting that the word bridegroom is used in the Doctrine and Covenants to refer to Jesus Christ. In section 33 the world is urged to "be ready at the coming of the Bridegroom" (verse 17); in section 65 the people are to "prepare . . . the supper of the Lamb, make ready for the Bridegroom" (verse 3); and later sections indicate that the "Bridegroom cometh; go ye out to meet him" (88:92; see also 133:10, 19).

Selected Quotations

"Let the Church, therefore, prepare as a bride to receive her bridegroom; let the Saints have on their wedding garments, and have their lamps well supplied with oil, trimmed and burning; let all things be made ready for the reception of our Savior and Redeemer, even our Lord the Christ. Let all the Saints throughout the world live their religion, that they may be worthy to enjoy his presence and have converse with the angels of our God; let them gird up their loins and step forth in the power and might of Elijah's God to do battle in this great cause, and armed with high heaven's panoply, even the armour of salvation and the helmet of righteousness, go forth conquering and to conquer, until the gospel shall be sounded to every nation, kindred, tongue and people, and the pure in heart, the meek of the earth, the Israel of our God, be gathered out from the wicked nations and brought to inherit and worship under their own vines and fig trees, and learn of him whose glory will rest upon his temple as a cloud by day and a pillar of fire by night." (First Presidency, MS 18:4.)

Scriptural References:

D&C 33:17; 65:3; 88:92; 133:10, 19; Matt. 9:15; John 3:29; Rev. 18:23.
