Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 2 ( 1978)

Tithe

tithing; law of tithing (see also material for section 119)

The basic meaning of tithe is "one-tenth." A tithing has been defined as "one-tenth of one's increase." The law of tithing was practiced in both Old Testament and New Testament times and has been reinstituted in this dispensation.

Selected Quotations

"The tithe is God's law for his children, yet the payment is entirely voluntary. In this respect it does not differ from the law of the Sabbath or from any other of his laws. We may refuse to obey any or all of them. Our obedience is voluntary, but our refusal to pay does not abrogate or repeal the law.

"If tithing is a voluntary matter, is it a gift or a payment of an obligation? There is a substantial difference between the two. A gift is a voluntary transfer of money or property without consideration. It is gratuitous. No one owes the obligation to make a gift. If tithing is a gift, we could give whatever we please, or make no gift at all. It would place our Heavenly Father in the very same category as the street beggar to whom we might toss a coin in passing.

"The Lord has established the law of tithing, and because it is his law, it becomes our obligation to observe it if we love him and have a desire to keep his commandments and receive his blessings. In this way it becomes a debt. The man who doesn't pay his tithing because he is in debt should ask himself if he is not also in debt to the Lord. . . .

"The payment of tithing strengthens faith, increases spirituality and spiritual capacity, and solidifies testimony. It gives the satisfaction of knowing one is complying with the will of the Lord. It brings the blessings that come from sharing with others through the purposes for which tithing is used. We cannot afford to deny ourselves these blessings. We cannot afford not to pay our tithing. We have a definite relationship to the future as well as to the present. What we give, and how we give, and the way we meet our obligations to the Lord has eternal significance.

"A testimony of the law of tithing comes from living it. Like all others of God's laws, when we live them we receive the blessings." (Howard W. Hunter, CR, April 1964, pp. 33-36 )

"Inquiries are received at the office of the First Presidency from time to time from officers and members of the Church asking for information as to what is considered a proper tithe. For your guidance in this matter, please be advised that we have uniformly replied that the simplest statement we know of is the statement of the Lord himself, namely, that the members of the Church should pay 'one-tenth of all their interest annually,' which is understood to mean income. No one is justified in making any other statement than this.

"We feel that every member of the Church is entitled to make his own decision as to what he thinks he owes the Lord and to make payment accordingly." (First Presidency, letter to stake presidents and bishops, Mar. 19, 1970.)

"Strictly speaking there is no such thing as a part tithing. Tithing is a tenth, and unless a person contributes the tenth, he has only made a contribution to the tithing funds of the Church. Somewhat inappropriately the term part-tithepayer is used with reference to those making such contributions." (Bruce R. McConkie, MD, pp. 798-99.)

Scriptural References:

D&C 64:23; 85:3; 97:12; 119:4; Gen. 14:20; 28:22; Lev. 27:30; Num. 18:26; Deut. 12:6; 14:22; 26:12;2 Chr. 31:5; Neh. 10:38; 12:44; Prov. 3:9; Mal. 3:8; Matt. 23:23; Luke 18:12; Heb. 7:2; Alma 13:15; 3 Ne. 24:8.
