Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 2 ( 1978)

Trump

"voice (sound) of a trump"

The trumpet is a musical instrument that can be made to produce a loud, blaring sound that can be heard for a considerable distance. Sometimes the expression "sound of a trumpet" is used in the scriptures in a literal sense—an actual trumpet will be blown and the actual sound of the trumpet will be heard. On other occasions, however, the expression is used only in the figurative sense that the message will be loud and clear, just as the sound of the trumpet can be loud and clear.

Selected Quotations

"After these great judgments [D&C 88:88-91] are poured upon the nations of the earth, then will be fulfilled the words which I have read. [D&C 88:92, quoted.] After these angels have flown through the midst of heaven calling upon the inhabitants of the earth to prepare for the coming of the Bridegroom, seven more angels are to sound their trumps. The first one sounds, and his proclamation is concerning great Babylon. [D&C 88:94, quoted.]

"There must be something connected with the sounding of this trump that is miraculous in order that all nations may hear it. Any sound that can be produced by mortal man does not reach, generally speaking, over about thirty miles from where it originates, which is a very small space indeed. But there will be something connected with the sounding of the trump of the first of the seven angels which will manifest a power which we know nothing of. The sound of that trump will be heard by all people, nations, kindreds and tongues in the four quarters of our globe. I do not know that the sound will be so much louder than some we have heard, but it will be carried by some miraculous power so that all people will hear it.

"'Immediately after the sounding of this trump, there will be silence in heaven for the space of half an hour.' Whether the half hour here spoken is according to our reckoning—thirty minutes, or whether it be according to the reckoning of the Lord we do not know. We know that the word hour is used in some portions of the Scriptures to represent quite a lengthy period of time. For instance, we, the Latter-day Saints, are living in the eleventh hour, that is the eleventh period of time [Sec. 33:3] and for aught we know the half hour during which silence is to prevail in heaven may be quite an extensive period of time. During the period of silence all things are perfectly still; no angels flying during that half hour; no trumpets sounding; no noise in the heavens above; but immediately after this great silence the curtain of heaven shall be unfolded as a scroll is unfolded." (Orson Pratt, JD 16:327-28.)

Scriptural References:

D&C 24:12; 29:4; 30:9; 33:2; 34:6; 36:1; 42:6; 75:4; JS-M 1:37; Ps. 47:5;1 Cor. 15:52; 1 Thes. 4:16; Alma 29:1.
