Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 2 ( 1978)

Truth

Light of Truth; Spirit of Truth

The meaning and extent of truth has been a favorite topic of discussion for philosophers over the years. The question "What is truth?" was asked of Jesus Christ when he lived upon the earth, but the present New Testament does not include his answer. (See John 18:38.) In the Doctrine and Covenants, the Lord has defined truth as "knowledge of things as they are, and as they were, and as they are to come." (93:24.)

The Savior frequently used the word truth in regard to himself, for he is a God of truth: "I am the way, the truth, and the life." (John 14:6; Ether 4:12.) The prophets indicate that the Savior "is full of grace and truth" (2 Ne. 2:6; John 1:14, 17; D&C 93:11), and he came to the earth to "bear witness unto the truth" (John 18:37). Jesus Christ is also identified by the title Spirit of truth—"I am the Spirit of truth." (D&C 93:26.) The apostle John quoted the Savior: "When he, the spirit of truth, is come, he will guide you into all truth." (John 16:13.) The Holy Ghost, who has the responsibility to be a witness for Jesus Christ and to testify of truth, might also be designated by the title Spirit of truth.

Selected Quotations

"What is truth? Here I must give you an inspired definition, a definition that came from an unsophisticated boy-prophet, but one which rivals the definitions of the greatest scholars and of all time. [D&C 93:24, quoted.] How is such knowledge to be obtained? Through science and education? Yes, in part, but not wholly. And why not completely? Because most of the knowledge of things 'as they were' and 'as they are to come' is without the realm and province of science, as well as much knowledge of 'things as they are.' Science, then, can give us but fragments of truth, not the whole truth. And the whole truth is necessary if we are to be provided with proper criteria by which to do our choosing.

"How then, is the whole truth to be secured? The key is to be found in another revelation, 'the Spirit of truth is of God.' [D&C 93:26.] That being so, we must, of necessity have God's aid in the acquisition of truth. His aid comes through faith and prayer. Faith contemplates the acceptance of spiritual reality of a world outside the domain of science. It involves methods and processes different from those of scientific research. It postulates humility and dependence on divine power, the antipathies of egotism and self-sufficiency. A contrite heart is a fertile field for planting the seeds of truth. In such a field they come to fruition in a knowledge, understanding, and conviction of the great concepts of life which defy the reason and philosophy of the arrogant and self-sufficient who will not stoop to the methods of the humble." (Stephen L Richards, CR, April 1939, pp. 40-41.)

"In the Church we have no fear that any discovery of new truths will ever be in conflict with these standards—with any fundamental basic principle which we advocate in the Gospel. Truth is always consistent. This fact gives to us as members of the Church a feeling of great security, a feeling of peace, a feeling of assurance. We know beyond any question that the truths which we advocate, the truths of the gospel restored to the earth through the Prophet Joseph, are in very deed the truths of heaven. These truths will always be consistent with the discovery of any new truths, whether discovered in the laboratory, through research of the scientist, or whether revealed from heaven through prophets of God. Time is always on the side of truth." (Ezra Taft Benson, CR, April 1958, p. 60.)

"Freedom is based on truth, and no man is completely free as long as any part of his belief is based on error, for the chains of error bind his mind. This is why it is so important for us to learn all the truth we can from all the sources we can." (N. Eldon Tanner, Ensign, May 1978, p. 14.)

"A truth of the gospel is not a truth until you live it. You do not really believe in tithing, and it is not a truth of the gospel to you until you pay it. The Word of Wisdom to you is not a truth of the gospel until you keep it. The Sabbath day is not a holy day unless you observe it. Fasting and paying fast offerings, consecrating your fast, is not a truth of the gospel unless you live it." (Harold B. Lee, BYUSY, 1961, p. 10.)

Scriptural References:

D&C 6:15; 50:17, 19, 21; 88:6; 93:9, 11, 23, 26, 29; 107:71; 124:9; Moses 1:6; Ps. 117:2; John 14:17; 15:26; 16:13; Alma 30:46.
