Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 2 ( 1978)

Burned

earth to be burned; wicked to be burned at second coming (see also Second coming)

In the time of Noah, the wicked were destroyed by a flood; at the second coming of the Messiah, the wicked will be destroyed by fire through burning. (Mal. 3:2, 4; D&C 64:23-25). Prophets of this dispensation have indicated that the fire which destroys the wicked at the second coming will be as literal as the water which destroyed the wicked in ancient times. During this time of great burning, the elements shall melt and all things shall become new; the earth will also be renewed then and receive its paradisiacal glory. (D&C 101:23-31.)

Selected Quotations

"It is not a figure of speech that is meaningless, or one not to be taken literally when the Lord speaks of the burning. All through the scriptures we have the word of the Lord that at his coming the wicked and the rebellious will be as stubble and will be consumed. Isaiah has so prophesied. . . . Surely the words of the Lord are not to be received lightly or considered meaningless." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:238.)

"The scriptures abound in declarations and reiterations, in repeated and solemn affirmations of the great fact that the day of the Lord's coming will be a day of glory and a day of terror—of glory and recompense unto those who are living righteously, and a day of terror unto the proud and unto all who do wickedly. Now, many have asked, do we interpret that scripture as meaning that in the new day of the Lord's coming, all who are not members of the Church shall be burned, or otherwise destroyed, and only this little body of men and women, very small compared with the uncounted hosts of men now living, shall be spared the burning and shall escape destruction? I think not so. I do not think we are justified in putting that interpretation upon the Lord's word, for He recognizes every man according to the integrity of his heart, and men who have not been able to understand the Gospel or who have not had opportunity of learning it and knowing of it will not be counted as the wilfully sinful who are fit only to be burned as stubble; but the proud, who lift themselves in the pride of their hearts and rise above the word of God and become a law unto themselves and who wilfully rise above the word of God, and with knowledge deny the saving virtues of the atonement of Christ, and who are seeking to lead others away from the truth will be dealt with by Him according to both justice and mercy." (James E. Talmage, CR, April 1916, p.128.)

Scriptural References:

D&C 31:4; 38:12; 64:23; 86:7; 88:94; 101:66; 1 Ne. 22:15; Jacob 5:77; 6:3.
