Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 2 ( 1978)

United Order

order of Enoch (see also Consecration; Enoch)

A distinction should be made between the law of consecration and the united order (or order of Enoch), which is concerned with the financial and monetary portions of the law of consecration.

The law of consecration is a celestial law wherein the righteous willingly and wholeheartedly consecrate their all—time, strength, talents, possessions—to the establishment, upbuilding, and maintenance of the Lord's work and kingdom. It is the law by which the city of Zion will be established in the last days.

Many of the saints in ancient times and some of the saints in the early part of this dispensation were given the opportunity to live the financial portions of this law by having "all things in common." Full practice of the financial law would help one to develop those attributes of godliness which enable one to live the law of consecration and prepare for eternal life in the celestial kingdom.

Selected Quotations

"In this last dispensation, before the church had been organized nine months the Lord directed the Saints to take care of the poor. At the same time he told them that if they did not do so, they were not his disciples. (See D&C 38.) Five weeks later, on February 9, 1831, he revealed the united order. (See D&C 42.) Within a month thereafter, he spoke again on the subject, saying to the brethren that, pending the establishment of the order, they must 'visit the poor and the needy and administer to their relief.' (D&C 44:6.)

"During the next three years and four months, the Saints had settled Independence, Missouri, made an attempt to live the united order, failed to do so, and been expelled from their properties in Jackson County, and Zion's Camp had gone to Missouri from Kirtland with the purpose of restoring them to their homes. This the expedition was unable to do. On Fishing River, Missouri, June 22, 1834, the Lord explained the reason for the failure of their putting the Saints back in their homes, as follows: [D&C 105:16 quoted.]

"The requirement to live the united order at that time was then withdrawn. The lesser law of tithing was revealed, which, with the law of the fast, has prevailed and persisted in the Church until now." (Spencer W. Kimball, Ensign, November 1975, p. 125.)

"Out of the answers to [Joseph Smith's] prayers on the subject [of help for the poor] was revealed an ideal economic system, commonly known as the 'United Order.' It rejected the weaknesses of the many similar attempts and introduced new, almost revolutionary methods of operation.

"Its objective was to provide every man who is willing to work with the necessities and the comforts of life, thus abolishing poverty from the earth. It was to be a cooperative plan but directly opposed to modern communism, since it recognized man as a free agent, respected the rights of private property, and preserved and encouraged individual initiative. The United Order thus established rests upon four basic principles.

"First, the earth is the Lord's. Men are only stewards of their possessions. All that man has should be used therefore in accordance with the Lord's expressed will.

"Second, all men are children of God—of a divine family. Therefore, the Lord requires that they must help one another as needs arise, provided that he who will not work shall have no claim upon his brother.

"Third, every man must be respected as a free agent. He may enter the order at his pleasure. Once in the order, he must be allowed to use, fully, and as he pleases, any properties placed in his hands. He may leave the order at his pleasure.

"Fourth, the government of the order is vested in a central agency, sustained by the members of the order, presided over by the bishop, his counselors, and such helpers as may be needed. This central agency would have power to adjust the disputes normally arising among strongly individualized human beings.

"The operation of the order under these four heads is extremely simple. Those who join the order would place all their possessions, irrevocably, in a common treasury-the rich man, his wealth; the poor man, his penny. Then each member would receive a sufficient portion, called 'an inheritance,' from the common treasury, to enable him to continue in his trade, business, or profession as he may desire. The farmer would receive land and implements; the tradesman, tools and materials; the merchant, the necessary capital; the professional man, instruments, books, etc. Members who work for others would receive proportionate interests in the enterprises they serve. No one would be without property—all would have an inheritance.

"A person's inheritance would be his personal property, to operate permanently and freely for his benefit and that of his family. Should he withdraw from the order, his inheritance would go with him, but he would have no claim upon that which he had placed in the common treasury. [D&C 51:3-6.] At the end of the year, or a set period, the member who had earned more than his business and family needs required would place the surplus in the common treasury. Thus, for example, large fortunes would be administered by the order as a whole rather than by one individual. The member who, despite intelligent diligence, had lost from his operations would have his loss made up by the general treasury for another start, or he might with his consent be placed in some activity better fitting his gifts.

"In short, the general treasury would set up every man in his preferred field and would care for and help those unable to profit from their inheritance. The general treasury, holding the surpluses of the members, would also finance the erection of public buildings and make possible all community enterprises decided upon by the order. [D&C 104:60-77.]

"This remarkable economic order was tried out in Ohio and Missouri, chiefly in 1832-1834. The Church was then organizing settlements in Missouri. Though practiced only a short time, about two years, it showed possibilities of great success. However, in those pioneer days, under severe persecution from neighbors, and with undisciplined selfishness of certain members, the people could not give the order a fair trial." (John A. Widtsoe, JS, pp. 191-94.)

Scriptural References:

D&C 76:57; 92:1; 104:48, 53.
