Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 2 ( 1978)

Virgins

parable of the ten virgins

The Savior gave the parable of the ten virgins in New Testament times (Matt. 25:1-13) and repeated it in this dispensation (D&C 45:56-59; 63:54). In all these instances, it is clear that this parable has to do with events associated with the second coming of Jesus Christ.

Selected Quotations

"The story itself is based on oriental marriage customs, with which the Lord's attentive listeners were familiar. It was and yet is common in those lands, particularly in connection with marriage festivities among the wealthy classes, for the bridegroom to go to the home of the bride, accompanied by his friends in processional array, and later to conduct the bride to her new home with a larger body of attendants composed of groomsmen, bridesmaids, relatives and friends. As the bridal party progressed, to the accompaniment of gladsome music, it was increased by little groups who had gathered in waiting at convenient places along the route, and particularly near the end of the course where organized companies came forth to meet the advancing procession. Wedding ceremonies were appointed for the evening and night hours; and the necessary use of torches and lamps gave brilliancy and added beauty to the scene." (James E. Talmage, JC , p. 577.)

"This was a parable [Matt. 25:1-13] as with many of the Master's teachings based upon customs with which the people, his hearers, were already familiar.

"The purpose of this lesson was to impress upon those called to the ministry and upon his followers and upon the world that there should be an increasing watchfulness and preparation for the day which he had predicted when the Lord would come again in judgment upon the earth.

"The bridegroom of the parable was the Master, the Savior of mankind. The marriage feast symbolized the second coming of the Savior to receive his Church unto himself. The virgins were those who were professed believers in Christ, because they were expectantly waiting for the coming of the bridegroom to the marriage feast, or they were connected with the Church and the events which were to transpire with reference to it.

"That this parable did refer particularly to the believers in Christ with a warning to them is further indicated by what the Lord has told us in modern revelation in which he said:

[D&C 63:53-54, quoted], undoubtedly meaning a separation of the wicked from the righteous among the professing believers in the Lord Jesus Christ.

"The Lord defines the wise virgins of his parable in still another revelation in which he said: [D&C 45:57, quoted].

"Here is clearly indicated a truth we must all recognize, that among the people of God, the believers in the Savior of the world, there are those who are wise and keep the commandments, and yet there are those who are foolish, who are disobedient, and who neglect their duties. . . .

"The Lord gives us, each one, a lamp to carry, but whether or not we shall have oil in our lamps depends solely upon each one of us. Whether or not we keep the commandments and supply the needed oil to light our way and to guide us on our way depends upon each of us individually. We cannot borrow from our Church membership. We cannot borrow from an illustrious ancestry. Whether or not we have oil in our lamps, I repeat, depends solely upon each one of us; it is determined by our faithfulness in keeping the commandments of the Living God.

"We must buy from the only source from which we can obtain this kind of oil referred to by the Master—from the fountain of eternal supply." (Harold B. Lee, CR, October 1951, pp. 26-27, 30.)

"Now the question is, how can we keep oil in our lamps? By keeping the commandments of God, remembering our prayers, doing as we are told by the revelations of Jesus Christ, and otherwise assisting in building up Zion. When we are laboring for the kingdom of God, we will have oil in our lamps, our light will shine and we will feel the testimony of the spirit of God. On the other hand, if we set our hearts upon the things of the world and seek for the honors of men, we shall walk in the dark and not in the light. If we do not value our priesthood, and the work of this priesthood, the building up of the kingdom of God, . . . if we do not feel that these things are more valuable to us than the things of the world, we will have no oil in our lamps, no light, and we shall fail to be present at the marriage supper of the Lamb." (Wilford Woodruff, JD 22:208.)

"Live within your means. Get out of debt. Keep out of debt. Lay by for a rainy day which has always come and will come again. Practice and increase your habits of thrift, industry, economy, frugality. Remember that the parable of the ten virgins, the five that were wise and the five that were foolish, can be just as applicable to matters of the temporal world as those of the spiritual." (J. Reuben Clark, Jr., CR, October 1937, p. 107.)

Scriptural References:

D&C 45:56; 63:54; Matt. 25:1-11.
