Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 2 ( 1978)

Watchmen

watchmen on the tower

The Lord's people have lived in many relatively flat lands. In some of these lands the people were instructed to build watchtowers on which a watchman could be placed to warn the people of an approaching enemy. The symbol of the watchman on the tower had great significance to the people, and they could very readily identify with the symbol and the principle being taught.

However, the practice of building and manning watch-towers would be ineffective (1) if the watchtower were never built, (2) if the watchman did not see the enemy coming, (3) if the watchman called out a warning when there was no enemy, (4) if the watchman saw the enemy but did not issue a warning, or (5) if the watchman issued the warning but the people did not hearken to it. All of these conditions were included at one time or another in the teachings of the Lord.

In regard to missionary work, when the Lord commands his servants to preach the gospel, it is the responsibility of the servants to obey the Lord. If the servants obey the Lord and teach the gospel, then the responsibility for accepting or rejecting the gospel shifts to those to whom the gospel is taught. If the servants do not teach the gospel when commanded, then the servants not only become responsible for their own disobedience, but they are also, in some way, responsible for the continued wickedness of those who would have received the gospel and repented if the gospel had been taught to them.

This is essentially the same teaching the Lord gave anciently to Ezekiel in his analogy of the watchman of Israel. (Ezek. 3:16-21 and 33:1-9.) It is also the admonition of Jacob the son of Lehi, in his explanation as to why he and his brother Joseph magnified their office "unto the Lord, taking upon us the responsibility, answering the sins of the people upon our own heads if we did not teach them the word of God with all diligence; wherefore, by laboring with our might their blood might not come upon our garments; otherwise their blood would come upon our garments, and we would not be found spotless at the last day." (Jacob 1:19.)

Selected Quotations

"I would like to speak of a dream or a parable taken from one of the prophets of the Old Testament, in which was depicted a watchman on a high tower overlooking the countryside, watching for enemies that might be coming to destroy, enemies that were in evidence by clouds of dust of approaching camels or horses, or whatever they had. The watchman was reporting hour by hour down to his lord in the courtyard. 'All is well, All is well,' or he reported if he saw any dangers.

"But in the dream or the parable the lord asked: 'But watchman, what of the night? Watchman, what of the night?' suggesting that more to be feared than the enemies that come in the daytime that you can see are the enemies that come in the night.

"Now it is about the enemies that come in the night I want just to make one reference.

"The term 'elder,' which is applied to all holders of the Melchizedek Priesthood, means a defender of the faith. That is our prime responsibility and calling. Every holder of the Melchizedek Priesthood is to be a defender of the faith.

"There are insidious forces among us that are constantly trying to knock at our doors and trying to lay traps for our young men and women, particularly those who are unwary and unsophisticated in the ways of the world. I speak of the battle against liquor by the drink, gambling, prostitution, pornography, and our efforts to aid Christian people who desire to have one day dedicated to keeping the Sabbath day holy. All we have to do is to remember what the Lord said in order to impress the importance of keeping the Sabbath day holy: 'And that thou mayest more fully keep thyself unspotted from the world, thou shalt go to the house of prayer and offer up thy sacraments upon my holy day.' (D&C 59:9.) Defenders of the faith should be alert, then, to see to it with all their influence that there is an opportunity given to the working man, the boy and the girl, the husband and the wife to have one day in the week when they can be with their families and have one day consecrated as a day of rest. Watchmen, be alert to the 'dangers of the night'!" (Harold B. Lee, IE, June 1970, p. 63.)

"We are the nation's watchmen—no other people collectively love the Constitution and honor it and hold it as a divinely inspired document as do the Latter-day Saints. The duty of the watchman is to watch over and safeguard his people. . . . As a generation of those who love this glorious country, we must ask ourselves, 'But watchman, what of the night?' Have our youth enough of the fires of freedom kindled in them to withstand the darkness? We must teach them in our homes, churches, and schools. The sound must go across this land from one end to the other." (Vaughn J. Featherstone, Ensign, November 1975, pp. 9-10.)

Scriptural References:

D&C 101:45-46, 53-54, 57; 105:16, 30; 124:61; 2 Kgs. 17:9; 18:8; Isa. 62:6; Ezek. 33:3-6; Mosiah 12:22; 15:29; 3 Ne. 16:18; 20:32.
