Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 2 ( 1978)

Weak things of the world

The Lord usually does not call as his prophets men who are already of great renown and who are highly learned in the ways of the world. Rather, he usually selects the young and/or relatively unlearned who are humble and worthy, and then tutors them. Joseph who was sold into Egypt, Daniel, Samuel the prophet, and Joseph Smith are all examples of prophets who were called in their youth and yet became powerful and great men under the tutelage and influence of the Lord.

In the true church today, the missionaries sent forth to teach are often quite young and relatively inexperienced in the ways of the world. Yet if they go forth humbly and worthily, the Spirit of the Lord can make them mighty in preaching and power.

Selected Quotations

"The Lord called Joseph Smith and others from among the weak things of the world, because he and his associates were contrite and humble. The great and mighty ones in the nations the Lord could not use because of their pride and self-righteousness. The Prophet discoursing on this question once said: 'There are a great many wise men and women, too, in our midst who are too wise to be taught; therefore they must die in their ignorance, and in the resurrection they will find their mistake. Many seal up the door of heaven by saying, So far God may reveal and I will believe.' (TPJS, p. 309.)

"The Lord's ways are not man's ways, and he cannot choose those who in their own judgment are too wise to be taught. Therefore he chooses those who are willing to be taught and he makes them mighty even to the breaking down of the great and mighty. In his mercy and justice he gives all men the means of escape from the dominion of Satan and the bondage of sin. Therefore he sent the Gospel and his Priesthood before the great and dreadful day should come. 'Surely,' said Amos, 'the Lord God will do nothing but he revealeth his secret unto his servants the prophets.' This restoration came that faith might increase, that the everlasting covenant, which had been broken might be established. When we think of our missionary system, we can see how the weak have gone forth among the strong ones and have prevailed. The mighty and strong ones have been broken down by the humble elders of the Church." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:255.)

Scriptural References:

D&C 1:19, 23; 35:13; 89:3; 124:1; 133:58-59; 1 Cor. 1:27; Ether 12:27.
