Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 2 ( 1978)

Welfare

welfare services

The scriptures would indicate that the Lord has always been concerned that the physical needs of the worthy be provided. Such principles and plans as the order of Enoch, the united order, tithing, and fast offering have been taught and utilized to help take care of the worthy poor, the sick, the handicapped, the fatherless, and the widow. During the past few decades, the plans and procedures through which these needs are to be met have been called welfare or welfare services. Of necessity, much of the attention of present Church leaders has been directed toward providing these physical and often spiritual needs.

Selected Quotations

"The welfare program in operation since 1936 is a continuing plan for the people of the Church until a more perfect and higher plan is revealed. When we demonstrate our faith, worthiness, willingness, and unity to live fully the principles of the welfare plan, it will lead and prepare us for the higher law of the celestial kingdom." (Delbert L. Stapley, CR, September 1955, pp. 14-15.)

"The principle of self-reliance or personal independence is fundamental to the happy life. In too many places, in too many ways, we are getting away from it. The substance of what I want to say is this: The same principle—self-reliance—has application to the spiritual and to the emotional.

"We have been taught to store a year's supply of food, clothing, and, if possible, fuel—at home. There has been no attempt to set up storerooms in every chapel. We know that in the crunch our members may not be able to get to the chapel for supplies.

"Can we not see that the same principle applies to inspiration and revelation, the solving of problems, to counsel, and to guidance? We need to have a source of it stored in every home, not just in the bishop's office. If we do not do that, we are quite as threatened spiritually as we should be were we to assume that the Church should supply all material needs.

"Unless we use care, we are on the verge of doing to ourselves emotionally (and, therefore, spiritually) what we have been working so hard for generations to avoid materially." (Boyd K. Packer, Ensign, May 1978, p. 91.)

"'The Latter-day Saints believe not only in the gospel of spiritual salvation, but also in the gospel of temporal salvation. . . . We do not feel that it is possible for men to be really good and faithful Christian people unless they can also be good, faithful, honest and industrious people. Therefore, we preach the gospel of industry, the gospel of economy, the gospel of sobriety.' (Joseph F. Smith, GD, pp. 208-9.)

". . . When in 1936 the First Presidency re-enunciated these precepts in the form of the present-day welfare plan, they were merely extending to that generation a more complete opportunity for establishing the ideal of Zion. In this generation their words may have even deeper meaning.

"'Our primary purpose,' said the First Presidency, 'was to set up, in so far as it might be possible, a system under which the curse of idleness would be done away with, the evils of a dole abolished, and independence, industry, thrift and self respect be once more established amongst our people. The aim of the Church is to help the people to help themselves. Work is to be reenthroned as the ruling principle of the lives of our Church membership.' (CR, October 1936, p. 3.)

"Welfare Services is not a program, but the essence of the gospel. It is the gospel in action. It is the crowning principle of a Christian life.

"So as to better visualize this process and firmly fix the specific principles that undergird this work, may I rehearse to you what I believe are its foundational truths.

"First is love. The measure of our love for our fellowman and, in a large sense, the measure of our love for the Lord, is what we do for one another and for the poor and the distressed. . . .

"Second is service. To serve is to abase oneself, to succor those in need of succor, and to impart of one's 'substance to the poor and the needy, feeding the hungry, and suffering all manner of afflictions, for Christ's sake.' (Alma 4:13.) . . .

"Third is work. Work brings happiness, self-esteem, and prosperity. It is the means of all accomplishment; it is the opposite of idleness. We are commanded to work. (See Gen. 3:19.) . . .

"Fourth is self-reliance. The Church and its members are commanded by the Lord to be self-reliant and independent. (See D&C 78:13-14.) . . .

"Fifth is consecration, which encompasses sacrifice. Consecration is the giving of one's time, talents, and means to care for those in need—whether spiritually or temporally— and in building the Lord's kingdom. . . .

"Sixth is stewardship. In the Church a stewardship is a sacred spiritual or temporal trust for which there is accountability. Because all things belong to the Lord, we are stewards over our bodies, minds, families, and properties. (See D&C 104:11-15.) A faithful steward is one who exercises righteous dominion, cares for his own, and looks to the poor and needy. (See D&C 104:15-18.)

"Now, turning from personal and family responsibilities to the Church's formal welfare activities . . . let me emphasize briefly several points.

"1. Make adequate provision for those who receive Church assistance to work or serve, according to their ability, for what they receive.

"2. Use good judgment in acquiring and managing your welfare production project. Be businesslike and frugal, recognizing that we are growing people—both givers and receivers—more than food and merchandise.

"3. Follow the Spirit in knowing to what extent individuals and families can and should care for themselves on their own.

"4. Use local resource persons to the fullest extent possible.

"5. Finally, regularly hold effective Welfare Committee meetings at all administrative levels." (Spencer W. Kimball, Ensign, November 1977, pp. 76-79.)

Scriptural References:

D&C 38:35; 42:30-39; 51:5; 56:16; 104:16, 18.
