Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 2 ( 1978)

Witnesses

law of witnesses; the three special witnesses of the Book of Mormon

The divine law of witnesses indicates that "in the mouth of two or three witnesses shall every word be established." (2 Cor. 13:1; see also Deut. 17:6; Matt. 18:15-16; John 8:12-29.) This law might be one of the reasons there are three members in the Godhead. As the Savior indicated: "the Father, and the Son, and the Holy Ghost are one. . . . I bear record of the Father, and the Father beareth record of me, and the Holy Ghost beareth record of the Father and me." (3 Ne. 11:27, 32.) One of the ways in which the members of the Godhead are one is that they witness or testify of each other.

The scriptures also testify of each other, and all the scriptures testify of Jesus Christ. The Book of Mormon has several modern witnesses to its authenticity: Joseph Smith, the three special witnesses, and the eight special witnesses. Such witnesses were provided by the Lord so that every word of his gospel might be established according to the divine law of witnesses.

Selected Quotations

"It was necessary . . . that there should be other witnesses and that Joseph Smith should not stand alone. . . . This is according to the law of witnesses which the Lord established in the very beginning. (See Deut. 19:15; John 5:30-32 and 8:12-14; 2 Cor. 13:1.) The consequences following the rejection of such strong, divine, and attested witness, is exceedingly great. After hearing such testimony as has been given by these witnesses and which is contained in the Book of Mormon itself, it should cause any person who has heard it to quake with fear in the very thought of rejecting any part of it. The Lord said to Nephi: 'Wherefore the Lord God will proceed to bring forth the words of the book; and in the mouth of as many witnesses as seemeth him good will he establish his word; and wo be unto him that rejecteth the word of God!' (2 Nephi 27:14.) Compare this with the testimony of Nephi in 2 Nephi 33:9 to end, and the testimony of Moroni in Moroni 10:27." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:73.)

"The witnesses of the Book of Mormon were true and faithful to their testimony throughout their lives. The time came, however, when all three of the special witnesses became estranged from Joseph Smith and departed from the Church because of their spirit of rebellion against the Prophet and the work. They were dealt with for their fellowship and excommunicated from the Church. While the Prophet lived, they retained their bitterness of spirit and remained aloof, but during all those years, and to the end of life, all three were steadfast in their testimony as found in the Book of Mormon. In the year 1848, after the Church had been driven from Nauvoo, Oliver Cowdery returned to the Church at Kanesville and humbly begged to be re-admitted as a member. Martin Harris also sought again a place and standing in the Church, and in the year 1870 he came to Utah to make his home. He died in 1875, at Clarkston, Utah at the age of 92 years. David Whitmer never came back to the Church, but shortly before his death, in refutation of the statements that had gone forth that he had denied his testimony, he published it again to the world, in which he said: 'It is recorded in the American Cyclopedia and the Encyclopedia Britannica, that I, David Whitmer, have denied my testimony as one of the Three Witnesses to the divinity of the Book of Mormon; and that the other two witnesses, Oliver Cowdery and Martin Harris, denied their testimony of that book. I will say once more to all mankind, that I have never at any time denied that testimony or any part thereof. I also testify to the world, that neither Oliver Cowdery nor Martin Harris ever at any time denied their testimony. They both died reaffirming the truth of the divine authenticity of the Book of Mormon.'" (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:67-68.)

"One overwhelming thought . . . comes to our attention when we consider the action of these men and the boldness of the Prophet and the Church to take such drastic action against them. Had they entered into collusion with Joseph Smith with intent to deceive and practice a fraud, the first thing they would have done when the bitter spirit was upon them would be to denounce Joseph Smith and reveal the fraud. This is human nature and it never fails. Let it be said to their credit that the day never came when they denied the testimonies they had borne. Oliver Cowdery declared consistently even when out of the Church the truth of his witness to the Book of Mormon and to every other gift and blessing coming by heavenly manifestation. He never wavered in this testimony. Years later, when his spirit had been given time to cool, and in the very darkest hour of the history of the Church, when almost all men thought that the Church had gone to its destruction, Oliver Cowdery came back repentant, sorrowful, and asked to be reinstated as a member of the Church. This was not the act of one guilty of fraud. David Whitmer, although he never asked to come back to the Church, organized one of his own and continued to his dying day before great and small, to bear record to his testimony as a witness of this work. Again, I repeat, men do not take this course if they are guilty of evil practices and it stands forth and makes their testimony as given in the Book of Mormon even stronger than it would have done had they remained true to their covenants and obligations as members of the Church." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 2:81-82.)

Scriptural References:

D&C 5:15; 6:28; 20:13; 42:80-81; 128:3, 20; Deut. 17:6; 19:15; Matt. 18:16; 2 Cor. 13:1; 2 Ne. 11:3; 27:12, 14, 22.
