Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 2 ( 1978)

Women

motherhood; important role of mother

Women and men hold equal positions in The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints so far as the greatest gift of God is concerned—eternal life. As Paul testified; "Neither is the man without the woman, neither the woman without the man, in the Lord." (1 Cor. 11:11.)

In this life, men and women play different roles in the family relationship. The man, as husband and father, has the major responsibility of providing the necessities of life for the family if he is able to do so. Both the wife and the children have claim upon the father and husband "for their maintenance." (D&C 83:1-6.)

The woman's role as mother makes her in a sense a cocreator with our Heavenly Father in providing physical bodies as earthly tabernacles for the spirit children of God. Also, the role of motherhood has always been held in the very highest regard by Church leaders and members.

Selected Quotations

"The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints has sponsored the advancement of women from its very outset. It was the Prophet Joseph Smith who set forth the ideals for womanhood. He advocated liberally for women in the purest sense of the word, and he gave them liberty to fully express themselves as mothers, as nurses to the sick, as proponents of high community ideals, and as protectors of good morals.

"What more can any woman want for herself? What more could any man want for his wife? What more could any man want than to match that standard in his own conduct?

"The Prophet Joseph Smith gave us the Relief Society organization to advance these high purposes for Latter-day Saint women. That society today is a worldwide movement holding membership in national and world organizations for the advancement of women.

"Finally, when we sing that doctrinal hymn and anthem of affection, 'O My Father,' we get a sense of the ultimate in maternal modesty, of the restrained, queenly elegance of our Heavenly Mother, and knowing how profoundly our mortal mothers have shaped us here, do we suppose her influence on us as individuals to be less if we live so as to return there?" (Spencer W. Kimball, Ensign, May 1978, p.6.)

"We know so little, brothers and sisters, about the reasons for the division of duties between womanhood and manhood as well as between motherhood and priesthood. These were divinely determined in another time and another place. We are accustomed to focusing on the men of God because theirs is the priesthood and leadership line. But paralleling that authority line is a stream of righteous influence reflecting the remarkable women of God who have existed in all ages and dispensations, including our own. Greatness is not measured by coverage in column inches, either in newspapers or in the scriptures. The story of the women of God, therefore, is, for now, an untold drama within a drama.

"We men know the women of God as wives, mothers, sisters, daughters, associates, and friends. You seem to tame us and to gentle us, and, yes, to teach us and to inspire us. For you, we have admiration as well as affection, because righteousness is not a matter of role, nor goodness a matter of gender. In the work of the Kingdom, men and women are not without each other, but do not envy each other, lest by reversals and renunciations of role we make a wasteland of both womanhood and manhood.

"Just as certain men were foreordained from before the foundations of the world, so were certain women appointed to certain tasks. Divine design—not chance—brought Mary forward to be the mother of Jesus. The boy prophet, Joseph Smith, was blessed not only with a great father but also with a superb mother, Lucy Mack, who influenced a whole dispensation.

"The charity of good women is such that their 'love makes no parade'; they are not glad 'when others go wrong'; they are too busy serving to sit statusfully about, waiting to be offended. Like Mary, they ponder trustingly those puzzlements that disable others. God trusts women so much that He lets them bear and care for His spirit children." (Neal A. Maxwell, Ensign, May 1978, p. 10. )

"We have special admiration for the unsung but unsullied single women among whom are some of the noblest daughters of God. These sisters know that God loves them, individually and distinctly. They make wise career choices even though they cannot now have the most choice career. Though in their second estate they do not have their first desire, they still overcome the world. These sisters who cannot now enrich the institution of their own marriage so often enrich other institutions in society. They do not withhold their blessings simply because some blessings are now withheld from them. Their trust in God is like that of the wives who are childless, but not by choice, but who in the justice of God will receive special blessings one day." (Neal A. Maxwell, Ensign, May 1978, p. 11.)

"Many of the sisters grieve because they are not blessed with offspring. You will see the time when you will have millions of children around you. If you are faithful to your covenants, you will be mothers of nations. . . . and when you have assisted in peopling one earth, there are millions of earths still in the course of creation. And when they have endured a thousand million times longer than this earth, it is only as it were the beginning of your creations. Be faithful, and if you are not blest with children this time, you will be hereafter." (Brigham Young, JD 8:208.)

Scriptural References:

D&C 25:3; Prov. 31:10; Luke 1:28, 42; 1 Tim. 2:9; 1 Pet. 3:5, 7; 1 Ne. 17:20; Jacob 2:28; Alma 19:10.
