Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 2 ( 1978)

Work

industry

The Church has always so emphasized the importance of work and industry that some people refer to it as a "second gospel"—the gospel of work. Work is a great eternal principle of progress that makes possible everything that has been accomplished or that will be accomplished in time (this life) and in eternity (the existence before this life and the existence after this life).

The Gods exert their physical, mental, and spiritual powers, all of which is work. Deity worked six days in creating the earth. (Ex. 20:8-11.) The Savior expended great energy (worked) in his ministry and in performing the atonement. He has taught: "My Father worketh hitherto, and I work" (John 5:17) and "I must work the works of him that sent me" (John 9:4). The Father has declared: "This is my work and my glory—to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man." (Moses 1:39.)

Man has been instructed by the Lord to work physically ("In the sweat of thy face shalt thou eat bread"—Gen. 3:19) and spiritually ("work out your own salvation with fear and trembling"—Philip. 2:12).

Selected Quotations

"We believe in work. We remember the fourth of the Ten Commandments says, 'Six days shalt thou labour, and do all thy work' (Exodus 20:9), and we are not sure that the rapidly decreasing work week is beneficial to mankind. We think the Lord knew what he was talking about. It would seem that we are play-conscious, travel-conscious, and our economy seems to be providing for the traveling public and the gaming public and the drinking public." (Spencer W. Kimball, Ensign, November 1974, p. 6.)

"Through the ages there have been many laws repealed, but we know of no divine repeal of the law of work. From the obscure life organs within the body to the building of the moon landing craft, work is one of the conditions of being alive. We have been told that everyday work is a purposeful activity requiring an expenditure of energy with some sacrifice of leisure. Sir William Osler, a great physician of Canada, said that work is the master word in ongoing life. It's the touchstone of progress, the measure of success, and the fount of hope. It is directly responsible, he said, for all advantages in medicine and technology. (See Harvey Cushing, Life of Sir William Osler, vol. 1, ch. 14.)" (Spencer W. Kimball, Ensign, May 1976, p. 126.)

"Work is a great thing. It is the law of this earth. When Adam was cast out, upon him was passed the glorious sentence, 'In the sweat of thy face shalt thou eat bread.' Man as he is would not and could not have existed except for the promulgation of this law. Work is a wonderful thing, no matter what that work may be. . . . If we can just get into our minds the dignity and the honor of work, no matter what that work may be, most of the ills from which we suffer will be solved. During the whole range of man's existence there has never yet been any plan by which men may live righteously in idleness, and no such plan, it is my faith, will ever be devised." (J. Reuben Clark, Jr., CR, October 1936, p. 112.)

"Now, as to a willingness to work: Nothing ever does itself. Nothing ever memorizes itself. Nothing ever accomplishes itself—without requisite effort. Carlyle said, 'Men do less than they ought, unless they do all that they can.' It is not enough just to try; we have to succeed. The Lord expects us to see things through." (Richard L. Evans, CR, April 1961, pp. 75-76.)

Scriptural References:

D&C 42:42; 58:27; 68:30; 72:17; 82:18; Gen. 3:19; 1 Thes. 2:9; 4:11; Mosiah 2:14; 10:5; 23:5; 27:5.
