Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 2 ( 1978)

World

in the world; of the world

Sometimes the words earth and world are used as though they are synonyms, but frequently the scriptures distinguish between the two. When this distinction is made, earth refers to the physical orb, whereas world refers to the civilization of mankind upon the earth. When world is used to represent the social conditions on the earth, it stands for worldliness, carnality, sensuality, wickedness, etc., for as Alma taught, since the fall of Adam all mankind has "become carnal, sensual, and devilish, by nature." (Alma 42:10.)

We are counseled that even though we are in the world we should not be of the world. The apostle John admonished, "Love not the world . . . the world passeth away, and the lust thereof." (1 Jn. 2:15, 17.) James taught, "Know ye not that the friendship of the world is enmity with God? whosoever therefore will be a friend of the world is the enemy of God." (James 4:4.)

Selected Quotations

"Now, what do we mean by the world? It is sometimes used as an indefinite term. I take it that the world refers to the inhabitants who are alienated from the saints of God. They are aliens to the Church, and it is the spirit of this alienation that we should keep ourselves free from." (David O. McKay, CR, October 1911, p. 58.)

"Why is it so difficult to accept things on faith? I think I can suggest an answer. It is because we are so conceited. Men of the world are in the world only because they adopt the philosophy of the world, which is the philosophy of self-sufficiency. It is not a humble philosophy—it is highly egotistical. It makes men themselves the arbiters of all things. They look to no higher source than themselves for the solution of all questions.

"Such a philosophy is diametrically opposed to the philosophy of Christ, which is that of faith. When men adopt his philosophy they are humble—they acknowledge an intelligence far superior to their own and they seek guidance and wisdom from that source. When they adopt the philosophy of faith, they come out of the world, for the world, as a term in theology, is not a place but a condition or state of mind and feeling. It requires courage to come out of the world and adopt the philosophy of faith." (Stephen L Richards, CR, April 1935, pp. 30-31.)

"This expression does not mean, as sometimes supposed, the destruction of the Earth, but the termination of a dispensation by some act of final judgment upon the inhabitants of the Earth. The flood was the 'end' of the antediluvian world. The destruction of Jerusalem by Titus was the end of 'the world' to which the first Christians were looking forward. The next 'end of the world' will be the overthrow of the kingdoms of the world and the establishment of the Millennium.

"'The end of the world is the destruction of the wicked; the harvest and the end of the world have an allusion directly to the human family in the last days, instead of the Earth, as many have imagined' (Joseph Smith, HC 2:271.)" (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 92.)

Scriptural References:

D&C 25:10; 121:35; Eccl. 3:11; John 15:18-19; 16:33; 17:16; Rom. 12:2; 1 Cor. 3:19; James 1:27; 4:4; 1 Jn. 2:15; Mosiah 3:19; 1 Ne. 6:5.
