Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 2 ( 1978)

Zion

cause of Zion; "Zion shall rejoice upon the hills and flourish"

Throughout history, the word Zion has referred to several different places, peoples, and conditions. In Enoch's day, Zion referred both to the people (Moses 7:18) and to the city in which they lived (Moses 7:19). As is shown in the selected quotations from this dispensation, Zion has also been used to refer to a specific place, or general area, and to a condition.

Selected Quotations

"There are several meanings of the word Zion. It may have reference to the hill named Mt. Zion or by extension in the land of Jerusalem. It has sometimes been used, as by the prophet Micah to refer to the location of 'the mountain of the house of the Lord'—as some place apart from Jerusalem. [See Micah 4:2.] Zion was so called by Enoch in reference to the 'City of Holiness,' or the 'City of Enoch.' [See Moses 7:18-19.] The Land of Zion has been used to refer, in some connotations, to the Western Hemisphere. But there is another most significant use of the term by which the Church of God is called Zion, comprising, according to the Lord's own definition, 'the pure in heart.' (D&C 97:21.)" (Harold B. Lee, CR, October 1968, pp. 61-62.)

"You know there has been great discussion in relation to Zion—where it is, and where the gathering of the dispensation is, and which I am now going to tell you. The prophets have spoken and written upon it; but I will make a proclamation that will cover a broader ground. The whole of America is Zion itself from north to south, and is described by the Prophets, who declare that it is the Zion where the mountain of the Lord should be, and that it should be in the center of the land. When Elders shall take up and examine the old prophecies in the Bible, they will see it." (Joseph Smith, HC 6:318-19.)

"This American continent will be Zion; for it is so spoken of by the prophets. Jerusalem will be rebuilt and will be the place of gathering, and the tribe of Judah will gather there; but this continent of America is the land of Zion." (Brigham Young, JD 5:4.)

"Zion means, literally, a 'sunny place' or 'sunny mountain.' It first designated an eminence in Palestine on which Jerusalem is built. In the Doctrine and Covenants, Zion has three designations: First, the land of America; second, a specific place of gathering; and third, the pure in heart. . . .

"The Zion we build will pattern after the ideals of its inhabitants. To change men and the world, we must change their thinking, for the thing which a man really believes is the thing which he has really thought; that which he actually thinks, is the thing which he lives. Men do not go beyond their ideals; they often fall short of them, but they never go beyond them.

"Victor Hugo said: 'The future of any nation can be determined by the thoughts of its young men between the ages of 18 and 25.' Thus it is easy to understand why the Lord designates Zion as the 'pure in heart' [D&C 97:21], and only when we are such shall Zion 'flourish and the glory of the Lord be upon her.'

"The foundation of Zion, then, will be laid in the hearts of men: broad acres, mines, forests, factories, beautiful buildings, modern conveniences will be but means and accessories to the building of the human soul and the securing of happiness. We should choose, in building Zion, what we call the 'four cornerstones of Zion's inhabitants.'

"First: There must be a firm belief and acceptance of the truth that this universe is governed by intelligence and wisdom. . . .

"The second cornerstone is that the ultimate purpose in God's great plan is the perfecting of the individual. . . .

"The third cornerstone is a realization that the first and most essential thing in man's progress is freedom—free agency. . . .

"Fourth cornerstone: A sense of responsibility toward other individuals and the social group." (David 0. McKay, IE, February 1959, 94:33.)

"The Zion the Lord seeks to establish through his covenant people . . . can be built up only among those who are the pure in heart, not a people torn by covetousness or greed, but a pure and selfless people. Not a people who are pure in appearance, rather a people who are pure in heart. Zion is to be in the world and not of the world, not dulled by a sense of carnal security, nor paralyzed by materialism. No, Zion is not things of the lower, but of the higher order, things that exalt the mind and sanctify the heart.

"Zion is 'every man seeking the interest of his neighbor, and doing all things with an eye single to the glory of God.' (D&C 82:19.). . . Zion can be established only by those who are pure in heart, and who labor for Zion, for 'the laborer in Zion shall labor for Zion; for if they labor for money they shall perish.' (2 Ne. 26:31.)

"As important as it is to have this vision in mind, defining and describing Zion will not bring it about. That can only be done through consistent and concerted daily effort by every single member of the Church. No matter what the cost in toil or sacrifice, we must 'do it.' That is one of my favorite phrases: 'Do It.' May I suggest three fundamental things we must do if we are to 'bring again Zion,' three things for which we who labor for Zion must commit ourselves.

"First, we must eliminate the individual tendency to selfishness that snares the soul, shrinks the heart, and darkens the mind. . . .

"Second, we must cooperate completely and work in harmony one with the other. There must be unanimity in our decisions and unity in our actions. . . .

"Third, we must lay on the altar and sacrifice whatever is required by the Lord. We begin by offering a 'broken heart and a contrite spirit.' We follow this by giving our best effort in our assigned fields of labor and callings. We learn our duty and execute it fully. Finally we consecrate our time, talents, and means as called upon by our file leaders and as prompted by the whisperings of the Spirit. In the Church, as in the welfare system also, we can give expression to every ability, every righteous desire, every thoughtful impulse. Whether a volunteer, father, home teacher, bishop, or neighbor, whether a visiting teacher, mother, homemaker, or friend—there is ample opportunity to give our all. And as we give, we find that 'sacrifice brings forth the blessings of heaven!' (Hymns, no.147.) And in the end, we learn it was no sacrifice at all." (Spencer W. Kimball, Ensign, May 1978, p. 81.)

Scriptural References:

D&C 6:6; 21:7-8; 35:24; 38:4; 45:67-71; 105:5-9; 124:2-11; 133:18-32; Moses 7:18-69; A of F 1:10;2 Chr. 5:2; Isa. 2:3; 52:1-2; Zech. 1:14, 17; 1 Ne. 22:14, 19; 2 Ne. 8:3-25; 14:3-5; 26:29-31; Mosiah 12:21-22; 15:14, 29; 3 Ne. 20:36-40.

Appendix B
