Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 2 ( 1978)

Celestial

(see also Degrees of glory)

The celestial glory is the highest of the three degrees of glory. It has within it three heavens or degrees. (D&C 131.) Those persons who receive exaltation are in the highest degree of the celestial glory.

Selected Quotations

"Those who partake of the fulness of the celestial kingdom are those who have received the testimony of Jesus and were baptized in his name and, after receiving baptism and the gift of the Holy Ghost, continue to 'be washed and cleansed from all their sins,' through obedience to the Gospel to the end." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:286.)

"The heavens were opened upon us, and I beheld the celestial kingdom of God, and the glory thereof, whether in the body or out I cannot tell. I saw the transcendent beauty of the gate through which the heirs of the kingdom will enter, which was like unto circling flames of fire; also the blazing throne of God, whereon was seated the Father and the Son. I saw the beautiful streets of that kingdom, which had the appearance of being paved with gold. . . .

"Thus came the voice of the Lord unto me, saying—

"'All who have died without a knowledge of this Gospel, who would have received it if they had been permitted to tarry, shall be heirs of the celestial kingdom of God; also all that shall die henceforth without a knowledge of it, who would have received it with all their hearts, shall be heirs of that kingdom, for I, the Lord, will judge all men according to their works, according to the desire of their hearts.'

"And I also beheld that all children who die before they arrive at the years of accountability, are saved in the celestial kingdom of heaven." (Joseph Smith, HC 2:380-81.)

"That law by obedience to which men gain an inheritance in the kingdom of God in eternity is called celestial law. It is the law of the gospel, the law of Christ, and it qualifies men for admission to the celestial kingdom because in and through it men are 'sanctified by the reception of the Holy Ghost,' thus becoming clean, pure, and spotless. (3 Ne. 27:19-21.)" (Bruce R. McConkie, MD, pp. 117-18.)

Scriptural References:

D&C 76; 88; l Cor. 15:40-42; 2 Cor. 12:2.
