Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 2 ( 1978)

Church offices and presiding quorum

(see also First Presidency; Council of the Twelve; First Quorum of Seventy; Presiding Bishopric)

The Lord has revealed the organization of the various presiding offices and quorums of his church "line upon line, precept upon precept, here a little and there a little" according to the needs of the members of his church and their willingness to receive these truths. Undoubtedly, additional changes and enlargements will continue to be made in church organization as the Church continues to fulfill its divine destiny as a worldwide institution.

At the present time, the Church is governed by three major presiding quorums:

The Patriarch to the Church and the members of the Presiding Bishopric are also considered to be general officers (General Authorities), but they do not form quorums in the same sense as the three quorums mentioned earlier.

Each of these major positions, quorums, and groups is discussed in this appendix under the title of the group and occasionally in the appropriate places where they are mentioned in the sections of the Doctrine and Covenants. Particular attention might be given to the materials for sections 20, 84, and 107.

Selected Quotations

"I believe that when the Presidency of this Church nominates a person for an office, it is not a personal nomination. I have that confidence in the Presidency and that testimony of the divinity of this Church. I believe that the Lord Jesus Christ reveals to them through the Spirit of the Holy Ghost the men they should name to office, and I believe that same Spirit will inspire and direct the presidents of stakes and the bishops of wards and the heads of other organizations in this Church, if they will live for such inspiration, so that when they name people for office they will name them under the inspiration of the Holy Ghost." (Marion G. Romney, CR, October 1947, pp. 39-40.)

"I will inform you that it is contrary to the economy of God for any member of the Church, or anyone, to receive instructions for those in authority, higher than themselves; therefore, you will see the impropriety of giving heed to them; but if any person have a vision or a visitation from a heavenly messenger, it must be for his own benefit and instruction, for the fundamental principles, government, and doctrine of the Church are vested in the keys of the kingdom." (Joseph Smith, HC 1:388.)

Scriptural References:

D&C 84; 102; 107; 112.
