Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 2 ( 1978)

Common consent

"all things to be done by common consent"

(see also Sustain)

Two guiding principles of administration in The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints are (1) that officers are to be selected by the spirit of revelation by those who are in authority and (2) that people over whom those officers are to preside have the right and privilege to sustain them in their positions. Briefly, this law of common consent ultimately provides that the Lord counsels what should be done in his church and earthly kingdom, but then he allows the members to exercise their free agency in either accepting or rejecting the proposed officers. Through thus exercising their free agency, members can learn to operate on righteous principles and prepare themselves for the type of government that prevails in the celestial kingdom where righteous followers fully support and sustain their Righteous King.

Although the law of common consent prevails in regard to officers, where individual personalities are involved, the same principle does not apply to the validity of revelations or other basic, fundamental laws or truths. God is a God of truth, and he reveals only that which is true. Thus, it is not the prerogative of the people to vote whether or not a particular truth or revelation is valid. Opportunity may be given to the members, however, to indicate whether or not they favor the publication of a particular revelation with the official canon (scriptures) of the Church; they may also be given the opportunity to bind themselves by covenant to follow the instructions contained in the revelation.

The law of common consent is based upon the principle of free agency and is designed to enhance the spiritual growth and development of the saints.

Selected Quotations

"Administrative affairs of the Church are handled in accordance with the law of common consent. This law is that in God's earthly kingdom, the King counsels what should be done, but then he allows his subjects to accept or reject his proposals. Unless the principle of free agency is operated in righteousness men do not progress to ultimate salvation in the heavenly kingdom hereafter. Accordingly, church officers are selected by the spirit of revelation in those appointed to choose them, but before the officers may serve in their positions, they must receive a formal sustaining vote of the people over whom they are to preside. (D&C 20:60-67; 26:2; 28; 38:34, 35; 41:9-11; 42:11; 102:9; 124:124-145.)" (Bruce R. McConkie, MD, pp. 149-50.)

"It was designed by the Almighty in the organization of this Church, that the voice of the people should respond to the voice of the Lord. It is the voice of the Lord and the voice of the people together in this Church that sanctions all things therein. [Sec. 20:63-66.] In the rise of the Church the Lord gave a revelation which said that 'all things shall be done by common consent.' And the Lord designs that every individual member shall take an interest therein, shall bear a part of the responsibility, and shall take upon him or her the spirit of the Church, and be an active living member of the body." (Charles W. Penrose, JD 21:45-46.)

Scriptural References:

D&C 26:2; 28:13; 104:21, 71-72, 85.
