Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 2 ( 1978)

Confess

confessed; confession

Confession is an integral part of the law of forgiveness: "I, the Lord, forgive sins unto those who confess their sins before me and ask forgiveness, who have not sinned unto death." (D&C 64:7.) The sin should always be confessed to the Lord and to any aggrieved person or persons. Also, if the sin is serious enough, it should be confessed to the person's bishop or branch president. Recognition of guilt is one of the first steps of repentance and thus forgiveness. Confession of sin is another logical and necessary step in the process.

Selected Quotations

"I would assume that we are to confess all our sins unto the Lord. For transgressions which are wholly personal, affecting none but ourselves and the Lord, such confession would seem to be sufficient.

"For misconduct which offends another, confession should also be made to the offended one, and his forgiveness sought.

"Finally, where one's transgressions are of such a nature as would, unrepented of, put in jeopardy his right to membership or fellowship in the Church of Jesus Christ, full and effective confession would, in my judgment, require confession by the repentant sinner to his bishop or other proper presiding Church officer—not that the Church officer could forgive the sin (this power rests in the Lord himself and those only to whom he specifically delegates it) but rather that the Church, acting through its duly appointed officers, might with full knowledge of the facts take such action with respect to Church discipline as the circumstances merit.

"One having forsaken his sins and, by proper confession, cleared his conduct with the Lord, with the people he has offended, and with the Church of Jesus Christ, where necessary, may with full confidence seek the Lord's forgiveness and go forth in newness of life, relying upon the merits of Christ." (Marion G. Romney, CR, October 1955, p. 125.)

"Perhaps confession is one of the hardest of all the obstacles for the repenting sinner to negotiate. His shame often restrains him from making known his guilt and acknowledging his error. . . .

"The ideal confession is voluntary, not forced. It is induced from within the offender's soul, not sparked by being found out in the sin. Such confession, like the voluntary humility of which Alma spoke (Alma 32:13-16), is a sign of growing repentance. It indicates the sinner's conviction of sin and his desire to abandon the evil practices. The voluntary confession is infinitely more acceptable in the sight of the Lord than is forced admission, lacking humility, wrung from an individual by questioning when guilt is evident. Such forced admission is not evidence of the humble heart which calls forth the Lord's mercy: ". . . For I, the Lord, forgive sins, and am merciful unto those who confess their sins with humble hearts.' (D&C 61:2. Italics added.) . . .

"Generally it is unwise and quite unnecessary to confess the same sin over and over again. If a major transgression has been fully confessed to and cleared by the proper authority, the person may usually clear himself in any future interview by explaining that this is so and giving the authority's name. Providing there has been no repetition of the offense, nor a commission of any other serious transgression, usually the matter may be considered settled." (Spencer W. Kimball, MF, pp. 178-79, 181, 187.)

Scriptural References:

D&C 19:20; 42:88-92; Lev. 5:5; Matt. 10:32; Luke 12:8; Mosiah 16:1; 26:29, 35-36; 27:31, 35.
