Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 2 ( 1978)

Consecration

law of consecration (see also United Order)

The law of consecration is one of the highest laws of God given to man on the earth because it requires complete and total dedication to God and to his divine purposes. Obedience to this great law also brings great blessings, because the blessings that come from obedience to a law are commensurate with the nature of that particular law.

Unfortunately, so far in this dispensation, the Latter-day Saints have not been able to live the high standards of the law of consecration. The Lord has indicated, however, that this law must be observed by at least a righteous portion of the Saints before Jesus Christ will inaugurate his millennial reign of peace and righteousness upon the earth.

Selected Quotations

"It is written: 'He who is not able to abide the law of a celestial kingdom cannot abide a celestial glory.' (D&C 88:22.) The law of sacrifice is a celestial law; so also is the law of consecration. Thus to gain that celestial reward which we so devoutly desire, we must be able to live these two laws.

"Sacrifice and consecration are inseparably intertwined. The law of consecration is that we consecrate our time, our talents, and our money and property to the cause of the Church; such are to be available to the extent they are needed to further the Lord's interests on earth. . . .

"We are not always called upon to live the whole law of consecration and give all of our time, talents, and means to the building up of the Lord's earthly kingdom. . . .

"But what the scriptural account means is that to gain celestial salvation we must be able to live these laws to the full if we are called upon to do so. Implicit in this is the reality that we must in fact live them to the extent we are called upon so to do." (Bruce R. McConkie, Ensign, May 1975, p. 50.)

"It is a strange thing that there are members of the Church who cannot distinguish the difference between the law of consecration and communism. Consecration and communism have nothing in common. Communism as it is practiced relieves the individual of all his inherent rights bestowed upon him by divine agency. It makes of him a pawn of the state and removes from him his freedom. He is denied the right of independent action. Even his home life is disturbed and is controlled by the state. All freedom of expression is gone and fear takes the place of love; obedience is forced, not voluntarily given. In the Lord's plan, the inalienable rights of the individual are strictly and jealously protected. What he does he does voluntarily, not by force. His stewardship is given into his own hands and is of his own choice. His wants are carefully guarded and he is at liberty to surround himself with such comforts and conveniences as suit his fancy. His work is entirely voluntary and what he does is based on love of his fellowman. Such a plan naturally is for the salvation, temporally and spiritually, of man, and to the glory of God." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:306-7.)

Scriptural References:

D&C 42:32-33; 83:6; 85:3; 105:29; 124:21; Acts 2:44; 4:32.
