Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 2 ( 1978)

Constitution

Constitution of the United States

The leaders of the Church in this dispensation have clearly taught that the Constitution of the United States is a divine document and was prepared by wise men who were raised up by the Lord for the exact purpose of bringing forth principles of freedom and truth. The Prophet Joseph Smith placed the Constitution in an important context when he taught: "We say that God is true; that the Constitution of the United States is true; that the Bible is true; that the Book of Mormon is true; that the Book of Covenants is true; that Christ is true." (HC 3:304.)

The value and place of the Constitution, as compared with other principles and types of government, have been explained and extolled by Church leaders as indicated in the following selected quotations and other materials listed in connection with sections 98 (verses 5, 6), 101 (verses 77, 80), 109 (verse 54), and 124 (verse 63).

Selected Quotations

"The Constitution of the United States is a glorious standard; it is founded in the wisdom of God. It is a heavenly banner; it is to all those who are privileged with the sweets of its liberty, like the cooling shades and refreshing waters of a great rock in a thirsty and weary land. It is like a great tree under whose branches men from every clime can be shielded from the burning rays of the sun. . . ." (Joseph Smith, HC 3:304.)

"The constitution of this government was written by men who accepted Jesus Christ as the Savior of mankind. Let men and women in these United States then continue to keep their eyes centered upon him who ever shines as a Light to all the world. Men and women who live in America, 'the land of Zion,' have a responsibility greater than that yet borne by any other people. Theirs the duty, the obligation to preserve not only the Constitution of the land but also the Christian principles from which sprang that immortal document." (David O. McKay, CR, October 1942, p. 70.)

"Every Latter-day Saint should love the inspired Constitution of the United States—a nation with a spiritual foundation and a prophetic history—which nation the Lord has declared to be his base of operations in these latter days.

"Following the drafting of the Constitution, it awaited ratification by the states. In 1787 three states ratified the Constitution. In the next year eight more followed: and on April 6, 1789, the Constitution of the United States went into operation as the basic law of the United States when the electoral college unanimously elected George Washington as the first president of the nation. This date, I believe, was not accidental.

"In 1973 the First Presidency of the Church made public this statement: 'We urge members of the Church and all Americans to begin now to reflect more intently on the meaning and importance of the Constitution, and of adherence to its principles.' (Ensign, November 1973, p.90.)

"I reverence the Constitution of the United States as a sacred document. To me its words are akin to the revelations of God. For God has placed his stamp of approval on the Constitution of this land. I testify that the God of heaven selected and sent some of his choicest spirits to lay the foundation of this government as a prologue to the restoration of the gospel and the second coming of our Savior." (Ezra Taft Benson, Ensign, May 1976, pp. 91-93.)

"The Constitution, as approved by the Lord, is still the same great vanguard of liberty and freedom in human government that it was the day it was written. No other human system of government, affording equal protection for human life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness, has yet been devised or vouchsafed to man. Its great principles are as applicable, efficient and sufficient to bring today the greatest good to the greatest number, as they were the day the Constitution was signed. Our Constitution and our Government under it, were designed by God as an instrumentality for righteousness through peace, not war." (J. Reuben Clark, Jr., CR, April 1957, pp. 50-52.)

"The statement has been made that the Prophet said the time would come when this Constitution would hang as by a thread, and this is true. There has been some confusion, however, as to just what he said following this. I think that Elder Orson Hyde has given us a correct interpretation wherein he says that the Prophet said the Constitution would be in danger. Said Orson Hyde:

"'I believe he said something like this—that the time would come when the Constitution and the country would be in danger of an overthrow; and said he: "If the Constitution be saved at all, it will be by the Elders of the Church." I believe this is about the language, as nearly as I can recollect it.' (JD 6:152.)" (Joseph Fielding Smith, CR, April 1950, p. 159.)

Scriptural References:

D&C 89:10; 98:5-6; 101:77, 80; 109:54; 124:63.
