Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 2 ( 1978)

Conversion

convert; converted

Conversion to the gospel of Jesus Christ involves much more than the changing of one's beliefs or ideas; it involves a complete change in one's manner of thinking and living. The change is so complete and real in true conversion that the scriptures refer to it as rebirth or as being born again. (Mosiah 27:24-29.)

Unfortunately, some people have confused conviction with conversion, and there is actually a world of difference between the two. A person can be convinced of something or can have a testimony of a particular thing and yet not do anything about it. However, if a person is truly converted to a principle or thing, then his actions are 100 percent consistent with what he knows to be right.

Selected Quotations

"Webster says the verb convert means 'to turn from one belief or course to another,' that conversion is 'a spiritual and moral change attending a change of belief with conviction.' As used in the scriptures, converted generally implies not merely mental acceptance of Jesus and his teachings, but also a motivating faith in him and in his gospel, a faith which works a transformation, an actual change in one's understanding of life's meaning and in one's allegiance to God—in interest, in thought, and in conduct. While conversion may be accomplished in stages, one is not really converted in the full sense of the term unless and until he is at heart a new person. Born again is the scriptural term." (Marion G. Romney, Ensign, November 1975, p.71.)

"Some may ask the question as to how we convert others to the truth. The answer is, we do not. Conversion comes from above. Our part in this work is to plant the seeds of truth. These seeds are born of our conviction when we testify of the divine mission of Jesus Christ, the Son of the Living God, who offered himself as a sacrifice for the sins of the world. We rely upon the gift and power of the Holy Ghost to carry our message into the hearts of our listeners and witness unto them the truthfulness of our stated conviction." (Henry D. Moyle, CR, April 1961, pp. 101-2.)

"Somebody recently asked how one could know when he is converted. The answer is simple. He may be assured of it when by the power of the Holy Spirit his soul is healed. When this occurs, he will recognize it by the way he feels, for he will feel as the people of Benjamin felt when they received remission of sins. The record says, '. . . the Spirit of the Lord came upon them, and they were filled with joy, having received a remission of their sins, and having peace of conscience. . . .' (Mosiah 4:3.)" (Marion G. Romney, CR, October 1963, pp. 23-25.)

Scriptural References:

D&C 42:64; 44:4; 109:65, 70; 112:13; Matt. 13:15; 18:3; Acts 3:19; 15:3; 28:27; Alma 19:16-31; 23:3-16.
