Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 2 ( 1978)

Covenant

covenants; "the new and everlasting covenant"

A covenant has been defined as a "two-edged promise." The dictionary suggests that a covenant is an agreement or promise, usually between two or more parties, for the performance of some action.

In the gospel sense, a covenant is a promise by the Lord that he will do certain things for us if we, in turn, promise to do certain things. Thus, a covenant of the gospel might be defined as a promise with blessing.

All principles and ordinances of the gospel are based on the principle of covenant. "The new and everlasting covenant" in its fulness is identical to the fulness of the gospel; both embrace all of the principles, ordinances, terms, conditions, and agreements inherent in the dealings of God with man here and in eternity. Sometimes a particular principle or ordinance might be referred to as "a new and everlasting covenant," but such usage does not rule out the possibility that other principles and ordinances might be referred to in the same words.

Selected Quotations

"We discover in this expression the thought that the covenants of the Lord, although they are from the beginning, are always new. Truth does not grow old. The same ordinances which are given us for our salvation are the ordinances required in all ages of the world. Not only that, but since our Father in heaven is unchangeable, and from everlasting to everlasting, that is from eternity to eternity, therefore his laws must be like him, also unchangeable. We may know, therefore, that the plan of salvation which has been given to us, was the same that was given to Adam. (Moses 7:64-68.) We can go still farther back and declare that these ordinances which are given us by which we seek salvation, have been the ordinances for salvation on other earths undergoing similar conditions, and so it will be through the countless ages of eternity. A divine law cannot be changed. The law of faith is eternal and is applied throughout the universe. The same is true of the law of repentance, of baptism, and every other principle of eternal truth." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:110.)

"There are some members of the Church who seem to think that the new and everlasting covenant is the covenant of celestial marriage, or marriage for eternity, but this is not so. Marriage for eternity is an everlasting covenant, and like the Lord said of baptism, we may say of marriage, it is a new as well as an everlasting covenant because it was from the beginning. It will be, if properly performed according to the law of the Lord, eternal. In the opening verses of Section 132, the Lord draws a distinction between a new and everlasting covenant and the new and everlasting covenant. While the definition is given in the negative form, it is plainly discernible that the new and everlasting covenant is the fulness of the Gospel." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 2:356.)

"When one joins the Church, he pledges certain things as he goes into the waters of baptism. When accepting the priesthood, we make a very definite covenant with the Lord. When partaking of the sacrament, we renew our covenants. I am using covenants, promises, and pledges interchangeably.

"When partaking of the sacrament, we renew those covenants. When accepting office in the Church, we agree to do certain things. We take upon ourselves certain covenants; we make certain pledges. You who have been to the temple know the covenants you make and the obligations you take upon yourselves.

"In home teaching, or any assignment that is given to us, if we accept that assignment, we certainly covenant with the Lord and the one who is giving the assignment that we will perform that duty. . . . It is important . . . that we keep our pledges and our covenants and keep our name good." (N. Eldon Tanner, CR, October 1966, pp. 98-100.)

Scriptural References:

D&C 1:15, 22; 22:1, 3; 45:9; 82:11-21; 84:39-41; 88:131-35; 132:4-6, 15-19; 133:57.
