Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 2 ( 1978)

Creator

Jesus Christ as the Creator (see also Jesus Christ)

Shortly after Jesus Christ was crucified and even before his resurrection, he introduced himself to the people of the Book of Mormon in these words: "Behold, I am Jesus Christ the Son of God. I created the heavens and the earth, and all things that in them are." (3 Nephi 9:15.) Earlier in the Book of Mormon, Jesus Christ is identified as "the Creator of all things from the beginning" (Mosiah 3:8) and as the creator of "heaven and earth, and all things" (Mosiah 4:2).

This truth is also taught in the Doctrine and Covenants when the Lord introduced himself to David Whitmer through a revelation to Joseph Smith as "Jesus Christ, the Son of the living God, who created the heavens and the earth." (D&C 14:9.)

The leaders of the Church in this dispensation have explained that the plan of creation was proposed by God the Father but that it was carried out under the direction of His Son, Jesus Christ. Joseph Smith taught that the word create meant "to organize." Thus, the word Creator in referring to Jesus Christ could also mean the Organizer.

Selected Quotations

"John commences his record of the ministry of Jesus Christ with the following words:

"'In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God.

"'The same was in the beginning with God.

"'All things were made by him; and without him was not anything made that was made.' (John 1:1-3.)

"In modern revelation, and in the revelation given to the ancients which has been revealed to us in this dispensation, we have received the definite information that Jesus Christ was the Creator of this earth. Not only of this earth, but of many other earths. The Book of Moses (see Chap. 1) is very explicit on this matter and we are taught this doctrine in the Book of Mormon as well. [1 Ne. 19:7-10; Mosiah 16:15; Alma 11:39 quoted.] . . .

"Scriptures that refer to God in any way as the Father of the heavens and in the earth are to be understood as signifying that God is the Maker, the Organizer, the Creator of the heavens and the earth.

"With this meaning, as the context shows in every case, Jehovah, who is Jesus Christ, the Son of Elohim, is called 'the Father,' and even 'the very eternal Father of heaven and earth.' (See Mosiah 16:15.) With analogous meaning, Jesus Christ is called 'The Everlasting Father.' (Isa. 9:6; compare 2 Ne. 19:6.) The descriptive titles 'Everlasting' and 'eternal' in the foregoing texts are synonymous.

"That Jesus Christ, who we also know as Jehovah, was the executive of the Father, Elohim, in the work of creation is set forth in the book Jesus the Christ, Chap. 4. Jesus Christ, being the Creator, is constantly called the Father of heaven and earth in the sense explained above; and since his creations are of eternal quality, he is very properly called the Eternal Father of heaven and earth." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:167.)

"It has been usual to refer to the Father of our Lord as the Creator, and this is true in the sense that He is the originator of the plan. But the worlds were created through the Son. He was the great Architect, the Executive of the Great Council in heaven, through whom the plan of creation was made a reality, as well as the plan of redemption (Comp. Heb. 1:2).

"Note that the worlds were 'created,' which means, 'formed,' 'organized.' They were not 'made' out of 'nothing,' or ex nihilo, as the learned express that impossible proposition. Nor are they without beginning, in their present form. The world, as we know it, has a beginning; it will have an end. Matter itself has neither beginning nor end, as far as mortals can know.

"John, the beloved, in his visions on Patmos, saw the Lord in the midst of the seven candlesticks, or the seven principal churches in Asia Minor, among which the Apostle had been laboring for some years. He describes His appearance (Rev. 1:13-16). John had known the Master intimately in the flesh, but in His glory He inspired even John with terror (v. 17). In this vision of Joseph and Sidney, the element of terror was absent. The Lord had opened their eyes and quickened them beforehand, so that they could gaze on His glory though its radiance surpassed that of the sun." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 449.)

Scriptural References:

Moses 1:33; 2:1, 27; 7:48; Isa. 40:28; 43:15; 2 Ne. 9:5-6; 29:7; 3 Ne. 9:15.
