Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 2 ( 1978)

Cross

"take up your cross"

Inasmuch as the cross was one of the instruments of crucifixion employed by the Romans in the death of Jesus, the symbol of the cross has become a symbol of Jesus Christ in the minds of many people. Some have even sculptured representations of Christ on the cross.

Members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, however, emphasize the resurrected and living Jesus Christ; the symbol of the cross or of the crucifix, which depicts the dead or dying Christ, is therefore not part of our worship.

The term take up your cross is found in both ancient and modern scripture, including at least three references in the Doctrine and Covenants (23:6; 56:2; 112:12). In Matthew 16:24 the Savior says, "If any man will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his cross, and follow me." The Inspired Version of the Bible provides the meaning of this term as given by Jesus Christ himself: "And now for a man to take up his cross, is to deny himself all ungodliness, and every worldly lust, and keep my commandments." (Matt. 16:25-26.)

The meaning of this term is also clarified in other scriptures. For example, the Lord in 3 Nephi 12:30 states: "It is better that ye should deny yourself of these things, wherein ye will take up your cross, than that ye should be cast into hell."

Each person has areas of weakness where he or she must strive diligently to overcome that weakness and turn it into a strength. The term "take up your cross" has to do with this strengthening process by denying yourself "all ungodliness" and by keeping the commandments of God.

Selected Quotations

"The cross to be taken up may be heavy, perhaps to be dragged because too burdensome to be borne. We are apt to assume that self-denial is the sole material of our cross; but this is true only as we regard self-denial in its broadest sense, comprising both positive and negative aspects. One man's cross may consist mostly in refraining from doings to which he is inclined, another's in doing what he would fain escape. One's besetting sin is evil indulgence; his neighbor's a lazy inattention to the activities required by the Gospel of Jesus Christ, coupled perchance with puritanical rigor in other observances." (James E. Talmage, VM, p. 353.)

"We recently held an open house in the Arizona Temple. Following a complete renovation of that building, nearly a quarter of a million people saw its beautiful interior. On the first day of the opening, clergymen of other religions were invited as special guests, and hundreds responded. It was my privilege to speak to them and to answer their questions at the conclusion of their tours. I told them that we would be pleased to answer any queries they might have. Many were asked. Among these was one which came from a Protestant minister.

"Said he: 'I've been all through this building, this temple which carries on its face the name of Jesus Christ, but nowhere have I seen any representation of the cross, the symbol of Christianity. I have noted your buildings elsewhere and likewise find an absence of the cross. Why is this when you say you believe in Jesus Christ?'

"I responded: 'I do not wish to give offense to any of my Christian brethren who use the cross on the steeples of their cathedrals and at the altars of their chapels, who wear it on their vestments, and imprint it on their books and other literature. But for us, the cross is the symbol of the dying Christ, while our message is a declaration of the living Christ.'

"He then asked: 'If you do not use the cross, what is the symbol of your religion?'

"I replied that the lives of our people must become the only meaningful expression of our faith and, in fact, therefore, the symbol of our worship." (Gordon B. Hinckley, Ensign, May 1975, p. 92.)

Scriptural References:

D&C 23:6; 56:2; 112:14; Matt. 10:38; 16:24; Mark 8:34; 10:21; Luke 9:23; 14:27; 3 Ne. 12:30.
