Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 2 ( 1978)

Damned

damnation

The basic meaning of the word damned is "to condemn to a punishment or fate"; another meaning is "to be constricted in or prevented from growth and progress." A person is damned whenever he is prevented from reaching his potential as a son or daughter of God. This damnation may result from the poor choices of the individual, from his unwillingness to obey those laws upon which certain blessings are predicated, or from his lack of valiancy. Therefore, even a person in the lower degrees of the celestial glory might be considered as damned in that he does not have the power of eternal increase and cannot enjoy eternal life nor reach his potential as a son of God.

Usually the words damned and damnation are used in connection with the lower degrees of glory (terrestrial and telestial), and they are particularly relevant to those who are not worthy to inherit any of the degrees of glory.

Selected Quotations

"We believe that all will be damned who do not receive the gospel of Jesus Christ; but we do not believe that they will go into a lake which burns with brimstone and fire, and suffer unnamed and unheard-of torments, inflicted by cruel and malicious devils to all eternity.

"The sectarian doctrine of final rewards and punishments is as strange to me as their bodiless, partless, and passionless God. Every man will receive according to the deeds done in the body, whether they be good or bad. [D&C 76:110-11.) All men, excepting those who sin against the Holy Ghost, who shed innocent blood or who consent thereto, will be saved in some kingdom [D&C 76:40-45; 88:29-32]; for in my father's house, says Jesus, are many mansions. [John 14:2.]" (Brigham Young, JD, 11:125-26.)

"What is it to be damned? Does it mean that all who come under that sentence shall be cast into hell, there to dwell forever and forever? The light of the century, given by the Lord, declares the falsity of that construction.

"Salvation is graded ever upward until it culminates in the glorious conditions of exaltation. Though the term salvation is used in scripture in a general way, and we must learn to discriminate between salvation and exaltation as we read, so damnation is graded; else what did the Lord mean as recorded in the twelfth chapter of Mark, when he spoke of those who used their power and position to oppress and to work evil; when he said of such: 'These shall receive greater damnation'? Well, if there be a greater damnation there are lesser degrees of damnation and the term is used in the same sense of deprivation and forfeiture. That man enters into a degree of damnation who has forfeited his opportunities and therefore has rendered himself incapable of the advancement that would otherwise be possible." (James E. Talmage, CR, April 1930, pp. 95-96.)

Scriptural References:

D&C 19:7; 132:4, 6, 27; Matt. 23:14, 33; 3 Ne. 11:34; 18:29; 26:5.
