Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 2 ( 1978)

Dead

salvation of the dead, including baptism for the dead

There is no dead in the eyes of the Lord. Those who are dead to us (separated from us) are alive with God. God is not God of the dead, but is God of the living, for we are all alive to him.

God is also no respecter of persons; he is a God of law and also a God of justice and mercy. If a person is going to receive a particular blessing, he must obey the law upon which that blessing is predicated; this eternal law applies to those who have already departed from this life as well as to those who are now living or who will yet live upon the earth.

Many people have lived upon the earth during periods when the saving principles and ordinances of the gospel have not been available to them. Inasmuch as God is fair and is no respecter of persons, every person must have an opportunity to receive the gospel—if not in this life, then in the life to come. However, those who hear and receive the gospel in their spiritual post-earthly condition are not able to observe some of the gospel ordinances that require the use of physical matter: immersion in physical water for the remission of sins; laying on of physical hands for the reception of the Holy Ghost, etc. These ordinances are performed "for and in behalf of" these people by worthy members of the Church who qualify as their vicarious representatives on the earth.

The great principles of salvation for the dead open up the possibility of eternal gospel blessings to billions of the children of our Heavenly Father who did not have opportunity to hear and receive the gospel on the earth.

Selected Quotations

"I first mentioned the doctrine [baptism for the dead] in public when preaching the funeral sermon of Brother Seymour Brunson; and have since then given general instructions in the Church on the subject. The Saints have the privilege of being baptized for those of their relatives who are dead, whom they believe would have embraced the Gospel, if they had been privileged with hearing it, and who have received the Gospel in the spirit, through the instrumentality of those who have been commissioned to preach to them while in prison.

"Without enlarging on the subject, you will undoubtedly see its consistency and reasonableness; and it presents the Gospel of Christ in probably a more enlarged scale than some have imagined it." (Joseph Smith, HC 4:231.)

"'Else what shall they do which are baptized for the dead, if the dead rise not at all? why are they then baptized for the dead?' (1 Cor. 15:29.)

"This is a challenging question. Why are you performing vicarious baptisms for those who are dead if there is no resurrection? History bears out the facts of the practice of baptizing for those who had died without the benefit of this ordinance. It would seem certain, from the question that was asked by Paul, that this vicarious practice was followed in the branch of the church in Corinth. His query is well taken. There would be no sense in such ordinances except there be a resurrection." (Howard W. Hunter, IE, June 1969, p. 107.)

"We have been authorized to perform baptisms vicariously so that when they [the dead] hear the gospel preached and desire to accept it, that essential ordinance will have been performed. They need not ask for any exemption from that essential ordinance. Indeed, the Lord Himself was not exempted from it.

"And so the question may be asked, 'You mean you are out to provide baptism for all who have ever lived?'

"And the answer is simply, 'Yes.' For we have been commanded to do so.

"'You mean for the entire human family? Why, that is impossible. If the preaching of the gospel to all who are living is a formidable challenge, then the vicarious work for all who have ever lived is impossible indeed.'

"To that we say, 'Perhaps, but we shall do it anyway.' . . .

"I say that no point of doctrine sets this church apart from the other claimants as this one does. Save for it, we would, with all of the others, have to accept the clarity with which the New Testament declares baptism to be essential and then admit that most of the human family could never have it.

"But we have the revelations. We have those sacred ordinances." (Boyd K. Packer, Ensign, November 1975, p. 99.)

"Before the Church was officially established, when the so-called 'constitution' of the Church was laid down by revelation in Section 20 of the Doctrine and Covenants, a statement of the universality of the mission of Jesus Christ was given which included the dead as well as the living:

"'Not only those who believed after he came in the meridian of time, in the flesh, but all those from the beginning, even as many as were before he came, . . . should have eternal life.' (D&C 20:26. Italics added.)

"Much of the work we do in the Church is preparatory work for us to qualify ourselves so that we can be of service not only to our fellowmen now living on the earth, but to those who lived before us. These good men and women are our ancestors, our fathers and our mothers through whose blood we receive our bodies and our life. What a debt we owe them to see that they too receive eternal life in Jesus Christ through the work and sacrifices we make in their behalf.

"This work of salvation for the dead is so important that Paul stated that they who are dead cannot be made perfect without our help. (Heb. 11:40.) Joseph Smith added that neither can we be made perfect without doing proxy ordinance work for our deceased ancestors. (D&C 128:18.)" (Theodore M. Burton, IE, December 1970, pp. 58-59.)

"The Lord has placed the baptismal font in our temples below the foundation, or the surface of the earth. This is symbolical, since the dead are in their graves, and we are working for the dead when we are baptized for them. Moreover, baptism is also symbolical of death and the resurrection, in fact, is virtually a resurrection from the life of sin, or from spiritual death, to the life of spiritual life. (See D&C 29:41-45.) Therefore when the dead have had this ordinance performed in their behalf they are considered to have been brought back into the presence of God, just as this doctrine is applied to the living. Other ordinances of the endowment and scalings therefore do not have to be performed below the surface of the earth as in the case of baptism." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 4:137-38.)

"It matters not what else we have been called to do, or what position we may occupy, or how faithfully in other ways we have labored in the Church, none is exempt from this great obligation [of helping to save those who have died]. It is required of the apostle as well as the humblest elder. Place, or distinction, or long service in the Church, in the mission field, the stakes of Zion, or where or how else it may have been, will not entitle one to disregard the salvation of one's dead.

"Some may feel that if they pay their tithing, attend their regular meetings and other duties, give of their substance to the poor, perchance spend one, two, or more years preaching in the world, that they are absolved from further duty. But the greatest and grandest duty of all is to labor for the dead." (Joseph Fielding Smith, DS 2: 148-49.)

Scriptural References:

D&C 124:29, 32-39; 127:5-6, 10; 128:1-18.
