Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 2 ( 1978)

Death

"second death" (for information on the term "shall not taste of death" see material listed after 42:46)

Death is a separation of the spirit from the physical body. The physical death is usually described in the scriptures as "temporal death," since it is temporary and will eventually be overcome through the resurrection. As Paul wrote anciently: "As in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive." (1 Cor. 15:22.)

Death can also be used to refer to a separation from God or from the teachings of God (the gospel). The scriptures sometimes refer to "spiritual death," which is death (or separation) from things pertaining to righteousness, or spiritual alienation from God.

"Second death" is a spiritual death and is much more serious in its consequences than physical death. The Savior taught, "Fear not them which kill the body, . . . but rather fear him which is able to destroy both soul and body in hell." (Matt. 10:28.)

The "second spiritual death" is the most serious death of all; it consists of permanent separation from God and comes upon sons of perdition who are cast into outer darkness and are thus permanently dead (or separated) from God.

Selected Quotations

"Every man that is born into the world will die. It matters not who he is, nor where he is, whether his birth be among the rich and the noble, or among the lowly and poor in the world, his days are numbered with the Lord, and in due time he will reach the end. . . . All fear of this death has been removed from the Latter-day Saints. They have no dread of the temporal death, because they know that as death came upon them by the transgression of Adam, so by the righteousness of Jesus Christ shall life come unto them, and though they die they shall live again. Possessing this knowledge, they have joy even in death, for they know that they shall rise again and shall meet again beyond the grave. They know that the Spirit dies not at all; that it passes through no change, except the change from imprisonment in this mortal clay to freedom and to the sphere in which it acted before it came to this death." (Joseph F. Smith, CR, October 1899, pp. 70-71.)

"Pretend, my little friends, that my hand represents your spirit. It is alive. It can move by itself. Suppose that this glove represents your mortal body. It cannot move. When the spirit enters into your mortal body, then it can move and act and live. Now you are a person—a spirit with a body, living on the earth.

"Someday, because of old age, or perhaps a disease, or an accident, the spirit and the body will be separated. We then say a person has died. Death is a separation. All of this was according to a plan.

"Remember my hand represents your spirit and the glove represents your body. While you are alive the spirit inside the body can cause it to work and to act and to live.

"When I separate them, the glove, which represents your body, is taken away from your spirit; it cannot move anymore. It just falls down and is dead. But your spirit is still alive.

"'A spirit born of God is an immortal thing. When the body dies, the spirit does not die.' (First Presidency, IE, March 1912, p. 463.)

"It is important that you get in your mind what death is. Death is a separation.

"The part of you that looks out through your eyes and allows you to think and smile and act and to know and to be, that is your spirit and that is eternal. It cannot die." (Boyd K. Packer, Ensign, July 1973, pp. 51, 53.)

"In this natural body are the seeds of weakness and decay, which, when fully ripened or untimely plucked up, in the language of scripture, is called 'the temporal death.' The spirit is also subject to what is termed in the scriptures and revelation from God, 'spiritual death.' The same as that which befell our first parents, when through disobedience and transgression they became subject to the will of Satan, and were thrust out from the presence of the Lord and became spiritually dead. . . .

"The 'temporal death' is one thing, and the 'spiritual death' is another thing. The body may be dissolved and become extinct as an organism, although the elements of which it is composed are indestructible or eternal, but I hold it as self-evident that the spiritual organism is an eternal, immortal being, destined to enjoy eternal happiness and a fullness of joy, or suffer the wrath of God, and misery—a just condemnation, eternally. Adam became spiritually dead, yet he lived to endure it until freed therefrom by the power of the atonement, through repentance, etc. Those upon whom the second death shall fall, will live to suffer and endure it, but without hope of redemption. The death of the body or natural death is but a temporary circumstance to which all were subjected through the fall and from which all will be restored or resurrected by the power of God, through the atonement of Christ." (Joseph F. Smith, JD 23:169-70.)

Scriptural References:

D&C 63:17; 76:37; Alma 12:16, 32; 13:30.
