Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 2 ( 1978)

Degrees of glory

(see also Celestial; Terrestrial; Telestial)

Every person will be judged according to the degree to which he (or she) has been obedient and faithful to the laws given to him. The degree of faithfulness differs almost from person to person; thus, logic and reason would both suggest that there must be many degrees of judgment.

The Doctrine and Covenants contains the most complete account of the present scriptures on the eventual destiny of man. The revelations in this scripture (particularly sections 76, 88, and 131) indicate that there are three major heavens or degrees of glory:

Section 131 indicates there are "three heavens or degrees" within the celestial glory, which would indicate that both the terrestrial glory and the telestial glory might also have different "heavens or degrees." In addition to the three major degrees of glory, there is at least one degree that is not a degree of glory; the sons of perdition are cast out to this degree of "unglory."

Selected Quotations

"Paul informs us of three glories and three heavens. He knew a man that was caught up to the third heaven. [2 Cor. 12:1-5.] Now, if the doctrine of the sectarian world, that there is but one heaven, is true, Paul, what do you tell that lie for, and say there are three? Jesus said unto His disciples, 'In my Father's house are many mansions, if it were not so, I would have told you. I go to prepare a place for you, and I will come and receive you to myself, that where I am ye may be also.' [John 14:2-3.]" (Joseph Smith, HC 5:425-26.)

"The Lord has shown to us that there are differences of rewards. Some of his children will attain to what is called celestial glory. Other of his children will not have faith enough nor exercise their agency in this direction to gain that glory; but they will gain terrestrial glory. There are others that will not progress that far; they will feel reluctant to obey the laws that pertain to the terrestrial, and they will obtain telestial glory. There are still others, that will not attain even to the telestial glory. Why is it that there are these differences? Is it because God has chosen some of us for the telestial glory, some of us for the terrestrial glory, and some of us for the celestial glory? No, there is no such predestination as this. We are all born with our free agency; with the power within ourselves, aided by the blessings of God, to attain unto the highest glory. How shall we attain unto the highest glory? There is only one way, and that is by observing the highest laws. The highest laws, when obeyed, bring as a reward the highest glory; and the man or woman who expects to attain to the highest glory without obeying these laws, deceives himself or herself. It cannot be done. If I rise above the telestial glory, I must obey a law that will lift me above that. If I rise to the terrestrial glory, it will be by obeying terrestrial law. If I do not obey laws higher than that, I cannot attain to a higher glory." (George Q. Cannon, CR, April 1900, p. 54.)

"The three different degrees of glory are made very plain and clear [in Section 76], I think, to all people who will read with a prayerful heart. The celestial glory is likened to the sun, because the sun is the biggest luminary that we know much about; the sun in our firmament is to us the brightest orb that revolves, and the glory of the terrestrial kingdom is likened to the moon, because the moon is second in our sight in glory; and the third degree, telestial, is called the glory of the stars, and as one star differs from another star in its magnitude and glory, according to what we know of astronomy, so it is called the telestial kingdom." (Charles W. Penrose, CR, April 1922, p. 29.)

Scriptural References:

D&C 76; 78:7;, 14; 88; 1 Cor. 15:41-43; 2 Cor. 15:2.
