Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 2 ( 1978)

Dispensation

"dispensation of the fulness of times"

The basic meanings of dispense are "to weigh out," "to deal out in portions," "to prepare and distribute." In a sense, a dispensation of the gospel is when there has been a special "giving out" or dispensing of gospel truths.

The earliest dispensation on this earth was in the days of Adam (the Adamic dispensation). But due to subsequent apostasy, it was necessary to restore some of the gospel truths at varying times in the days of Enoch, Noah, Abraham, Moses, the meridian of time, and Joseph Smith. The Book of Mormon indicates other periods of time when truths of the gospel were either restored or given to a greater extent; for example, reference is sometimes made to the Jaredite dispensation, the Nephite dispensation, etc.

However, the ancient prophets foretold of a time when there would be a restitution or restoration of all the gospel truths (principles and ordinances) that had ever been revealed on the earth, during the "dispensation of the fulness of times."

The teachings of the Lord in the Doctrine and Covenants indicate that the present dispensation is indeed the long-awaited dispensation of the fulness of times.

Selected Quotations

"The dispensation of the fulness of times will bring to light the things that have been revealed in all former dispensations; also other things that have not been before revealed. [D&C 124:41.]" (Joseph Smith, HC 4:426.)

"We are living the dispensation of the fulness of times, and in this dispensation . . . not only are the people to be gathered together, but the glorious truths which have been made manifest in the ages that are past will all be brought forth in the dispensation in which we are living, and things kept hid from the foundation of the world will be made manifest; for the Lord has promised it; and His promises never fail of fulfillment." (Charles W. Penrose, CR, October 1911, pp. 48-49.)

Scriptural References:

D&C 27:13; 110:12, 16; 112:30-32; 121:31; 124:41; 128:9, 18, 20-21; 1 Cor. 9:17; Eph. 1:10; Col. 1:25.
