Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 2 ( 1978)

Divorce

(see also Marriage)

Marriage is intended to be eternal. Divorce (the "legal dissolution of a marriage" or, in biblical times "writing of divorcement") is not encouraged by the Church except under extreme circumstances, although it is permitted and the divorced persons can remarry if worthy.

Selected Quotations

"We continue to be concerned with the rising divorce rate. Every divorce means saddened lives, broken vows, neglected and deprived children, and broken homes. We decry divorce and feel that there are relatively few divorces which are justifiable. Great care should be taken in forming marriage alliances; then both parties should do their utmost to keep these marriages happy ones. This can be done. . . . Family stability is fairly well measured by the divorce rate in the community." (Spencer W. Kimball, Ensign, November 1975, p. 6.)

"Analyze the divorces of which you know, and you will find so often selfishness is in them. Most divorces are unwarranted and come of weakness and selfishness and often result in great unhappiness for the divorced persons and also almost irreparable damage and frustration to the unfavored children, who are torn and disturbed.

"Certainly, selfishness is near its greatest peak when innocent children must suffer for the sins of their parents. Almost like a broken record come from divorcees that it is better to have them grow up in a single-parent home than a fighting home. The answer to that specious argument is: there need be no battling parents in fighting homes.

"Someone checked a long list of divorces and found that almost all of them came about through selfishness, where people were determined to get as much as they could and give as little as possible. It was found in this survey that about 90 percent gave as the reason for the breakup immorality on the part of one or both of the participants.

"Immorality is totally selfish. Can you think of a single unselfish element in that sin? Accordingly, if two good people will discard selfishness, generally they can be compatible." (Spencer W. Kimball, Ensign, May 1974, p. 7.)

Scriptural References:

Matt. 5:31-32; 19:7; 3 Ne. 12:31-32.
