Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 2 ( 1978)

Earth

the earth abides its law; earth to be transfigured; "ends of the earth"; "face of the earth"; "four quarters of the earth"

The earth was created as a living thing to provide a place wherein man could gain a physical body and live out his mortal probation. As a living entity, the earth itself is subject to laws, obedience to which will gain for the earth a celestial glory. The earth was baptized of water at the time of the flood; will be baptized of fire and the spirit; will die, be resurrected, and attain a physical celestial status as a fit dwelling place eternally for the celestial beings. The meek will then inherit the earth, as has been promised in both ancient and modern times.

Several terms are used in the scriptures as idioms signifying everyone or everywhere on the earth, including such expressions as "ends of the earth" (meaning every conceivable place on the earth), "face of the earth" (meaning everywhere on the earth), and "four quarters of the earth" (meaning from every direction and covering or including the entire earth).

Selected Quotations

"The materials out of which this earth was formed, are just as eternal as the materials of the glorious personage of the Lord himself. . . . This Being, when he formed the earth, did not form it out of something that had no existence, but he formed it out of materials that had an existence from all eternity: they never had a beginning, neither will one particle of substance now in existence ever have an end. There are just as many particles now as there were at any previous period of duration, and will be while eternity lasts. Substance had no beginning; . . . the earth was formed out of eternal materials, and it was made to be inhabited and God peopled it with creatures of his own formation." (Orson Pratt, JD 19:286.)

"Associated with matter-energy was the implication in Joseph Smith's teachings that the energy in the universe is a form of intelligence; that is, in a manner not fully understood by man, some form of life resides in all matter, though of an order wholly different from the organized intelligence of men or higher living things. Hence, everything in the universe is alive. The differences among rock, plant, beast, and man are due to the amount and organization of life element. Confirming this view, the Prophet in a revelation said: [D&C 88:26, quoted.] That implies clearly that the earth is a living organism. . . . We live then in a living universe which in all its component parts is intelligent." (John A. Widtsoe, JS, pp. 149-50.)

"And this world, so benighted at present, and so lightly esteemed by infidels, when it becomes celestialized, it will be like the sun, and be prepared for the habitation of the Saints, and be brought back into the presence of the Father and the Son. It will not then be an opaque body as it now is, but it will be like the stars of the firmament, full of light and glory; it will be a body of light. John compared it, in its celestialized state, to a sea of glass." (Brigham Young, JD, 10:175.)

"Are the wicked to receive the earth as an inheritance? No; for Jesus did not say, Blessed are the wicked, for they shall inherit the earth; this promise was made only to the meek. Who are the meek? None but those who receive the ordinances of the Gospel, and live according to them. . . .And after they have died as the earth will die, they will have to be resurrected as this earth will be resurrected, and then receive their inheritances upon it." (Orson Pratt, JD 1:293.)

"The opinion that this globe is to be annihilated finds no support in the Word of God. Here, the important truth is revealed that our globe will be sanctified from all unrighteousness, and prepared for celestial glory, so that it will be fit for the presence of God, the Father. It will die (v. 26), but it will be quickened again. It will not remain a dead planet, whirling about aimlessly in space; nor will it be distributed in the form of cosmic dust, throughout the universe. It will be glorified, by celestial glory, and become an abode for resurrected beings (v. 20)." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 543.)

Scriptural References:

D&C 14:9; 29:9-26; 38:5-39; 49:6-23; 59:2-18; 63:20-37; 65:1-6; 101:23-46; 109:38-74.
