Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 2 ( 1978)

Elijah

calling of Elijah; mission of Elijah (see also Elias)

The life and ministry of Elijah the prophet are primarily documented in the books of 1 and 2 Kings of the Old Testament. He was translated or assumed into heaven by being taken up in a chariot of fire (2 Kings 2:1-11); thereafter he disappeared from the Old Testament record except for the prophecy of Malachi that he would return to the earth "before the coming of the great and dreadful day of the Lord." (Mal. 4:5.)

Three of the New Testament writers record the appearance of Elijah and Moses to Peter, James, and John on the Mount of Transfiguration. (Matt. 17:3; Mark 9:4; Luke 9:30.)

The Book of Mormon indicates that the resurrected Jesus Christ quoted Malachi's prophecy concerning Elijah to the surviving Lehites. (3 Ne. 25:5.)

The Pearl of Great Price includes the words of the angel Moroni when he appeared to Joseph Smith on September 21, 1823, and quoted the prophecy concerning Elijah. (JS-H 1:38.)

The Doctrine and Covenants includes both the prophecy of the coming of Elijah (Sec. 2) and also an account of his appearance in the Kirtland Temple. (Sec. 110.)

Thus, Elijah is mentioned in all the standard works of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. It is also interesting to note that the title "the prophet" is consistently used in connection with this great man. Malachi's prophecy indicated that it was necessary for Elijah to return to the earth before the second coming of Jesus Christ (before the "great and dreadful day of the Lord"); otherwise, the earth would be utterly wasted at his coming. The following references indicate why the calling, mission, and latter-day appearance of Elijah are so important to all mankind.

Selected Quotations

"Elijah was the last prophet that held the keys of the Priesthood, and who will, before the last dispensation, restore the authority and deliver the keys of the Priesthood, in order that all the ordinances may be attended to in righteousness. It is true that the Savior had authority and power to bestow this blessing; but the sons of Levi were too prejudiced. 'And I will send Elijah the prophet before the great and terrible day of the Lord,' etc. etc. [Mal. 4:5-6.] Why send Elijah? Because he holds the keys of the authority to administer in all the ordinances of the Priesthood; and without the authority is given, the ordinances could not be administered in righteousness." (Joseph Smith, HC 4:211.)

"Joseph Smith was ordained under the hands of Peter, James and John, receiving the Melchizedek Priesthood, and he went forth and built the Church in this dispensation. All that he did was valid; all those ordinances were valid; but in order that the binding power should come which is recognized in the heavens, and by which we pass by the angels and the Gods to exaltation, it had to come from Elijah, who held that power upon the face of the earth, for the Lord had given it to him, and so he came to Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery on the 3rd day of April, and bestowed upon them the keys of his priesthood." (Joseph Fielding Smith, Elijah the Prophet and His Mission, pp. 36-37.)

"Through the power of this priesthood which Elijah bestowed, husband and wife may be sealed, or married for eternity; children may be sealed to their parents for eternity; thus the family is made eternal, and death does not separate the members. This is the great principle that will save the world from utter destruction.

"In like manner, the children who are living may have the same ordinances performed for their ancestors who are dead. . . .

"The sealing power of Elijah makes it possible for this joining of the families, generation to generation, back to the beginning. Now, if these units of authority were not here, then the work of sealing, by which the family units are preserved, could not be performed; then the binding power by which all blessings are sealed in heaven, as well as on earth, would be lacking. If this were so, the earth would be smitten with a curse, for all work which had been done, without these binding or sealing ordinances, would fall to the ground unfulfilled.

"If Elijah had not come, we are led to believe that all the work of past ages would have been of little avail, for the Lord said the whole earth, under such conditions, would be utterly wasted at his coming. Therefore his mission was of vast importance to the world. It is not the question of baptism for the dead alone, but also the sealing of parents and children to parents, so that there should be a 'whole and complete and perfect union, and welding together of dispensations, and keys, and powers, and glories,' from the beginning down to the end of time. . . .

"Why would the earth be wasted? Simply because if there is not a welding link between the fathers and the children— which is the work for the dead—then we will all stand rejected; the whole work of God will fail and be utterly wasted. Such a condition, of course, shall not be." (Joseph Fielding Smith, DS 2:118, 120-22.)

"Edersheim in his work, The Temple, says: 'To this day, in every Jewish home, at a certain part of the Paschal service [i.e. when they drink the "third cup"]—the door is opened to admit Elijah the prophet as forerunner of the Messiah, while appropriate passages are at the same time read which foretell the destruction of all heathen nations. It is a remarkable coincidence that, in instituting his own Supper, the Lord Jesus connected the symbol, not of judgment, but of his dying love, with his "third cup."'

"It was, I am informed on the third day of April, 1836, that the Jews, in their homes at the Paschal feast, opened their doors for Elijah to enter. On that very day Elijah did enter—not in the home of the Jews to partake of the Passover with them—but he appeared in the house of the Lord, erected to his name and received by the Lord in Kirtland, and there bestowed his keys to bring to pass the very things for which these Jews, assembled in their homes, were seeking." (Joseph Fielding Smith, DS 2:100-101.)

Scriptural References:

D&C 2:1-2; 27:9; 35:4; 98:16; 110:13-15; 128:17; 133:55; JS-H 2:38-39; Mal. 4:5; 3 Ne. 25:5.
