Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 2 ( 1978)

Endowment

the endowment

The word endow means "to furnish, provide, equip, or give." In a general sense the word endowment could refer to the act or the process of endowing or to the thing that is being endowed (given). Among Latter-day Saints the word endowment has special meaning, as it refers to a special gift of knowledge or understanding of the eternal purposes of life that is given in the temple. As indicated in some of the following quotations, the "endowment" received by the Saints in the Kirtland Temple is not the same or as complete as the endowment given in temples today.

Selected Quotations

"As early as January, 1831, the Lord said he had called the members of the Church out of New York to the Ohio, and he would give them his law; and there they would be 'endowed with power from on high.' (D&C 38:32.) In this same month he said he had kept in store a blessing such as is not known among the children of men, and it shall be poured forth upon their heads. And from thence men shall go forth into all nations. They were to go forth with greater power because of the endowment. In February, 1831, he further said that the elders should be taught from on high. 'Sanctify yourselves and ye shall be endowed with power that ye may give even as I have spoken.' (43:16.) In June, 1833, the Lord commanded that his house in Kirtland be built. 'Yea, verily I say unto you, I gave unto you a commandment that you should build a house, in the which house, I design to endow those whom I have chosen with power from on high.' (D&C 95:8.) The elders were commanded to tarry until they could receive this endowment.

"In Kirtland, November 12, 1835, in a council meeting with the apostles, the Prophet said: 'You need an endowment, brethren, in order that you may be prepared and able to overcome all things; and those that reject your testimony will be damned.' (HC 2:309.) January 20, 1836, a council meeting was held in the Kirtland Temple in which the endowment was given, consisting of washing, anointing with oil, washing of feet and other ordinances. It was on this occasion that the Prophet had the heavens opened to his view in which he saw the glory of the celestial kingdom, and the redemption of little children in the kingdom of God. (HC 2:379-381.)" (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 2:304.)

"The endowment promised and received in the Kirtland Temple was not the same as today's temple endowment ceremony, though priesthood members did participate in a 'partial endowment, the full ordinance being reserved for a future performance when a temple designed for ordinance work itself should be built [at Nauvoo].'" (Bruce R. McConkie, Ensign, August 1976, p. 10.)

"The first complete endowments in this dispensation were given in Nauvoo, May 4, 1842. These, of course, could not be given in the temple, and were given elsewhere. In the time of poverty and when necessity requires the giving of blessings which belong to the House of the Lord, and there is no such house, they may be given in the wilderness, on a mountain or some other spot, consecrated to that purpose. The Savior had to give an endowment to Peter, James and John, on the Mount of Transfiguration. The saints of that dispensation had to be baptized for the dead and give other ordinances for the dead in the wilderness, for the temple in Jerusalem was closed to them and had been desecrated, therefore the wilderness, mountain tops and rivers, had to be utilized for the temple work for their dead in that dispensation." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 2:333.)

Scriptural References:

D&C 38:32, 38; 43:16; 95:8; 105:11-12, 18, 33; 110:9; 124:39; 132:59.
