Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 2 ( 1978)

Endure to the end

Many people start out on a venture full of hope and enthusiasm but soon fall by the wayside and abandon the enterprise. The Lord rightfully expects his Saints to be faithful at all times, under all conditions, and in all seasons. Both ancient and modern scriptures urge the faithful to "endure to the end" because only then will the promised blessings be received.

Selected Quotations

"Why endure to the end? Why is it so important to our salvation? Can we not be faithful part of the time and stray a bit, and yet get our salvation? Why does he limit the application to 'whosoever is of my church, and endureth of my church to the end'? To answer these questions we must ask and answer one more: What is the purpose of our existence?

"We are the children of God, actually his offspring. He is our Father. We are not mere creatures of the Almighty, but rather we are his sons and daughters. We are of the divine race. We are in this life to prove ourselves, and develop within us Godlike traits of character. We must become Christlike in our souls in order to come into his presence. . . .

"The Gospel is the plan. The commandments are the detailed instructions. By living them we achieve our goal. But where does 'enduring to the end' come in? Steadfastness is part of good character. If we are not steadfast, we are not strong. If we are not steadfast, we waver, we are undecided, unpredictable; we stumble and fall; . . . we never overcome.

"There is nothing Christlike in weakness, neither in disobedience. We are commanded to 'overcome.' What is it that we are to overcome? Weakness, indecision, turning back, failure, sin. We are to fight a battle and win. The victory and all the effort leading up to it, build character. Do we build character in being wishy-washy? Do we build character in only partial performance?

"To become like him we must be strong. We must not bow to temptation. We must not be idle. Only in labor is there true excellence. But we must follow the right road to perfection. We must adopt the correct instructions. That is why he emphasized that he is the door to the sheepfold, that the way to life is straight and narrow. There is only one way.

"Hence he taught: [D&C 10:69, quoted.] In his Church, and only in his Church, is the way of salvation. By following that path—to the very end—we gain salvation. [D&C 53:7; 66:12; 76:5.]" (Mark E. Petersen, YFY, pp. 288-89.)

"It is he who endureth to the end that shall be saved, he who, in the midst of all the afflictions and trials to which he may be subjected, keeps his integrity unsullied and never swerves from his rectitude in the severest trials and temptations. Men and women of this description are rare. We may know this by reading the words of Jesus . . . that few there be that find that strait and narrow way which leadeth unto eternal lives." (George Q. Cannon, MS 25:88-89.)

"Lest we lull ourselves into thinking that only the gross sins of life cause us to falter, consider the experience of the rich young man who came running to the Savior and asked the question: [Matt. 19:16-22 quoted.]

"He preferred the comforts of earth to the treasures of heaven. He would not purchase the things of eternity by abandoning those of time. He faltered. He failed to finish.

"So it was with Judas Iscariot. He commenced his ministry as an apostle of the Lord. He ended it a traitor.

"Lust for power, greed of gold, and disdain for honor have ever appeared as faces of failure in the panorama of life. Captivated by their artificial attraction, many noble souls have stumbled and fallen, thus losing the crown of victory reserved for the finisher of life's great race.

"Concerning those who fall short, John Greenleaf Whittier's words seem particularly fitting:

"'For of all sad words of tongue or pen, The saddest are these: "It might have been!"' ('Maude Muller.')" (Thomas S. Monson, Ensign, July 1972, pp. 68-69.)

Scriptural References:

D&C 14:7; 18:22; 20:25, 29; 53:7; 63:47; Matt. 10:22; 24:13; 3 Ne. 15:9; 27:6, 16, 17.
