Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 2 ( 1978)

Enoch

city of Enoch; the Zion of Enoch (for further information on the "order of Enoch," see United Order)

Very little is known by the world concerning the great prophet Enoch, who is mentioned in the Bible only in Genesis 4 and 5 of the Old Testament and Luke 3:37, Hebrews 11:5, and Jude 1:14 of the New Testament. However, the writers of both the Old Testament and New Testament indicate that Enoch was so righteous that he was translated (transfigured).

Modern scriptures and revelations provide much additional information on this great man, including some of his writings. His life and teachings are of particular importance to Latter-day Saints, because Enoch was able to prepare a people who became so righteous they were actually taken off the telestial earth so they could live a terrestrial order. In a somewhat similar manner, a people must be prepared in these latter days to be worthy to live at least a terrestrial order so they will be able to live with Jesus Christ when he comes on the earth to rule in power and great glory.

Selected Quotations

"We learn amongst other truths, all based upon Enoch's faith in the atoning blood of the Lamb slain from before the foundation of the world, the following:

"That Enoch was clothed with glory and saw the Lord who talked with him as one man talks with another, even face to face.

"That the Lord commanded Enoch to preach repentance; and to baptize in the name of the Father, and the Son, which is full of grace and truth, and the Holy Spirit, which bears record of the Father and the Son.

"That so great was the faith of Enoch that he led the people of God, overthrew their enemies, and at his word the earth trembled, whilst the mountains, rivers, and seas obeyed his command.

"That through his faith Enoch saw the days of the coming of the Son of Man in the flesh, and by it he obtained a covenant from the Lord that after Noah's day He would never again cover the earth by a flood, and obtained an unalterable decree that a remnant of his seed should always be found among all nations while the earth should stand.

"That the Lord showed Enoch the world and its future history for the space of many generations, even unto the end of the world.

"That so great was the faith and righteousness of Enoch and his people, that the Lord came down and dwelt with them, and in process of time Enoch's city, Zion, was taken up into heaven, and many, through the testimony of the Father and the Son, were afterwards caught up by the powers of Heaven into Zion.

"And, further, that Enoch, through the favor of the Almighty, . . . obtained a promise that the future peopling of the earth should come through his seed; thus making him one of the great agencies to administer salvation in the heavens and upon the earth. [Moses ch. 7.]" (John Taylor, MA, pp. 79-80.)

"In this day of wickedness it is difficult to understand how an entire people could become so righteous that it was no longer expedient that they should remain on the earth, and, therefore, were translated and taken away to await the time when righteousness should come. The people of the city of Enoch, because of their integrity and faithfulness, were as pilgrims and strangers on the earth. This is due to the fact that they were living the celestial law in a telestial world, and all were of one mind, perfectly obedient to all commandments of the Lord. When Christ comes, these people will be returned to the earth again, for this is their eternal abode." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:195.)

Scriptural References:

D&C 38:4; 45:11; 76:57, 67, 100; 78:1, 4, 9; 84:15-16; 107:48, 53, 57; 133:54; Moses 5:42-8:19; Gen. 4:17-18; 5:18-24; Luke 3:37; Heb. 11:5; Jude 1:14.
