Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 2 ( 1978)

Exaltation

Exaltation is a synonym for eternal life. Exaltation comes only to those who inherit the highest degree within the celestial kingdom. It is the power to have eternal increase after the resurrection; it consists in the continuation of the family unit throughout eternity; it is the type of life that is lived by our Heavenly Father.

The possibility of exaltation, or of eternal life, is God's greatest gift to man. The word exaltation appears in at least eleven verses of section 132 and is discussed in further detail in the supplementary readings of that section.

Selected Quotations

"The perfection upon which exaltation hangs is an individual matter. It is conditioned upon the observance of celestial laws as they apply to earth life. The Word of Wisdom is one of them, so also are chastity, tithing, observance of the Sabbath day, prayer, honesty, industry, love of God and fellow men, patience, kindness, charity, and all the rest of the principles and ordinances of the gospel of Jesus Christ. Each individual who observes one or more of these laws shall receive the blessings predicated thereon, and each Church member who will, with all the energy of his soul, diligently strive to live them all, shall receive the blessings predicated upon such striving. Eternal life, the greatest gift of God, is that blessing, and it will follow the living of the gospel as the night the day, regardless of statistics or averages, or of what others think or say or do." (Marion G. Romney, CR, October 1956, pp. 15-16.)

"It is not necessary for a man to be a president of a stake, or a member of the Quorum of the Twelve, in order to attain a high place in the celestial kingdom. The humblest member of the Church, if he keeps the commandments of God, will obtain an exaltation just as much as any other man in the celestial kingdom. . . . In as far as we observe to keep the laws of the Church we have equal opportunities for exaltation." (George Albert Smith, CR, October 1933, p. 25.)

Scriptural References:

D&C 109:69; 124:9; 132:17-63.
