Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 2 ( 1978)

Excommunication

Excommunication is the most severe form of discipline or penalty that can presently be imposed by a Church court. It consists in severing the person from his Church ties so that he can no longer be considered a member of the Church. If the excommunicant subsequently repents, proves to be faithful, and is found qualified and worthy by the appropriate Church authorities, he may be readmitted to the Church through baptism. Following further testing and proven faithfulness, the former blessings of the readmitted member may also be restored. Excommunication differs from disfellowshipment in its severity and in the steps that must be followed before the person can again become a member of the Church in good standing.

Selected Quotations

"The Church applies only two kinds of punishment. The first and lightest is that of being disfellowshipped, which means that the hand of fellowship is withdrawn from the accused, who cannot then officiate in the activities of the Church, though he may be present and partake of the spirit of all Church gatherings. In the course of time, if his conduct justifies it, he is again admitted into full fellowship by the tribunal that found him guilty. Re-baptism is not necessary.

"The second punishment is that of excommunication. This means loss of membership in the Church. An excommunicated member can re-enter the Church only after showing full faith, and sincere repentance, by being again baptized." (John A. Widtsoe, PC, p, 175.)

"There are some who claim that even though they are excommunicated from the Church, their priesthood and temple blessings are not taken away. Let us remind those persons that the power to seal is also the power to loose, for the Lord has said of his true servants that 'whatsoever thou shalt bind on earth shall be bound in heaven: and whatsoever thou shalt loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven.' (Matt. 16:19; D&C 132:46.) Excommunication takes away all rights, privileges, and blessings of the Church." (Mark E. Petersen, Ensign, July 1973, pp. 110-11.)

Scriptural References:

D&C 41:1; 64:12-13; 76:29-37; 82:1-7; 104:8-9; 121:13-25; 134:10; Matt. 18:15-19; 1 Cor. 5:1-5; 1 Tim. 1:20.
