Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 2 ( 1978)

Faith

(see also Gifts of the Spirit)

Faith in the Lord Jesus Christ has been identified by the Prophet Joseph Smith as the first principle of the gospel, the foundation of all righteousness, and the moving cause of all action in intelligent beings. Without faith, the Prophet said, "there is no power, and without power there could be no creation nor existence." (Lectures on Faith, end of Lecture 1.) Faith is more than belief, as faith impels to action whenever action is required. As James stated, "Faith, if it hath not works, is dead, being alone." (James 2:17.)

Selected Quotations

"We cannot know what faith is if we have never had it, and we cannot obtain it as long as we deny it. Faith and doubt cannot exist in the same time, for one will dispel the other." (Thomas S. Monson, IE, June 1964, 67:509.)

"I admit that difficulties are to be encountered because a man cannot really know what faith is until he has experienced it, nor can he really experience it without recognizing it for what it is. It is rather confusing to say to one who denies the reality of spiritual things, 'You, sir, cannot know what faith is because you have never had it and you cannot get it as long as you deny it.' This sounds paradoxical, but in reality, it is not so absurd as it sounds, for this reason—faith is a divine gift open to all men to receive, if only their attitude and life will permit its reception. It is true only the faithful know this, but their knowledge of it is so certain that they never despair of bringing the knowledge to others. In this absolute certitude of the faithful lies the hope and promise of universal conversion." (Stephen L Richards, CR, October 1937, p. 36.)

"Whether seeking for knowledge of scientific truths or to discover God, one must have faith. This becomes the starting point. Faith has been defined in many ways, but the most classic definition was given by the author of the letter to the Hebrews in these meaningful words: 'Now faith is the substance of things hoped for, the evidence of things not seen.' (Heb. 11:1.) In other words, faith makes us confident of what we hope for and convinced of what we do not see. The scientist does not see molecules, atoms, or electrons, yet he knows they exist. He does not see electricity, radiation, or magnetism, but he knows these are unseen realities. In like manner, those who earnestly seek for God do not see him, but they know of his reality by faith. It is more than hope. Faith makes it a conviction—an evidence of things not seen.

"The author of the letter to the Hebrews continues: 'Through faith we understand that the worlds were framed by the word of God, so that things which are seen were not made of things which do appear.' (Heb. 11:3.) Faith is here described as believing or having the conviction that the world was created by the word of God. Witnesses cannot be produced to prove this fact, but faith gives the knowledge that what we see in the wonders of the earth and in all nature was created by God. It is just as reasonable to believe in an unseen God, in a literal resurrection, or in the miracles of the things pertaining to the spiritual as it is to believe in some of the discoveries in the field of the physical sciences. Faith is the primary tool in the realm of religion, and it is also the tool of the scientist." (Howard W. Hunter, Ensign, November 1974, p. 97.)

Scriptural References:

James 1:5-6; 5:14-15; Alma 32:26-43.
