Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 2 ( 1978)

Fasting

fast offering; fast day; fast meeting

The law of the fast was taught in Old Testament times, preached by the righteous in the Book of Mormon, and instituted in the Church in this dispensation directly by the Lord. When combined with prayer, fasting increases spirituality, faith, devotion, love, and humility in the person fasting, increases his understanding and appreciation of his dependence upon God, and subjects his physical body to higher spiritual laws. Fasting in the right spirit should be observed because it is a commandment of God; it might also properly be observed with a specific goal or objective in mind.

Fasting has been defined by Church leaders as complete abstinence from food and drink from "even to even." The money saved by not consuming the food should be donated for the benefit and blessing of the poor. These fast offerings should be administered by the proper authorities in the Church, who should be aware of the needs of others.

Fasting, when properly observed, is conducive to spiritual growth, and the Lord has provided a special testimony meeting to be held in connection with the fasting of the Saints where they can "meet together . . . to speak one with another concerning the welfare of their souls." (Moro. 6:5.) In recent times this fast and testimony meeting has been combined with a sacrament meeting, usually the first sacrament meeting of each month.

Selected Quotations

"Now, while the law requires the Saints in all the world to fast from 'even to even' and to abstain both from food and drink, it can easily be seen from the scriptures and especially from the words of Jesus, that it is more important to obtain the true spirit of love for God and man, 'purity of heart and simplicity of intention,' than it is to carry out the cold letter of the law. The Lord has instituted the fast on a reasonable and intelligent basis, and none of his works are vain or unwise. His law is perfect in this as in other things. Hence, those who can are required to comply thereto; it is a duty from which they cannot escape; but let it be remembered that the observance of the fast day by abstaining twenty-four hours from food and drink is not an absolute rule, it is no iron-clad law to us, but it is left with the people as a matter of conscience, to exercise wisdom and discretion.

"But those should fast who can, and all classes among us should be taught to save the meals which they would eat, or their equivalent, for the poor. None are exempt from this; it is required of the Saints, old and young, in every part of the Church." (Joseph F. Smith, GD, pp. 243-44.)

"It is generally conceded that most people usually consume more food than the body requires. Overeating clogs the system with deleterious waste products. When such a condition exists a short fast is useful as a means of restoring the body to its normal active state.

"But besides this there is the spiritual strength derived from the subjecting of the physical appetite to the will of the individual. 'He who reigns within himself and rules passions, desires and fears is more than a king.' If there were no other virtues in fasting but gaining strength of character, that alone would be sufficient justification for its universal acceptance." (David O. McKay, CR, April 1932, pp. 64-65.)

"To keep the Sabbath in this manner is fasting and prayer; or, in other words, rejoicing and prayer.

"Fasting should be rejoicing.

"Fasting, as an expression of sorrow, is natural, for in deep affliction man does not crave nourishment to the same extent as under normal conditions. In the Law of Moses one annual fast day was provided—the day of atonement (Lev. 23:27-29). But on solemn occasions other fast days were observed. Joshua and the leading Elders of Israel were prostrate before the Ark one entire day after the defeat in the battle of Ai (Josh. 7:6). David fasted when his child was sick (2 Sam. 12:16). Moses fasted forty days on Mount Horeb. Elijah fasted a similar period, as did our Lord before entering upon His ministry. The children of God, in all ages, have found comfort and strength in fasting and prayer. In answer to prayer with fasting, extending over a period of two days and nights, Alma was healed (Mosiah 27:22, 23). Alma fasted and prayed many days, in order to receive a testimony of the truth (Alma 5:46). There are many instances of fasting recorded in the Book of Mormon. Paul reminded the Saints that he and his companions had proved themselves to be ministers of God in 'fastings' as well as in all other circumstances (2 Cor. 6:5). Our Lord warns His disciples not to fast as hypocrites who look sad and distort their countenances in order to be seen by men, but to appear as if going to a social function in order that God, "who seeth in secret" may reward them openly (Matt. 6:16-18). This is in harmony with what God revealed through Joseph the Prophet, that fasting should be rejoicing. It is also in harmony with the view taken by Isaiah (58:3-8). The Latter-day Saints have a Fast Sunday every month, on which they bear testimony to the goodness of the Lord to them, and remember the poor by donations. If they understand the gospel, they will make every Sunday a fast-Sunday, by abstaining from work, partaking of simple food, and devoting the day to spiritual matters." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, pp. 352-53.)

Scriptural References:

D&C 59:13-14; 88:76, 119; 95:7, 16; 109:8, 16; Isa. 58:3-6; Matt. 4:2; 6:16-18; 9:14-15; 3 Ne. 13:16, 18; 27:1.
