Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 2 ( 1978)

Feet

cleansing of feet; "shake off the dust of thy feet"

The custom of having missionaries cleanse their feet, either by washing or wiping off the dust, as a testimony against the wicked who refused to accept the gospel, was practiced in New Testament times and was reinstituted by the Lord in this dispensation. Because of the serious obligation associated with this act, Church leaders have counseled that it should only be done under the direction of the Spirit. The act appears to be associated with the commandment that the missionaries (and members) are to make certain they are clean from the sins of the wicked.

Selected Quotations

"The elders were to seek out from among the people the honest in heart and leave their warning testimony with all others, thus they would become clean from their blood. The cleansing of their feet, either by washing or wiping off the dust, would be recorded in heaven as a testimony against the wicked. This act, however, was not to be performed in the presence of the offenders, 'lest thou provoke them, but in secret, and wash thy feet, as a testimony against them in the day of judgment.' The missionaries of the Church who faithfully perform their duty are under the obligation of leaving their testimony with all with whom they come in contact in their work. This testimony will stand as a witness against those who reject the message, at the judgment." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:206.)

"Our Lord instructed His first Apostles to shake the dust off their feet, when they departed from a house or a city in which their message had been rejected. Paul and Barnabas did so, when they were forced to leave Antioch in Pisidia (Acts 13:50-1). Paul, at Corinth, when the Jews opposed him and blasphemed, shook his raiment and said, 'Your blood be upon your own heads; I am clean' (Acts 18:6). The significance of this solemn act is made clear in Nehemiah 5:13. This prophet, after having taken a promise of the priests, shook his lap and said, 'God shake out every man from his house, and from his labor, that performeth not this promise, even thus be he shaken out and empty.' To shake the dust of the feet signified the same thing. The Elders of the Church were to perform this act in secret, as a testimony against scoffers and persecutors on the day of judgment, and only when prompted by the Spirit, lest they should make a serious mistake." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 360.)

Scriptural References:

D&C 24:15; 60:15; 75:26; 84:92; 88:139-40; 99:4; John 11:2; 12:3; 13:5-14.
