Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 2 ( 1978)

First Presidency

(see also Church offices and presiding quorums)

The quorum of the First Presidency consists of the President of the Church and his counselors and is the presiding quorum in the Church today.

Selected Quotations

"The First Presidency of the Church was organized March 18, 1833, with Joseph Smith, president, and Sidney Rigdon and Frederick G. Williams as counselors. This was in fulfillment of the commandment given in a revelation the eighth of that month (Sec. 90). . . .

"One year before, in March 1832, the Lord had called Frederick G. Williams to this position as a counselor and to hold the 'keys of the kingdom, which belongeth always unto the Presidency of the High Priesthood.' Sidney Rigdon was also called and these men had acted in this calling for one full year before they were set apart. The Prophet laid his hands on the head of each in turn and conferred upon each the authority to take part with him in the First Presidency of the Church. In this manner the presiding council of the Church was organized for the first time in this dispensation." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:392-93.)

"The Lord in the beginning of this work revealed that there should be three High Priests to preside over the High Priesthood of His Church and over the whole Church. (D&C 107:22, 64, 65, 66, 67, 91, and 92.) He conferred upon them all the authority to preside over all the affairs of the Church. They hold the keys of the house of God, and of the ordinances of the Gospel, and of every blessing which has been restored to the earth in this dispensation. This authority is vested in a Presidency of three High Priests. They are three Presidents. The Lord himself so calls them. (D&C 107:29.) But there is one presiding President, and his counselors are Presidents also. . . . I have always held . . . that it is wrong for one man to exercise all the authority and power of presidency in The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints." (Joseph F. Smith, CR, November 1901, p. 82.)

"The question as to whether the Counselors held the same power as the President was soon debated among the people. What could the counselors do without direct appointment from the President? These questions were answered in a meeting on January 26, 1836. The prophet there said, 'The Twelve are not subject to any other than the First Presidency . . . and where I am not, there is no First Presidency over the Twelve.' In other words, were the President taken, the Counselors would have no authority. The Counselors do not possess the power of the President and cannot act in Church matters without direction and consent of the President." (John A. Widtsoe, JS, p. 303.)

"There are certain ordinances which belong to the Priesthood, from which flow certain results; and the Presidents or Presidency are over the Church; and revelations of the mind and will of God to the Church are to come through the Presidency. This is the order of heaven, and the power and privilege of this Priesthood." (Joseph Smith, HC 2:477.)

"It does not follow and never has followed that the members of the first presidency of the Church are necessarily to be ordained apostles. They hold by virtue of their rights as presidents of the Church all the keys and all the authority that pertains to the Melchizedek Priesthood, which comprehends and comprises all of the appendages to that priesthood, the lesser priesthood and all the offices in the priesthood from first to last, and from least to greatest." (Joseph F. Smith, CR, April 1913, p. 4.)

Scriptural References:

D&C 68:15, 19, 22; 102:26-27, 33; 112:20, 30; 117:13; 120:1; 124:126.
