Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 2 ( 1978)

First Quorum of the Seventy

(see also Seventy; Church offices and presiding quorums)

The First Quorum of the Seventy is the third highest of the presiding quorums of the Church. The members of this quorum serve under the direction of the First Presidency and the Council of the Twelve.

Selected Quotations

"On the 28th of February, the Church in council assembled, commenced selecting certain individuals to be Seventies, from the number of those who went up to Zion with me in the camp . . . to begin the organization of the first quorum of Seventies, according to the visions and revelations which I have received. The Seventies are to constitute traveling quorums, to go into all the earth, whithersoever the Twelve Apostles shall call them." (Joseph Smith, HC 2:201-2.)

"Next to the Twelve Apostles are the First Seven Presidents of the Seventies. These Seven Presidents are called to look after the interests of this great body of Seventies, to counsel, to direct, to warn them against the spirit of neglect and indifference, or commend them for their good works.

"The seven presidents of Seventies labor under the direction of the Twelve Apostles, and hold themselves in constant readiness to respond to every call." (Rudger Clawson, CR, October 1903, p. 59.)

"If the first Seventy are all employed and there is a call for more laborers, it will be the duty of the seven presidents of the first Seventy to call and ordain other Seventy and send them forth to labor in the vineyard, until, if needs be, they set apart seven times seventy, and even until there are one hundred and forty-four thousand thus set apart for the ministry." (Joseph Smith, HC 2:221.)

"The First Quorum of the Seventy will be gradually organized, eventually with seventy members, the presidency of which will be made up of the seven members. . . .

"Today we shall present . . . additional members of the First Quorum of the Seventy to you for your votes. . . . These changes bring to thirty-nine the total number in the First Quorum of the Seventy, thus providing a quorum to do business.

"With this move, the three governing quorums of the Church defined by the revelations—the First Presidency, the Quorum of the Twelve, and the First Quorum of the Seventy—have been set in their places as revealed by the Lord. This will make it possible to handle efficiently the present heavy workload and to prepare for the increasing expansion and acceleration of the work, anticipating the day when the Lord will return to take direct charge of His church and kingdom." (Spencer W. Kimball, CR, October 1976, p. 10.)

Scriptural References:

D&C 107:25-26, 36.
