Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 2 ( 1978)

First Vision

The term first vision is used in the Church to refer to the vision of Joseph Smith in the spring of 1820 when he beheld and talked with the Father and the Son. This was the "first" vision of this dispensation and in a sense inaugurated the great dispensation of the fulness of times.

Selected Quotations

"It came about in a regular, normal process. An inspired, fourteen-year-old boy had difficulty learning from the scriptures alone what the future was. In a dense grove of trees he sought the Lord and prayed for wisdom.

"The time had come, and though the adversary, Satan, recognizing all the powers of eternity which would be revealed with the gospel, did everything in his power to destroy the lad and destroy the prospects of the Restoration—in spite of him there came the splendid and magnificent vision to this pure, inquiring lad. Exerting all his powers, and with the strength of the Lord, the darkness was dispelled. Satan yielded and the vision proceeded, with a pillar of light coming exactly over the boy's head—a light above the brightness of the sun, which gradually descended until it fell upon him. The young Joseph continues:

"'It no sooner appeared than I found myself delivered from the enemy which held me bound. When the light rested upon me I saw two Personages, whose brightness and glory defy all description, standing above me in the air. One of them spake unto me, calling me by name and said, pointing to the other—This is My Beloved Son. Hear Him!' (JS-H 1:17 )

"This formal introduction by the Father to the Son was most important, for this would be the world of Jesus Christ and the Church of Jesus Christ and the kingdom of Jesus Christ.

"Questions were asked and answered, and eternal truths were given." (Spencer W. Kimball, Ensign, May 1976, p. 9.)

"The occurrence which ranks in importance alongside the greatest verities of revealed religion, is one that took place in a grove of trees near Palmyra, New York, on a beautiful, clear day early in the spring of 1820. Was it on the sixth of April? Perhaps—such at least is the tradition. But be that as it may, what transpired at that time was destined to affect the salvation of the billions of our Father's children who should live on earth from that day to the great winding up scene when the Son shall deliver up the kingdom, spotless, to his Father.

"Once or twice in a thousand years a new door is opened through which all men must enter if they are to gain peace in this life and be inheritors of eternal life in the realms ahead.

"Once or twice in a score of generations a new era dawns: the light from the east begins to drive the darkness of the earth from the hearts of men.

"Now and then in a peaceful grove, apart from the gaze of men, heaven and earth share a moment of intimacy, and neither are ever thereafter the same. Such a moment occurred on that beautiful, clear morning in the spring of 1820 in a grove of trees near Palmyra, New York. Man asked and God answered. Joseph Smith saw the Father and the Son." (Bruce R. McConkie, Ensign, November 1975, pp. 15, 18.)

"When Joseph Smith went out to the grove to pray, he had no idea that the Father and the Son were separate Personages. His religious training had been solely along the lines of the sectarian Protestant and Catholic world. This doctrine proclaimed with apparent assurance that the Father and the Son were one; that God was a Spirit in some mysterious form that could not be understood, and definitely not an anthropomorphic being. The current doctrine was that God was invisible to mortal eyes.

"We may well believe that when the youthful prophet knelt and prayed he never expected such a visitation, which was contrary to the universal religious views in his day. Evidently his mind was not clear as to how an answer would be received. Possibly he could have thought he might hear a voice or even that an angel might appear to him, as angels once appeared in ancient times. That he would receive a visitation from both Father and Son absolutely could not have entered his mind. Their presence, therefore, must have been just as great a shock to him as his repeating it to certain ministers must have been to them. For telling it he was severely rebuked and accused of blasphemy.

"Without doubt, one of the chief reasons for the coming of both Father and Son was to establish the great truth which was lost to the world, that the declaration of the scriptures is true, and that once again there was to be witness in the flesh to bear testimony to the world. Through the mixture of the gospel with pagan philosophy, the true nature of God had been lost. It was necessary that it be restored again through the presence of a living witness. There were other reasons, of course, why the Lord should have living witnesses on the earth. The time had come for the light of the gospel to break through the dark clouds of superstition and false philosophy." (Joseph Fielding Smith, AGQ 1:20-21.)

Scriptural Reference:

JS-H 1:2.
