Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 2 ( 1978)

Foreordination

(see also Pre-earthly existence)

The principle of foreordination is that certain people were preselected or "ordained before" their birth upon the earth to certain positions or responsibilities while in their physical, mortal condition. Such selection would be possible because of the knowledge of God concerning the individual's strengths, inclinations, and predispositions in the pre-earthly existence. Foreordination in no sense violates the principle of free agency, as the individual is still free to decide whether or not he will do those things to which he has been foreordained.

Selected Quotations

"There is no chance in the call of these brethren to direct the Lord's work on earth. His hand is in it. He knows the end from the beginning. He ordained and established the plan of salvation and decreed that his everlasting gospel should be revealed to man in a series of dispensations commencing with Adam and continuing to Joseph Smith. And he—the Almighty—chooses the prophets and apostles who minister in his name and present his message to the world in every age and dispensation. He selects and foreordains his ministers; he sends them to earth at the times before appointed; he guides and directs their continuing mortal preparations; and he then calls them to those positions they were foreordained to receive from before the foundations of the earth.

"Joseph Smith said, 'Every man who has a calling to minister to the inhabitants of the world was ordained to that very purpose in the grand council of heaven before this world was.' Then the Prophet said of himself, 'I suppose that I was ordained to this very office in that grand council.' (TPJS, p. 365.)

"All those who receive the Melchizedek Priesthood in this life were, as Alma teaches, 'called and prepared from the foundation of the world according to the foreknowledge of God,' because they were among the noble and great in that premortal sphere. (Alma 13:3.)

"And Paul says that through this law of foreordination, which he calls the doctrine of election, there came to the whole house of Israel 'the adoption, and the glory, and the covenants, and the giving of the law, and the service of God, and the promises.' (Rom. 9:4.) He says that the faithful members of the Church, those 'that love God' and 'are called according to his purpose,' are foreordained 'to be conformed to the image of his Son,' to be 'joint-heirs with Christ,' and to have eternal life in our Father's kingdom. (Rom. 8:17, 28.)

"He says also of members of the Church that God 'hath chosen us in him before the foundation of the world, that we should be holy and without blame before him in love,' and that we were foreordained to become the children of Jesus Christ by adoption, thus gaining a 'forgiveness of sins' in this life and an inheritance of eternal glory in the life to come. (Eph. 1:7.)

"True, a curtain has been drawn so we do not recall our associations there. But we do know that our Eternal Father has all power, all might, all dominion, and all truth and that he lives in the family unit. We do know that we are his children, created in his image, endowed with power and ability to become like him. We know he gave us our agency and ordained the laws by obedience to which we can obtain eternal life. We know we had friends and associates there. We know we were schooled and trained and taught in the most perfect educational system ever devised, and that by obedience to his eternal laws we developed infinite varieties and degrees of talents.

"And hence comes the doctrine of foreordination. When we come into mortality, we bring the talents, capacities, and abilities acquired by obedience to law in our prior existence.

Mozart composed and published sonatas when but eight years of age because he was born with musical talent. Melchizedek came into this world with such faith and spiritual capacity that 'when a child he feared God, and stopped the mouths of lions, and quenched the violence of fire.' (Gen. 14:26, JST.) Cain, on the other hand, like Lucifer, was a liar from the beginning and was told in this life: '. . . thou shalt be called Perdition; for thou wast also before the world.' (Moses 5:24.)

"Now this is the doctrine of foreordination; this is the doctrine of election." (Bruce R. McConkie, Ensign, May 1974, pp. 72-73.)

Scriptural References:

Abr. 3:24-26; Jer. 1:5; Acts. 17:26-27; 1 Pet. 1:20; Alma 13:2-4.
