Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 2 ( 1978)

Forgiveness

Forgiveness means to be "given before" and is conditioned upon repentance, which in turn is made possible because of the law of mercy. The eternal law of justice requires that there must be a payment (or suffering) made for every law that is broken in the moral realm. The law of mercy makes possible the vicarious payment of broken law; that is, the law of mercy makes it possible for a person other than the person who broke the law to pay (or suffer) for the broken law.

Because Jesus Christ was the Son of God in the flesh as well as in the spirit, and because he lived a sinless life upon the earth, he was able to atone (or pay or suffer) for our sins upon the condition of our repentance. He was willing to do this for us because of his great love for us.

Whenever any of us break a law (commit sin) in the moral realm, a payment must be made in order for the law to be brought back into a state of balance (order) and so that the law will no longer have claim upon us. The basic question then is, Will we pay or suffer for the broken law ourselves, or will we stop breaking the law (repent) so then Jesus Christ can and does pay for us, and we are "given before" (forgiven) the punishment that would naturally have devolved upon us?

When understood in its true light, forgiveness is one of the most meaningful and beautiful principles of the gospel. It is made active in our lives through repentance, and in repenting we can either stop doing those things that we have been doing that are wrong or we can start doing those things that we have not been doing that are right. Repentance and the forgiveness associated with it are vital, important, and necessary principles that must be utilized by man in order for him to achieve eternal life and exaltation.

No wonder President Kimball has referred to forgiveness as a miracle, and like other miracles of God it results in great blessings.

Selected Quotations

"One of the wonderful things about the restored gospel is that it provides a way whereby mankind may gain forgiveness of their sins. True repentance followed by baptism is the gate which initially puts men on the path of salvation, but even after going through the gate and getting on the path, all men sin to some extent, and some grievously. What is the law of repentance for such Church members? What must they do to cleanse themselves? [D&C 58:42-43.]

"The formula of forgiveness is plainly set forth in the scriptures. First men must forsake their sins. Then they must confess to the Lord and also to those against whom they have sinned, asking for forgiveness. Grievous sins which affect the standing in the Church should be made known to the bishop of the ward. One of the important factors in our escape from sin is the matter of making restitution to those against whom we have sinned. This we should do so far as it is within our power—the Lord expects it. We must also be willing to forgive other people who have offended us and finally we must press forward in doing the works of righteousness for the rest of our lives." (Mark E. Petersen, YFY, pp. 92-93.)

"Forgiveness is as wide as repentance. Every person will be forgiven for all the transgression of which he truly repents. If he repents of all his sins, he shall stand spotless before God because of the atonement of our Master and Savior, Jesus Christ, while he that exercises no faith unto repentance remains '. . . as though there had been no redemption made, except it be the loosing of the bands of death.' (Alma 11:41.) Such is the gift of God's merciful plan of redemption." (Marion G. Romney, CR, October 1955, pp. 123-25.)

"There are many people who seem to rely solely on the Lord's mercy rather than on accomplishing their own repentance. One woman rather flippantly said, 'The Lord knows my intents and that I'd like to give up my bad habits. He will understand and forgive me.' But the scriptures will not bear this out. The Lord may temper justice with mercy, but he will never supplant it. Mercy can never replace justice. God is merciful, but he is also just. The Savior's atonement represents the mercy extended. Because of this atonement, all men can be saved. Most men can be exalted.

"Many have greatly misunderstood the place of mercy in the forgiveness program. Its role is not to give great blessings without effort. Were it not for the atonement of Christ, the shedding of his blood, the assumption by proxy of our sins, man could never be forgiven and cleansed. Justice and mercy work hand in hand. Having offered mercy to us in the overall redemption, the Lord must now let justice rule for he cannot save us in our sins, as Amulek explained. (Alma 11:37.) . . .

"'There should be no license for sin,' said the Prophet, 'but mercy should go hand in hand with reproof.' And again, 'God does not look on sin with allowance, but when men have sinned, there must be allowance made for them." (Spencer W. Kimball, MF, pp. 358-59.)

"If the time comes when you have done all that you can to repent of your sins, whoever you are, wherever you are, and have made amends and restitution to the best of your ability; if it be something that will affect your standing in the Church and you have gone to the proper authorities, then you will want that confirming answer as to whether or not the Lord has accepted of you. In your soul-searching, if you seek for and you find that peace of conscience, by that token you may know that the Lord has accepted of your repentance. [Mosiah 4:2-3.] Satan would have you think otherwise and sometimes persuade you that now having made one mistake, you might go on and on with no turning back. That is one of the great falsehoods. The miracle of forgiveness is available to all of those who turn from their evil doings and return no more, because the Lord has said in a revelation to us in our day: '. . . go your ways and sin no more; but unto that soul who sinneth [meaning again] shall the former sins return, saith the Lord your God.' (D&C 82:7.)" (Harold B. Lee, CR, April 1973, pp. 177-78.)

Scriptural References:

D&C 42:25; 64:7-13; 76:34; 95:1; Moses 6:53; Lev. 4:20; 19:22; Matt. 6:12, 14-15; 9:6; 12:32; 18:35; Mosiah 4:2; 26:29; 3 Ne. 13:14.
