Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 2 ( 1978)

Free agency

agency of man

Free agency has been described as the most far-reaching gift of God to man because without the opportunity of choice and the freedom of choice all other gifts or blessings of God would be virtually meaningless. All of the basic principles of growth, development, and progression are based on the premise that God will give us law (the opportunity of choice) and free agency (the freedom of choice).

The scriptures teach that righteousness is obedience to law. The scriptures also teach that every blessing is predicated upon obedience to law. Thus, righteousness results in blessings. However, righteousness (obedience to law) would not be possible unless unrighteousness (disobedience to law) were also a possibility. Our Heavenly Father gave to man the opportunity of choice by giving him law. He also gave the freedom of choice to man from the very beginning in the days of Adam. Free agency on this earth is a gift from God and, when used in righteousness, can help man achieve blessings, including eternal life, which is the greatest blessing of all.

Selected Quotations

"There is no compulsion in any part of the gospel. The Lord said in 1833, 'Behold, here is the agency of man, and here is the condemnation of man; because that which was from the beginning is plainly manifest unto them, and they receive not the light.' (D&C 93:31.)

"This means that since Adam the Lord has taught us correct doctrines and we may accept or reject them, but the responsibility is ours. It means that, having the Holy Ghost which we received at baptism time, we all know good from evil. The conscience whispers to us what is right and what is wrong. We cannot blame others or circumstances. We know what is right.

"Every person has his free agency. He may steal or curse or drink; he may defile himself with pornographic material; he may laze away his life, fail to do his duty, commit sexual sins, or even take life. There is no force, but he must know that sin brings its proper punishment, sooner or later and in total, so that one is stupid indeed to choose to do the wrong things.

"Every person can fail to attend his meetings, fail to pay his tithing, fail to fill a mission, ignore his temple obligations and privileges, but if he is smart, he must know that he is the deprived one." (Spencer W. Kimball, Ensign, May 1974, p. 87.)

"One of God's greatest gifts to man is freedom of choice.

"At an early period in the journey through life, man finds himself at a crossroad where he must choose one of two great highways—the right, leading to progress and happiness; and the wrong, leading to retardation and sorrow. There exists this eternal law that each human soul, through the choices he makes, will shape his own destiny. Our success or failure, peace or discontent, happiness or misery, depend on the choices we make each day." (N. Eldon Tanner, Ensign, July 1973, p.7.)

"The agency of man is not interfered with by Divine Providence. If men were not left free to choose the good and refuse the evil, or vice versa, there would be no righteousness or even reason in bringing them to judgment. In consequence of the power of volition they become responsible beings, and therefore will receive the results of their own doings. They will be rewarded or punished according to their works, when the books are opened and they are judged out of the things written therein.

"God, doubtless, could avert war, prevent crime, destroy poverty, chase away darkness, overcome error, and make all things bright, beautiful and joyful. But this would involve the destruction of a vital and fundamental attribute in man, the right of agency. It is for the benefit of His sons and daughters that they become acquainted with evil as well as good, with darkness as well as light, with error as well as truth, and with the results of the infraction of eternal laws. Therefore He has permitted the evils which have been brought about by the acts of His creatures, but will control their ultimate results for His own glory and the progress and exaltation of His sons and daughters when they have learned obedience by the things they suffer. The contrasts experienced in this world of mingled sorrow and joy are educational in their nature, and will be the means of raising humanity to a full appreciation of all that is right and true and good. The foreknowledge of God does not imply His action in bringing about that which man does or refuses to do. The comprehension of this principle makes clear many questions that puzzle the uninformed as to the power and works of Deity." (Joseph Fielding Smith, Deseret News, December 1914.)

Scriptural References:

D&C 29:35-39; 58:27; 88:86; 93:31; 98:8; 101:78; 134:2, 7; Alma 12:31; 29:4-5; 41:3-7.
