Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 2 ( 1978)

Garments

"clean garments"; "spotted garments"

The Lord has indicated that "it becometh every man who hath been warned to warn his neighbor." (D&C 88:81.) Those who have been blessed in receiving the gospel have the responsibility to teach the gospel to others. In a similar way, if a person is aware that another person is committing sin, and he does not warn that person of his evil acts, then in some way he assumes part of the responsibility for the evil deed.

The counsel of the Lord to keep our garments clean from the blood of the wicked generation in which we live is a descriptive reminder of our responsibility to warn and teach others. For example, if we teach others the gospel and they do not accept the teachings, then the responsibility has been shifted from us to them ("their blood shall be upon their own heads"); however, if we do not teach them the gospel and they do not even have the opportunity to accept, then the responsibility remains with us ("our garments shall be spotted with their blood").

Selected Quotations

"'Save yourselves from this untoward generation, and come forth out of the fire, hating even the garments spotted with the flesh.' [36:6] This expression is found in Jude (23), and the Lord said to John (Rev. 3): 'Thou hast a few names even in Sardis which have not defiled their garments; and they shall walk with me in white; for they are worthy.' This is symbolic language, yet is plain to understand. This is an untoward generation, walking in spiritual darkness, and the punishment for sin is spoken of as punishment in fire. Garments spotted with flesh are garments defiled by the practices of carnal desires and disobedience to the commandments of the Lord. We are commanded to keep our garments unspotted from all sin, from every practice that defiles. We are therefore commanded to come out of the world of wickedness and forsake the things of this world." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:162-63.)

"Can we fold our arms in peace and cry 'all is peace in Zion,' when, so far as we have the power of the priesthood resting upon us, we can see the condition of the world? Can we imagine that our garments will be clean without lifting our voices before our fellow men and warning them of the things that are at their doors? No, we cannot. There never was a set of men since God made the world under a stronger responsibility to warn this generation, to lift up our voices long and loud, day and night so far as we have the opportunity and declare the words of God unto this generation. We are required to do this. This is our calling. It is our duty." (Wilford Woodruff, JD 21:122.)

"Garments spotted with the flesh: This expression is also found in Jude 23. The garment, a tunic worn next to the body, was thought of as polluted by indulgence in carnal sins, or defiled by the stains of diseases caused by transgression. The Elders of the Church were to cry repentance as the only means of salvation from the burning fires of the lusts of the flesh." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p.192.)

Scriptural References:

D&C 20:6; 36:6; 61:34; 88:85; 109:76; 112:33; 135:5; 2 Ne. 8:24; 9:44; 19:5; 3 Ne. 20:36; 27:19.
