Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 2 ( 1978)

Gathering

gathering of Israel

From the days of Joshua until approximately 722 B.C. a group of people called Israel lived in a land known today as Israel. The Israelites were descendants of Jacob (Israel) and were divided into the twelve tribes of Israel; collectively they were known as the house of Israel.

For about 350 years (approximately 1450-1095 B.C.) the Israelites were governed by at least thirteen judges, with Samuel being the last judge. Then they formed the United Kingdom, which lasted for approximately 120 years (about 1095-975 B.C.). Upon the death of Solomon, the people divided into two kingdoms: the kingdom of Israel (northern kingdom) and kingdom of Judah (southern kingdom).

About 722 B.C. the kingdom of Israel was conquered by Assyria, and many of the people in the ten tribes comprising that kingdom were taken into captivity. The next year (721 B.C.) they fled north from Assyria and disappeared from the pages of the Bible and from history. Even today they are known as the ten lost tribes of Israel. Thus, the blood descendants of Israel started to be separated from the land of Israel.

In approximately 587 B.C. the southern kingdom was conquered by Babylonia. The Lord warned some of the people of that kingdom to flee into the wilderness to escape that destruction. The progenitors of one of the major groups in the Book of Mormon—Lehi and his family, Ishmael and his family, and Zoram—were dispersed from Israel and eventually arrived in the promised land, the Americas. Therefore, another major group of blood Israel was separated from the land of Israel.

Other people of the kingdom of Judah were taken captive into Babylonia; but when that country was conquered by Persia, the Israelites were allowed to return to their own country.

When the Savior was born among these people in that land, what was previously the kingdom of Judah was a province in the Roman Empire. The Savior prophesied that soon even these people (primarily Jews—descendants of Judah and/or citizens of the previous Kingdom of Judah) would be scattered. Under the Roman emperors Nero and Vespasian, the city of Jerusalem and its temple were destroyed, many of the people killed, and most of the remaining Israelites were scattered throughout the Roman Empire.

Thus, nearly all of the blood of Israel was scattered from the land of Israel in three major scatterings: (1) the lost tribes, (2) the dispersed of Israel, and (3) the descendants of Judah.

Throughout the centuries, however, the Lord told his prophets that Israel would be gathered together again in the last days. These prophecies are recorded in many of the books of the Old Testament and the New Testament, as well as in the Book of Mormon.

In the Doctrine and Covenants, the Lord has revealed many things associated with three aspects of the gathering of Israel in the last days.

Selected Quotations

"Six years after the Church was organized, the keys of gathering were committed to Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery in the Kirtland Temple. The record of that marvelous restoration is given in these words: [D&C 110:11, quoted.] The spirit of gathering has been with the Church from the days of that restoration. Those who are of the blood of Israel, have a righteous desire after they are baptized, to gather together with the body of the Saints at the designated place. This, we have come to recognize, is but the breath of God upon those who are converted, turning them to the promises made to their fathers.

"But the designation of gathering places is qualified in another revelation by the Lord to which I would desire to call your attention. After designating certain places in that day where the Saints were to gather, the Lord said this: [D&C 101:21, quoted.]

"Thus, clearly, the Lord has placed the responsibility for directing the work of gathering in the hands of the leaders of the Church to whom he will reveal his will where and when such gathering would take place in the future." (Harold B. Lee, CR, April 1948, pp. 54-56.)

"What was the object of gathering the Jews, or the people of God in any age of the world? . . .

"The main object was to build unto the Lord a house whereby He could reveal unto His people the ordinances of His house and the glories of His kingdom, and teach the people the way of salvation; for there are certain ordinances and principles that, when they are taught and practiced, must be done in a place or house built for that purpose.

"It is for the same purpose that God gathers together His people in the last days, to build unto the Lord a house to prepare them for the ordinances and endowments, washings and anointings, etc." (Joseph Smith, HC 5:423-24.)

Gathering to Zion

"By it [Book of Mormon] we learn that our western tribes of Indians are descendants from that Joseph which was sold into Egypt, and that the land of America is a promised land unto them, and unto it all the tribes of Israel will come, with as many of the Gentiles as shall comply with the requisitions of the new covenant. But the tribe of Judah will return to old Jerusalem." (Joseph Smith, HC 1:315.)

"I received, by a heavenly vision, a commandment in June following [1831], to take my journey to the western boundaries of the State of Missouri, and there designate the very spot which was to be the central place for the commencement of the gathering together of those who embrace the fullness of the everlasting gospel. Accordingly I undertook the journey, with certain ones of my brethren, and after a long and tedious journey, suffering many privations and hardships, arrived in Jackson County, Missouri, and after viewing the country, seeking diligently at the hand of God, He manifested Himself unto us, and designated, to me and others, the very spot upon which He designed to commence the work of the gathering, and the upbuilding of an 'holy city,' which should be called Zion—Zion, because it is a place of righteousness, and all who build thereon are to worship the true and living God, and all believe in one doctrine, even the doctrine of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ." (Joseph Smith, HC 2:254.)

Gathering of Judah

"The promise is . . . made to the Jews that they shall be gathered again, after their pain and suffering. They will gather as predicted by Zechariah and by the Lord in . . . revelation (D&C 45) in their unbelief. They will begin to believe in Christ but will not be ready to accept him in his full right as their Deliverer and as the Son of God. (See 2 Nephi 30:5-8.) In this state they shall gather to Jerusalem and its vicinity. When their enemies come upon them and part of the city is taken, there shall come a great earthquake and the mount of Olives shall cleave in twain forming a valley into which the Jews shall flee for safety. At that time, Christ will appear to them and show them his hands and his feet, and they shall fall down and acknowledge him as their King and Redeemer." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:265.)

"In our day, in that first visit of Moroni to the Prophet Joseph Smith, mention was made that the 'dispersed of Judah would be gathered from the four corners of the earth.' Thirteen years later, when Moses delivered the keys for the gathering of Israel and the Kirtland Temple was dedicated, the Prophet Joseph made further reference to the promises made to Judah and appealed to the Lord that the time may soon come when the children of Judah would return to the land promised to their father, Abraham. [D&C 109:61-64.]" (Ezra Taft Benson, CR, Apr. 1950, pp. 72, 74-77.)

Gathering of the Lamanites

"Zion is bound to rise and flourish. The Lamanites will blossom as the rose on the mountains. . . . Every word that God has ever said of them will have its fulfillment, and they, by and by, will receive the Gospel." (Wilford Woodruff, JD 15:282.)

"The Lamanites must rise in majesty and power." (Spencer W. Kimball, CR, October 1947, p. 22.)

"This prophetic statement was made on October 3, 1947, when in Central America we had fewer than 100 members and in that great land of Mexico fewer than 5, 000, half of whom were in the Mormon colonies. 'The Lamanites must rise in majesty,' I repeat. The fewer than 100 in Central America when these prophetic words were uttered has blossomed into more than 40, 000 as of today. From the fewer than 5, 000 in Mexico at that time, a rich harvest of over 150, 000 stand tall in the field white already to harvest; the total membership of 1947 but represents harvest of a pair of months today." (J. Thomas Fyans, Ensign, May 1976, pp. 12-13.)

"The day of the Lamanite is surely here and we are God's instrument in helping to bring to pass the prophecies of renewed vitality, acceptance of the gospel, and resumption of a favored place as part of God's chosen people. The promises of the Lord will all come to pass; we could not thwart them if we would. But we do have it in our power to hasten or delay the process by our energetic or neglectful fulfillment of our responsibilities." (Spencer W. Kimball, FPM, pp. 348-49.)

Gathering of Lost Tribes

"All that God has said with regard to the ten tribes of Israel, strange as it may appear, will come to pass. They will, as has been said concerning them, smite the rock, and the mountains of ice will flow before them, and a great highway will be cast up, and their enemies will become a prey to them to Zion. These things are as true as God lives." (Wilford Woodruff, JD 21:300-301.)

"Notwithstanding all that has been written, there are many members of the Church who think that these 'lost tribes' were scattered among the nations and are now being gathered out and are found through all the stakes and branches of the Church. They reach this conclusion because the general opinion is that these tribes went into the North, and it is the northern countries from whence most of gathered Israel has been found. . . .

"Speaking of this, Elder Orson F. Whitney has said:

"'It is maintained by some that the lost tribes of Israel— those carried into captivity about 725 B.C.—are no longer a distinct people; that they exist only in a scattered condition, mixed with the nations among which they were taken by their captors, the conquering Assyrians. If this be true, and those tribes were not intact at the time Joseph and Oliver received the keys of the gathering why did they make so pointed a reference to "the leading of the ten tribes from the land of the north"? . . . What need to particularize as to the Ten Tribes, if they were no longer a distinct people? And why do our Articles of Faith give these tribes a special mention?' (See SNT, p. 174.)

"Another striking statement pointing to the fact that these people are now in a body in preparation for their return is the statement by the Prophet Joseph Smith at the conference held in Kirtland, June 3 to 6, 1831. At this conference the Prophet said: 'John the Revelator was then among the ten tribes of Israel who had been led away by Shalmaneser, King of Assyria, to prepare them for their return from their long dispersion.' The Savior also bore witness that these tribes were in a body like the Nephites and he would visit them. [3 Ne. 15:20 and 16:1-4.]" (Joseph Fielding Smith, Signs of the Times, pp. 158-60.)

"We live in the age of restoration. Peter calls it 'the times of restitution,' meaning the period or time in the earth's history when that which once was shall be restored in all its original glory and perfection. He says the things to be restored include 'all things, which God hath spoken by the mouth of all his holy prophets since the world began.' (Acts 3:21.). . .

"As is clear from the inspired account, Zion shall be built up—she shall obtain that perfection and glory which is hers—when the Lord appears in his glory. . . . This will be during the Millennium when the restoration of all things is completed. Zion shall be perfected after the second coming of Christ. . . .

"We have been commissioned to prepare a people for the second coming of the Son of Man. We have been called to preach the gospel to every nation and kindred and tongue and people. We have been commanded to lay the foundations of Zion and to get all things ready for the return of Him who shall again crown the Holy City with his presence and glory. . . .

"Now, what is Zion, and where shall she be established? On what ground shall we build her walls? Where shall we place her gates and strong towers? Who shall dwell within her portals? And what blessings shall rest upon her inhabitants? . . .

"Truly the scripture saith, 'The Lord loveth the gates of Zion more than all the dwellings of Jacob. Glorious things are spoken of thee, O city of God. . . . And of Zion it shall be said, This and that man was born in her: and the highest himself shall establish her.' (Ps. 87:2-3, 5.) Zion has been established many times among men. From the day of Adam to the present moment—whenever the Lord has had a people of his own; whenever there have been those who have hearkened to his voice and kept his commandments; whenever his saints have served him with full purpose of heart— there has been Zion.

"Our first scriptural account relative to Zion concerns Enoch and his city. That prophet of transcendent faith and power lived while father Adam yet dwelt in mortality. It was a day of wickedness and evil, a day of darkness and rebellion, a day of war and desolation, a day leading up to the cleansing of the earth by water. Enoch, however, was faithful. He 'saw the Lord,' and talked with him 'face to face' as one man speaks with another. (Moses 7:4.) The Lord sent him to cry repentance to the world, and commissioned him to 'baptize in the name of the Father and of the Son, which is full of grace and truth, and of the Holy Ghost, which beareth record of the Father and the Son.' (Moses 7:11.) Enoch made converts and assembled a congregation of true believers, all of whom became so faithful that 'the Lord came and dwelt with his people, and they dwelt in righteousness,' and were blessed from on high. 'And the Lord called his people Zion, because they were of one heart and one mind, and dwelt in righteousness; and there was no poor among them.' (Moses 7:18.)

"Please note: Zion is people; Zion is the saints of God; Zion is those who have been baptized; Zion is those who have received the Holy Ghost; Zion is those who keep the commandments; Zion is the righteous; or in other words, as our revelation recites: 'This is Zion—the pure in heart.' (D&C 97:21.)

"As is well known, ancient Israel was scattered among all the nations of the earth because they forsook the Lord and worshipped false gods. As is also well known, the gathering of Israel consists of receiving the truth, gaining again a true knowledge of the Redeemer, and coming back into the true fold of the Good Shepherd. In the language of the Book of Mormon, it consists of being 'restored to the true church and fold of God,' and then being 'gathered' and 'established' in various 'lands of promise.' (2 Ne. 9:2.) 'When they shall come to the knowledge of their Redeemer, they shall be gathered together again to the lands of their inheritance.' (2 Ne. 6:11.)

"Two things are accomplished by the gathering of Israel: First, those who have thus chosen Christ as their Shepherd; those who have taken upon themselves his name in the waters of baptism; those who are seeking to enjoy his Spirit here and now and to be inheritors of eternal life hereafter— such people need to be gathered together to strengthen each other and to help one another perfect their lives.

"And second, those who are seeking the highest rewards in eternity need to be where they can receive the blessings of the house of the Lord, both for themselves and for their ancestors in Israel who died without a knowledge of the gospel, but who would have received it with all their heart had opportunity afforded. . . .

"You cannot create a stake of Zion without creating a part of Zion. Zion is the pure in heart; we gain purity of heart by baptism and by obedience. A stake has geographical boundaries. To create a stake is like founding a City of Holiness. Every stake on earth is the gathering place for the lost sheep of Israel who live in its area. The gathering place for Peruvians is in the stakes of Zion in Peru, or in the places which soon will become stakes. The gathering place for Chileans is in Chile; for Bolivians it is in Bolivia; for Koreans it is in Korea; and so it goes through all the length and breadth of the earth. Scattered Israel in every nation is called to gather to the fold of Christ, to the stakes of Zion, as such are established in their nations.

"Each one of us can build up Zion in our own lives by being pure in heart. And the promise is, 'Blessed are the pure in heart: for they shall see God.' (Matt. 5:8.) Each one of us can extend the borders of Zion by gathering our friends and neighbors into the fold of Israel. . . .

"God grant us the zeal and good sense to go forth on his errand living the gospel ourselves and saving our own souls, and offering these glorious principles of salvation to his other children. This is the Lord's work." (Bruce R. McConkie, Ensign, May 1977, pp. 115-18.)

Scriptural References:

D&C 10:65; 29:7; 42:9; 45:25; 77:14; 110:11; A of F 1:10; Jer. 3:17; 23:3; 29:14; 31:10; 32:37; Matt. 23:37; John 11:52; Eph. 1:10; 3 Ne. 5:24; 16:5; 20:13, 29; 21:24.
