Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 2 ( 1978)

Gentile

gentiles; fulness of the gentiles; nations of the gentiles; times of the gentiles

The basic meaning of the word gentile is a stranger or foreigner. To a member of a particular group, a gentile is any person who does not belong to that group. To a Hebrew (a descendant of Abraham), a gentile is a person who is not a Hebrew. To an Israelite (a descendant of Jacob or Israel), a gentile is a person who is not an Israelite. To a Jew (a descendant of Judah; a citizen of the Kingdom of Judah or a descendant of such a citizen), a gentile is a non-Jew.

Thus, it is consistent that a Latter-day Saint should refer to those who are not Latter-day Saints as gentiles. However, this usage is very difficult for many nonmembers to understand inasmuch as the word gentile as used by Latter-day Saints could includes people who are Jews, Israelites, and Hebrews.

The word Hebrew is first used in the Bible in Genesis 14, the word Israel in Genesis 32, and the word Jews in 2 Kings 16. Most of the Bible was written after these terms were in rather common usage. The word gentile, then, refers either to non-Hebrew, non-Israelite, or non-Hebrew, non-Israelite, or non-Jew, depending on the time and the situation of the usage.

The major story in the Book of Mormon begins during the days of the kingdom of Judah. Lehi, Ishmael, Mulek, and those associated with them were evidently citizens of the Kingdom of Judah, and Mulek himself was a descendant of Judah through his father, Zedekiah. The peoples of the Book of Mormon are sometimes referred to as Jews, and in keeping with such usage the peoples who are not descendants of the Jews or of one of the Book of Mormon groups are referred to as gentiles.

The specialized term times of the gentiles refers to the period of time when the gospel will be taken primarily to the peoples who are not considered to be Israelites even though many of them may actually be descendants of Jacob (Israel). When the gospel is taken primarily to those who are recognized by the world as Israelites (the Jews), in a sense the "times of the gentiles will be fulfilled."

Selected Quotations

"The name Gentile is not with us a term of reproach. It comes from Gentiles, meaning of a nation, a family or a people not of Israel—that is all. 'Mormon' is a nickname for Latter-day Saints, but 'gentile' is not a nickname. It simply means, with us, one who does not belong to the Church." (Orson F. Whitney, CR, April 1928, pp. 59-60.)

"Let us also remember that we are of the Gentiles! By this I mean that the Latter-day Saints have come to their blessings through the Gentile nations. President Brigham Young . . . said that Joseph Smith was a pure Ephraimite. This is true; yet Joseph Smith came also of a Gentile lineage. So do most members of the Church. We may boast of our lineage and rejoice in the fact that Patriarchs have declared us to be of Ephraim, but at the same time let us not despise the Gentiles, for we are also of them. If it were not so the scriptures would not be fulfilled. [1 Nephi 15:13-14, Ether 12:22.]" (Joseph Fielding Smith, WP, p. 140.)

"'Gentiles' means 'nations,' as distinct from the Jews. It is the goyim of the Hebrews—a term applied to all outside the Mosaic faith. In the Church literature 'Gentile' is not a term of disrespect, but merely one of convenience. It is not used frequently in our day." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 185.)

Scriptural References:

D&C 18:6, 26; 19:27; 35:7; 45:28; 57:4; 90:9; Isa. 11:10; 49:6; 60:3; 66:19; Rom. 3:29; 11:25; 3 Ne. 15:22; 16:10; 20:27; 21:14; 22:3.
