Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 2 ( 1978)

Gifts of the Spirit

Some of the gifts of the Spirit are listed in the scriptures (1 Cor. 12:8-11; Moroni 10:8-17); section 46 of the Doctrine and Covenants enumerates fourteen of these gifts. However, Elder Bruce R. McConkie has indicated: "These are by no means all of the gifts. In the fullest sense, they are infinite in number and endless in their manifestations." (MD, p. 315.)

Selected Quotations

"We believe in the gift of the Holy Ghost being enjoyed now, as much as it was in the Apostles' days; we believe that it (the gift of the Holy Ghost) is necessary to make and to organize the Priesthood, that no man can be called to fill any office in the ministry without it; we also believe in prophecy, in tongues, in visions, and in revelations, in gifts, and in healings; and that these things cannot be enjoyed without the gift of the Holy Ghost. . . . We believe in it (this gift of the Holy Ghost) in all its fullness, and power, and greatness, and glory." (Joseph Smith, HC 5:27-30.)

"The gifts named in the seventh Article of Faith are gifts of the Holy Ghost. The enjoyment of them has always been a distinctive characteristic of the Church of Jesus Christ. As a matter of fact, without the gift of revelation, which is one of the gifts of the Holy Ghost, there could be no Church of Jesus Christ. This is apparent from the obvious fact that in order for his Church to exist, there must be a society of people who individually have testimonies that Jesus is the Christ. According to Paul, such testimonies are revealed only by the Holy Ghost, for said he, '. . . no man can say [know] that Jesus is the Lord, but by the Holy Ghost.' (See 1 Cor. 12:3.) In the 46th section of the Doctrine and Covenants, the Lord specifically lists such knowledge as one of the gifts of the Holy Ghost, as follows: 'To some it is given by the Holy Ghost to know that Jesus Christ is the Son of God. . . .' (D&C 46:13.) Everyone who has a testimony of Jesus has received it by revelation from the Holy Ghost. The Holy Ghost is a revelator, and everyone who receives him receives revelation.

"Wherever and whenever revelation is operative, manifestations of other gifts of the Holy Ghost are prevalent. This has been so in all dispensations. . . . Yes, all the gifts of the Holy Spirit are in the Church today." (Marion G. Romney, CR, April 1956, p. 68.)

"Believing as we do in all the gifts named in the 46th Section of the Doctrine and Covenants, and knowing that there are counterfeits to them, how are we to distinguish between the truth and the false, the genuine and the counterfeit? . . .

"Without attempting an exhaustive discussion of this question, I shall take the liberty to suggest three simple tests which, if applied, will prove of great value in making the distinction.

"First, determine whether the alleged supernatural manifestation is edifying. If it is not, then it is not of God because spiritual gifts are given for the edification of God's people. . . .

"Second—this pertains particularly to purported supernatural healings—find out whether the purported healer follows the divinely established procedure, that is, does he do as Jesus did, when he laid his hands upon the sick and healed them. (See Mark 6:5.) . . .

"Third, find out whether the worker of the purported miracle has himself received the gift of the Holy Ghost through the prescribed ordinances. If he has not, then his works, whatever they may be, are not the manifestations of the Holy Spirit. This is a key test because, as we have already pointed out, the gifts of the spirit are given by the power of the Holy Ghost. Without the gift of the Holy Ghost, the manifestations of his gifts may not be enjoyed." (Marion G. Romney, CR, April 1956, pp. 68-73.)

Scriptural References:

D&C 8:2-3; 39:6; 46:13-29; 68:3-4; Acts 19:6; 21:10-12; 1 Cor. 12:3-14; Gal. 5:22-23; 2 Pet. 1:20-21; Moro. 8:25-26; 10:4-19.
