Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 2 ( 1978)

God

attributes and characteristics of God; God is the same yesterday, today, and forever; God knoweth all things; living God (see also Knowledge of God)

The word God is a title; it is not a name. The title God could refer to several personages; as Paul stated, "there be gods many." (1 Cor. 8:5.)

Three of the Gods form the Godhead—the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost. These three are separate and distinct from each other in person, personality, and substance, but they form a unity in witness, testimony, purpose, and plan. Usually when the scriptures use the word God, the term refers to one of these three persons, most often either to the Father or to the Son.

The God who is the Father of the spirits of all mankind and who resides in heaven (and is rightfully referred to as our Father in heaven or as our Heavenly Father) has been given a name-title by Latter-day Saints: Elohim. The name-title Elohim does not appear in any English scripture; it is a transliteration of the Hebrew word for Gods.

One purpose of the scriptures is to tell us something about the nature, person, personality, attributes, and characteristics of God. Jesus taught: "This is life eternal, that they might know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou hast sent." (John 17:3.)

The scriptures teach that God the Father is loving, kind, merciful, gracious, just, and true. He is a God of truth, and cannot lie. He is a God of justice, and is unchanging in his obedience to all law. He is the all-knowing (omniscient) and all-powerful (omnipotent) Creator of all good things. Although as a person with a physical body he can be in only one place at one time, yet his influence can be felt everywhere in the universe (he is omnipresent).

God the Father is infinite and eternal, from eternity to eternity, the same yesterday, today, and forever. These attributes and characteristics enable us to have absolute faith in God, for we know we can trust him completely.

Selected Quotations

"It is the first principle of the Gospel to know for a certainty the character of God, and to know that we may converse with him as one man converses with another." (Joseph Smith, TPJS, p. 345.)

"There is a God in heaven who is infinite and eternal. He has all power, all might, and all dominion. There is no power he does not possess and no truth he does not know. Every good thing dwells in him independently in its eternal fulness. He is the Creator, Upholder, and Preserver of all things. His name is Elohim, and he is our Father in heaven, the literal Father of the spirits of all men. He has a body of flesh and bones as tangible as man's, and is in fact a resurrected and glorified Person. The name of the kind of life he lives is eternal life; and eternal life, by definition and in its nature, consists of life in an eternal family unit and of the possession of the fulness of the glory and power of the Father." (Bruce R. McConkie, Ensign, May 1977, p. 12.)

"There are a few statements in the Bible which have been misunderstood and have led to a misconception of the personality and form of God and of his Son, Jesus Christ. Brief consideration might be given to some of them:

"'No man hath seen God at any time; the only begotten Son, which is in the bosom of the Father, he hath declared him.' (John 1:18.)

"'No man hath seen God at any time. If we love one another, God dwelleth in us, and his love is perfected in us.' (1 John 4:12.)

"In the Inspired Version of the Bible, as rendered by the Prophet Joseph Smith, he gives us the following: 'And no man hath seen God at any time, except he hath borne record of the Son; for except it is through him no man can be saved.' (John 1:19.)

"He also gives us the rendition of 1 John 4:12 as follows: 'No man hath seen God at any time, except them who believe. If we love one another, God dwelleth in us, and his love is perfected in us.'" (LeGrand Richards, MWW, pp. 18-19.)

"The doctrine that man is created in the image of God was lost in the apostasy. The vision given to Joseph Smith restored the true doctrine in relation to this question. It is just as strange that man, in his spiritual darkness, would change this glorious doctrine and in these later times substitute for it the abominable doctrine that man has ascended through countless ages from lower forms of life, as it is that they could make of the Father and the Son and the Holy Ghost a God to be worshipped that is without substance, immaterial and therefore non-existent. Here are a few references showing the error of the teaching of the so-called Christian world, all creeds and denominations, on this point, and proving that God has both body, parts and passions: Gen. 1:26, 5:1 and 9:6; James 3:8-9; Ex. 33:9-23; Num. 12:7-8; Ex. 20:5; Deut. 4:24." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:12.)

Scriptural References:

D&C 19:4; 20:17; 50:15-34; 59:5; 75:1; 76; 77:2-12; 85:3-8; 93:14-38; JS-H 1:14-19
