Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 2 ( 1978)

Godhood

One of the definite and distinctive teachings of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is the principle of eternal progression. Carried to its ultimate conclusion, this principle indicates that through obedience to divine commandments, and by virtue of an eternal law that "like begets after its own kind," it is possible for sons and daughters of God to become as he is. This doctrine of the potential godhood of mankind was clearly understood in biblical times but was lost to the world during the period of the great apostasy.

Selected Quotations

"Every man who reigns in celestial glory is a God to his dominions. . . .

"They who obtain a glorious resurrection from the dead are exalted far above principalities, powers, thrones, dominions, and angels, and are expressly declared to be heirs of God and joint-heirs with Jesus Christ, all having eternal power." (Joseph Smith, TPJS, p. 374.)

"The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, basing its belief on divine revelation, ancient and modern, proclaims man to be the direct and lineal offspring of Deity. God Himself is an exalted man, perfected, enthroned, and supreme. . . .

"Man is the child of God, formed in the divine image and endowed with divine attributes, and even as the infant son of an earthly father and mother is capable in due time of becoming a man, so the undeveloped offspring of celestial parentage is capable, by experience through ages and aeons, of evolving into a God. [D&C 76:58, 132:20-24.]" (Joseph Fielding Smith, IE, November 1909, pp. 75-81.)

"As man now is, our God once was; /As now God is, so man may be." (Lorenzo Snow, IE, June 1919, 22:660.)

"As our Father and God begat us, sons and daughters, so will we rise immortal, males and females, and beget children to inherit these worlds, the same as we were sent here, and thus will the works of God continue, and not only God himself, and His Son Jesus Christ have the power of endless lives, but all of His redeemed offspring. They grow up like the parents; that is a law of nature so far as this world is concerned. Every kind of being begets its own like, and when fully matured and grown up the offspring become like the parent. So the offspring of the Almighty, who begot us, will grow up and become literally God, or the sons of God.[D&C 132:17-24.]" (Orson Pratt, JD 14:242.)

Scriptural References:

D&C 132:20, 37.
