Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 2 ( 1978)

Gospel

fulness of the gospel

The basic meaning of the word gospel has traditionally been given as "good news"; modern dictionaries also indicate that it means "something accepted as infallible truth or as a guiding principle."

The gospel of Jesus Christ includes the good news that he is indeed the Son of God; that he broke the bands of death through his resurrection, thus enabling us all to achieve immortality; that through his atonement he made it possible for us to become sinless (sanctified) again; and that through his life and teachings he showed us what we must do to regain the presence of our Heavenly Father.

The fulness of the gospel, therefore, would include those principles and ordinances which would enable us to sanctify ourselves so that we can live again with our heavenly Father. Sometimes this has been referred to as the gospel of salvation in the presence of God, and the Book of Mormon contains these aspects of the gospel.

Additional principles and ordinances not listed in our present Book of Mormon are required in order for a person to be exalted in the presence of God, such as the temple endowment and marriage for time and eternity. Many of these are found in the revelations of the Doctrine and Covenants.

Selected Quotations

"I will proceed to tell you what the Lord requires of all people, high and low, rich and poor, male and female, ministers and people, professors of religion and non-professors, in order that they may enjoy the Holy Spirit of God to a fulness, and escape the judgments of God, which are almost ready to burst upon the nations of the earth. Repent of all your sins, and be baptized in water for the remission of them, in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, and receive the ordinance of the laying on of the hands of him who is ordained and sealed unto this power, that ye may receive the Holy Spirit of God; and this is according to the Holy Scriptures [Acts 2:37-39], and the Book of Mormon [2 Ne. 31:17-18; Moro. 2:1-2]; and the only way that man can enter into the celestial kingdom. These are the requirements of the covenant, or first principles of the Gospel of Christ." (Joseph Smith, HC 1:314-15.)

"I was brought up in scientific laboratories, where I was taught to test things, never to be satisfied unless a thing was tested. We have the right to test the Gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ. By testing it I mean living it, trying it out. Do you question the Word of Wisdom? Try it. Do you question the law of tithing? Practice it. Do you doubt the virtue of attending meetings? Attend them. Only then shall we be able to speak of these things intelligently and in such a way as to be respected by those who listen to us. Those who live the Gospel of Jesus Christ gain this higher knowledge, this greater testimony, this ultimate assurance that this is the truth." (John A. Widtsoe, CR, October 1938, p. 129.)

"The gospel might be likened to the keyboard of a piano—a full keyboard with a selection of keys on which one who is trained to play a variety without limits; a ballad to express love, a march to rally, a melody to soothe, and a hymn to inspire; an endless variety to suit every mood and satisfy every need.

"How shortsighted it is, then, to choose a single key and endlessly tap out the monotony of a single note, or even two or three notes, when the full keyboard of limitless harmony can be played.

"It is not unusual to find people who take an interest in The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints but give only casual attention to the ideal that the fulness of the gospel is here.

"They become attracted by a single key, a doctrine, often one to which they take immediate exception and object to. They investigate it by itself alone. They want to know all there is about it without reference, in fact, with specific objection and rejection, to anything else.

"They want to hear that key played over and over again. It will give them little knowledge unless they see that there is a fullness—other complementary ideals and doctrines that present a warmth and a harmony, and a fullness, that draw at the right moment upon each key, which if played alone might seem discordant.

"Now that danger is not limited to investigators alone. Some members of the Church who should know better pick out a hobby key or two and tap them incessantly, to the irritation of those around them. They can dull their own spiritual sensitivities. They lose track that there is a fullness of the gospel and become as individuals, like many churches have become. They may reject the fullness in preference to a favorite note. This becomes exaggerated and distorted, leading them away into apostasy." (Boyd K. Packer, Ensign, December 1971, p. 41.)

Scriptural References:

D&C 33:10-12; 76:40-42; 133:57; Rom. 1:16-17; Gal. 1:6-9; 1 Ne. 8.
