Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 2 ( 1978)

Great and dreadful day of the Lord

(See also Calamities before second coming; Second coming)

This term is used consistently in the Doctrine and Covenants to refer to the period associated with the second coming of Jesus Christ in great power and glory. This period will be a great day for the righteous upon the earth, for the day of their deliverance will have come; it will be a dreadful day for the wicked upon the earth, for they will be destroyed while still in their unrepented condition.

Selected Quotations

"What 'great and dreadful day of the Lord' is meant in the words of our text? [Mal. 4:5-6.] . . . Surely this coming of our Lord has relation to the great and terrible day, the day of burning, the day in which wickedness should be entirely swept from the earth, and no remnants of the wicked left, when every branch of them and every root of them should become as stubble, and be consumed from the face of the earth. [D&C 101:23-24; Mal. 4:1.]" (Orson Pratt, JD 7:76-77

"A characteristic of present-day revelation is the reiteration of the fact that the event [second coming] is nigh at hand, 'even at the doors.' The fateful time is repeatedly designated in scripture, 'the great and dreadful day of the Lord.' [D&C 110:14, 16; Joel 2:31, Mal. 4:5.] Fearful indeed will it be to individuals, families, and nations, who have sunk so far into sin as to have forfeited their claim to mercy. The time is not that of the final judgment—when the whole race of mankind shall stand in the resurrected state before the bar of God—nevertheless it shall be a time of unprecedented blessing unto the righteous and of condemnation and vengeance upon the wicked." (James E. Talmage, JC , pp. 786-87.)

"A dreadful day; a day of pestilence, of famine, of earthquake, of tempests, and a day of burning, designated . . . in very impressive language as 'the great and dreadful day of the Lord! When that day comes, the power of the Priesthood must be upon the earth to protect and deliver the people of God from destruction; for the righteous and those who keep the commandments of God, including those who are tithed, shall not be burned. [D&C 64:23-24.]" (Rudger Clawson, CR, April 1902, p. 28.)

Scriptural References:

D&C 2:1; 110:14, 16; 128:17; JS-H 1:38; 3 Ne. 25:5.
