Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 2 ( 1978)

Healing

the gift of healing

(see also Gifts of the Spirit)

Healings of the sick may be the result of faith and manifestations of one of the gifts of the Spirit. Such healings have been performed by faithful men in all ages by virtue of the priesthood power and authority bestowed upon them.

During the Savior's mortal ministry, he went "forth amongst men, working mighty miracles, such as healing the sick, raising the dead, causing the lame to walk, the blind to receive their sight, and the deaf to hear, and curing all manner of diseases." (Mosiah 3:5.)

Later he gave this authority to his apostles in the meridian of time, and this gift has also been restored in this dispensation of the fulness of times.

Selected Quotations

"The healing spiritual power of the Lord is sought in cases of sickness, by the formal administration to the sick. This is in full harmony with the practice of the Christian Church from the beginning. (James 5:14, 15; Mark 6:13; Luke 4:40; Acts 28:8; D&C 42:43, 44.) Such administrations should be made at the request of the sufferer, so that it may be done in answer to faith. One of the two elders called in applies oil, consecrated for the purpose, to the head of the sick person, and the other elder is mouth in sealing the anointing and in praying to the Lord for the restoration of the health of the sick brother or sister. Tens of thousands of healings have followed such administrations." (John A. Widtsoe, PC, p. 111.)

"Though the authority to administer to the sick belongs to the elders of the Church in general, some possess this power in an unusual degree, having received it as an especial endowment of the Spirit. Another gift, allied to this, is that of having faith to be healed, which is manifested in varying degrees. Not always are the administrations of the elders followed by immediate healings; the afflicted may be permitted to suffer in body, perhaps for the accomplishment of good purposes (see instances of Job), and in the time appointed all must experience bodily death." (James E. Talmage, AF, p. 226.)

"'Is it proper for an elder to take with him a brother holding the Aaronic Priesthood to assist in administering to the sick?' This question has been answered by the First Presidency and Council of the Twelve as follows:

"'. . . it was the sense of the Council . . . that the practice (of administering) be confined to the elders; but in the case of absolute necessity, that is where an elder finds himself in the situation that he cannot avail himself of the company of another elder, he may, if opportunity affords, avail himself of the company of a member of the Aaronic Priesthood, or even a lay member, but for the purpose only of being supported by the faith of such member or members, the elder alone to officiate in the ordinance of administration; or the elder may administer alone without such assistance of a lay member or one holding the Aaronic Priesthood.' (Journal History, Feb. 18, 1903.)

"'If a man and his wife were alone with a sick person, could he anoint with the oil and then seal the anointing with his wife assisting, using the priesthood she holds jointly with her husband?'

"President Joseph F. Smith, in The Improvement Era, Vol. 10, page 308, answered this question as follows:

"'Does a wife hold the priesthood with her husband, and may she lay hands on the sick with him, with authority?

"'A wife does not hold the priesthood with her husband, but she enjoys the benefits thereof with him; and if she is requested to lay hands on the sick with him, or with any other officer holding the Melchizedek Priesthood, she may do so with perfect propriety. It is no uncommon thing for a man and wife unitedly to administer to their children. . . .'

"The wife would lay on hands just as would a member of the Aaronic Priesthood, or a faithful brother without the priesthood, thus giving support by faith to the ordinance. The Prophet Joseph Smith said, 'Respecting females administering for the healing of the sick, there could be no evil in it, if God gave his sanction by healing; that there could be no more sin in any female laying hands on and praying for the sick, than in wetting the face with water; it is no sin for anybody to administer that has faith; or if the sick have faith to be healed by their administration.' (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, pp. 224-225.) Such an administration would not be by virtue of the priesthood, but a manifestation of faith." (Joseph Fielding Smith, IE, Aug. 1955, 58:558-59.)

"There are two kinds of healing. One is mental; the other we may call spiritual. Mental healing is as old as the race. It is done through 'suggestion," or even 'auto-suggestion.' The spirit within is an intelligent being and is greatly helped, in its efforts to repair tissue or withstand the attacks of adverse agencies, by the suggestion of others who have great willpower; or even by auto-willpower; or even by auto-suggestion. The disciples of the Pharisees cast out demons by that power, and many modern 'healers' operate under the law of suggestion. This is mental healing. Spiritual healing is by the Spirit of God, through the Priesthood. It is healing effected by the Holy Spirit imparting the strength necessary to overcome the causes of diseases, and it often operates instantaneously. Its power is circumscribed, for all men must die; but those who live so that they are receptive to the healing influences of the Holy Spirit should live to a ripe age, and then fall 'asleep' in sweet slumber, conscious of the beginning of a new life in the morning of the resurrection. Spiritual healing is divine healing. It is part of the gospel. Mental healing is human. It is good in its place, but it is not part of the gospel any more than common therapeutics, or surgery." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 403.)

Scriptural References:

D&C 35:9; 42:43; 52:40; 66:9; 84:63; 124:98; Matt. 4:23; 8:17; 10:1; 14:14; James 5:14; Mosiah 3:5; 3 Ne. 17:7; 4 Ne. 1:5; Morm. 9:24.
