Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 2 ( 1978)

Holy Ghost

the Comforter; Holy Spirit; "Holy Spirit of Promise"

Holy Ghost is the title given to the personage of spirit who is a God and who serves with the Father and the Son in the Godhead. He serves many functions and carries out many responsibilities in relationship to man upon the earth. He is a Comforter, Testator (Testifier), Revelator, and Sanctifier. Sometimes in the scriptures the Holy Ghost is referred to by such titles as the Holy Spirit of Promise (meaning that He is the Holy Spirit promised to the Saints).

Sometimes the term Holy Ghost is used to refer to the power or gift of that member of the Godhead, rather than to refer to his actual personage. In the ordinance of confirmation, newly baptized persons are instructed to "receive the Holy Ghost," meaning his power or gift.

Selected Quotations

"The question is often asked, Is there any difference between the Spirit of the Lord and the Holy Ghost? The terms are frequently used synonymously. We often say the Spirit of God when we mean the Holy Ghost; we likewise say the Holy Ghost when we mean the Spirit of God. The Holy Ghost is a personage in the Godhead [D&C 130:22], and is not that which lighteth every man that cometh into the world. [John 1:9.] It is the Spirit of God which proceeds through Christ to the world, that enlightens every man that comes into the world, and that strives with the children of men, and will continue to strive with them, until it brings them to a knowledge of the truth and the possession of the greater light and testimony of the Holy Ghost. [D&C 84:44-48.] If, however, he receives that greater light, and then sins against it, the Spirit of God will cease to strive with him, and the Holy Ghost will wholly depart from him." (Joseph F. Smith, GD, pp. 67-68.)

"The Prophet explained the difference between the Holy Ghost and the gift of the Holy Ghost. 'Cornelius received the Holy Ghost before he was baptized, which was the convincing power of God unto him of the truth of the Gospel, but he could not receive the gift of the Holy Ghost until after he was baptized. Had he not taken this sign or ordinance upon him, the Holy Ghost which convinced him of the truth of God would have left him. Until he obeyed these ordinances and received the gift of the Holy Ghost, by the laying on of hands, according to the order of God, he could not have healed the sick or commanded an evil spirit to come out of a man, and it obey him; for the spirits might say unto him, as they did to the sons of Sceva: "Paul we know and Jesus we know, but who are ye?"' (HC 4:555.)

"The Holy Ghost is the third member of the Godhead. The gift of the Holy Ghost, is the bestowal of the power by which one becomes the companion of the Holy Ghost. One who receives the gift has the right, through faithfulness, to the guidance of the Holy Ghost in all things. While a man who sincerely seeks the truth may have manifestation of the Holy Ghost, he has no claim to a continued guidance by that Holy Spirit, unless he is baptized and has the gift bestowed upon him by the laying on of hands. None but members of the Church can obtain this gift, for the Lord has said that the world cannot receive it. (John 14:17.)" (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 2:300.)

"The Holy Spirit of Promise is the Holy Spirit promised the saints, or in other words the Holy Ghost. This name-title is used in connection with the sealing and ratifying power of the Holy Ghost, that is, the power given him to ratify and approve the righteous acts of men so that those acts will be binding on earth and in heaven. 'All convenants, contracts, bonds, obligations, oaths, vows, performances, connections, associations, or expectations,' must be sealed by the Holy Spirit of Promise, if they are to have 'efficacy, virtue, or force in and after the resurrection from the dead; for all contracts that are not made unto this end have an end when men are dead.' (D&C 132:7.)

"To seal is to ratify, to justify, or to approve. Thus an act which is sealed by the Holy Spirit of Promise is one which is ratified by the Holy Ghost; it is one which is approved by the Lord; and the person who has taken the obligation upon himself is justified by the Spirit in the thing he has done. The ratifying seal of approval is put upon an act only if those entering the contract are worthy as a result of personal righteousness to receive the divine approbation. They 'are sealed by the Holy Spirit of promise, which the Father sheds forth upon all those who are just and true.' (D&C 76:53.) If they are not just and true and worthy the ratifying seal is withheld.

"When any ordinance or contract is sealed by the Spirit, it is approved with a promise of reward, provided unrighteousness does not thereafter break the seal, remove the ratifying approval, and cause loss of the promised blessing." (Joseph Fielding Smith, DS 1:55; 2:94-99.)

Scriptural References:

D&C 20:28, 73; 33:15; 121:26; 130:22-23; Moses 5:9-14; Matt. 3:16; Acts 1:5-8; 2:1-4, 38; 7:51-55; 3 Ne. 9:20; 11:27-36; Moro. 2:2-3; 6:4-9.
