Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 2 ( 1978)

Honesty

If a person were completely honest, he would obey all of the commandments of the Lord, including the Ten Commandments, for he would be dependable and trustworthy in all his dealings with God and with his fellowmen. As pride has been called the mother of all sins, so honesty might be called the mother, or at least the companion, of all virtues.

Selected Quotations

On Mount Sinai the finger of the Lord wrote the law on tablets of stone: 'Thou shalt not steal.' (Ex. 20:15.) There was neither enlargement nor rationalization. And then that declaration was accompanied by three other commandments, the violation of each of which involves dishonesty: 'Thou shalt not commit adultery.' 'Thou shalt not bear false witness.' 'Thou shalt not covet.' (Ex. 20:14, 16-17.)

Was there ever adultery without dishonesty? In the vernacular, the evil is described as 'cheating.' And cheating it is, for it robs virtue, it robs loyalty, it robs sacred promises, it robs self-respect, it robs truth. It involves deception. It is personal dishonesty of the worst kind, for it becomes a betrayal of the most sacred of human relationships, and a denial of covenants and promises entered into before God and man. It is the sordid violation of a trust. It is a selfish casting aside of the law of God, and like other forms of dishonesty its fruits are sorrow, bitterness, heart-broken companions, and betrayed children.

'Thou shalt not bear false witness.' Dishonesty again.

'Thou shalt not covet.' Is not covetousness—that dishonest, cankering evil—the root of most of the world's sorrows? For what a tawdry price men of avarice barter their lives! . . .

"Wrote the author of Proverbs: 'These six things doth the Lord hate: yea, seven are an abomination unto him: A proud look, a lying tongue, and hands that shed innocent blood, An heart that deviseth wicked imaginations, feet that be swift in running to mischief, A false witness that speaketh lies, and he that soweth discord among brethren.' (Prov. 6:16-19.)

"The appraisal spoken long ago by an English poet is true yet today: 'An honest man's the noblest work of God.' (Alexander Pope, An Essay on Man. Epistle III, line 248.) Where there is honesty, other virtues will follow.

"The final Article of Faith of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints affirms that, 'We believe in being honest, true, chaste, benevolent, virtuous, and in doing good to all men.'

"We cannot be less than honest, we cannot be less than true, we cannot be less than virtuous if we are to keep sacred the trust given us. Once it was said among our people that a man's word was as good as his bond. Shall any of us be less reliable, less honest than our forebears?" (Gordon B. Hinckley, Ensign, May 1976, pp. 60-62.)

"Dishonesty is directly related to selfishness, which is its origin and source. Selfishness is at the root of nearly all the disorders that afflict us, and man's inhumanity to man continues to make countless thousands mourn. If all mankind were honest, we could have heaven here on earth. We would have no need for armies or navies, nor even a policeman in the smallest community, for there would be no crime, no invasion of other people's rights, no violence of one person against another." (Mark E. Petersen, Ensign, December 1971, p. 72.)

"In public office and private lives, the word of the Lord thunders: 'Thou shalt not steal: . . . nor do anything like unto it.' (D&C 59:6.)

"We find ourselves rationalizing in all forms of dishonesty, including shoplifting, which is a mean, low act indulged in by millions who claim to be honorable, decent people.

"Dishonesty comes in many other forms: in hijacking, in playing upon private love and emotions for filthy lucre; in robbing money tills or stealing commodities of employers; in falsifying accounts; in taking advantage of other taxpaying people by misuse of food stamps and false claims; in taking unreal exemptions; in taking out government or private loans without intent to repay; in declaring unjust, improper bankruptcies to avoid repayment of loans, in robbing on the street or in the home money and other precious possessions; in stealing time, giving less than a full day of honest labor for a full day's compensation; in riding public transportation without paying the fare; and all forms of dishonesty in all places and in all conditions.

"To all thieveries and dishonest acts, the Lord says, 'Thou shalt not steal.' Four short common words He used. Perhaps He wearied of the long list He could have made of ways to steal, misrepresent, and take advantage, and He covered all methods of taking that which does not properly belong to one by saying, 'Thou shalt not steal.'" (Spencer W. Kimball, Ensign, Nov. 1976, p. 6.)

Scriptural References:

D&C 51:9; 98:10.
