Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 2 ( 1978)

I AM

the great I AM (see also Jesus Christ)

I AM is a divine descriptive title that refers to the preearthly Jehovah, who was known on the earth as Jesus Christ. This name-title emphasizes the eternal nature of the power, authority, might, mission, and calling of Jesus Christ. Unfortunately, the translators of the Bible have not understood the nature and significance of these words. The King James Version of the Bible punctuates John 8:58 as follows:

"Before Abraham was, I am." This is confusing in syntax as well as in meaning. The verse would more correctly be punctuated: "Before Abraham, was I AM," indicating that Jesus Christ was the great Jehovah, the preexistent One, who was a God before Abraham was even born on the earth.

Selected Quotations

"Christ revealed Himself in the Old Testament as 'I am,' —Hebrew, 'Ehyeh 'asher 'Ehyeh (Ex. 3:14), which implies that, while He is, or exists, and is therefore different from all non-existing deities of merely human imagination, He is not an abstract existence without form or substance, but He is a real Being, manifesting Himself in history ever anew; He is always with His people, active for their welfare." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 86.)

"When Moses was tending the flocks of his father-in-law, Jethro, at Horeb, the mountain of God, the Lord appeared to him in a flaming bush and gave him commandment to go to Egypt and lead Israel from bondage. Moses said to the Lord: 'Behold, when I come unto the children of Israel, and shall say unto them, The God of our Fathers hath sent me unto you; and they shall say to me, What is his name? what shall I say unto them? And God said unto Moses, I am that I am; and he said, Thus shalt thou say unto the children of Israel, I Am hath sent me unto you.'

"When Jesus was contending with the Jews, and they were boasting of their descent from Abraham, he said to them: 'Your father Abraham rejoiced to see my day: and he saw it and was glad. Then said the Jews unto him, Thou art not yet fifty years old, and hast thou seen Abraham? Jesus said unto them, Verily, verily, I say unto you, Before Abraham was, I am.' (John 8:56-58.) Observe, he did not say, 'Before Abraham was, I was.'

"The name given to Moses is the same as given by Jesus Christ to the Jews, and the meaning of it is expressed in the saying that God is 'omnipotent, omnipresent, and omniscient; without beginning of days or end of life; and that in him every good gift and every good principle dwell.' (Lecture on Faith, No. 2.) Jesus declared to the Jews that which they were incapable of understanding, which is that the great I Am who appeared to Moses, was himself, and that he was God and gave commandments to Abraham.

"In [Sec. 38] we again have our Lord declaring himself as 'the great I Am, Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end.'" (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:165-66.)

Scriptural References:

D&C 39:1; Ex. 3:14; John 8:58.
