Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 2 ( 1978)

Inspired Version of the Bible

In the First Vision, Joseph Smith was informed that the creeds then prevalent in Christianity were an abomination before the Lord. Later the Lord and his servants (the Angel Moroni and others) indicated that some of the plain and precious truths of the gospel had been taken out of the Old Testament and New Testament. The Prophet was instructed by the Lord to go through the Bible and revise it as he would be inspired to do so. This revision is sometimes referred to as the New Translation of the scriptures. However, because the changes were made under inspiration from God, the term Inspired Version of the Bible is frequently used. It is also known as the Joseph Smith Translation (abbreviated JST).

The Inspired Version has never been used as the official Bible of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints as it is felt that the Prophet never completed the revision chapter by chapter. The following statements substantiate this position:

Emma Smith Bidamon in a letter to her son, Joseph Smith III, dated February 10, 1867: "My heart is made glad by your report of your progress in the New Translation as you know something of my fears with regard to its publication, on account of what your Father said about the unfinished condition of the work." (Robert J. Matthews, Joseph Smith's Translation of the Bible: A History and Commentary, p. 208.)

We have heard President Brigham Young state that the Prophet before his death had spoken to him about going through the translation of the scriptures again and perfecting it upon points of doctrine which the Lord had restrained him from giving in plainness and fulness at the time of which we write. (George Q. Cannon, Life of Joseph Smith the Prophet, p.148, footnote.)

George Reynolds to Mr. C. J. Hunt:

Dear Sir: I am directed by President Wilford Woodruff. . . to say, that the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints does not use the revision of the Scriptures made by the Prophet Joseph Smith, for the reason that he never completed the work. It was his intention to have gone all through the Bible again and make further corrections, but he did not have the opportunity of doing so. Consequently it is deemed an injustice both to the dead prophet and to the reader to place this unfinished work in the hands of the public. Though we may rest assured that the changes that he has made are correct, we have no assurance that he would not have made many other corrections in his second revision. (Matthews, Joseph Smith's Translation of the Bible, p. 209.)

In course of time the Prophet went through the Bible, topic by topic, revising as he was led by revelation. The work was never fully completed, for he had intended, while at Nauvoo, a number of years later, to finish the work, but was cut off by his enemies. Nevertheless, many plain and precious things were revealed which throw great light upon many subjects. (Joseph Fielding Smith, ECH, pp. 139-40.)

One of the latest official statements of the Church on the use of the Inspired Version is this editorial of December 1974:

The Inspired Version does not supplant the King James Version as the official church version of the Bible, but the explanations and changes made by the Prophet Joseph Smith provide enlightenment and useful commentary on many biblical passages.

Part of the explanations and changes made by the Prophet Joseph Smith were finally approved before his death; and some of these have been cited in current church instructional materials or may be cited in future church instructional materials.

Accordingly, these cited portions of the Inspired Version may be used by church writers and teachers, along with the Book of Mormon, Doctrine and Covenants, and Pearl of Great Price, in connection with Biblical interpretations, applying always the divine injunction that whoso is enlightened by the Spirit shall obtain benefit therefrom. (D&C 91:5.)

When the Book of Mormon, Doctrine and Covenants, and Pearl of Great Price offer information relative to biblical interpretation, these should be given preference in writing and teaching. But when these sources of latter-day revelation do not provide significant information which is available in the Inspired Version, then this version may be used.

The King James Version will, of course, constitute the basic English-speaking Bible text of the church. (Church News, December 7, 1974, p.16.)

Selected Quotations

"All of the changes made by Joseph Smith in the King James Version of the Bible . . . are the voice of truth and revelation to the Latter-day Saints and carry the same verity as any of his revelations or inspired narration." (Bruce R. McConkie, Ensign, August 1976, p. 8.)

"The eighth Article of Faith declares that 'We believe the Bible to be the word of God as far as it is translated correctly.' This implies that there are mistranslations in the Bible. Moreover, the Prophet Joseph Smith, from the beginning of his ministry, gave some time to revising passages in the Bible which had been translated incorrectly or so rendered as to make the meaning obscure. . . .

"Latter-day Saints believe that the protecting hand of the Lord has been over the Bible, whether in the ancient manuscripts or in copies of the earliest documents. Modern scholarship and modern revelation have clarified erroneous and difficult passages." (John A. Widtsoe, ER 1:100-101.)

"The teachings of the Book of Mormon, and the revelations he had received, convinced Joseph that in the Bible were many errors, such as unauthorized additions, incomplete statements, and faulty translations. This seemed to him, a lover and expounder of truth, out of keeping with the sacred nature of the volume.

"Therefore, after placing the matter before the Lord he began the so-called 'inspired translation' of the Bible. In June, 1830, less than three months after the Church was organized, there was revealed to him the 'Visions of Moses,' which gave a more complete account of the events mentioned in the book of Genesis, and set forth many lost doctrines; for example, the meaning of the fall of Adam and Eve, long misunderstood because of the imperfections of existing translations of the Bible, was cleared, and shown to be a necessary act in the development of the Lord's plan of salvation. [Moses, chapters 2-8.]

"Towards the end of the year 1830, with Sidney Rigdon as assistant, he began a somewhat full 'explanation and review' of the Old and New Testaments. The work then done is a convincing evidence of Joseph's inspiration.

"Thousands of the changes were made, all conforming to common sense, and many in full harmony with later modern scholarship. Disputed meanings were made clear, and new doctrines expounded. . . .

"Joseph Smith may well be accounted one of the early students who sought to restore the Bible to its original form and simplicity. All this which came as helps to the missionaries in the field was opposed by the ministers whose Bible teaching left the people confused and in a state of uncertainty." (John A. Widtsoe, JS, pp. 138-40.)

"Before the close of this year, the first of the existence of the Church, the Prophet Joseph commenced preparing a new English version of the Bible. It is referred to as an inspired 'translation,' although that term, in its generally accepted meaning of rendition of the spoken, or written, word from one language into another, hardly gives a correct idea of the character of that work. But if by 'translate' we mean, to render sentences which are obscure and difficult to understand, into language more easy of comprehension, and free from ambiguity and contradiction, then the attempted revision is a translation. For that is what the Prophet aimed at, by the guidance of the Holy Spirit. Sidney Rigdon aided him as secretary. On the 2nd of February, 1833, the New Testament was completed, and on the 2nd of July, the same year, the Old Testament was completed, as far as the Prophet was directed to revise these records up to that time. This work of revision was never completed fully, and the Prophet intended to take up this work in Nauvoo, but persecution and difficulties prevented him from finishing this work.

"Regarding the publication of this work, the Prophet, in a letter to W. W. Phelps, dated June 25th, 1833, wrote: 'In regard to the printing of the New Translation: It cannot be done until we can attend to it ourselves, and this we will do, as soon as the Lord permits' (HC 1:365). From this it is clear that the publication of this version is not authorized. 'It cannot be done until we can attend to it ourselves.'

"The prophet expected some indication from the Lord that the time for publication had come. But, during the later years of his life, events crowded upon him so fast that it became a physical impossibility for him to give his personal attention to everything that seemed to be necessary. The publication of the New Translation would, no doubt, have involved a final revision by himself; that no one else could do; and he did not do it; the Lord did not command him to put the finishing touch to the work, and, therefore, it remained in manuscript, unpublished.

"But we must not suppose that the patient labor spent on the study of the Old and New Testament was lost. It was while Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon were engaged in this work that they received the wonderful Revelation on the resurrection, recorded in Section 76; also the Key to John's revelation, recorded in Section 77. It was during the same time that the Prophet received the Revelation explaining 1 Cor. 7:14. There can be no doubt that the close study of the Scriptures, such as that in which the Prophet engaged during these years particularly—for he was always a Bible student— was one of the means by which the Holy Spirit revealed to him the grand and glorious truths concerning the salvation of the children of men, before he sealed his testimony with his blood." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, pp. 193-94.)

Scriptural References:

D&C 35:20; 42:56-60; 45:60-61; 73:3-4; 93:53; 94:10; 104:58; 124:89.
