Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 2 ( 1978)

Intelligence; intelligences

The word intelligence is usually used in the Doctrine and Covenants in the regular sense pertaining to the general areas of knowledge, wisdom, understanding, etc. (See D&C 130:18-19.)

However, the word intelligences is frequently used in a specialized sense by Latter-day Saints to refer to a part of the pre-earthly existence. The Pearl of Great Price records that the Lord showed unto Abraham "the intelligences that were organized before the world was." (Abr. 3:22.)

Selected Quotations

"The word intelligence as used by Latter-day Saints has two chief meanings, both found in the dictionary but of secondary use. First, a man who gathers knowledge and uses it in harmony with the plan of salvation is intelligent. He has intelligence. . . . Second, the word when preceded by the article an, or used in the plural as intelligences, means a person, or persons, usually in the spiritual estate. Just as we speak of a person or persons, we speak of an intelligence, or intelligences.

"This second use of the word has come into being among Latter-day Saints because of a statement made by the Lord to the Patriarch Abraham: [Abr. 3:22-23 quoted.]

"These remarkable statements use the words intelligences, souls, spirits, and Abraham (a man not yet on the earth) interchangeably. Thus has come the frequent use in the Church of the term an intelligence, meaning usually a personage in the spirit world, who may come on earth.

"Implied in the use of this term is the doctrine of preexistence. It is a basic belief of the Church that man lived as a personal being before he came on earth. He was a spirit child of God, begotten by God. His life as a spirit in the heavenly domain is often spoken of as the first estate of man. In this estate most of the spirit children of God grew toward perfection. They possessed the right of all the children of God to act for themselves, to accept or to reject any and every offering. When they had arrived at the proper degree of development, they were given the opportunity of further training through a mortal experience on earth. . . .

"Elder Joseph Fielding Smith, writing on this subject, adds: 'Some of our writers have endeavored to explain what an intelligence is, but to do so is futile, for we have never been given any insight into this matter beyond what the Lord has fragmentarily revealed. We know, however, that there is something called intelligence which has always existed. It is the real eternal part of man, which was not created or made. This intelligence combined with the spirit constitutes a spiritual identity or individual.' (Joseph Fielding Smith, The Progress of Man, p. 10.) . . .

"Under this concept, the eternal ego of man was, in some past age of the other world, dim to us, clothed with a spiritual body. That was man's spiritual birth and his entrance into the spiritual world. Then later, on earth, if permitted to go there, he will receive a material body. As a result, after the resurrection he will be master of the things of the spiritual and material universes, and in that manner approach the likeness of God.

"This view of the nature of man is a widespread belief among Latter-day Saints. The term an intelligence is then applied to the external ego existing even before the spiritual creation.

"In reading Latter-day Saint literature, the two-fold sense in which the terms an intelligence or intelligences are used—applied to spiritual personages or to pre-spiritual entities—must be carefully kept in mind." (John A. Widtsoe, ER 3:74-77.)

Scriptural References:

D&C 88:40; 93:29, 30, 36; 130:18-19; Abr. 3:21-22; JS-H 2:54.
