Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 2 ( 1978)

Jesus Christ

positions and titles of Jesus Christ; "no other name given whereby salvation cometh"

The following scriptural references and selected quotations from General Authorities provide important information and background on Jesus the Christ, who is the most important person who has or who will ever live on this earth.

As numerous scriptures testify, his name is the only name under heaven whereby salvation comes. Because of his atonement, all mankind, living or dead, are guaranteed resurrection from physical death and given the opportunity of eternal joy and happiness through obedience to the principles and ordinances of his gospel.

His divine mission has many different aspects; it started in the pre-earthly existence, continued in this life, and will extend throughout the eternities to come. Many names and titles have been used throughout the centuries to refer to his various roles. These titles are also found in the quotations and scriptural references that follow.

Selected Quotations

"None ever were perfect but Jesus; and why was He perfect? Because He was the Son of God, and had the fullness of the Spirit, and greater power than any man." (Joseph Smith, HC 4:358.)

"'The hinge of history is on the door of a Bethlehem stable.' (Ralph Sockman.) The name Jesus Christ and what it represents has been plowed deep into the history of the world, never to be uprooted. Christ was born on the sixth of April. Being one of the sons of God and His Only Begotten, his birth is of supreme importance." (Spencer W. Kimball, Ensign, May 1975, p. 4.)

"It was He, Jesus Christ, who came forth from the tomb a resurrected being, and He, who 'though he were a Son, yet learned he obedience by the things which he suffered.' (Heb. 5:8.)

"It was this same Jesus Christ who gave revelations to his prophets and revealed to them also through John the Revelator: 'I am Alpha and Omega, the first and the last. . . .

"'I am he that liveth, and was dead: and, behold, I am alive for evermore, Amen; and have the keys of hell and of death.' (Rev. 1:11, 18.)

"It was He, Jesus Christ, in his glorified state who came to the ancestors of the Indians, who is variously known by them as the Great White Spirit, the Fair God and numerous other names.

"It was He, Jesus Christ, our Savior, who was introduced to surprised listeners at Jordan (see Matt. 3:13-17), at the holy Mount of Transfiguration (see Matt. 17:1-9), at the temple of the Nephites (see 3 Ne. 11-26), and in the grove at Palmyra, New York (see Joseph Smith—History 1:17-25) and the introducing person was none other than his actual Father, the holy Elohim, in whose image he was and whose will he carried out.

"Many people have grown up with the idea that it was the Father who was in charge through the Old Testament history days whenever the title God or Lord was used.

"It is noteworthy that the Father, God, Elohim came to the earth upon each necessary occasion to introduce the Son to a new dispensation, to a new people; then Jesus Christ, the Son, carried forward his work." (Spencer W. Kimball, Ensign, November 1977, pp. 73-74.)

"God the Father has given Jesus Christ a name above all others, so that eventually every knee will bow and every tongue confess that Jesus is the Christ. He is the way, the truth, and the light, and no one can come back into the presence of our Father in heaven except through him. Christ is God the Son and possesses every virtue in its perfection. Therefore, the only measure of true greatness is how close a man can become like Jesus. That man is greatest who is most like Christ, and those who love him most will be most like him." (Ezra Taft Benson, Ensign, January 1973, p. 57.)

"Joseph Smith was asked, 'What are the fundamental principles of your religion?' He answered: 'The fundamental principles of our religion are the testimony of the Apostles and Prophets, concerning Jesus Christ, that He died, was buried, and rose again the third day, and ascended into heaven; and all other things which pertain to our religion are only appendages to it.' (HC 3:30.)

"That is to say, the atoning sacrifice of the Lord is the center of all things, as far as we are concerned. God our Heavenly Father created us, without which we would have no existence. And Christ the Son has redeemed us, without which there would be neither immortality nor eternal life." (Bruce R. McConkie, Ensign, July 1972, p. 110.)

Jesus Christ as Father

"Father because of the Atonement. Our scriptures teach that Jesus Christ is both the Father and the Son. The simple truth is that he is the Son of God by birth, both in the spirit and in the flesh. He is the Father because of the work that he has performed. . . .

"The Savior becomes our Father, in the sense in which this term is used in the scriptures, because he offers us life, eternal life, through the atonement which he made for us. . . .

"So, we become the children, sons and daughters of Jesus Christ, through our covenants of obedience to him. Because of his divine authority and sacrifice on the cross, we become spiritually begotten sons and daughters, and he is our Father.

"Father by divine investiture of authority. Christ is also our Father because his Father has given him of his fulness; that is, he has received a fulness of the glory of the Father. This is taught in Doctrine and Covenants 93:1-5, 16-17, and also by Abinadi in the 15th chapter of Mosiah. Abinadi's statement that he is 'the Father, because he was conceived by the power of God,' harmonizes with the Lord's own words in section 93 that he is the Father because he has received of the fulness of the Father. Christ says he is the Son because, 'I was in the world and made flesh my tabernacle, and dwelt among the sons of men.' Abinadi expresses this truth by saying he is 'the Son because of the flesh.'

"The Father has honored Christ by placing his name upon him, so that he can minister in and through that name as though he were the Father; and thus, so far as power and authority are concerned, his words and acts become and are those of the Father.

"Father as Creator. Our Lord is also called the Father in the sense that he is the Father or Creator of the heavens and the earth and all things." (Joseph Fielding Smith, DS 1:28-30.)

Jesus Christ as the Only Begotten Son of God in the Flesh

"We should understand this, that Jesus the Christ came into the world, in the Meridian of Time, to be the Only Begotten Son of God in the flesh. That is a doctrine established in this Church, and we have received it by revelation so we can put aside any doubts or speculations or contentions in regard to it. Jesus as we call him, the Nazarene, the son of Mary, was the Son of God, who is the Father of his spirit. So, in the beginning he was with God and was the firstborn of this great family [D&C 93:21], and on the earth he was the Only Begotten of the Father in the flesh. [D&C 29:42.]" (Charles W. Penrose, CR, April 1921, pp. 10-11.)

Names and Titles of Jesus Christ

"In The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints we worship the living Christ. We know that he came forth from the tomb, that he is a resurrected being, that he is our advocate with the Father, that only through him and by obedience to the gospel he has given us can we return into his presence and that of the Father.

"Jesus Christ is our Redeemer and Savior. He was begotten of the Father in the spirit, the Firstborn of the Father, and is the Only Begotten of the Father in the flesh. He is our elder brother. He is the second member of the Godhead. He was the Creator of heaven and earth under the direction of the Father. He is the Jehovah of the Old Testament. He is Jesus of Nazareth.

"He is the Way, the Truth, and the Life. He is the Light of the world. He is the Author of our salvation. He was chosen before the foundation of the world to be the Lamb slain as an offering for our sins. Ultimately every knee must bow and every tongue confess that he is the Christ." (Joseph Anderson, Ensign, November 1974, p. 103.)

"His name shall be called 'Immanuel,' which being interpreted is, 'God with us.' Hence He is not only called the Son of God, the First Begotten of the Father, the Well Beloved, the Head, Ruler, and Dictator of all things, Jehovah, the I Am, the Alpha and Omega, but He is also called the very Eternal Father. Does not this mean that in Him were the attributes and power of the very Eternal Father?" (John Taylor, MA, p. 138.)

Jesus Christ the Only Name Given Whereby Salvation Comes

"We realize that there is no virtue for salvation and exaltation outside of the atoning blood of Jesus Christ, our Savior. There is no other name under heaven by which man may obtain salvation. [D&C 29:17; 38:4; 45:4; 76:69; Alma 34:8-17.] The whole plan of salvation is founded upon revelation and Jesus Christ; rejecting these there is no foundation left upon which to build nor to stand. The ordinances of the Gospel have virtue in them by reason of the atoning blood of Jesus Christ, and without it there would be no virtue in them for salvation. [Moses 6:57-63.]" (George F. Richards, CR, April 1916, pp. 53-54.)

Old Testament Prophecies Concerning Christ

"He was to be born of a virgin; he was to be named Immanuel, which means 'God with us.' (Isa. 7:14 and Matt. 1:23.) He was to come out of Egypt (Hosea 11:1 and Matt. 2:13-23), and yet be born in Bethlehem of Judea (Micah 5:2). His enemies would cause great mourning for children in Bethlehem. (Jer. 31:15 and Matt. 2:18.) And he would finally be called a Nazarene; the Nazarenes were despised, and so people could call him a Nazarene, meaning 'despised.' (Isa. 53:3 and Matt. 2:23.) He was to do many marvelous acts which their recipients were not to make known in the streets. (Isa. 42:2 and Matt. 12:19.) He would cast out devils and heal the sick. (Isa. 53:4 and Matt. 8:17.) He was to teach in parables. (Ps. 78:2 and Matt. 13:35.) When he was proclaimed king, he would come lowly, and riding upon an ass, and upon a colt, the foal of an ass. (Zech. 9:9 and Matt. 21:4-9.)

"He would make the temple a house of prayer, driving the moneychangers from it in the process. (Isa. 56:7 and Matt. 21:12.) He would suffer an ignominious death; his executioners would part his raiment among them and cast lots for his garment. (Ps. 22:18 and Matt. 27:35.) And from the death price of thirty pieces of silver, a potter's field would be purchased. (Zech. 11:12-13 and Matt. 27:6-9.) In the process of dying he would cry out, 'I thirst.' (Ps. 69:21 and John 19:28-29.)

"In spite of the Roman custom of breaking the bones of those they crucified, the prophets proclaimed that not one of his bones would be broken. (Ex. 12:46, Ps. 34:20, and John 19:33-36.) He was to make his grave with the rich. (Isa. 53:9.) And after all this he would be called by Isaiah, 'Wonderful, Counseller, The mighty God, The everlasting Father, The Prince of Peace.' (Isa. 9:6.)" (S. Dilworth Young, Ensign, May 1974, p. 59.)
