Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 2 ( 1978)

John the Baptist

John the Baptist baptized the Savior in New Testament times (Matt. 3:1-17) and restored the Aaronic Priesthood in this dispensation (section 13). He should not be confused with John the Beloved, the apostle who restored the Melchizedek Priesthood together with Peter and James.

Selected Quotations

"The question arose from the saying of Jesus—'Among those that are born of women there is not a greater prophet than John the Baptist; but he that is least in the kingdom of God is greater than he [John].' How is it that John was considered one of the greatest prophets? His miracles could not have constituted his greatness.

"First. He was entrusted with a divine mission of preparing the way before the face of the Lord. . . .

"Secondly. He was entrusted with the important mission, and it was required at his hands, to baptize the Son of Man. . . .

"Thirdly. John, at that time, was the only legal administrator in the affairs of the kingdom there was then on the earth, and holding the keys of power. The Jews had to obey his instructions or be damned, by their own law; and Christ himself fulfilled all righteousness in becoming obedient to the law which he had given to Moses on the mount, and thereby magnified it and made it honorable, instead of destroying it. The son of Zacharias wrested the keys, the kingdom, the power, the glory from the Jews, by the holy anointing and decree of heaven, and these three reasons constitute him the greatest prophet born of a woman.

"Second Question: 'How was the least in the kingdom of heaven greater than he?' [John] In reply I asked—Whom did Jesus have reference to as being the least? Jesus was looked upon as having the least claim in God's kingdom, and [seemingly] was least entitled to their credulity as a prophet; as though he had said: 'He that is considered the least among you is greater than John—that is I myself.'" (Joseph Smith, HC 5:261.)

Scriptural References:

D&C 27:7-8; JS-H 2:72; Matt. 3:1; 11:11, 12; 14:2; 16:14; 17:13; Mark 6:14, 24-25; 8:28; Luke 7:20, 28, 33; 9:19.
