Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 2 ( 1978)

Judgment

judges; "all to be judged"

One of the distinguishing characteristics of law is that every law has consequences or results. For example, in the moral realm the consequence for obedience to the law (righteousness) is a blessing, which results in joy and happiness; the consequence for disobedience to the law (wickedness) is a punishment, which results in misery and unhappiness. By the very nature of law we will be judged (either here or in the hereafter or both) according to the laws that we keep or do not keep. Inasmuch as there are many kinds of law, many kinds of people and many degrees of faithfulness in obeying laws, and many types of willfulness in disobeying laws, it is obvious that there will be many types and degrees of judgment.

Selected Quotations

"God judges men according to the use they make of the light which He gives them." (Joseph Smith, HC 5:401.)

"He holds the reins of judgment in His hands; He is a wise Lawgiver, and will judge all men, not according to the narrow, contracted notions of men, but, 'according to the deeds done in the body whether they be good or evil,' or whether these deeds were done in England, America, Spain, Turkey, or India. He will judge them, 'not according to what they have not, but according to what they have,' those who have lived without law, will be judged without law, and those who have law, will be judged by that law. He will award judgment or mercy to all nations according to their several deserts, their means of obtaining intelligence, the laws by which they are governed, the facilities afforded them of obtaining correct information, and His inscrutable designs in relation to the human family; and when the designs of God shall be made manifest, and the curtain of futurity be withdrawn, we shall all of us eventually have to confess that the Judge of all the earth has done right." (Joseph Smith, HC 4:595-96.)

"We know that every man will be judged according to the deeds done in the body; and whether our sin be against our own peace and happiness alone or whether it affects that of others, as the Lord lives we will have to make satisfaction or atonement; God requires it, and it is according to his providences, and we cannot escape it." (Joseph F. Smith, JD 21:13.)

"We are told that we shall reap as we sow. This is the law of the harvest. If we sow wheat on our farms here on earth, we grow wheat. If, in our character building, we sow the seeds of righteousness, we shall reap that kind of harvest. So as the Lord himself said: 'Whatsoever ye sow, that shall ye also reap; therefore, if ye sow good ye shall also reap good for your reward.' (D&C 6:33.)

"It works out like this, for example: The Lord said, 'If ye forgive men their trespasses, your heavenly Father will also forgive you.' (Matt. 6:14.) And he added: 'With what judgment ye judge, ye shall be judged: and with what measure ye mete, it shall be measured to you again.' (Matt. 7:2.)" (Mark E. Petersen, Ensign, November 1974, p. 51.)

Scriptural References:

D&C 1:36; 88:35; 107:72, 74, 78; Moses 6:61; 7:66; JS-H 1:45; Isa. 30:18; 61:8; Matt. 27:2; John 5:22; 8:16; 1 Pet. 4:17; Ether 11:20.
