Richard Lloyd Anderson, Investigating the Book of Mormon Witnesses ( 1981)

xiPreface

xi"Let him see anything he wants." This terse response of the LDS Church historian authorized serious research on the Book of Mormon witnesses. At that time I was aware that eleven men had given impressive testimonials in printed and unprinted sources. I was determined to examine original manuscripts and then follow their careers in civil records and newspapers of each county where they lived. Much later I published ten articles (in the Improvement Era during the year beginning August 1968) that were valued for their new data by the Mormon History Association, winning the annual award for best article. These installments are updated and presented here with supplementary chapters. In the future I hope to add longer books on the subject, but not more significant ones. Surveys often lightly skim the surface, but a good summary has a far more serious goal. It resembles good art in the sense that it comes only after an author pays the price to know his subject.

xiiMuch has been learned about the major Book of Mormon witnesses. Above all is the drama of their solemn affirmations, in the quiet intimacy of friendship and in the hostility of ridicule and even persecution. Theirs is a compelling life story. Here are modern men who can be examined closely on their astounding claim—of being commissioned by an angel's appearance and by God's voice to testify of ancient scripture. Here are others who describe a physical experience of seeing and handling the metal record. Discovery of early scrolls or plates will always fascinate people, and adding the miraculous should only heighten the significance of the claim. Can it be taken seriously? It must be taken seriously if the witnesses' words are taken seriously. These eleven were interviewed by both the careful and the careless, leaving scores of accounts that can furnish not only the accurate quotation, but also the partial quotation and the misquotation. So their true experience will be understood only from their personal writings, speeches, and responsibly reported interviews. These Book of Mormon witnesses sincerely sought answers and risked comfort and honor in unwavering assurance that God had acted. After years of working with their lives and their words, I am deeply convinced that their printed testimonies must be taken at face value.
