Richard Lloyd Anderson, Investigating the Book of Mormon Witnesses ( 1981)

xiiiAcknowledgments

xiiiNaming some contributing to this work means that many others go unmentioned because of short space. I owe a debt to the pioneer researchers on the witnesses, Andrew Jenson, B. H. Roberts, and Preston Nibley, and to three whose masters' theses at Brigham Young University were the first systematic collections on the lives of the three witnesses. These men are Wayne C. Gunnell; Ebbie L. V. Richardson; and Stanley R. Gunn, whose work on Oliver Cowdery was published.

xiiiThe richest resources on the Book of Mormon witnesses are in the archives of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Administrators in the Historical Department have given consistent cooperation, including Earl E. Olson, Donald T. Schmidt, Jeffery Johnson, James L. Kimball, Jr., and their competent assistants, who deserve much more than my anonymous thanks here.

xiiiMany important manuscripts are at the Library-Archives of the Reorganized Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints at Independence, Missouri. These were made available over the years by Church Historian Richard P. Howard and many capable assistants. Invaluable help for reconstructing the early community life of the Whitmers was given by friend and local historian John S. Genung of Waterloo, New York. Other essential aid came as publisher John Van Camp allowed me to work evenings and early mornings in the files of the Advertiser-Tribune at Tiffin, Ohio, the home of Oliver Cowdery for seven years.

xivCapable secretaries transformed cluttered drafts into readable pages; they will know the value of their contribution without my making a long list. Some photographs appear by courtesy of the LDS Historical Department or the LDS Graphics Design and Resources Division. My thanks go to Church News editor Dell Van Orden for furnishing his photograph of the recently reconstructed Whitmer cabin. Special appreciation goes to my wife, Carma de Jong Anderson, who prepared final copy and did the layout of the Book of Mormon translation map. I continue to benefit from her good judgment in studying early Mormonism, where her interests are as intense as my own.

xiv Places of Book of Mormon Translation.

xiv Whitmer farm and reconstructed family home, Fayette, New York.
