Richard Lloyd Anderson, Investigating the Book of Mormon Witnesses ( 1981)

11

1Assistants and Eyewitnesses

1Joseph Smith's criticisms of Christianity in the nineteenth century are remarkably like Christian self-criticisms of the twentieth. The youth was confused by multiplying churches and conflicting claims. Christian leaders in recent decades have also repeated their frustration at "the scandal of the divided church." After long inquiry young Joseph found no answers among quarreling leaders, so he turned to God alone. In past decades world councils and international committees have also sought the "renewal of the spirit." But the results are less than convincing. Creeds have softened, inter-faith negotiations continue, but competitive Christianity remains. Its tragedy is the confusion of human systems that inadequately direct the faith of innumerable men and women of great commitment. Early Christians were "of one heart and of one soul" (Acts 4:32), but Christianity now better resembles the early world confounded after Babylonian pride "that they may not understand one another's speech." (Gen. 11:7.) Religious leaders can quote past prophets, but who can divinely lead God's people out of the bondage of confusion today?

2This question is even more urgent than it was on the spring day of 1820 when Joseph Smith strode into the New York woods and returned shaken by a divine decree: "I was answered that I must join none of them, for they were all wrong." [^1] This message may be ridiculed or ignored, but precedents are on Joseph Smith's side, for few religious systems have escaped the gradual corruption of embracing the world that they originally were called to confront. What have past prophets said as they returned from sacred visions? Isaiah was overwhelmed by God's presence and received the message that his generation no longer knew God—that they would hear "but understand not," that they would see "but perceive not." (Isa. 6:9.) Six centuries later Jesus quoted these words to the Jewish people in solemn warning that they no longer walked in God's path. (Matt. 13:14-15.) Ezekiel also withstood the glory of the Lord and received from his lips the commission to go to the chosen but "rebellious nation"—for "they and their fathers have transgressed against me, even unto this very day." (Ezek. 2:3.) Ezekiel then tasted the book of God's decree for the Israelites, sweet because it came from the Lord and bitter because it condemned their sins and promised judgment. Nor did the God who called the early Christians speak with another voice. Six decades after the crucifixion John the Revelator came from the fiery vision of the exalted Christ to severely warn the Christian churches that they would lose their places without immediate repentance. (Rev. 2:5.) Who has aspired to God's presence today? The blunt condemnation of current religions reported by Joseph Smith is a profound mark of credibility when read by the light of past prophets.

2Measuring a prophet is not unlike other serious decisions of life. Mosaic law required solid proof: "at the mouth of two witnesses, or at the mouth of three witnesses, shall the matter be established." (Deut. 19:15.) Prophets independently substantiate other prophets. Even Jesus had the comfort and strength of the testimony of John the Baptist, to whom he referred as a second witness on more than one occasion. (Matt. 11, John 5:33.) And nothing is more dominant in the early chapters of Acts than the force of many witnesses, the united testimony of apostles who had seen the resurrection for themselves. The public ministry of the latter-day Prophet also involved his associates as witnesses. The three called to tell of the angel and the plates were vital personalities of historical interest in their own right. But their story is really part of the larger story of the unfolding revelations to their leader—the call to restore ancient scriptures and reestablish Christ's Church with authority.

3The Book of Mormon witnesses testified of the truth of an ancient book, but its significance can only be seen by the meaning of events that brought them together in the new cause of God. As Luke said in reviewing earliest Christianity, the founding events rest on reports of those who "from the beginning were eyewitnesses." (Luke 1:2.) First there were Joseph's visions, and afterward men were called to verify their reality. This story of the sharing of the burden will later be told through the eyes of each witness, for each reiterated his printed testimony and also verified many surrounding experiences that remained inspirational for a lifetime. Full information on how the Book of Mormon witnesses were called is found in the straightforward recollections of founder Joseph Smith, supplemented by those of his mother. These two are important "eyewitnesses," so their narratives will appear below with minimal explanations. An outline of these beginning events is in an appendix at the back of this book for easy reference.

3Since the adult Joseph Smith was a prayerful man, he is all the more convincing in relating his 1820 prayer concerning which church was right. His first letter to his wife comes a dozen years later and speaks of time spent while waiting for the opportunity to return to her: "I have visited a grove which is just back of the town almost every day, where I can be secluded from the eyes of any mortal and there give vent to all the feeling of my heart in meditation and prayer." [^2] This is the language of practiced communion with God. The 1820 petition was answered with the command not to join established churches—to "continue as I was until further directed." [^3] That direction came as he neared his eighteenth birthday. The radiance of God's glory is the most striking first impression of the visions of Isaiah, Ezekiel, and John mentioned above. The same brilliance filled the many divine visions of Joseph Smith in the 1820 decade. On the night of September 21, 1823 he prayed intensely to know God's further will toward him. Steadily the soft darkness about him was transformed into blinding brilliance. Oliver Cowdery privately talked with Joseph Smith about the experience and reported: "Indeed, to use his own description, the first sight was as though the house was filled with consuming and unquenchable fire." [^4] No wonder the Prophet's earliest picture of the glorious messenger comes in similar terms: "an holy angel, whose countenance was as lightning and whose garments were pure and white above all whiteness." [^5]

4The angel was Joseph's teacher—that night; the next morning at the hill, where he was instructed to wait until further maturity; and periodically during the next four years before getting the plates before dawn on September 22, 1823. In midcareer the Prophet concisely summarized how he obtained the Book of Mormon: "Moroni, the person who deposited the plates from whence the Book of Mormon was translated, in a hill in Manchester, Ontario County, New York, being dead and raised again therefrom, appeared unto me and told me where they were and gave me directions how to obtain them. I obtained them and the Urim and Thummim with them, by the means of which I translated the plates. And thus came the Book of Mormon." [^6]

5As he prepared for translation, Joseph grew to young manhood. One month after he turned twenty-one, he married Emma Hale, his intensely religious and intelligent companion. A rural schoolteacher of considerable native talents, Emma gave Joseph her deepest loyalty, which strongly suggests total sincerity in his religious life. These young adults married over the objections of Emma's father and therefore lived in their first year with Joseph's parents on their New York farm a few miles from where the plates were buried. That fall they went together to the hill, where Emma waited while Joseph received the inscribed record of an ancient American civilization and its prophets. The angel instructed Joseph again on obedience, promising divine protection in the coming attempts to steal the plates and to frustrate his work of translation. The next chapter will re-create these first trials through the recollections of Joseph's immediate family.

5Martin Harris and his wife were the first beyond Joseph's family to be interested in the new work. Joseph correctly called him "a farmer of respectability," [^7] and he could have had little interest in young Joseph Smith, poor son of a struggling farmer, except for a deep conviction of the truth of Joseph's confidential story of being called to translate an ancient record that he had newly acquired. Joseph's mother tells how Martin had just arranged his affairs for a year's vacation for travel, providentially allowing time to help Joseph in the translation during the summer of 1828. Before that took place, however, community rumors incited jealousy, resulting in several attempts to take the plates. So for safety Joseph and Emma moved near her father's farm in Harmony township, Pennsylvania, where the couple managed thirteen acres and settled in their own small house. By this time Martin Harris was convinced enough to hand Joseph fifty dollars in moving expenses in public, at the same time commenting, "I give this to you to do the Lord's work with; no, I give it to the Lord for his own work." [^8]

6This local aristocrat was now the most active adherent of the Prophet. Soon after Joseph and Emma returned to Pennsylvania, Martin traveled over a hundred miles to obtain characters copied from the plates and then continued his winter journey another hundred miles to New York City. There he called on linguists, including the learned Columbia classics professor Charles Anthon. Some details of the Harris-Anthon conversation are unclear, but Martin was convinced all of his life that the professor had fulfilled Isaiah's prophecy of a learned man getting "the words of a book that is sealed," being asked to read, and responding, "I cannot; for it is sealed." (Isa. 29:11.) Anthon confirmed this much in two later letters on the subject, insisting that the characters presented to him were unintelligible, as indeed they should have been, since Egyptian had not been deciphered in his day, nor have many other near-eastern and middle-American scripts. Joseph Smith's earliest private understanding of what Harris said is in his first biography, written in 1832. He wrote that Martin came to Pennsylvania, where Joseph had recently moved with the plates, "and said the Lord had shown him that he [Martin] must go to New York City with some of the characters, so we proceeded to copy some of them, and he took his journey to the eastern cities and to the learned, saying, Read this, I pray thee, and the learned said, I cannot, but if he would bring the plates they would read it." [^9]

6Martin Harris would later finance the first printing of the Book of Mormon, but his considerable role in the beginning translation is now apparent, followed by two intensive months as Joseph Smith's scribe in the summer of 1828. Their work produced 116 manuscript pages, which were entrusted to Martin on his pleading for evidence to soften his critical household. Joseph imposed strict conditions, which Martin Harris did not keep. Since his carelessness made possible the loss of the manuscript, Martin was rebuked in further revelations, directing Joseph not to use this man again as secretary, but to wait for further assistance. Nevertheless, Martin Harris continued his intense interest in the translation in the face of the fury of his wife, and he later pledged valuable land against the printing costs for the Book of Mormon some weeks after seeing the angel and the plates.

7The translation lagged in the winter after the loss of the 116 pages. Practical work for survival drained the strength of Joseph and Emma, who sometimes helped as a secretary then. But this discouraging winter season at the Prophet's home in Harmony was also the time of conversion for Oliver Cowdery at the Prophet's parents' home in Manchester, where he boarded as district schoolteacher. Convinced that God had called him to assist, he arrived to write for the Prophet in early April, 1829, and the efficient team had apparently finished the major segments of the ancient record when they moved to Fayette, New York two months later. By then they had also received together personal visits of New Testament prophets and apostles, restoring authority to baptize and direct Christ's church. No one exceeded Oliver Cowdery in contributions of time or effective talent to this daily work of restoration. Nearly ninety percent of the surviving pages of original dictation are in his handwriting. [^10]

7By this time Joseph and at least one secretary knew that there would be witnesses of the plates, for there was a revelation on this subject just before Oliver Cowdery arrived to help. Martin Harris again had traveled to Harmony to satisfy recurring doubts about the plates. The words of inspiration came to assure that three would see the plates, and that if faithful, he would be one of the three. The general promise of this event was clear: "Yea, and the testimony of three of my servants shall go forth with my words unto this generation. Yea, three shall know of a surety that these things are true, for I will give them power, that they may behold and view these things as they are, and to none else will I grant this power to receive this same testimony among this generation." [^11]

8This promise given in Pennsylvania would be fulfilled in New York, for Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery would move in midtranslation because of threats of violence. Oliver explained these in a letter to his friend David Whitmer, who then prayed to know whether he should bring the translators to his father's New York home. The whole Whitmer family weighed the request and became convinced that God had called them to his work. So David made the sacrifice to travel to Pennsylvania and get the translators. As this expanded household gathered socially in the evenings, there were obviously times of reading the manuscript and discussing its exciting truths. In this setting came a "discovery" that there would be three witnesses, though clearly a rediscovery for Joseph Smith and Martin Harris, who shared in the above revelation March, 1829. Sometime in May the new scribe, Oliver Cowdery, had perhaps recorded one of two Book of Mormon prophecies on witnesses. [^12] Then during June the translation continued after the move to Fayette, where the "discovery" of the witnesses prophecy took place as the translation was nearing its end. From the Prophet's language, the following promise seems the one that intensified the desires of his associates to become witnesses:

8Wherefore at that day when the book shall be delivered unto the man of whom I have spoken, the book shall be hid from the eyes of the world, that the eyes of none shall behold it save it be that three witnesses shall behold it, by the power of God, besides him to whom the book shall be delivered; and they shall testify to the truth of the book and the things therein.

9And there is none other which shall view it, save it be a few according to the will of God, to bear testimony of his word unto the children of men; for the Lord God hath said that the words of the faithful should speak as if it were from the dead.

9Wherefore, the Lord God will proceed to bring forth the words of the book; and in the mouth of as many witnesses as seemeth him good will he establish his word; and wo be unto him that rejecteth the word of God. [^13]

9In mentioning Book of Mormon promises, the Prophet depicts the deep desires of three whose contributions to the translation had been most critical. With this work nearly over, both Book of Mormon prophecies concerning witnesses were probably known—and the one not quoted above named the witnesses as "those who shall assist to bring forth this work." (Ether 5:2.) That verse aside, it was still inevitable that those who were doing the most to produce the book had the greatest emotional interest in seeing the treasured plates that it came from. That interest had earlier caused Martin Harris to ask Joseph and to get the inspired promise of "a view of the things which he desireth to know," on condition that he would "humble himself in mighty prayer and faith." [^14] Just in their capacities as secretaries, Martin Harris and Oliver Cowdery had contributed far more personal time than anyone else. And although several Whitmer brothers had been equally zealous, David Whitmer's help had been critical because of the timing of moving the translators when their work would otherwise have stopped. Thus with strong reasons for their expectations to be witnesses, they approached the Prophet:

9In the course of the work of translation we ascertained that three special witnesses were to be provided by the Lord, to whom he would grant that they should see the plates from which this work (the Book of Mormon) should be translated, and that these witnesses should bear record of the same . . .

10Almost immediately after we had made this discovery, it occurred to Oliver Cowdery, David Whitmer, and the aforementioned Martin Harris (who had come to inquire after our progress in the work) that they would have me inquire of the Lord, to know if they might not obtain of him to be these three special witnesses. And finally they became so very solicitous, and teased me so much, that at length I complied, and through the Urim and Thummim, I obtained of the Lord for them the following revelation: . . . [^15]

10As the prophet indicates, this inquiry of the three was answered by an affirmative revelation. Their faith was evidently great, for the promises were great, not only to see the plates, but also the sacred relics that had been hidden up by the early American prophets. Those who see the witnesses as victims of simple deception have overlooked the complexity of the experience promised to them, and their later spontaneous mention of seeing the other ancient objects with the plates:

10Behold I say unto you, that you must rely upon my word, which if you do with full purpose of heart, you shall have a view of the plates, and also the breastplate, the sword of Laban, and Urim and Thummim, which were given to the brother of Jared upon the mount, when he talked with the Lord face to face, and the miraculous directors which were given to Lehi while in the wilderness on the borders of the Red Sea. And it is by your faith that you shall obtain a view of them, even by that faith which was had by the prophets of old.

10And after that you have obtained faith, and have seen them with your eyes, you shall testify of them by the power of God. And this you shall do that my servant Joseph Smith, Jr., may not be destroyed, that I may bring about my righteous purposes unto the children of men in this work. [^16]

10All of the foregoing discussion has set the stage for the striking experiences reported in simplicity by the witnesses themselves and by Joseph Smith, who shared the vision of the Three Witnesses and who accompanied the Eight Witnesses to the grove where they lifted and examined the plates. Conventional writing detracts from the powerful realities reported by these participants. Only through their words can we appreciate what happened. The Prophet's mother adds great insight into the surrounding circumstances, though careful readers must be cautious enough to realize that her recollections are partial glimpses, not total inventories. The following sources are the vivid narratives of what was seen and physically sensed by all twelve witnesses, including Joseph Smith. The importance of their reports is highlighted here by reproducing their words without comment. These narratives begin with Lucy Smith taking the reader into the Whitmer home as the translation was being finished.

Preparations of the Three Witnesses

"Here they continued translating until the whole work was completed. They then lost no time in informing us—that is, his father's family—of the accomplishment of this very important duty. We communicated this intelligence to Martin Harris the same evening, for we loved the man, although his weakness had cost us much unnecessary trouble. He seemed to have a heart that designed no evil, and we felt a commiseration for the disappointment which he had brought upon himself in an evil hour. When he heard that the translation was finally completed, he seemed as greatly rejoiced as if he knew that it had affected his salvation, and determined to go straightway to Waterloo as soon as he could get away the next morning. We accordingly set off together, and before sunset we met Joseph and Oliver at Waterloo. The evening was spent in reading the manuscript, and it would be superfluous for me to say to anyone who has read these pages that we were greatly rejoiced, for it then appeared to us who did not realize the magnitude of the work, which could hardly be said at that time to have beginning, as though the greatest difficulty was then surmounted. But with Joseph it was not so, for he knew that a dispensation of the gospel was committed to him, of which the starting bud had scarcely yet made its appearance.

12"The next morning after breakfast was over, we repaired to the sitting room, and after attending the morning service Joseph approached Martin with a solemnity which I thrill through my veins to this day whenever it comes to my recollection. 'Martin Harris,' said he, 'you have got to humble yourself before your God this day and obtain if possible a forgiveness of your sins. And if you will do this, it is his will that you and Oliver Cowdery and David Whitmer should look upon the plates.' Soon after this these four left and went into a grove a short distance from the house." (Lucy Smith, preliminary manuscript of Biographical Sketches, also cit. Biographical Sketches, pp. 138-39.) [^17]

The Angel and Plates: Joseph Smith's Testimony

"Not many days after the above commandment was given, we four—viz., Martin Harris, David Whitmer, Oliver Cowdery and myself—agreed to retire into the woods, and try to obtain by fervent and humble prayer the fulfilment of the promises given in the revelation that they should have a view of the plates, etc. We accordingly made choice of a piece of woods convenient to Mr. Whitmer's house, to which we retired. And having knelt down we began to pray in much faith to Almighty God to bestow upon us a realization of these promises. According to previous arrangements I commenced by vocal prayer to our heavenly Father, and was followed by each of the rest in succession. We did not yet however obtain any answer or manifestation of the divine favor in our behalf. We again observed the same order of prayer, each calling on, and praying fervently to God in rotation, but with the same result as before. Upon this our second failure, Martin Harris proposed that he would withdraw himself from us, believing as he expressed himself that his presence was the cause of our not obtaining what we wished for.

13"He accordingly withdrew from us, and we knelt down again and had not been many minutes engaged in prayer when presently we beheld a light above us in the air of exceeding brightness. And behold, an angel stood before us. In his hands he held the plates which we had been praying for these to have a view of. He turned over the leaves one by one, so that we could see them, and discover the engravings thereon distinctly. He addressed himself to David Whitmer, and said, 'David, blessed is the Lord, and he that keeps his commandments.' When immediately afterwards, we heard a voice from out of the bright light above us, saying: 'These plates have been revealed by the power of God, and they have been translated by the power of God. The translation of them which you have seen is correct, and I command you to bear record of what you now see and hear.'

13"I now left David and Oliver, and went in pursuit of Martin Harris, whom I found at a considerable distance, fervently engaged in prayer. He soon told me, however, that he had not yet prevailed with the Lord, and earnestly requested me to join him in prayer that he also might realize the same blessings which we had just received. We accordingly joined in prayer, and ultimately obtained our desires, for before we had yet finished, the same vision was opened to our view—at least it was again to me. And I once more beheld, and heard the same things, whilst at the same moment, Martin Harris cried out, apparently in ecstacy of joy, 'Tis enough; mine eyes have beheld,' and jumping up he shouted, hosannah, blessing God, and otherwise rejoiced exceedingly." (Joseph Smith, History of the Church 1:54-55, in the form first published in Times and Seasons 3 [1842]:897-98.)

Return of the Three Witnesses

"They returned to the house. It was between three and four o'clock. Mrs. Whitmer and Mr. Smith and myself were sitting in a bedroom. I sat on the bedside. When Joseph came in he threw himself down beside me: 'Father! Mother!' said he, 'you do not know how happy I am. The Lord has caused the plates to be shown to three more besides me, who have also seen an angel and will have to testify to the truth of what I have said. For they know for themselves that I do not go about to deceive the people. And I do feel as though I was relieved of a dreadful burden, which was almost too much for me to endure. But they will now have to bear a part, and it does rejoice my soul that I am not any longer to be entirely alone in the world.' Martin Harris then came in. He seemed almost overcome with excess of joy. He then testified to what he had seen and heard, as did also others, Oliver and David. Their testimony was the same in substance as that contained in the Book of Mormon. . . .

14"Martin Harris particularly seemed altogether unable to give vent to his feelings in words. He said, 'I have now seen an angel from heaven, who has of a surety testified of the truth of all that I have heard concerning the record, and my eyes have beheld him. I have also looked upon the plates and handled them with my hands and can testify of the same to the whole world. But I have received for myself a witness that words cannot express, that no tongue can describe, and I bless God in the sincerity of my soul that he has condescended to make me—even me—a witness of the greatness of his work and designs in behalf [of] the children of men.' Oliver and David also joined with him in solemn praises to God for his goodness and mercy." (Lucy Smith, preliminary manuscript of Biographical Sketches, also cit. Biographical Sketches, p. 139.)

Writing the Testimony of Three Witnesses

"Having thus through the mercy of God, obtained these manifestations, it now remained for these three individuals to fulfil the commandment which they had received, viz., to bear record of these things, in order to accomplish which, they drew up and subscribed the following document:" (Joseph Smith, History of the Church 1:56, in the form first published in Times and Seasons 3 [1842]:898.)

The Testimony of Three Witnesses

"Be it known unto all nations, kindreds, tongues, and people, unto whom this work shall come, that we, through the grace of God the Father, and our Lord Jesus Christ, have seen the plates which contain this record, which is a record of the people of Nephi, and also of the Lamanites, his brethren, and also of the people of Jared, which came from the tower of which hath been spoken; and we also know that they have been translated by the gift and power of God, for his voice hath declared it unto us; wherefore we know of a surety, that the work is true. And we also testify that we have seen the engravings which are upon the plates; and they have been shewn unto us by the power of God, and not of man. And we declare with words of soberness, that an Angel of God came down from heaven, and he brought and laid before our eyes, that we beheld and saw the plates, and the engravings thereon; and we know that it is by the grace of God the Father, and our Lord Jesus Christ, that we beheld and bear record that these things are true; and it is marvellous in our eyes. Nevertheless, the voice of the Lord commanded us that we should bear record of it; wherefore, to be obedient unto the commandments of God, we bear testimony of these things. And we know that if we are faithful in Christ, we shall rid our garments of the blood of all men, and be found spotless before the judgement seat of Christ, and shall dwell with him eternally in the heavens. And the honor be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost, which is one God. Amen.

16OLIVER COWDERY

16DAVID WHITMER

16MARTIN HARRIS

16(Copy of the three witnesses' testimony from the 1830 edition of the Book of Mormon.)

Background on the Eight Witnesses

"We returned home the next day, a cheerful, rejoicing little company. In a few days we were followed by Joseph and Oliver and the Whitmers, who came to make us a visit and also to make some arrangements about getting the book printed. Soon after they came, they all—that is the male part of the company—repaired to a little grove where it was customary for the family to offer up their secret prayers. Joseph had been instructed that the plates would be carried there by one of the ancient Nephites. Here it was that those eight witnesses recorded in the Book of Mormon looked upon the plates and handled them." (Lucy Smith, preliminary manuscript of Biographical Sketches, also cit. Biographical Sketches, p. 140.)

16"Soon after these things had transpired, the following additional testimony was obtained:" (Joseph Smith, History of the Church 1:57, Times and Seasons 3 [1842]:898.)

The Testimony of Eight Witnesses

"Be it known unto all nations, kindreds, tongues, and people, unto whom this work shall come, that Joseph Smith, Jr. the Author and Proprietor of this work, has shewn unto us the plates of which hath been spoken, which have the appearance of gold; and as many of the leaves as the said Smith has translated, we did handle with our hands; and we also saw the engravings thereon, all of which has the appearance of ancient work, and of curious workmanship. And this we bear record, with words of soberness, that the said Smith has shewn unto us, for we have seen and hefted, and know of a surety, that the said Smith has got the plates of which we have spoken. And we give our names unto the world, to witness unto the world that which we have seen: and we lie not, God bearing witness of it."

17CHRISTIAN WHITMER

17JACOB WHITMER

17PETER WHITMER, JR.

17JOHN WHITMER

17HIRAM PAGE

17JOSEPH SMITH, SEN.

17HYRUM SMITH

17SAMUEL H. SMITH

17(Copy of the eight witnesses' testimony from the 1830 edition of the Book of Mormon.)

Joseph Smith on the Plates and "Interpreters"

"These records were engraven on plates which had the appearance of gold. Each plate was six inches wide and eight inches long, and not quite so thick as common tin. They were filled with engravings in Egyptian characters, and bound together in a volume as the leaves of a book with three rings running through the whole. The volume was something near six inches in thickness, a part of which was sealed. The characters on the unsealed part were small, and beautifully engraved. The whole book exhibited many marks of antiquity in its construction, and much skill in the art of engraving. With the records was found a curious instrument, which the ancients called 'Urim and Thummim,' which consisted of two transparent stones set in the rim of a bow, fastened to a breast plate. Through the medium of the Urim and Thummim I translated the record by the gift and power of God." (Joseph Smith, "Wentworth Letter," Times and Seasons 3 [1842]:707, also History of the Church 4:537.)

Recalling the Book of Mormon Revelations

"And again, what do we hear? Glad tidings from Cumorah! Moroni, an angel from heaven, declaring the fulfilment of the prophets—the book to be revealed. A voice of the Lord in the wilderness of Fayette, Seneca County, declaring the Three Witnesses to bear record of the book." (Beginning of Joseph Smith's list of early revelations, letter to the Church, Sept. 6, 1842, first published in Times and Seasons 3 [1842]:935-36, now D&C 128:20.)

---
Notas:
[^1] Joseph Smith, History of the Church 1:6, also Pearl of Great Price, JS-H 1:19, reprinted also in the LDS pamphlet "Joseph Smith's Testimony."
[^2] Joseph Smith to Emma Smith, June 6, 1832, Greenville, Indiana, manuscript at the Chicago Historical Society.
[^3] HC 1:8, JS-H 1:26.
[^4] Latter Day Saints' Messenger and Advocate 1 (1835):79.
[^5] "Articles and Covenants of the Church of Christ," first published in The Evening and the Morning Star, June, 1832, now D&C 20:6.
[^6] Elders' Journal, July, 1838, pp. 42-43.
[^7] HC 1:19, JS-H 1:61.
[^8] Biographical Sketches, p. 113.
[^9] See Joseph Smith, 1832 Manuscript History, in Dean C. Jessee, ed., The Personal Writings of Joseph Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1984), pp. 7-8. The second Anthon Transcript and the apparent Joseph Smith note on it, pp. 223-26 of this book, proved to be forged.
[^10] See the valuable tabulation of surviving pages of the original Book of Mormon manuscript in Dean C. Jessee, "The Original Book of Mormon Manuscript," Brigham Young University Studies 10 (1970):273.
[^11] Book of Commandments 4:4, the earliest datable writing (1833), with subsequent verbal changes in D&C 5:11-14. An undated manuscript of the early form is in the Whitney papers at Brigham Young University, box 1, folder 2.
[^12] Cowdery's priesthood restoration narrative indicates that by May 15, 1829, the translators had passed 3 Nephi 11, which raises the authority question that caused their inquiries on baptism. See Latter Day Saints' Messenger and Advocate 1 (1834):13: "after writing the account given of the Savior's ministry." The next book, Ether, 5:24 contains the promise of witnesses seeing the plates.
[^13] In the next quotation of the text, the Prophet mentions the Book of Mormon promise in language much closer to this 2 Nephi 27 prophecy than to Ether 5:2-4, which suggests that they were in Fayette translating the first two books of Nephi, the period of the lost 116 pages. The non-Cowdery manuscript pages, some of which are apparently done by John Whitmer, also indicate a Fayette translation for the beginning portions of the book. Cp. n. 10.
[^14] Book of Commandments 4:8, with the Whitney manuscript reading "the things which he desireth to view," now D&C 5:24. Cp. n. 11.
[^15] Times and Seasons 3 (1842):897, also cit. HC 1:52-53.
[^16] D&C 17:1-4, first published in the 1835 edition with the dating: "June, 1829, given previous to their viewing the plates containing the Book of Mormon." Early dissenter Ezra Booth saw a manuscript of this revelation in the summer of 1831: "When in Missouri, I had an opportunity to examine a commandment given to these witnesses, previous to their seeing the plates. They were informed that they should see and hear those things by faith and then they should testify to the world." (Letter 3, [Ravenna] Ohio Star, Oct. 27, 1831.)
[^17] Joseph Smith's history suggests that Book of Mormon translation was nearly completed at this time, a correction of Lucy Smith, who did not live in the Whitmer home but only visited. In Lucy's manuscript at the end of the quotation here, "four" is written over an original "three," referring to those who then left the home. Since David remembered being in the field when others came to get him, he may not have been at the morning devotional service. There are other possibilities of time, since we have only glimpses of that morning in the sources.
