Richard Lloyd Anderson, Investigating the Book of Mormon Witnesses ( 1981)

212

21Informal Witnesses of the Plates

21 William Smith (1811-93). Younger brother of Joseph Smith, Jr.

21Reality is greater than short official statements. The testimony of the Three and Eight Witnesses is a bold design in a whole pattern of events. The official witnesses gave their names to two documents that outlined their experiences in seeing the plates in June, 1829. Yet the plates figured in the regular life of Joseph Smith for over a year and a half prior to that. He worried about obtaining them, guarded them carefully during this period, and used them in translation for many months. This meant that those nearest him shared in his strategies for preserving and using them. So a larger circle than the official witnesses had some contact with the ancient record in their daily affairs. The plates were brought to Father Smith's home in Manchester, New York; then taken to the Prophet's home in Harmony, Pennsylvania; after which they were transported to Father Whitmer's home in Fayette, New York, to finish the translation. Most of the Smith and Whitmer men became formal witnesses of the plates. But what did the women and older children of these households say, including the Prophet's wife?

22Joseph went to the Hill Cumorah late on the night of September 21, 1827 and some time after midnight obtained the plates. [^1] But his mother makes clear that he did not bring the ancient book home then. Instead he found a decayed tree in the woods for a hiding place, and returned to bring the plates to his house about a day and a half later. Mother Lucy Smith's history gives the fullest details of this night: Joseph's going alone to the forest cache about three miles from his house and scraping away the covering bark from the records, after which he "took them from their secret place, and wrapping them in his linen frock, placed them under his arm and started for home." [^2] But Joseph was assaulted several times as he cut through the woods to avoid traveled places. Alternately fending off his attackers and outrunning them, he threw himself breathless in a fence corner "in sight of the house." His mother adds, "And as soon as he could go on he rose and finished his race for the house, where he arrived altogether speechless from fright and exhaustion." [^3]

22Besides Joseph there were six children then living in the home. Samuel later joined married brother Hyrum to give his name publicly as a witness. William became the most articulate spokesman for the rest, partly because he lived until 1893 and was sought out for his recollections. In his eighty-two-year life span he was outspoken on his early experiences in the Smith family. When Joseph first brought in the plates, William was an impressionable sixteen-year-old, of large build and aggressive. Joseph's overgarment made of tow, or rough-woven linen, figures prominently in William's recollections, as it does in Lucy Smith's history. The following is part of a speech of William, his most detailed picture of Joseph's entering the home with the ancient record.

22When the plates were brought in they were wrapped up in a tow frock. My father then put them into a pillow case. Father said, "What, Joseph, can we not see them?" "No. I was disobedient the first time, but I intend to be faithful this time. For I was forbidden to show them until they are translated, but you can feel them." We handled them and could tell what they were. They were not quite as large as this Bible. Could tell whether they were round or square. Could raise the leaves this way (raising a few leaves of the Bible before him). One could easily tell that they were not a stone, hewn out to deceive, or even a block of wood. Being a mixture of gold and copper, they were much heavier than stone, and very much heavier than wood. [^4]

Witnesses of the Book of MormonHC23Joseph's father was not allowed to see the plates then, but he became an official witness. This was after the translation was finished, as William explained to an educated minister who reported his conversation in 1841: Joseph Smith "kept the plates a long time in his chamber, and after translating from them, he repeatedly showed them to his parents and to other friends. But my informant said he had never seen them." [^5] But picking them up and feeling their contour was another matter, for at the end of the above speech William was asked how much the plates weighed, and his answer was: "As near as I could tell, about sixty pounds." [^6] William said the same thing in the early story of Mormonism that he authored, recounting how Joseph "escaped to the house and brought the plates with him—wrapped up in a towfrock." [^7] In the same work William sharply distinguished himself from his father and brothers Hyrum and Samuel, "who were witnesses to the truth of the book." [^8] They had this additional privilege later, for William could say of himself (and the family) on the night that Joseph brought in the plates: "I was permitted to lift them as they laid in a pillowcase, but not to see them, as it was contrary to the commands he had received. They weighed about 60 lbs. according to the best of my judgment." [^9] All of William's reports of lifting and feeling seem to refer to this same night, for Joseph did not usually keep the plates wrapped in his work smock, which William called "his everyday frock such as young men used to wear then." [^10] Not long before his death, William reiterated his vivid experience with the plates to interviewer J. W. Peterson. "Bro. Briggs then handed me a pencil and asked Bro. Smith if he ever saw the plates his brother had had, from which the Book of Mormon was translated. He replied, 'I did not see them uncovered, but I handled them and hefted them while wrapped in a tow frock and judged them to have weighed about sixty pounds. I could tell they were plates of some kind and that they were fastened together by rings running through the back.' " [^11]

Witnesses of the Book of MormonHC24Mother Lucy Smith shared William's experiences, but she also had some others. Her son Joseph showed her both the Urim and Thummim and the breastplate, the objects obtained in the box with the plates, apparently to ease her worries and reward her for her intense concern about obtaining the plates. [^12] Her view of these things may account for the above minister's report from William that Joseph had showed the plates to his parents; in fact only the father saw the plates, but perhaps William hinted that his mother had seen things not shown to him. As far as the ancient records, Lucy is like William, for both said that they had not seen but had picked them up. This new information from Lucy is not from her dictated memoirs, but from an 1838 letter from a neighbor, a convert who wrote her relatives in response to their request for something to strengthen their faith after the difficult financial troubles and apostasy in Kirtland. The author of the following letter had temporarily moved back to her mid-Ohio home but reviewed her close association with the Prophet's mother, telling the same stories that Lucy Smith later put in her memoirs about hiding the plates from neighbors who sought to take them. Since these are events of October and November, 1827, a period of about eight weeks, the "eight months" of the following report may be miswritten. Otherwise this letter summarizes well the events of the Smith family in these two months with the same intimate details that are only found in Lucy Smith's history.

25I lived by his mother, and [she] was one of the finest of women— always helping them that stood in need. She told me the whole story. The plates was in the house and sometimes in the woods for eight months on account of people trying to get them. They had to hide them. Once they hid them under the hearth. They took up the brick and put them in and put the bricks back. The old lady told me this herself with tears in her eyes, and they ran down her cheeks too. She put her hand upon her stomach and said she [ha]s the peace of God that rested upon us, all that time. She said it was a heaven below. I asked her if she saw the plates. She said no, it was not for her to see them, but she hefted and handled them, and I believed all she said, for I lived by her eight months, and she was one of the best of women. [^13]

25Such a record of a woman's private conversation is all too rare in history, but there is every reason to suppose that Joseph Smith's sisters could have told equivalent stories. Of course, youngest sister Lucy was only six when Joseph brought home the plates and probably said little about it; similar considerations may have influenced youngest brother Don Carlos, then eleven, though also pertinent is his early death at the age of twenty-five in Nauvoo. The two sisters nearer Joseph's age were modest people and evidently did not talk much about their experiences. Yet their overall faith in their brother's mission supports their sharing the events mentioned by William and mother Lucy Smith. For instance, a Mormon elder saw the sisters Sophronia and Katharine in 1856 and reported after a long visit, "They testified that they knew that their brother Joseph was a Prophet of God." [^14] Their special family knowledge was earlier tested by Martin Harris, for he told how careful he had been in investigating the Book of Mormon soon after Joseph got the plates. He first allowed his wife and daughter to visit the Smith house and afterwards questioned them about the box that supposedly held the plates. "My daughter said they were about as much as she could lift . . . and my wife said they were very heavy." Martin Harris decided to see for himself and while there also lifted the box of plates. "I knew from the heft that they were lead or gold, and I knew that Joseph had not credit enough to buy so much lead." [^15] All of this fits the Lucy and William recollections, but the point here is Martin Harris's individualized cross-examination of "Joseph, his wife, brothers, sisters, his father and mother. I talked with them separately, that I might get the truth of the matter." In fact, Martin arrived on the above visit when Joseph was away. "I was glad he was absent, for that gave me an opportunity of talking with his wife and the family about the plates. I talked with them separately, to see if their stories agreed, and I found they did agree." [^16]

26Joseph's younger sister Katharine was no doubt in the house at this time. When Joseph got the plates she was fifteen, and she also summarized the events of that night, though what stands out is her disappointment at Joseph's not fully sharing the plates. "We had supposed that when he should bring them home, the whole family would be allowed to see them, but he said it was forbidden of the Lord. They could be seen only by those who were chosen to bear their testimony to the world. We had therefore to be content until they were translated and we could have the book to read. Many times when I have read its sacred pages, I have wept like a child, while the Spirit has borne witness with my spirit to its truth." [^17] Katharine Smith Salisbury lived longest of all of the immediate family of the Prophet, but up to her death in 1900 was not interviewed systematically. Yet her educated grandson, Herbert S. Salisbury, reported her private conversations about Joseph's first bringing the plates home. "She said he entered the house running and threw himself on a couch, panting from his extraordinary exertion. She told me Joseph allowed her to 'heft' the package but not to see the gold plates, as the angel had forbidden him to show them at that period. She said they were very heavy." [^18]

27Joseph had received the plates late in September, 1827, and in the following weeks endured constant harassment from excited neighbors determined to get them. Mother Smith told not only of hiding them under the hearth, but also of having a mob ransack their cooper's shed and smash apart the box that the plates had been removed from. [^19] When Joseph moved to Pennsylvania in December, another group conspired to waylay him, but broke up arguing with each other. [^20] Finally Emma and Joseph arrived at her father's farm, where they settled on a small acreage and fixed up a house for their needs. In the spring of 1828 Martin Harris came some 130 miles from their former home to live with Joseph and Emma and spend his time writing manuscript while Joseph dictated the translation. By mid-June Emma was ready to deliver her first child, and the men were at a stopping point in their work. Double sorrow now descended on Joseph and his wife. Against divine direction, Joseph had taken the responsibility of loaning the manuscript to Martin Harris for the purpose of convincing his hypercritical wife and certain friends. Soon after Harris left, Emma's child came but died right after birth. [^21] Then Emma's life hung in the balance for a time, but as she recovered, she was as worried about the manuscript as Joseph was, and urged him to go to Palmyra to find out why Martin had sent no word. Under great physical hardship Joseph did this, only to find the worst—Martin had been careless, and the manuscript had disappeared. Joseph detailed in his history how he was rebuked, stripped of both plates and translating aids for a time, and that fall reintrusted with the commission to translate the Book of Mormon. But Martin Harris, who had violated his solemn commitments, was not again allowed to write for the work. Joseph said that during that fall and winter he marked time, devoting himself to farming for a living, but in his early summary history he added of this winter of 1828-29: "now my wife had written some for me to translate, and also my Brother Samuel H. Smith." [^22] This knowledge gives great value to his wife's candid comments on the translation process.

28The Prophet's problem of how to proceed was moving to solution in his parent's home that winter. Oliver Cowdery had been engaged as the schoolteacher in that district and boarded at the Smiths. Fascinated by the rumors he had heard regarding the finding of the ancient record, Oliver carefully investigated the facts from Joseph's parents, who shared their knowledge fully with him as they learned to trust him. Through prayer he received confirmation of Joseph's mission, and traveled 130 miles to help with the translation in Pennsylvania in early April, 1829. [^23] For the next two months Oliver boarded with Joseph and Emma and wrote as the religious record of ancient American peoples was deciphered. This period of the translation at Emma's home in Harmony, Pennsylvania, offered her additional opportunity to observe. Here Joseph's wife had cooked and cleaned for the translating team for two months during 1828 and now again for two months during 1829, doubling as secretary herself during several months between these periods. All of this was in a small house with few rooms. No doubt her comments are most significant.

28Emma outlived Joseph by a third of a century and had strong opinions on the inspired nature of Book of Mormon translation. Her overall impression is clear: "And though I was . . . present during the translation of the plates, and had cognisance of things as they transpired, it is marvelous to me, 'a marvel and a wonder,' as much so as to any one else." [^24] She stressed that Joseph worked beyond his natural abilities that she well knew, not relying on any English aid or even mental review to create the narrative. Right after talking with his mother, Joseph III reported her responses in a letter. "She wrote for Joseph Smith during the work of translation, as did also Reuben Hale, her brother, and O. Cowdery; that the larger part of this labor was done in her presence, and where she could see and know what was being done; that during no part of it did Joseph Smith have any mss. or book of any kind from which to read, or dictate, except the metallic plates, which she knew he had." [^25]

Translation of the Book of MormonHC29How did she know that Joseph had the plates? In the same interview Emma described how she would write for him "day after day, often sitting at the table close by him." He would translate by excluding the light from his interpreting stone by a hat. Some have assumed that this process went on without the plates, since Emma said that he sat at this table "dictating hour after hour with nothing between us." [^26] But the plates evidently had a constant function in their work, since they were also at the same table. The question was asked about her husband, "Are you sure that he had the plates at the time you were writing for him?" This was Emma's full answer: "The plates often lay on the table without any attempt at concealment, wrapped in a small linen table cloth, which I had given him to fold them in. I once felt of the plates as they thus lay on the table, tracing their outline and shape. They seemed to be pliable like thick paper, and would rustle with a metallic sound when the edges were moved by the thumb, as one does sometimes thumb the edges of a book." [^27] Emma made clear that she did not attempt to remove the cover from the plates, though she was certain what they were. "I moved them from place to place on the table, as it was necessary in doing my work." [^28]

29Emma's quiet valley was finally infested with ugly threats of persecution as the translation progressed in late spring of 1829. At that point Oliver wrote his acquaintance David Whitmer, who in company with his unmarried brothers worked with Father Whitmer on their farm near Seneca Lake, back in western New York some thirty miles from Palmyra. David Whitmer lived long and was interviewed enough to leave detailed recollections of the events that followed Cowdery's request for help. His father doubted whether he should take six days for the round trip to Pennsylvania at the critical season of spring planting. But the whole household was humbled by clear evidences of divine help, and David set out with team and wagon, bringing Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery to his rural Fayette home, leaving Emma to settle up business and follow later. [^29] In later life David relived the journey, picturing himself and Oliver on the spring seat of the wagon, with Joseph behind on the board bed. The earliest journal account relates David's story as follows: "And an aged man about 5 feet 10, heavy set and on his back an old fashioned army knapsack strapped over his shoulders and something square in it, and he walked alongside of the wagon and wiped the sweat off his face, smiling very pleasant. David asked him to ride and he replied, 'I am going across to the Hill Cumorah.' Soon after they passed, they felt strange and stopped but could see nothing of him—all around was clear. And they asked the Lord about it. He said that the Prophet looked as white as a sheet and said that it was one of the Nephites, and that he had the plates " [^30] In another interview David portrayed the messenger carrying the plates, "about 5 feet 8 or 9 inches tall and heavy set," with "large" face, "a suit of brown woolen clothes, his hair and beard . . . white." [^31]

30After the translators had moved into the Whitmer home, Mother Whitmer told David a remarkable episode of the same messenger. "My mother was going to milk the cows, when she was met out near the yard by the same old man (judging by her description of him) who said to her: 'You have been very faithful and diligent in your labors, but you are tried because of the increase of your toil; it is proper therefore that you should receive a witness that your faith may be strengthened.' Thereupon he showed her the plates." [^32] David gave other details to Edward Stevenson. "She said that they were fastened with rings, thus: . He turned the leaves over; this was a satisfaction to her." [^33] She also added of the plates "that a portion of them were sealed together." [^34] In telling the story David alluded to the large Whitmer family and the added burden of "Joseph, his wife Emma, and Oliver." Thus the special manifestation had the compassionate purpose of comforting the woman in the household who shouldered the most cares in the new translation arrangement. David said: "And although she had never complained, she had sometimes felt that her labor was too much, or at least she was perhaps beginning to feel so. This circumstance, however, completely removed all such feelings and nerved her up for her increased responsibilities." [^35]

31David told the above details after his mother's death. Then soon after David's death Mormon historians visited his nephew, John C. Whitmer, a grandson of Mary Musselman Whitmer through her son Jacob. He reiterated the above experience of Mother Whitmer, but with fascinating supplementary details that deserve to be repeated in his own words. He insisted that he had heard the story independently from Mary herself. "I have heard my grandmother say on several occasions that she was shown the plates of the Book of Mormon by an holy angel, whom she always called Brother Nephi." This account was printed by LDS historian Andrew Jenson a month after he had interviewed Mother Whitmer's grandson.

31One evening, when (after having done her usual day's work in the house) she went to the barn to milk the cows, she met a stranger carrying something on his back that looked like a knapsack. At first she was a little afraid of him, but when he spoke to her in a kind, friendly tone, and began to explain to her the nature of the work which was going on in her house, she was filled with unexpressible joy and satisfaction. He then untied his knapsack and showed her a bundle of plates, which in size and appearance corresponded with the description subsequently given by the witnesses to the Book of Mormon. This strange person turned the leaves of the book of plates over, leaf after leaf, and also showed her the engravings upon them; after which he told her to be patient and faithful in bearing her burden a little longer, promising that if she would do so, she should be blessed and her reward would be sure, if she proved faithful to the end. The personage then suddenly vanished with the plates, and where he went, she could not tell. From that moment my grandmother was enabled to perform her household duties with comparative ease, and she felt no more inclination to murmur because her lot was hard. I knew my grandmother to be a good, noble and truthful woman, and I have not the least doubt of her statement in regard to seeing the plates being strictly true. She was a strong believer in the Book of Mormon until the day of her death. [^36]

31The Book of Mormon translation was largely finished at the Whitmer home in Fayette, New York, during June, 1829, the same month in which the Three and the Eight Witnesses saw the plates. These two events gave impressive evidence of the sacred record that Joseph Smith translated, though they are also a part of the larger picture of many people concerned with the translation. The others had knowledge of the ancient record virtually in proportion to their sacrifices to help in translation. Joseph's brother William, his mother Lucy, and his wife Emma all gave early recorded statements of lifting and feeling the original record. And Mary Whitmer's special view was relayed later through the responsible words of her son and grandson. These experiences are not part of the formal proclamation to the world. They are a treasure of personal knowledge that was quietly shared, not to plead a case but to relate why the Book of Mormon touched each life profoundly. These private encounters with the metal book preceded both the Three Witnesses' seeing the angel and the plates, and also the Eight Witnesses' handling the plates in natural surroundings. The final events climaxed household events in which the plates played a part. Thus family knowledge solidly supports the public statements of the Three and Eight Witnesses.

Lucy Smith, Biographical Sketches, pp. 99-101, narrates that Joseph and Emma left about midnight of September 21, but did not return until early morning of September 22, the date which Joseph gives for getting the plates in History of the Church 1:18.

Biographical Sketches, p. 104.

Lucy Smith, manuscript of Biographical Sketches. See also Biographical Sketches, p. 105.

William Smith, "Sermon in the Saints' Chapel," Deloit, Iowa, June 8, 1884, Saints' Herald 31 (1884):643-44.

James Murdock to the Hartford Observer, June 19, 1841, New Haven, Conn., Peoria (Ill.) Register, Sept. 3, 1841.

William Smith, Sermon, p. 644.

William Smith, William Smith on Mormonism (Lamoni, Iowa, 1883), p. 11.

Ibid., p. 12.

Ibid.

Interview of William Smith with E. C. Briggs and J. W. Peterson, Zion's Ensign, Jan. 13, 1894, p. 6.

Ibid.

See Biographical Sketches, pp. 101, 107.

Sally Parker to Francis Tufts, Aug. 26, 1838, evidently written at Sunbury, Ohio, and posted at Kirtland Mills. Manuscript in possession of a descendant.

G.F.A. Spiller to T.B.H. Stenhouse, Dec. 8, 1856, Saint Louis, cit. The Mormon, Dec. 20, 1856. Cp. Richard Lloyd Anderson, "What Were Joseph Smith's Sisters Like?" Ensign, Mar., 1979, pp. 42-44.

Joel Tiffany, "Mormonism—No. II," Tiffany's Monthly 4 (1859):168-70 Martin Harris seems responsibly reported by Tiffany, with the exception of the discovery of the plates, where Tiffany admits that he is interested in proving Mormonism a product of superstition or spiritualistic influence. Not only does the Tiffany interview show serious inconsistency on this issue, but reading of all of his installments on Mormonism discloses that he as an interviewer was highly interested in using Harris to support his preconceived explanations.

Ibid., pp. 167, 169.

Katharine Salisbury letter, Mar. 10, 1886, Fountain Green Township, Ill., cit. Saints' Herald 33 (1886):260. First name spelling follows this printed letter and other similar signatures of this period.

---
Notas:
[^1] Joseph Smith, History of the Church 1:6, also Pearl of Great Price, JS-H 1:19, reprinted also in the LDS pamphlet "Joseph Smith's Testimony."
[^2] Joseph Smith to Emma Smith, June 6, 1832, Greenville, Indiana, manuscript at the Chicago Historical Society.
[^3] HC 1:8, JS-H 1:26.
[^4] Latter Day Saints' Messenger and Advocate 1 (1835):79.
[^5] "Articles and Covenants of the Church of Christ," first published in The Evening and the Morning Star, June, 1832, now D&C 20:6.
[^6] Elders' Journal, July, 1838, pp. 42-43.
[^7] HC 1:19, JS-H 1:61.
[^8] Biographical Sketches, p. 113.
[^9] See Joseph Smith, 1832 Manuscript History, in Dean C. Jessee, ed., The Personal Writings of Joseph Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1984), pp. 7-8. The second Anthon Transcript and the apparent Joseph Smith note on it, pp. 223-26 of this book, proved to be forged.
[^10] See the valuable tabulation of surviving pages of the original Book of Mormon manuscript in Dean C. Jessee, "The Original Book of Mormon Manuscript," Brigham Young University Studies 10 (1970):273.
[^11] Book of Commandments 4:4, the earliest datable writing (1833), with subsequent verbal changes in D&C 5:11-14. An undated manuscript of the early form is in the Whitney papers at Brigham Young University, box 1, folder 2.
[^12] Cowdery's priesthood restoration narrative indicates that by May 15, 1829, the translators had passed 3 Nephi 11, which raises the authority question that caused their inquiries on baptism. See Latter Day Saints' Messenger and Advocate 1 (1834):13: "after writing the account given of the Savior's ministry." The next book, Ether, 5:24 contains the promise of witnesses seeing the plates.
[^13] In the next quotation of the text, the Prophet mentions the Book of Mormon promise in language much closer to this 2 Nephi 27 prophecy than to Ether 5:2-4, which suggests that they were in Fayette translating the first two books of Nephi, the period of the lost 116 pages. The non-Cowdery manuscript pages, some of which are apparently done by John Whitmer, also indicate a Fayette translation for the beginning portions of the book. Cp. n. 10.
[^14] Book of Commandments 4:8, with the Whitney manuscript reading "the things which he desireth to view," now D&C 5:24. Cp. n. 11.
[^15] Times and Seasons 3 (1842):897, also cit. HC 1:52-53.
[^16] D&C 17:1-4, first published in the 1835 edition with the dating: "June, 1829, given previous to their viewing the plates containing the Book of Mormon." Early dissenter Ezra Booth saw a manuscript of this revelation in the summer of 1831: "When in Missouri, I had an opportunity to examine a commandment given to these witnesses, previous to their seeing the plates. They were informed that they should see and hear those things by faith and then they should testify to the world." (Letter 3, [Ravenna] Ohio Star, Oct. 27, 1831.)
[^17] Joseph Smith's history suggests that Book of Mormon translation was nearly completed at this time, a correction of Lucy Smith, who did not live in the Whitmer home but only visited. In Lucy's manuscript at the end of the quotation here, "four" is written over an original "three," referring to those who then left the home. Since David remembered being in the field when others came to get him, he may not have been at the morning devotional service. There are other possibilities of time, since we have only glimpses of that morning in the sources.
[^18] The quotation comes from Salisbury's most reliable document, his signed typescript, "Things the Prophet's Sister Told Me," June 30, 1945.
[^19] See Biographical Sketches, pp. 108-9.
[^20] For the date of the move and a summary of persecution, see HC 1:18-19. For aborted plans to take the plates as Joseph was moving, see Biographical Sketches, p. 113.
[^21] HC 1:20-21 gives the approximate translation dates of April 2 to June 14, 1828. For the family tragedy that accompanied the loss of the 116 pages, see Biographical Sketches, pp. 118-22, which is confirmed by the death date of the first son on the gravestone: June 15, 1828.
[^22] HC 1:28 gives a one-sentence summary of Joseph's practical affairs that winter, but his 1832 ledger book manuscript mentions the limited translation: "History of the Life of Joseph Smith, Jr.," p. 6. Cp. Lucy's report of Joseph's conversation this winter; "I have again commenced translating, and Emma writes for me." Biographical Sketches, p. 126.
[^23] For events mentioned, see Biographical Sketches, pp. 128-31. Both Joseph and Oliver gave his arrival as April 5, 1829, with translation beginning immediately afterward. HC 1:32 and Latter Day Saints' Messenger and Advocate 1 (1834):14.
[^24] Emma Smith, Interview between Feb. 4 and Feb. 10, 1879, Saints' Herald 26 (1879):290.
[^25] Joseph Smith III to James T. Cobb, Feb. 14, 1879, Letterbook 2, pp. 85-88, RLDS Archives, courteously shared with me by Smith family scholar Buddy Youngreen.
[^26] Saints' Herald 26 (1879):289.
[^27] Ibid., p. 290.
[^28] Ibid.
[^29] The Whitmer family reactions are told by Lucy Smith, who knew the parents well. Biographical Sketches, pp. 135-37. For further detail see Richard L. Anderson, "The Whitmers: A Family That Nourished the Church," Ensign, Aug., 1979, p. 36.
[^30] Edward Stevenson, Journal, Dec. 23, 1877.
[^31] Orson Pratt and Joseph F. Smith to John Taylor, cit. Deseret News, Nov. 16, 1878.
[^32] Ibid.
[^33] Stevenson, Journal, Dec. 23, 1877.
[^34] Stevenson, Journal, Feb. 9, 1886. Stevenson also noted David's retelling the same incident in the journal entry of January l, 1887, recording another visit.
[^35] Pratt and Smith to Taylor, cit. Deseret News, Nov. 16, 1878.
[^36] Andrew Jenson, The Historical Record, Oct., 1881, p. 621. Edward Stevenson was also present at the visit with John C. Whitmer and approved Jenson's report. See Edward Stevenson, "The Thirteenth Witness to the Plates of the Book of Mormon," Juvenile Instructor 24 (1889):23.
