Richard Lloyd Anderson, Investigating the Book of Mormon Witnesses ( 1981)

373

37Oliver Cowdery: Non-Mormon Lawyer

37 Law card of Oliver Cowdery and partner, 1843. Printed in the Seneca Advertiser, Tiffin, Ohio.

37Oliver Cowdery played an extraordinary role in the beginning of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. His title of "second elder" was appropriate, as an examination of incidents in which he was prominent indicates: the translation of the Book of Mormon, restoration of the Aaronic and Melchizedek priesthoods, printing of the Book of Mormon, the conversion of Sidney Rigdon, and the vision of the Christ and the Old Testament prophets in the Kirtland Temple. Since he was announced as the sole companion of Joseph Smith in the foundation experiences, no one else stood in the unique position of being able to expose Joseph Smith at all critical points, if he could be exposed. Because whatever Oliver Cowdery reported about the earliest events of Mormonism is of the greatest significance, it is most important to study the kind of man he was and assess his reliability.

37Oliver Cowdery was respected by associates wherever he lived. The pinnacle of his Latter-day Saint career was in Kirtland, Ohio, in 1836, when he was a trusted "assistant president" to Joseph Smith and was involved on many practical fronts of the expanding LDS movement. [^1] In that year he reassumed the editorship of the Church newspaper, and his brother-in-law characterized him publicly as "a man of piety, of candor, of truth, of integrity, of feeling for the welfare of the human family, and in short, he is a man of God." [^2]

38Although Cowdery was prominent in Ohio, the history of Mormonism in Missouri is written with his name largely in footnotes. Personally hurt in his relationship with Joseph Smith, he allied himself with his Whitmer relatives in serious differences with the Church as it was gathering in Caldwell County, Missouri. The Whitmers were in local leadership and also involved in land promotion that might be considered either private enterprise or—as was interpreted by Missouri members—the exploitation of the Saints. Oliver sided with this family as he attempted to build up his personal fortune through beginning legal work. Six of nine charges against him involved his economic affairs, and his part in filing collection suits was specifically named. This Book of Mormon witness penned a spirited letter of resignation, in which he defined his controversy with leaders not in terms of basic beliefs, but only "the outward government of this Church." [^3] He left Missouri after mob violence and by the end of that year found his way back to Ohio. In the decade between his excommunication from the Church in 1838 and his return in 1848, his name is absent from Mormon activity.

38But no one can make an intelligent appraisal of Cowdery as a person without knowing a good deal about his non-Mormon career. By failing to conform to Church discipline, he forfeited his title of "second elder" and exchanged it for "Oliver Cowdery, Esquire," the traditional designation of an attorney-at-law. Without companionship of his Church associates, he nevertheless belonged to the fraternity of fellow attorneys, who admired him as a legal craftsman. During his non-Mormon decade, he was also a politician, journalist, promoter of education, and civic servant. The opinions of his friends of this period show clearly that he was widely respected as a man of more than ordinary stature.

39By the time of his excommunication on April 12, 1838, Oliver Cowdery had made definite plans for the practice of law. The only question was where. He exchanged much correspondence with his brothers in Kirtland in hopes of settling in the same vicinity, and one letter states his ideal of professional competence:

39"I take no satisfaction in thinking of practicing law with a half dozen books. Let us get where people live, with a splendid library, attend strictly to our books and practice, and I have no fear if life and health are spared, but we can do as well as, at least, the middle class." [^4]

39After experimenting with living in Missouri, he decided to move back to Ohio, where his brothers Warren and Lyman were beginning their careers in the field of law. This move to Kirtland took place at the end of 1838, and by January 1840 it is clear that Oliver Cowdery was practicing law. [^5] The year 1839 was undoubtedly devoted to study for his admission to the bar, [^6] but there were other activities. His biography in the family history was compiled with access to information from his widow, Elizabeth Whitmer Cowdery, who lived until 1892, and it says that he "supported himself by teaching school while pursuing his study of the law." [^7] If this phrasing is strictly correct, then Cowdery taught during his non-Mormon stay in Kirtland. Perhaps this is why he appears as secretary of one of the organizational meetings of the Western Reserve Teacher's Seminary and Kirtland Institute, which used the Kirtland Temple in the period that he was there. [^8]

39Be that as it may, Cowdery was active in the Democratic Party during his Kirtland stay. In 1839 he was chosen as one of the thirteen delegates from Geauga county to the bi-county senatorial convention. [^9] The upset victory there for Benjamin Bissell is most interesting, [^10] since, as Joseph Smith's attorney at Kirtland, Bissell was well acquainted with Mormon leaders. He is spoken of as Cowdery's patron in introducing him to law, and consequently he was the likely source of Cowdery's recommendation to the Democratic leaders in Tiffin, Ohio, where Cowdery next moved.

40The spirited presidential campaign of 1840 necessitated a Democratic paper in Seneca County, Ohio, and both a press and an editor were imported. Cowdery was chosen for that job, obviously on the basis of recommendations of prominent Democrats of his Cleveland-Kirtland region, some 125 miles northeast. A prominent Tiffin politician later said of the founding of that campaign paper, "Oliver Cowdery was to have been editor, but was dropped on the discovery that he was one of the seven founders of Mormonism." [^11] If the arithmetic of the six organizers or the eleven witnesses is garbled, the recollection is clear that a Book of Mormon witness was no political asset and could not be tolerated in a local party post. The fact that Oliver Cowdery nevertheless remained in Tiffin for seven years and earned the respect of a biased community says a good deal for his personal capacities and character. Before leaving he was appointed temporary editor of the Democratic weekly and was publicly thanked in its columns for his "ability" as shown in "the management of our paper." [^12]

40While the above incident illustrates Cowdery's lifelong talent as a writer, it was through his profession as a lawyer and his public activities that he was chiefly known while in Tiffin from 1840 to 1847. The courthouse today holds files of legal pleadings signed "O. Cowdery"; the two local newspapers of the period contain both his lawyer's advertisements and the notices of his cases requiring publication. More significantly, two colleagues of that period are on record with their estimate of the man and his legal talent.

41William Lang had the greater personal contact with Cowdery, because he apprenticed in his office for the period of one and a half years. Lang was a self-reliant man of twenty-five at the beginning of his period of reading law in the Cowdery office, and the senior attorney created a powerful impression upon his student. This relationship with Cowdery terminated in 1842 upon Lang's own entrance to the bar, but he associated with Cowdery for another five years, both as a member of the Seneca County Bar and in the inner circles of the county Democratic organization. Lang's lifetime legal career was supplemented with public service as prosecuting attorney, probate judge, mayor of Tiffin, county treasurer, and two terms in the Ohio senate. He was nominated by his party for major state offices twice. In later life he wrote a History of Seneca County, in which he expressed unlimited admiration for the "noble and true manhood" of Oliver Cowdery. He there describes Cowdery personally and professionally:

41Mr. Cowdery was an able lawyer and a great advocate. His manners were easy and gentlemanly; he was polite, dignified, yet courteous. He had an open countenance, high forehead, dark brown eye, Roman nose, clenched lips and prominent lower jaw. He shaved smooth and was neat and cleanly in his person. He was of light stature, about five feet, five inches high, and had a loose, easy walk. With all his kind and friendly disposition, there was a certain degree of sadness that seemed to pervade his whole being. His association with others was marked by the great amount of information his conversation conveyed and the beauty of his musical voice. His addresses to the court and jury were characterized by a high order of oratory, with brilliant and forensic force. He was modest and reserved, never spoke ill of any one, never complained. [^13]

41The other Tiffin attorney who left written recollections of Cowdery was William Harvey Gibson. It is an adequate introduction to note that Gibson's statue stands in front of the Seneca County courthouse. He won considerable fame as a Civil War general, but the statue commemorates his more famous achievements as an orator and nationally known campaign speaker in the late nineteenth century. Although Gibson was involved in a state scandal and resigned his elective office of treasurer of Ohio in 1857, he won back a creditable reputation as Tiffin's most famous citizen. An active lawyer from 1845 to 1872 and a seasoned businessman afterward, he evaluated Cowdery from the vantage point of a fellow attorney and political opponent. In a letter designed for publication in 1892, Gibson said, "Cowdery was an able lawyer and [an] agreeable, irreproachable gentleman." [^14]

42Of Cowdery's considerable public service in his Tiffin career, most consistent and significant is his service as a member of the Board of School Examiners of Seneca County. Both William Lang and William H. Gibson's wife remembered his questioning them for certification to teach. Another individual of some ability attended one of these public examinations that Cowdery and two other trustees administered, and reported, "I must acknowledge myself not a little instructed, though but a spectator." [^15] The court files also reveal that Cowdery was prominent in testing candidates for admission to the bar, so it is clear that he displayed lifelong interest and ability as an educator.

42Several remarkable estimates of Cowdery as a person stem from his political activities in two states while out of the Church. In Tiffin, Ohio, he was regularly before the public as an active party worker, public speaker, and occasional candidate for civil office. In 1842, 1844, and 1845, he was elected by the party township meeting as delegate to the Democratic county convention. In all these years he was named on the resolutions committee at the county convention because of his characteristic role as an articulate party spokesman. He was regularly sent to political rallies as a persuasive stump speaker. In 1845 he was elected as one of three township trustees, defeating his nearest opponent by a twenty-six percent vote margin. [^16] In his last year of political activity in Tiffin, 1846, Cowdery was promoted for the office of state senator at a tri-county convention by a dozen delegates who were loyal to him through two ballots. [^17] At an early point of his stay in Tiffin, Cowdery had written Brigham Young that he labored to produce "a fair reputation and a fair business," [^18] and his solid political career in Seneca County shows the continued truth of that statement.

43The year that the Latter-day Saints migrated west, Cowdery moved also, mainly because of health problems (perhaps tuberculosis). He located at Elkhorn, Wisconsin, where he was attracted by the personal association and established law practice of his brother Lyman. It is characteristic that his first known letter from Wisconsin is from the state capital, where he initiated contact with a chief justice and a key Democratic editor. [^19]

43His career had three phases in the year spent in Wisconsin prior to his returning to the Church. First of all, he continued his profession as a lawyer. The minutes of the Walworth County commission reveal that he was granted an office in the courthouse October 3, 1847; the two known surviving issues of Elkhorn papers for that period contain his law advertisement: "O. Cowdery, Attorney & Counsellor at Law"; and court records include a number of his cases. Second, for a few months prior to rejoining the Church he was co-editor of the Walworth County Democrat. [^20] A neighboring party newspaper acknowledged his appointment by observing, "Mr. Cowdery is highly spoken of as an editor." [^21]

43The third activity, politics, provides the most impressive evidence of what associates thought of Oliver Cowdery while he was away from the Church. With less than a year of residence in Elkhorn, he was nominated as state assemblyman in the first voting under the state constitution of Wisconsin. This election in the spring of 1848 was characterized by the predictable campaign smears for which Cowdery's Mormon background left him vulnerable.

44With no copies of local newspapers of that period still available, the political infighting must be reconstructed from borrowed articles. The Whig paper of Cowdery's district first noted that Democrats had nominated "one of the three witnesses to the discovery of the Golden Plates, or Mormon Bible, by Joe Smith." [^22] It next ran liberal extracts from the Book of Mormon, undoubtedly including the testimony of the Three Witnesses, which were the basis of personal sarcasm against Cowdery not only in the Elkhorn Western Star, but elsewhere. [^23] Since the campaign was short, the timing of the vicious personal attack on Cowdery resulted in much of his defense reaching print after the election. He was defeated, but by only 40 votes out of about 500 total votes cast, which under the circumstances was both a moral victory and a vindication of the man.

44Considering the unpopularity of Mormonism, Cowdery's Democratic associates might have chosen to respond to attacks on him with silence or even a disavowal of their candidate. Yet Horace A. Tenney, then editor of the important Wisconsin Argus in Madison and later a man of respectable public service to his state, deplored the defeat of "a man of sterling integrity, sound and vigorous intellect, and every way worthy, honest and capable." [^24] Tenney had conversed with Cowdery personally, as well as corresponded with him, so his opinion is a matter of more than casual impression.

44The most significant defense of Oliver Cowdery, however, came from John Breslin, his close associate in Tiffin, Ohio. Breslin had assumed the editorial post initially offered to Cowdery and had constantly promoted and defended him in the Seneca Advertiser. A brilliant young man in Ohio politics, Breslin was elected in 1848 to the Ohio House of Representatives, where he was chosen speaker. He subsequently was reelected as representative and later elected state treasurer. While in that office he made private investments of state funds (an action somewhat condoned by contemporary practice), but he was ruined politically in 1857 when the money invested was uncollectible. [^25] But the personal mistake of Breslin is quite irrelevant to his judgment on Cowdery prior to this scandal, especially since Breslin's open approval of Cowdery points to considerable public opinion in agreement with him. Immediately upon hearing that Cowdery's Mormonism was the basis of personal attacks upon him in Wisconsin, Breslin published an article deploring the "baseness of such a course" of attack; and in another article, entitled "Oliver Cowdery, Esq.," he insisted on the capability and integrity of his friend:

45"Mr. C. was a resident among us for a period of seven years, during which time he earned himself an enviable distinction at the bar of this place and of this judicial circuit, as a sound and able lawyer, and as a citizen none could have been more esteemed. His honesty, integrity, and industry were worthy the imitation of all, whilst his unquestioned legal abilities reflected credit as well upon himself as upon the profession of which he was a member." [^26]

45Although Cowdery had initially planned to come back to the Church at the April conference of 1848, his Wisconsin nomination obviously altered this decision and postponed the return to late October, when he arrived at Kanesville, Iowa, the "eastern" headquarters of the Church. Migration to Utah that fall was out of the question, so economic reality dictated his wintering with Elizabeth Whitmer Cowdery's relatives some 250 miles southeast, in Richmond, Missouri. Since his chronic lung condition left him too weak to cross the plains and had reduced his finances, he was forced to continue his stay in Richmond for the year 1849. Research has so far failed to find evidence that he practiced law there. As a matter of fact, for a considerable portion of that year he was bedridden, and on March 3, 1850, his weakened physical condition brought his death.

46The three Mormon periodicals noting Oliver Cowdery's death did so either in brief comment or by way of reference to his early prominence in the Church. Until his brief reunion with former friends on his return to the Church, the Latter-day Saints were basically unaware of his non-Mormon achievements. But he had created a marked impression upon leading men wherever he lived. Though briefly a resident of Richmond, where he died, the circuit court and bar awarded him the normal honor of a practicing attorney in good standing. Adjourning all business in honor of his funeral, it passed a resolution of condolence on behalf of "his afflicted widow and daughter," and expressed regret that "in the death of our friend and brother, Oliver Cowdery, his profession has lost an accomplished member, and the community a reliable and worthy citizen." [^27] Perhaps it is strange to those accustomed to modern communication that publicity of his death was not given in Salt Lake City until some four months afterward, when it was printed in the first issue of the Deseret News. However, the news did not reach his main non-Mormon home at Tiffin, Ohio, until some eight months after his death. Breslin immediately headlined a story "Death of Oliver Cowdery," in which he expressed sorrow at the passing of "our much esteemed friend and former fellow citizen." More important than the few circumstantial details in this article is the final judgment of Oliver Cowdery by the friends who knew him best while he was out of the Church.

46"His numerous acquaintances at this place will receive the tidings of his decease with much regret. He was a man of more than ordinary ability, and during his residence among us had endeared himself to all who knew him in the private and social walks of life." [^28]

47Such a man publicly insisted that he and the Prophet Joseph Smith on several occasions stood in the presence of divine messengers who brought revelation and authority to establish The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

Although the title "assistant president" is loosely equated with "Counselor" in early sources, it is clear that Oliver Cowdery's position as "Second Elder" meant that be "preceded the counselors in the First Presidency in authority." (Joseph Fielding Smith, Doctrines of Salvation, comp. Bruce R. McConkie [Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1954] 1:212.) The main scriptural sources for this conclusion are his early designation as second in authority (D&C 20:3) and the 1841 appointment of Hyrum Smith to the "gifts of the priesthood, that once were put upon him that was my servant Oliver Cowdery" (D&C 124:95). This position was distinguished in the latter revelation from that of the counselors in the First Presidency.

Messenger and Advocate 2 (1836):236.

Far West Record, p. 122, also cit. History of the Church, 3:18.

Letter of Oliver Cowdery to his brothers Warren and Lyman, June 2, 1838, Far West, Mo. The letter was reproduced photographically by Stanley R. Gunn, Oliver Cowdery (Bookcraft: Salt Lake City, 1962), pp. 263-66.

The first known case is advertised under the name "L. & O. Cowdery" with the publication date of January 20, l840, in the Painesville Republican. The notice of the case is preserved in the issue of January 28, 1840.

William Lang, who knew Cowdery personally, says that he came to Ohio as a young man "and entered the law office of Judge Bissell, a very distinguished lawyer in Painesville, Lake county, as a student, and was admitted to practice after having read the requisite length of time and passed an examination." (History of Seneca County [Springfield, Ohio, 1880], p. 364.) Whether Lang really knew the details of Cowdery's pre-Tiffin period is open to question. There is no evidence that Cowdery resided in Painesville, although he was undoubtedly assisted by Bissell.

Mary Bryant Alverson Mehling, Cowdrey-Cowdery-Cowdray Genealogy (1905), p. 173.

Painesville Telegraph, Nov. 29, 1838.

Painesville Republican, Sept. 26, 1839.

Ibid., Oct. 3, 1839.

"Letter from General W. H. Gibson," Seneca Advertiser (Tiffin, Ohio), Apr. 12, 1892.

Seneca Advertiser, Feb. 19, 1847.

Lang, Seneca County, p. 365. In evaluating Lang's opinion of Cowdery, it must be admitted that he shows a distinct critical ability in appraising the qualities of his fellow attorneys in the Seneca County bar.

"Letter from General W. H. Gibson," Seneca Advertiser.

Seneca Advertiser, Oct. 14, 1842.

Ibid., Apr. 11, 1845. For a fuller discussion of Cowdery's political offices in Tiffin, see Richard L. Anderson, "Oliver Cowdery, Esq.: His Non-Church Decade," To the Glory of God (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1974), p. 197 ff.

Ibid., Aug. 7, 1846.

Letter of Oliver Cowdery to Brigham Young and Willard Richards, Dec. 25, 1843, Tiffin, Ohio, also cit. Gunn, Oliver Cowdery, p. 179.

"Letter from Wisconsin," May 18, 1847; Seneca Advertiser, June 18, 1847.

Issues of January 19, 1848, and August 4, 1848, contain his law advertisements. The masthead of the latter issue also lists him as co-editor.

Racine Advocate, July 26, 1848.

Milwaukee Sentinel, Apr. 13, 1848.

Ibid., Apr. 29, 1848.

Wisconsin Argus, May 16, 1848.

William H. Gibson, his brother-in-law and successor in the same office, was also discredited in this incident because he had bought time for Breslin to repay by not revealing the deficit at the beginning of his own term.

Seneca Advertiser, May 5, 1848. This article was copied verbatim as an endorsement in the Walworth County Democrat and then republished (May 30, 1848) by Horace A. Tenney in the Wisconsin Argus at Madison several weeks after Cowdery's defeat.

Circuit Court Record, Ray County, Missouri, Book C, p. 190 (entry Mar. 5, 1850).

Seneca Advertiser, Nov. 1, 1850.

---
Notas:
[^1] Joseph Smith, History of the Church 1:6, also Pearl of Great Price, JS-H 1:19, reprinted also in the LDS pamphlet "Joseph Smith's Testimony."
[^2] Joseph Smith to Emma Smith, June 6, 1832, Greenville, Indiana, manuscript at the Chicago Historical Society.
[^3] HC 1:8, JS-H 1:26.
[^4] Latter Day Saints' Messenger and Advocate 1 (1835):79.
[^5] "Articles and Covenants of the Church of Christ," first published in The Evening and the Morning Star, June, 1832, now D&C 20:6.
[^6] Elders' Journal, July, 1838, pp. 42-43.
[^7] HC 1:19, JS-H 1:61.
[^8] Biographical Sketches, p. 113.
[^9] See Joseph Smith, 1832 Manuscript History, in Dean C. Jessee, ed., The Personal Writings of Joseph Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1984), pp. 7-8. The second Anthon Transcript and the apparent Joseph Smith note on it, pp. 223-26 of this book, proved to be forged.
[^10] See the valuable tabulation of surviving pages of the original Book of Mormon manuscript in Dean C. Jessee, "The Original Book of Mormon Manuscript," Brigham Young University Studies 10 (1970):273.
[^11] Book of Commandments 4:4, the earliest datable writing (1833), with subsequent verbal changes in D&C 5:11-14. An undated manuscript of the early form is in the Whitney papers at Brigham Young University, box 1, folder 2.
[^12] Cowdery's priesthood restoration narrative indicates that by May 15, 1829, the translators had passed 3 Nephi 11, which raises the authority question that caused their inquiries on baptism. See Latter Day Saints' Messenger and Advocate 1 (1834):13: "after writing the account given of the Savior's ministry." The next book, Ether, 5:24 contains the promise of witnesses seeing the plates.
[^13] In the next quotation of the text, the Prophet mentions the Book of Mormon promise in language much closer to this 2 Nephi 27 prophecy than to Ether 5:2-4, which suggests that they were in Fayette translating the first two books of Nephi, the period of the lost 116 pages. The non-Cowdery manuscript pages, some of which are apparently done by John Whitmer, also indicate a Fayette translation for the beginning portions of the book. Cp. n. 10.
[^14] Book of Commandments 4:8, with the Whitney manuscript reading "the things which he desireth to view," now D&C 5:24. Cp. n. 11.
[^15] Times and Seasons 3 (1842):897, also cit. HC 1:52-53.
[^16] D&C 17:1-4, first published in the 1835 edition with the dating: "June, 1829, given previous to their viewing the plates containing the Book of Mormon." Early dissenter Ezra Booth saw a manuscript of this revelation in the summer of 1831: "When in Missouri, I had an opportunity to examine a commandment given to these witnesses, previous to their seeing the plates. They were informed that they should see and hear those things by faith and then they should testify to the world." (Letter 3, [Ravenna] Ohio Star, Oct. 27, 1831.)
[^17] Joseph Smith's history suggests that Book of Mormon translation was nearly completed at this time, a correction of Lucy Smith, who did not live in the Whitmer home but only visited. In Lucy's manuscript at the end of the quotation here, "four" is written over an original "three," referring to those who then left the home. Since David remembered being in the field when others came to get him, he may not have been at the morning devotional service. There are other possibilities of time, since we have only glimpses of that morning in the sources.
[^18] The quotation comes from Salisbury's most reliable document, his signed typescript, "Things the Prophet's Sister Told Me," June 30, 1945.
[^19] See Biographical Sketches, pp. 108-9.
[^20] For the date of the move and a summary of persecution, see HC 1:18-19. For aborted plans to take the plates as Joseph was moving, see Biographical Sketches, p. 113.
[^21] HC 1:20-21 gives the approximate translation dates of April 2 to June 14, 1828. For the family tragedy that accompanied the loss of the 116 pages, see Biographical Sketches, pp. 118-22, which is confirmed by the death date of the first son on the gravestone: June 15, 1828.
[^22] HC 1:28 gives a one-sentence summary of Joseph's practical affairs that winter, but his 1832 ledger book manuscript mentions the limited translation: "History of the Life of Joseph Smith, Jr.," p. 6. Cp. Lucy's report of Joseph's conversation this winter; "I have again commenced translating, and Emma writes for me." Biographical Sketches, p. 126.
[^23] For events mentioned, see Biographical Sketches, pp. 128-31. Both Joseph and Oliver gave his arrival as April 5, 1829, with translation beginning immediately afterward. HC 1:32 and Latter Day Saints' Messenger and Advocate 1 (1834):14.
[^24] Emma Smith, Interview between Feb. 4 and Feb. 10, 1879, Saints' Herald 26 (1879):290.
[^25] Joseph Smith III to James T. Cobb, Feb. 14, 1879, Letterbook 2, pp. 85-88, RLDS Archives, courteously shared with me by Smith family scholar Buddy Youngreen.
[^26] Saints' Herald 26 (1879):289.
[^27] Ibid., p. 290.
[^28] Ibid.
