Richard Lloyd Anderson, Investigating the Book of Mormon Witnesses ( 1981)

514

51Oliver Cowdery: The Scribe as a Witness

51 Oliver Cowdery (1806-50). The only surviving photograph.

Witnesses of the Book of MormonHC51Oliver Cowdery had fair warning that participation in the translation of the Book of Mormon would bring public ridicule. While teaching school and boarding with the Smith family during the winter of 1828-29, he began to hear rumors "from all quarters." [^1] He was obviously a sincere believer to ignore the bitter community sentiment against the Smiths, to persist in inquiring concerning the ancient plates in the possession of the Smiths' son, and to face raw weather and muddy spring roads to travel over a hundred miles to Harmony, Pennsylvania, and offer his services as scribe in translating the religious history of several migrations to ancient America.

Witnesses of the Book of MormonHC51Probably no one gets such a brutally candid view of an executive or author as does a secretary, but Joseph Smith passed this severe test. Five years later, Oliver's memory of this time was still vivid:

Witnesses of the Book of MormonHC51"These were days never to be forgotten-to sit under the sound of a voice dictated by the inspiration of heaven, awakened the utmost gratitude of this bosom! Day after day I continued, uninterrupted, to write from his mouth, as he translated, with the Urim and Thummim, or, as the Nephites would have said, 'Interpreters,' the history, or record, called 'The Book of Mormon.' " [^2]

Witnesses of the Book of MormonHC52The above statement is an important part of Oliver Cowdery's testimony as a Book of Mormon witness. Three full months of constant companionship with the translator of the record convinced this intelligent man of the inspired nature of the process by which the Book of Mormon was produced.

Witnesses of the Book of MormonHC52His official testimony, however, went far beyond this. Persecution in Pennsylvania had forced a change of residence to the Whitmer farm in upstate New York, where continued translation reiterated the direct promise that three men should see the plates. [^3] An overwhelming desire to be these three witnesses came upon Oliver Cowdery, David Whitmer, and Martin Harris. In his original version of the Church history, Joseph Smith emphasized, "they became so very solicitous and teased me so much" that he sought a revelation on the subject. [^4] The result was a promise, conditioned upon faith, that these men would see the plates "with your eyes." [^5] One prophecy in the Book of Mormon implied even more, since it promised that the plates would be shown "by the power of God." [^6]

Witnesses of the Book of MormonHC52The most complete and dramatic account of what subsequently happened is given by Joseph Smith, who depicts the anticipation that brought the four men into the woods to pray for the fulfillment of these promises, their disappointment after repeated unsuccessful prayers, the confession of lack of faith on the part of Harris, the appearance of the angel showing the plates, and the divine voice declaring the truth of the translation and issuing a command that these witnesses "bear record of what you now see and hear." [^7] The appearance of the angel, the reality of the plates, and the command of God to testify of their experience are all summarized in the official testimony that the Three Witnesses permitted to be published with their names affixed:

Witnesses of the Book of MormonHC53"And we declare with words of soberness, that an Angel of God came down from heaven, and he brought and laid before our eyes, that we beheld and saw the plates, and the engravings thereon . . . and we also know that they have been translated by the gift and power of God, for his voice hath declared it unto us; wherefore we know of a surety, that the work is true." [^8]

Witnesses of the Book of MormonHC53Nothing short of biblical Christianity furnishes such a concrete statement of supernatural reality. One cannot dismiss the experience easily, for each man so testifying impressed his community with his capacity and unwavering honesty, and all three consistently reaffirmed the experience in hundreds of interviews throughout their lives. Oliver Cowdery was generally recognized by Mormon and non-Mormon alike as an astute and highly intelligent individual, and his mature life was spent in the practical vocation and avocation of law and politics. The fact that he considered the above experience the most impressive and solemn event of his life must weigh heavily in favor of the objective reality of the vision. Above all, he had the emotional and intellectual capacity to know whether he was deceived. If this vision was real to him, there is a burden upon every informed person to face the great probability that the Latter-day Saints have indeed received modern revelation.

Witnesses of the Book of MormonHC53One other possibility exists—fraud. But this is merely conceivable, for Oliver's solid career as a responsible attorney and public servant is completely inconsistent with such an assumption. Of greatest weight is the unvarying reiteration of this testimony throughout a lifetime. He told the same simple story of the vision, whether under privation, persecution, resentment against the translator of the Book of Mormon, ridicule by non-Mormons, or knowledge of imminent death. Beyond all doubt, he was repeating his inmost convictions as he testified of the truth of the Book of Mormon.

54After the translation, Oliver Cowdery faithfully recopied the manuscript and spent the following winter in the tedious work of supervising its printing. The book was offered for sale ten days before the formal organization of the Church, one week after which he preached its first public discourse. In the small group that he baptized on that day was his future wife, Elizabeth Whitmer, who personally heard the first private and public statements that he made concerning his Book of Mormon witness. Active proselyting in distributing the new scripture containing his name and testimony was soon noted in the local press with skeptical sarcasm: "The apostle to the NEPHITES (Cowdery) has started for the EAST, on board a boat, with a load of 'gold bibles.' " [^9]

First Mission to the LamanitesHC54By the fall of the first year of Church organization, Oliver Cowdery led out in the expansion of missionary activity beyond upstate New York. In a journey as spectacular as any of the Apostle Paul, he and three companions proceeded mainly on foot 300 miles west to Kirtland, Ohio, where they "baptized one hundred and thirty disciples in less than four weeks." [^10] Adding a convert-companion, they traveled and preached another 600 miles to Saint Louis, and walked the last 300 miles to their destination, Independence, Missouri, in the face of the cold and deep snow of a bitter winter in an unsettled country. [^11] Oliver did not exaggerate when he later referred to the many "fatigues and privations which have fallen to my lot to endure, for the gospel's sake." [^12] Like Paul, there can be no doubt that he sacrificed for his vision. Because Kirtland was the scene of the most spectacular success of this mission, the newspapers and private records report the impact of his forceful proclamation that he had seen the angel and the plates.

First Mission to the LamanitesHC54An example of the unbeliever's reaction to Oliver Cowdery comes from the Shaker community at North Union, today a part of Cleveland. The vigorous leader of that settlement was impressed by Oliver's personal manner, if not his testimony. His journal introduced the incident by reviewing that the Latter-day Saint claims "began to make a stir in a town not far from North Union, Ohio," and then described the visit of the missionaries to the Shaker settlement:

First Mission to the LamanitesHC55"Late in the fall a member of that society came to our house to visit the Believers. His name was Oliver Cowdery. He stated that he had been one who assisted in the translation of the golden Bible, and had seen the angel, and also had been commissioned by him to go out and bear testimony that God would destroy this generation. By his request we gave liberty for him to bear his testimony in our meetings. . . . He appeared meek and mild." [^13]

First Mission to the LamanitesHC55Non-Mormon sources clearly demonstrate the fundamental accuracy of later reminiscences of converts of the missionaries. Out of many, perhaps the most interesting is the recollection of Philo Dibble, who lived about five miles from Kirtland. With considerable ridicule his neighbors informed him "that four men had come to Kirtland with a golden Bible and one of them had seen an angel." Dibble's reaction was one of serious curiosity, shared by his wife, and they proposed to find the fact of the matter firsthand.

First Mission to the LamanitesHC55"I hitched up my carriage and again drove to Kirtland, one of my neighbors accompanying us with his team and family. On arriving there, we were introduced to Oliver Cowdery, Ziba Peterson, Peter Whitmer, Jr. and Parley P. Pratt. I remained with them all day, and became convinced that they were sincere in their professions. I asked Oliver what repentance consisted of, and he replied, 'Forsaking sin and yielding obedience to the gospel.' That evening he preached at Brother Isaac Morley's and bore his testimony to the administration of an angel at noonday." [^14]

56Published histories adequately record the career of Oliver Cowdery as an important general authority in Missouri and then Kirtland. Because he came to be the leading writer for the Church in this period, his confidence in the truth of the Book of Mormon and the divinity of the latter-day work is repeatedly expressed. The most frequently asked question about the witnesses is: If these men had seen the angel and the plates, how could they permit themselves to leave the Church? The fundamental answer is that those who had received such special favor had special problems with egotism. Because they had seen for themselves with regard to the Book of Mormon, the time came when the majority of the witnesses considered their judgment equal to Joseph Smith's on all other matters. If specific details are different in the excommunications of Oliver Cowdery and his two brothers-in-law, David and John Whitmer, there is a common theme of a clash of wills in which these witnesses failed to acknowledge Joseph Smith in his appointed role as their leader. Yet at the peak of their personal rebellion against the Prophet, each witness insisted on the strict truth of his signed testimony. Thomas B. Marsh also allowed personal feelings to overcome his commitment to the Church, although he was president of the Twelve. He immediately sought out the witnesses through whose testimony he had been converted eight years before and asked them as fellow dissenters to tell him the truth about the origin of the Book of Mormon.

56"I enquired seriously at David if it was true that he had seen the angel, according to his testimony as one of the witnesses of the Book of Mormon. He replied, as sure as there is a God in heaven, he saw the angel, according to his testimony in that book. I asked him, if so, how he did not stand by Joseph? He answered, in the days when Joseph received the Book of Mormon, and brought it forth, he was a good man filled with the Holy Ghost, but he considered he had now fallen. I interrogated Oliver Cowdery in the same manner, who answered me similarly." [^15]

57The impressiveness of such a testimony cannot be appreciated without knowing the spirited independence that characterizes all of Oliver Cowdery's writing and is so pronounced in his personal letters at the time of his excommunication. In one of these he insists that freedom is more important than life and declares, "I shall speak out when I see a move to deceive the ignorant." [^16] There is every reason to believe that he told Marsh the full truth.

Witnesses of the Book of MormonHC57The cessation of his activity in the Church meant a suspension of his role as a witness of the Book of Mormon. Not that his conviction ceased, but he discontinued public testimony as he worked out a successful legal and political career in non-Mormon society and avoided its prejudiced antagonism by creating as little conflict as possible. Since faith in Jesus Christ was the foundation of his religion, he logically affiliated himself with a Christian congregation for a time, the Methodist Protestant Church at Tiffin, Ohio. There is no more inconsistency in this than Paul's worshiping in the Jewish synagogue, or Joseph Smith's becoming a Mason in order to stem prejudice. A late recollection of Oliver's Methodist affiliation alleged that he was willing to renounce Mormonism, but what this meant to him is much too vague to imply a denial of his testimony—at his excommunication from the Church he had resigned from membership while strongly suggesting that he did not disbelieve basic doctrines. [^17] Thomas Gregg asked Cowdery's colleague in the law, William Lang, whether the former Mormon leader had "openly denounced Mormonism." The answer was that he kept this subject entirely to himself: "He would never allow any man to drag him into a conversation on the subject." [^18]

Witnesses of the Book of MormonHC57One of the few exceptions to this calculated silence is Oliver Cowdery's courtroom testimony of the Book of Mormon. Evidently it did not violate his conscience to be an inactive witness, but he would not accept the role of a denying witness in a direct confrontation where silence would strongly imply a denial. The courtroom incident is widely questioned by informed people, because it is related by a secondary source that inaccurately describes him as a prosecuting attorney (an office that he sought but failed to get) and erroneously locates his law practice in Michigan (a contradiction to his continuous residence out of the Church in Ohio and Wisconsin).

Witnesses of the Book of MormonHC58This version of the courtroom scene comes from Charles M. Nielsen, who frequently described his missionary experiences in the Midwest and the conversion in 1884 of Robert Barrington, who some forty years before had heard Oliver Cowdery's testimony at a trial. The fact that Barrington lived in Michigan at this supposed contact is inconsistent with Cowdery's probable law practice in Ohio at that time.

Witnesses of the Book of MormonHC58 Furthermore, the first version that Barrington gave Nielsen (recorded in 1884 in his missionary journal) was that he had been impressed with Mormonism not by Cowdery but through one Richard Cox, a Latter-day Saint who had lived in his area but moved to California. At some stage in the telling Barrington evidently created the erroneous impression that he had heard Cowdery, so the Nielsen account is thirdhand instead of secondhand. [^19] Yet history is filled with examples of authentic incidents not very accurately described, so the Nielsen account is perhaps a distant recollection of this historical incident.

Witnesses of the Book of MormonHC58The earliest known statement concerning Oliver Cowdery's courtroom testimony is from Brigham Young, who in 1855 publicly reported that Oliver was "pleading law" when he was confronted with his written testimony and asked directly about its truth. According to Brigham Young, Oliver's answer emphasized that his testimony was not a matter of belief but knowledge: "what I have there said that I saw, I know that I saw." [^20] Although this account also wrongly places him as practicing law in Michigan, there is more to this story than first meets the eye. First, it is told within five years of his death, when the knowledge of his life was relatively vivid. Next, the fact that this story comes from the Young family is most significant. The person who did most to bring about his reconciliation to the Church was Phineas Young, who married Oliver's half-sister. In the decade that his brother in-law was out of the Church, Phineas kept up a constant correspondence and regular visits, reporting Cowdery's actions favorably to his brother Brigham in an attempt to bring about Oliver's reinstatement.

Witnesses of the Book of MormonHC59Other members of the Young family had details of the courtroom incident. Seymour B. Young was only eleven years of age when Cowdery returned to the Church but remembered meeting him personally then at the home of Phineas at Kanesville. He related that Oliver had been ridiculed in court by the opposing counsel for his Book of Mormon testimony and that he rose "with tears streaming down his face" and simply responded that he still believed in Mormonism, though "through my own weakness I have been disfellowshipped by that people." [^21] Unquestionably such traditions in the Young family were based on direct contact with Cowdery when he was still alive, perhaps at his return.

Witnesses of the Book of MormonHC59Such an incident would certainly not enter a court record, though it clearly circulated as a story among Mormon leaders, to whom young George Q. Cannon was close, through his uncle and Nauvoo employer, John Taylor. Cannon later related that he heard the details of this incident "when I was a boy." A score of similar references in his public speeches all refer to the period prior to his Hawaiian mission in 1850. In his early twenties then, Cannon does not thereafter refer to himself as "a boy." This means that Cannon evidently heard the courtroom incident while Oliver Cowdery was still alive. Although giving a late recollection, George Q. Cannon had a remarkable intellect and a great capacity for accurate detail in his personal writing. Furthermore, his version of the courtroom incident is consistent with Oliver's conservative references to Mormonism while out of the Church and places his law practice in the right state. For these reasons, Cannon's 1881 description of the courtroom testimony of the Book of Mormon witness is probably the most correct one:

Witnesses of the Book of MormonHC60When I was a boy I heard it stated concerning Oliver Cowdery, that after he left the Church he practiced law, and upon one occasion, in a court in Ohio, the opposing counsel thought he would say something that would overwhelm Oliver Cowdery, and in reply to him in his argument he alluded to him as the man that had testified and had written that he had beheld an angel of God, and that angel had shown unto him the plates from which the Book of Mormon was translated. He supposed, of course, that it would cover him with confusion, because Oliver Cowdery then made no profession of being a "Mormon," or a Latter-day Saint; but instead of being affected by it in this manner, he arose in the court, and in his reply stated that, whatever his faults and weaknesses might be, the testimony which he had written, and which he had given to the world, was literally true. [^22]

60Joseph Smith took the initiative to invite Oliver Cowdery to return to the Church in 1843, an invitation likely based on Joseph Smith's estimate that Oliver was then in the frame of mind to accept it. [^23] Oliver waited another four years for some form of public apology and vindication, but then swallowed his pride by traveling to Kanesville with Phineas Young and asking for baptism. An overdone document entitled "A Confession of Oliver Overstreet" claims that Oliver Cowdery was impersonated and consequently did not return to the Church. Yet its author conveniently died "a few days after he penned the confession given above," making him definitely unavailable for further historical investigation. Whoever forged this melodramatic memoir followed the record of Reuben Miller slavishly, and did not know that Phineas Young was the main actor in the drama of reinstatement—not Miller, an incidental witness. The confession alleges that Miller supervised the impersonation and does not even mention Phineas Young.

61What is factual about Oliver Cowdery's return is that the deed books at Elkhorn, Wisconsin, record that he sold his property (with Phineas Young as a witness on the deed) eighteen days before Church records report his arrival at Kanesville, that James J. Strang reluctantly admitted that he returned to the main body of the Church, that William Marks (then no friend of the Twelve) recalled that Cowdery had visited Marks in Illinois "when on his way to Council Bluffs," [^24] and that contemporary records and later recollections of numerous Latter-day Saints recall his impressive appearance and testimony there. For instance, Reuben Miller recorded the testimony of the Book of Mormon scribe in his journal at the time:

61"I wrote with my own pen the entire Book of Mormon (save a few pages) as it fell from the lips of the Prophet, as he translated it by the gift and power of God, by means of the Urim and Thummim, or as it is called by that book, Holy Interpreters. I beheld with my eyes, and handled with my hands, the gold plates from which it was translated. I also beheld the Interpreters. That book is true." [^25]

61Oliver Cowdery's stay in Kanesville was short but impressive. He consulted officially with the members of the local presidency, Orson Hyde and George A. Smith, whom he had known at Kirtland and who wrote letters at the time referring to his reconciliation. He met in formal session with the high council and high priests quorum, and the records of both bodies describe close questioning of the Book of Mormon witness by former associates who knew him at the height of his Church career and at his apostasy. Oliver Cowdery spoke publicly in meetings after his return. John Needham, a prominent merchant in Kanesville, later recalled, "I heard him preach many time[s], and listened to his powerful testimony with regard to the work of God, Joseph Smith the Prophet, and the great events he took part in." [^26]

62The most intimate portrait of the Kanesville stay is from the son and daughter-in-law of Oliver's former associate in the First Presidency, Frederick G. Williams. Henrietta Williams was recovering from her first childbirth eight days previously and remembered the absence of her mother-in-law and husband to attend the conference at which Oliver spoke and the fact that "after that meeting the Cowderys stayed at our house." This included the family group: "Oliver, his wife and daughter Maria, only child living." [^27] What impressed Ezra Williams most about the former priesthood leader was "the humble spirit, the realization of what he had lost by leaving the Church." [^28]

62The above sources on Oliver's return and reaffirmed testimony are a selection from many documents that demonstrate these events beyond reasonable question. This was actually the crescendo of an eventful career, for his chronic illness restricted his activity and then terminated his life only sixteen months after the reconciliation at Kanesville. David Whitmer concisely summed up this closing period: "In the winter of 1848, after Oliver Cowdery had been baptized at Council Bluffs, he came back to Richmond to live, and lived here until his death, March 3, 1850. [^29]

62In Richmond, Missouri, time was strangely turned back to Oliver's close association with the Whitmer family during the translation of the Book of Mormon in their home in upstate New York twenty years earlier. The friends of that period and their families now cared for him. At his deathbed stood David Whitmer, John Whitmer, Hiram Page and his son, the Son of Jacob Whitmer (and probably the father), as well as Phineas Young, Lucy Cowdery Young, and the wife of Oliver Cowdery. All report the power of his dying testimony, with subtle details that supplement each other. Oliver Cowdery distinctly reiterated his firm witness of the Book of Mormon with full knowledge that he faced the closing hours and moments of life.

63Of the group then surrounding him, the person with most intimate knowledge of all his actions and attitudes was his wife, Elizabeth Whitmer Cowdery. Thirty-seven years later the unwavering consistency of Oliver Cowdery's testimony of the angel and the plates stood out in her mind. In a letter to her brother David Whitmer, she emphasized the meaning of the life of her husband in the measured prose that reflects his own words:

63"From the hour when the glorious vision of the Holy Messenger revealed to mortal eyes the hidden prophecies which God had promised his faithful followers should come forth in due time, until the moment when he passed away from earth, he always without one doubt or shadow of turning affirmed the divinity and truth of the Book of Mormon." [^30]

Biographical Sketches, p. 128.

Latter Day Saints' Messenger and Advocate 1 (1834):14.

Times and Seasons 3 (1842):897, also cit. History of the Church 1:52-53.

Ibid.

D&C 17:1-3 (Kirtland ed. 42:1-2). Cp. ch. 1, n. 16.

2 Ne. 27:12, Ether 5:3 1830 ed., pp. 110, 548).

Times and Seasons 3:897-98, also cit. HC 1:54-56.

The Testimony of Three Witnesses, at end of the original edition and in the forepart of the present Book of Mormon. My quotation inverts the sequence of two thoughts but quotes precisely the words of description, which are the same in the original and present editions of the Book of Mormon.

The Reflector (Palmyra, N.Y.), June 1, 1830. The quotation has limited historical value in tracing Oliver Cowdery's early missionary work. Perhaps it merely refers to a journey to the neighboring Fayette area, conveniently accessible on the Erie Canal. He never left rural New York in this period.

The Evening and the Morning Star l (Apr., 1833):84. Since the editor, W.W. Phelps, did not associate himself with the Church until about a year after the Lamanite mission, these inner details of the earliest Church history probably come from his associate Oliver Cowdery.

See Times and Seasons 3 (1841):623-24, for Parley P. Pratt's summary of the final hardships of their journey: "[I]n 1830, in the depth of a howling winter five men penetrated Missouri's wilds, and traveled on foot from St. Louis to Independence, Jackson county, wading in snow to the knees and the greater part of the way for 300 miles, and all this as may be said, without money or friends, except as they made them."

Latter Day Saints' Messenger and Advocate 1 (1834):14.

Journal of Ashbel Kitchell, copied by Henry C. Blinn, manuscript on file at the Shaker Museum, Old Chatham, New York. A variant copy of the same journal is also at Old Chatham, made by Elisha D. Blakeman; this was published by Robert F. W. Meader, "The Shakers and the Mormons," The Shaker Quarterly 2 (1962):87. I have used the Blinn account because it has minor details not in Blakeman, and Mr. Meader (to whom I am indebted for manuscript copies and private correspondence) suggests that Blinn is more likely to be a careful copyist. For the spelling of Cowdery's name, Blinn has "Cowdrel" and Blakeman writes "Lowdree"; both are understandable misreadings in cursive copying from the name Cowdery. The location of Union Village is within the present Shaker Heights, a suburb of Cleveland, Ohio.

"Philo Dibble's Narrative," Early Scenes in Church History, Faith-Promoting Series, no. 8 (Salt Lake City, 1882), pp. 75-76. David Whitmer rather consistently gave noon as the approximate time of the appearance of the angel with the plates.

"History of Thomas Baldwin Marsh," written Nov., 1857. This was printed first in the Deseret News, Mar. 24, 1858, and then in Millennial Star 26 (1864):406.

Letter of Oliver Cowdery to Brothers Warren and Lyman, Feb. 4, 1838, Far West, Mo., "Cowdery Letter Book" at Huntington Library, San Marino, Calif.

The conclusion of Cowdery's forceful letter of resignation from the Church contained this significant sentence: "I beg you, sir, to take no view of the foregoing remarks, other than my belief on the outward government of this Church." Far West Record, p. 122, also cit. HC 3:18.

Letter of William Lang to Thomas Gregg, Nov. 5, 1881, Tiffin, Ohio, cit. Charles A. Shook, The True Origin of the Book of Mormon (Cincinnati, 1914), p. 56. There is every reason to trust Lang's personal reminiscences but every reason to distrust Lang's theories on the origin of the Book of Mormon, which he admits Cowdery discussed with no person while living in Tiffin.

Nielsen reported to President Heber J. Grant in a letter of Nov. 11, 1899, that he had visited Barrington in Salt Lake City, who told the courtroom story and described himself and Cox as spectators. This variation from what Barrington evidently reported to Nielsen at his conversion may suggest that Barrington was not consistent in the details of his recollection.

Journal of Discourses 2:258.

LDS Conference Report, (Apr., 1921), pp. 114-16.

JD 22:254. Note that the Cannon version contains the elements of testimony and personal regret of being out of the Church that are found separately in the Brigham Young and Seymour B. Young accounts. Several letters from Cowdery in the period while out of the Church deplore the circumstances that brought about his estrangement from the Church. See n. 23.

The Prophet's direction to the Twelve to write a letter of invitation to Cowdery is found in HC 5:368. The proof that Cowdery was willing to entertain seriously the idea of return is his emotional answer written on Christmas, 1843, from Tiffin, Ohio, to Brigham Young and the Twelve. Deeply appreciative of an earlier letter from them containing "feelings of friendship and kindness," he portrays himself as a success but a stranger in non-Mormon society, suggests an apology due for misstatements about him, and concludes by expressing to these men his "kindness, friendship and fellowship."

Letter of William Marks to James M. Adams, June 11, 1855, Shabbona Grove, DeKalb Co., Ill. The original has evidently perished, but a typescript of the entire letter is preserved at the RLDS Archives. Also cit. Inez Smith Davis, The Story of the Church (Independence, Mo., 1964), p. 420.

Journal of Reuben Miller, Oct. 21, 1848. For an insight into Miller's competence as a diarist, see Richard L. Anderson, "Reuben Miller, Recorder of Oliver Cowdery's Reaffirmations," Brigham Young University Studies 8 (1968):277-93.

Life Sketch of John Needham, given on his eightieth birthday anniversary to his family (Apr. 1, 1899), also cit. Andrew Jenson, Latter-day Saint Biographical Encyclopedia (Salt Lake City, 1901) 1:416.

The impersonation theory breaks down completely in the face of family relationships, Will someone now seriously suggest that Cowdery's wife and daughter were also impersonated? Numerous former friends, including the Youngs and the widow and son of Frederick G. Williams, could certainly identify each of the Cowderys. This is a good case in point on the essential difference between authentic and invented documents. The latter inevitably lack the subtle details that reflect an accurate knowledge of their surroundings. The entire Overstreet confession is bent toward explaining a single impersonation on one public occasion. Historical sources show that Cowdery's stay at Kanesville was more prolonged than this, that he was prominent in numerous meetings, and that his family accompanied him.

Frederick G. Williams Family Record, pp. 233-34, 246, summarized in Nancy Clement Williams, After One Hundred Years (Independence, Mo., 1951), pp. 148-49.

David Whitmer, An Address to Believers in the Book of Mormon (Richmond, Mo., 1887), p. 1.

Letter of Elizabeth Cowdery to David Whitmer, Mar. 8, 1887, Southwest City, Mo., published by George W. L. Sweich in The Return 3 (1892):9. In the period of his editorship, Sweich, who was the grandson of David Whitmer, published a number of family reminiscences and evidently obtained this letter from his grandfather's papers. Because it is obviously badly copied, I have corrected one spelling error, changed "shudder of turning" to "shadow of turning," and punctuated the sentence correctly.

---
Notas:
[^1] Joseph Smith, History of the Church 1:6, also Pearl of Great Price, JS-H 1:19, reprinted also in the LDS pamphlet "Joseph Smith's Testimony."
[^2] Joseph Smith to Emma Smith, June 6, 1832, Greenville, Indiana, manuscript at the Chicago Historical Society.
[^3] HC 1:8, JS-H 1:26.
[^4] Latter Day Saints' Messenger and Advocate 1 (1835):79.
[^5] "Articles and Covenants of the Church of Christ," first published in The Evening and the Morning Star, June, 1832, now D&C 20:6.
[^6] Elders' Journal, July, 1838, pp. 42-43.
[^7] HC 1:19, JS-H 1:61.
[^8] Biographical Sketches, p. 113.
[^9] See Joseph Smith, 1832 Manuscript History, in Dean C. Jessee, ed., The Personal Writings of Joseph Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1984), pp. 7-8. The second Anthon Transcript and the apparent Joseph Smith note on it, pp. 223-26 of this book, proved to be forged.
[^10] See the valuable tabulation of surviving pages of the original Book of Mormon manuscript in Dean C. Jessee, "The Original Book of Mormon Manuscript," Brigham Young University Studies 10 (1970):273.
[^11] Book of Commandments 4:4, the earliest datable writing (1833), with subsequent verbal changes in D&C 5:11-14. An undated manuscript of the early form is in the Whitney papers at Brigham Young University, box 1, folder 2.
[^12] Cowdery's priesthood restoration narrative indicates that by May 15, 1829, the translators had passed 3 Nephi 11, which raises the authority question that caused their inquiries on baptism. See Latter Day Saints' Messenger and Advocate 1 (1834):13: "after writing the account given of the Savior's ministry." The next book, Ether, 5:24 contains the promise of witnesses seeing the plates.
[^13] In the next quotation of the text, the Prophet mentions the Book of Mormon promise in language much closer to this 2 Nephi 27 prophecy than to Ether 5:2-4, which suggests that they were in Fayette translating the first two books of Nephi, the period of the lost 116 pages. The non-Cowdery manuscript pages, some of which are apparently done by John Whitmer, also indicate a Fayette translation for the beginning portions of the book. Cp. n. 10.
[^14] Book of Commandments 4:8, with the Whitney manuscript reading "the things which he desireth to view," now D&C 5:24. Cp. n. 11.
[^15] Times and Seasons 3 (1842):897, also cit. HC 1:52-53.
[^16] D&C 17:1-4, first published in the 1835 edition with the dating: "June, 1829, given previous to their viewing the plates containing the Book of Mormon." Early dissenter Ezra Booth saw a manuscript of this revelation in the summer of 1831: "When in Missouri, I had an opportunity to examine a commandment given to these witnesses, previous to their seeing the plates. They were informed that they should see and hear those things by faith and then they should testify to the world." (Letter 3, [Ravenna] Ohio Star, Oct. 27, 1831.)
[^17] Joseph Smith's history suggests that Book of Mormon translation was nearly completed at this time, a correction of Lucy Smith, who did not live in the Whitmer home but only visited. In Lucy's manuscript at the end of the quotation here, "four" is written over an original "three," referring to those who then left the home. Since David remembered being in the field when others came to get him, he may not have been at the morning devotional service. There are other possibilities of time, since we have only glimpses of that morning in the sources.
[^18] The quotation comes from Salisbury's most reliable document, his signed typescript, "Things the Prophet's Sister Told Me," June 30, 1945.
[^19] See Biographical Sketches, pp. 108-9.
[^20] For the date of the move and a summary of persecution, see HC 1:18-19. For aborted plans to take the plates as Joseph was moving, see Biographical Sketches, p. 113.
[^21] HC 1:20-21 gives the approximate translation dates of April 2 to June 14, 1828. For the family tragedy that accompanied the loss of the 116 pages, see Biographical Sketches, pp. 118-22, which is confirmed by the death date of the first son on the gravestone: June 15, 1828.
[^22] HC 1:28 gives a one-sentence summary of Joseph's practical affairs that winter, but his 1832 ledger book manuscript mentions the limited translation: "History of the Life of Joseph Smith, Jr.," p. 6. Cp. Lucy's report of Joseph's conversation this winter; "I have again commenced translating, and Emma writes for me." Biographical Sketches, p. 126.
[^23] For events mentioned, see Biographical Sketches, pp. 128-31. Both Joseph and Oliver gave his arrival as April 5, 1829, with translation beginning immediately afterward. HC 1:32 and Latter Day Saints' Messenger and Advocate 1 (1834):14.
[^24] Emma Smith, Interview between Feb. 4 and Feb. 10, 1879, Saints' Herald 26 (1879):290.
[^25] Joseph Smith III to James T. Cobb, Feb. 14, 1879, Letterbook 2, pp. 85-88, RLDS Archives, courteously shared with me by Smith family scholar Buddy Youngreen.
[^26] Saints' Herald 26 (1879):289.
[^27] Ibid., p. 290.
[^28] Ibid.
[^29] The Whitmer family reactions are told by Lucy Smith, who knew the parents well. Biographical Sketches, pp. 135-37. For further detail see Richard L. Anderson, "The Whitmers: A Family That Nourished the Church," Ensign, Aug., 1979, p. 36.
[^30] Edward Stevenson, Journal, Dec. 23, 1877.
