Richard Lloyd Anderson, Investigating the Book of Mormon Witnesses ( 1981)

796

79David Whitmer: The Most Interviewed Witness

79 David Whitmer (1805-88) at about age seventy-two. Photograph matching the likeness in the 1877 Ray County Atlas.

Witnesses of the Book of MormonHC79No testimony of direct revelation in the world's history is better documented than the testimony of the Book of Mormon witnesses. Since David Whitmer was widely known as "the last-surviving witness" prior to his death in 1888, he was interviewed far more extensively than the others. He said that thousands came to inquire, and over fifty of these conversations are reported in reasonable detail in contemporary diaries, letters, and newspapers, supplemented by later recollections. This examination and cross-examination of the reports furnishes a detailed historical record. Most contain questions that one would direct to the witness, and his specific and positive answers. So today's investigator can test David Whitmer's convictions almost as well as the visitor of the past century who talked with him personally.

Witnesses of the Book of MormonHC79By means of these conversations with the last-surviving witness, one may reconstruct a line of questioning on the central points of the revelation that came to him. The following replies are taken from the better recorded interviews of about the last decade of his life. Since these responses can be documented in multiple situations, such a composite interview gives a fair idea of the impact of a private talk with David Whitmer: [^1]

Witnesses of the Book of MormonHC80Q: Is your published testimony accurate?

Witnesses of the Book of MormonHC80A: "As you read my testimony given many years ago, so it stands as my own existence, the same as when I gave it, and so shall stand throughout the cycles of eternity." [^2]

Witnesses of the Book of MormonHC80Q: When did this event take place?

Witnesses of the Book of MormonHC80A: "It was in June, 1829, the very last part of the month." [^3]

Witnesses of the Book of MormonHC80Q: What was the approximate time of day?

Witnesses of the Book of MormonHC80A: "It was about 11 A.M." [^4]

Witnesses of the Book of MormonHC80Q: What were the circumstances of the vision?

Witnesses of the Book of MormonHC80A: "[We] went out into the woods nearby, and sat down on a log and talked awhile. We then kneeled down and prayed. Joseph prayed, We then got up and sat on the log and were talking, when all at once a light came down from above us and encircled us for quite a little distance around, and the angel stood before us." [^5]

Witnesses of the Book of MormonHC80Q: Describe the angel.

Witnesses of the Book of MormonHC80A: "He was dressed in white, and spoke and called me by name and said, 'Blessed is he that keepeth His commandments.' This is all that I heard the angel say." [^6]

Witnesses of the Book of MormonHC80Q: Did the angel have the Book of Mormon plates?

Witnesses of the Book of MormonHC80A: "[He] showed to us the plates, the sword of Laban, the Directors, the Urim and Thummim, and other records. Human language could not describe heavenly things and that which we saw." [^7]

Witnesses of the Book of MormonHC80Q: Did the vision take place under natural circumstances?

Witnesses of the Book of MormonHC80A: "The fact is, it was just as though Joseph, Oliver and I were sitting right here on a log, when we were overshadowed by a light. it was not like the light of the sun, nor like that of a fire, but more glorious and beautiful. It extended away round us, I cannot tell how far, but in the midst of this light, immediately before us, about as far off as he sits (pointing to John C. Whitmer, who was sitting 2 or 3 feet from him) there appeared, as it were, a table, with many records on it—besides the plates of the Book of Mormon, also the sword of Laban, the Directors, and the Interpreters. I saw them as plain as I see this bed (striking his hand upon the bed beside him), and I heard the voice of the Lord as distinctly as I ever heard anything in my life declaring that they were translated by the gift and power of God." [^8]

Witnesses of the Book of MormonHC81Q: Can you explain the supernatural power that surrounded you?

Witnesses of the Book of MormonHC81A: "All of a sudden I beheld a dazzlingly brilliant light that surpassed in brightness even the sun at noonday, and which seemed to envelop the woods for a considerable distance around. Simultaneous with the light came a strange entrancing influence which permeated me so powerfully that I felt chained to the spot, while I also experienced a sensation of joy absolutely indescribable." [^9]

Witnesses of the Book of MormonHC81Q: "Did you see the Urim and Thummim?"

Witnesses of the Book of MormonHC81A: "I saw the Interpreters in the holy vision; they looked like whitish stones put in the rim of a bow—looked like spectacles, only much larger." [^10]

Witnesses of the Book of MormonHC81Q: Did you see an actual table?

Witnesses of the Book of MormonHC81A: "You see that small table by the wall? . . . Well, there was a table about that size, and the heavenly messenger brought the several plates and laid them on the table before our eyes, and we saw them." [^11]

Witnesses of the Book of MormonHC81Q: Did you handle the plates?

Witnesses of the Book of MormonHC81A: "I did not handle the plates—only saw them." [^12] "Joseph, and I think Oliver and Emma told me about the plates, and described them to me, and I believed them, but did not see except at the time testified of." [^13]

Witnesses of the Book of MormonHC81Q: How clearly could you see the plates?

Witnesses of the Book of MormonHC82A: "[T]he angel stood before us, and he turned the leaves one by one." [^14] "[H]e held the plates and turned them over with his hands, so that they could be plainly visible." [^15]

Witnesses of the Book of MormonHC82Q: "Did the angel turn all the leaves before you as you looked on it?"

Witnesses of the Book of MormonHC82A: "No, not all, only that part of the book which was not sealed, and what there was sealed appeared as solid to my view as wood." [^16]

Witnesses of the Book of MormonHC82Q: "Can you describe the plates?"

Witnesses of the Book of MormonHC82A: "They appeared to be of gold, about six by nine inches in size, about as thick as parchment, a great many in number and bound together like the leaves of a book by massive rings passing through the back edges. The engraving upon them was very plain and of very curious appearance." [^17]

Witnesses of the Book of MormonHC82Q: Is it possible that you imagined this experience?

Witnesses of the Book of MormonHC82A: "[O]ur testimony is true. And if these things are not true, then there is no truth; and if there is no truth, there is no God; and if there is no God, there is no existence. But I know there is a God, for I have heard His voice and witnessed the manifestation of his power." [^18]

Witnesses of the Book of MormonHC82Q: "Do you remember the peculiar sensation experienced upon that occasion?"

Witnesses of the Book of MormonHC82A: "Yes, I remember it very distinctly. And I never think of it, from that day to this, but what that spirit is present with me." [^19]

Witnesses of the Book of MormonHC82How does one measure the truth of such testimony? The person with faith will realize (as Paul insisted) that spiritual truths must be spiritually verified. (1 Cor. 2:9-14.) Although expecting to be believed, David Whitmer advised prayer as the necessary supplement to the human testimony of witnesses: "If you are open to investigation and conviction, I pray you to read the Book of Mormon with a prayerful heart. . . . The Book carries conviction with it." [^20]

82Yet practical examination is the inevitable companion of a real love for truth, and one moved by David Whitmer's testimony must subject its author to basic tests of accuracy. People in everyday life constantly sort out the valid from the invalid through the reliability of the source of information and the consistency of the report. By these standards the testimony of the last-surviving witness is trustworthy, for its author earned the solid respect of his non-Mormon townsmen through a half century of private integrity, and in this time repeated his account of the vision of the angel and the plates without varying its fundamental points. As he said himself toward the end of his life, "Those who know me best, well know that I have always adhered to that testimony." [^21]

83If neither the man nor his manner of relating his story is questionable, what of his motives? Can the distorting force of self-interest be detected? His plain courage in ignoring self-interest in the matter of his testimony was the source of admiration earned from community leaders in Richmond, Missouri. Neither unpopularity, danger, nor tedious inconvenience altered his expressed convictions. David occasionally alluded to an ultimatum delivered by about five hundred armed men to force him to repudiate the Book of Mormon. We know that this came in 1833 in the public square at Independence, Missouri, when vigilantes menaced Mormon leaders to force all Mormons from Jackson County. The story was told by New York convert John P. Greene, nearly as old in the Church as David Whitmer:

83[W]hen the mob again assembled they went to the houses of several of the leading Mormons. And taking Isaac Morley, David Whitmer, and others, they told them to bid their families farewell, for they would never see them again. Then driving them at the point of the bayonet to the public square, they stripped and tarred and feathered them, amidst menaces and insults. The commanding officer then called twelve of his men. And ordering them to cock their guns and present them at the prisoners' breasts, and to be ready to fire when he gave the word, he addressed the prisoners, threatening them with instant death unless they denied the Book of Mormon and confessed it to be a fraud; at the same time adding that if they did so, they might enjoy the privileges of citizens. David Whitmer, hereupon, lifted up his hands and bore witness that the Book of Mormon was the Word of God. The mob then let them go. [^22]

84David Whitmer told Heman C. Smith that on command of the mob to "renounce his testimony," he nevertheless reaffirmed it "in the face of death." [^23] The most extensive personal account of the incident was related to James H. Hart: "[T]he testimony I gave to that mob made them fear and tremble, and I escaped from them. One gentleman, a doctor, an unbeliever, told me afterwards that the bold and fearless testimony borne on that occasion and the fear that seemed to take hold of the mob had made him a believer in the Book of Mormon." [^24]

84In the above conversation with James H. Hart, the Missouri businessman alluded to "thousands of people" that had sought his comments, "sometimes 15 or 20 in a day." This posed no small burden on one with practical responsibilities who naturally avoided the spotlight of publicity. An example of this constant personal pressure comes from the visit of Henry Moon. One of his missionary contacts in Missouri, John Lefler, desired to talk with David Whitmer personally, and he and Moon arrived in Richmond January 9, 1872, at the inconvenient supper hour, just after dark, after an evidently difficult day of sickness in the Whitmer family. The Book of Mormon witness sought to avoid the inquirers by leaving the house to perform an errand at his livery stable, but they persistently followed him. Yet after stating that "he had not time to talk that evening," David's sense of duty about his testimony overcame his personal irritability:

84We followed him in the street, and I told him that the gentleman with me had come to hear what he had to say with regard to the Book of Mormon. I told Mr.Whitmer I had been reading the testimony of the Witnesses to Mr. Lefler, and . . . he was anxious to hear . . . for himself. 'Now Mr.Whitmer, here is the gentleman. What have you to say to him?' Mr. Whitmer turned towards Mr. Lefler and said, 'Well, God Almighty requires at my hand to bear testimony to the truth of the Book of Mormon. It is the pure Gospel of Jesus Christ, translated from the plates by the gift and power of God by Joseph Smith. . . . I know I tell the truth.' [^25]

85More than one person appealed privately to the last-surviving witness to disclose deceit if it existed. Two such earnest requests virtually eliminate the possibility of deception on the part of David Whitmer. James H. Moyle was later Assistant Secretary of Treasury in two U.S. administrations. Graduating with legal training at the University of Michigan in 1885, he determined to cross-examine the remaining Book of Mormon witness before returning to Utah. Young Moyle journeyed to Richmond, Missouri, secured an appointment with David Whitmer, and spent some time recounting the persecutions and sacrifices of his family because of belief in Mormonism. He further contrasted Whitmer's situation of not being far from death with his own commencement of a life's career: "And so I begged of him not to let me go through life believing in a vital falsehood." The thoughtful law student requested not confirmation, but disclosure: "Was there any possibility that he might have been deceived in any particular?" All of his life Moyle remembered the "unequivocal" affirmation of the testimony: "There was no question about its truthfulness." [^26] Entries made in his diary at the time show that David Whitmer gave the young man the same information that he related to scores of others. As a mature lawyer and administrator, Moyle could not accept the view that David Whitmer misrepresented: "To have been insincere seems impossible, would have made him a hideous, soulless mental deformity." [^27]

85David Whitmer's grandson came to the same conclusion, and no one seems to have been closer to the witness in his closing years than George W. Sweich, a partner in the Whitmer stables and private secretary to David. He had been personally present at numerous interviews and had written many dictated letters reaffirming his grandfather's story. Through all of this he formed his personal appraisal of the man based in large part on private conversation:

86"I have begged him to unfold the fraud in the case, and he had all to gain and nothing to lose, but speak the word if he thought so. But he has described the scene to me many times, of his vision about noon in an open pasture. There is only one explanation barring an actual miracle, and that is this: If that vision was not real, it was HYPNOTISM, it was real to grandfather IN FACT." [^28]

86Since one cannot successfully challenge David Whitmer's sincerity, is there a reasonable alternative to his own explanation of the vision? Some have pointed out that the witness was as sure of certain personal revelations as his testimony of the Book of Mormon. While few fail to develop some overconfidence in their own opinions, David Whitmer never put any other incident of his life on the objective grounds of sense experience to the extent that he did his vision of the angel and the plates, Yet, in explaining that event as exceeding sense perception, David Whitmer became the target of a few who jumped to the conclusion that the revelation involved no sense perception. For instance, an interview of 1880 with John Murphy of Caldwell County was published, and David Whitmer insisted that it was erroneous. Murphy had written a tongue-in-cheek report totally emphasizing the spiritual nature of the vision. This undoubtedly distorted what David actually said, since Murphy's materialistic philosophy was not equipped to explain the miraculous. The point of misunderstanding was the choice between a vision of material plus spiritual perception or a vision of spiritual instead of material perception. The latter alternative was too quickly picked by some who talked to both Martin Harris and David Whitmer. The Missouri witness answered Murphy by a public statement "that I have never at any time denied that testimony or any part thereof." [^29] The doubting Anthony Metcalf wrote to David Whitmer in 1887 and raised the same issue. The answer of the witness was a testimony of both spiritual and physical elements in the vision: "Of course we were in the spirit when we had the view, for no man can behold the face of an angel, except in a spiritual view, but we were in the body also, and everything was as natural to us, as it is at any time." [^30]

87John Murphy also raised the issue of whether David Whitmer had been deceived, suggesting "mesmerism" and appealing to the witness to admit that his testimony was a "delusion." [^31] In terms of scientific psychology, the only person able to answer this question is David Whitmer. The possibility was put to him and ruled out many times. In this case he went to the trouble and expense of publishing his "Proclamation," repeating his testimony and emphasizing his confidence in his own powers of observation: " 'He that hath an ear to hear, let him hear;' it was no delusion!" [^32]

87This point is highlighted by an incident during the examination of the Book of Mormon manuscript at the Whitmer home in 1884 by a committee of the Reorganized Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints. Since this event acquired some notoriety, onlookers were often present, one of which was a skeptical Richmond military officer. The soldier discussed the Book of Mormon testimony with the aging witness in a cordial but frank manner, suggesting the possibility that Whitmer "had been mistaken and had simply been moved upon by some mental disturbance or hallucination, which had deceived him into thinking he saw" the angel, plates, and other objects. The immediate reaction of the witness was described by a spectator, Joseph Smith III:

88"How well and distinctly I remember the manner in which Elder Whitmer arose and drew himself up to his full height—a little over six feet—and said, in solemn and impressive tones: 'No sir! I was not under any hallucination, nor was I deceived! I saw with these eyes, and I heard with these ears! I know whereof I speak!' " [^33]

88David Whitmer's "positive and emphatic testimony" solidly impressed the unbelieving questioner. For the sake of courtesy, the RLDS president left the room with the officer, who confessed the difficulty of belief "for us everyday men," but added: "[O]ne thing is certain—no man could hear him make his affirmation, as he has to us in there, and doubt for one moment the honesty and sincerity of the man himself. He fully believes he saw and heard, just as he stated he did." [^34] No theme permeates the numerous Mormon and non-Mormon interviews more than this one. Few came away unimpressed with the power of David Whitmer's conviction. In 1886 Edward Stevenson visited him for the second time and talked with the feeble octogenarian, whose frame was reduced to less than a hundred pounds. Reiterating his testimony "as sure as the sun shines and I live," David Whitmer's enthusiasm had to be restrained for his own good. [^35] Three years before, Moroni W. Pratt wrote about the combination of mental alertness and physical infirmity of the witness. During ordinary conversation, David would "falter a little, but when giving his testimony he would straighten up, his voice would be firm, his eye would flash, and one could feel that he spoke by the spirit of truth." [^36] Independently reporting these identical details the following year, J. Frank McDowell added: "He would relate the scene with a freshness and earnestness of expression, as though it were of recent occurrence, and not of fifty-five years agone." [^37]

89Since genuineness is better judged by personal contact than reading cold print, these evaluations of the witness himself are as important as the record of what he said. Far from having a prepackaged statement about the Book of Mormon, David Whitmer spontaneously recalled a personal experience that deeply moved him. The believers' estimates of the witness are fully substantiated by the reactions of newspaper reporters, a class generally calloused to empty sentimentality. They measured their man during interviews and also came away impressed. A detailed and restrained report in the Chicago Times contained the candid opinion of the interviewer: "And no man can look at David Whitmer's face for a half-hour, while he charily and modestly speaks of what he has seen, and then boldly and earnestly confesses the faith that is in him, and say that he is a bigot or an enthusiast." [^38] Joe Johnson, of the Missouri Plattsburg Democrat, an astute political analyst, was profoundly affected by the inner conviction of the witness. While describing the vision, David's cold symptoms diminished, "his form straightened," and with "evidently no studied effort" but with "strangely eloquent" tones, he described the vision and "the divine presence." The seasoned Missouri newspaperman classified what he heard as far more than an oddity: "Skeptics may laugh and scoff if they will, but no man can listen to Mr. Whitmer as he talks of his interview with the angel of the Lord, without being most forcibly convinced that he has heard an honest man tell what he honestly believes to be true." [^39]

89Those who testified to the truth of the Book of Mormon are modern witnesses not only because they lived in recent time, but also because modern investigation can study their experience. Over a hundred detailed personal statements and interviews with them exist, about half of which come from David Whitmer. Like the others, the modest but intense Missouri businessman admirably passes the test of examining his person and his story. Impeccable in reputation, consistent in scores of recorded interviews, obviously sincere, and personally capable of detecting delusion—no witness is more compelling than David Whitmer. He answered every objection thrown at him in a half century of life in Richmond, Missouri, and by sheer moral strength forced a non-Mormon community to take him seriously. Through the miracle of modern communication, his testimony now transcends a community and confronts a world.

90What must be as impressive as the words of the modern witnesses is their deep sense of responsibility in reporting their experience. Despite his vigorous differences with most believers in the Book of Mormon, David Whitmer insisted that no one could evade the challenge of this modern revelation: "Kind reader, . . . beware how you hastily condemn that book which I know to be the word of God; for his own voice and an angel from heaven declared the truth of it unto me, and to two other witnesses who testified on their deathbed that it was true." [^40] Less than a year after voicing this warning, David Whitmer added his deathbed testimony to the historical record. These dramatic details were published in full by the Richmond Democrat, but his more specific closing words were given some two weeks earlier to Angus Cannon. Bedridden and "as helpless as a child," the octogenarian was informed by George W. Sweich that his visitor wanted to hear his testimony of the Book of Mormon. After a lifetime of reiteration, the moment was still sacred to the enfeebled witness. Raising his hand, he declared: "My friend, if God ever uttered a truth, the testimony I now bear is true. I did see the angel of God, and I beheld the glory of the Lord, and he declared the record true." [^41]

If noted, a statement of David Whitmer is placed in the first person instead of the third person of a given report.

Letter of David Whitmer to Dr. James N. Seymour, Dec. 8, 1875, Richmond, Mo., cit. Saints' Herald 26 (1879):223.

Journal of Joseph F. Smith, cit. Joseph Fielding Smith, Life of Joseph F. Smith (Salt Lake City, 1938), p. 242.

Journal of Edward Stevenson, Dec. 22, 1877.

Letter of William H. Kelley to Saints' Herald, Jan. 16, 1882, Coldwater, Mich., cit. Saints' Herald 29 (1882):68.

Ibid.

Journal of George Q. Cannon, Feb. 27, 1884, cit. Instructor 80 (1945):520. Narrative is changed from third to first person and the clause "he said" deleted.

Reference at n. 3. Parenthetical definitions of "Directors" and "they" have been deleted.

Omaha Herald, Oct. 17, 1886, simultaneously released to other dailies. Narrative is changed from third to first person and the clause "Mr. Whitmer says" deleted.

Interview notes of Zenas H. Gurley, Jan. 14, 1885, also cit. Autumn Leaves 5 (1892):452.

Letter of James H. Hart to Deseret News, Aug. 23, 1883, Seneca, Mo., cit. Deseret Evening News, Sept. 4, 1883.

Journal of James H. Moyle, June 28, 1885, changed from third to first person.

Journal of Nathan Tanner, Jr., Apr. 13, 1886, changed from third to first person, except that the first "me" is unchanged.

Letter of P. Wilhelm Poulson to Deseret News, Aug. 13, 1878, Ogden, Utah, cit. Deseret Evening News, Aug. 16, 1878.

Chicago Times, Oct. 17, 1881.

See n. 14: Letter of P. Wilhelm Poulson to Deseret News, Aug. 13, 1878, Ogden, Utah, cit. Deseret Evening News, Aug. 16, 1878..

Kansas City Daily Journal, June 5, 1881.

See n. 11: Letter of James H. Hart to Deseret News, Aug. 23, 1883, Seneca, Mo., cit. Deseret Evening News, Sept. 4, 1883.

See n. 5: Letter of William H. Kelley to Saints' Herald, Jan. 16, 1882, Coldwater, Mich., cit. Saints' Herald 29 (1882):68.

David Whitmer, An Address to All Believers in Christ (Richmond, Mo., 1887), p. 14.

David Whitmer, A Proclamation (Richmond, Mo., 1881).

John P. Greene, Facts Relative to the Expulsion of the Mormons (Cincinnati, 1839), p. 17. This source, within six years of the event, corrects the later setting assumed in Richard Lloyd Anderson, "The Most Interviewed Witness," Improvement Era, May 1969, p. 79.

Letter of Heman C. Smith to Saints' Herald, June 28, 1884, Grand Prairie, Tex., cit. Saints' Herald 31 (1884):442.

See n. 11: Letter of James H. Hart to Deseret News, Aug. 23, 1883, Seneca, Mo., cit. Deseret Evening News, Sept. 4, 1883.

Letter of Henry Moon to Joseph F. Smith, Mar. 7, 1872, Farmington, Utah. Cp. Moon's general conference speech, Deseret Evening News, Apr. 10, 1872.

James H. Moyle, "A Visit to David Whitmer," Instructor 80 (1945):401.

Joseph E. Cardon and Samuel O. Bennion, Testimonies of the Divinity of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (Independence, Mo., 1930), p. 305.

Letter of George W. Sweich, Sept. 22, 1899, Richmond, Mo., cit. 1. Woodbridge Riley, The Founder of Mormonism (London, 1903), pp. 219-20.

See n. 21: David Whitmer, A Proclamation (Richmond, Mo., 1881).

Letter of David Whitmer to Anthony Metcalf, Mar. 1887, cit. Anthony Metcalf, Ten Years Before the Mast (Malad, Ida., 1888), p. 74.

The Hamiltonian, Hamilton, Mo., Jan. 21, 1881.

See n. 21: David Whitmer, A Proclamation (Richmond, Mo., 1881).

Memoirs of Joseph Smith III, cit. Mary Audentia Smith Anderson, Joseph Smith III and the Restoration (Independence, Mo., 1952), pp. 311-12,

Ibid.

Letter of Edward Stevenson to Daniel H. Wells, Feb. 16, 1886, New York City, cit. Millennial Star 48 (1886):156.

Letter of Moroni W. Pratt to Bear Lake Democrat, July 3, 1883, Covington, Ind., cit. Bear Lake Democrat, July 14, 1883.

---
Notas:
[^1] Joseph Smith, History of the Church 1:6, also Pearl of Great Price, JS-H 1:19, reprinted also in the LDS pamphlet "Joseph Smith's Testimony."
[^2] Joseph Smith to Emma Smith, June 6, 1832, Greenville, Indiana, manuscript at the Chicago Historical Society.
[^3] HC 1:8, JS-H 1:26.
[^4] Latter Day Saints' Messenger and Advocate 1 (1835):79.
[^5] "Articles and Covenants of the Church of Christ," first published in The Evening and the Morning Star, June, 1832, now D&C 20:6.
[^6] Elders' Journal, July, 1838, pp. 42-43.
[^7] HC 1:19, JS-H 1:61.
[^8] Biographical Sketches, p. 113.
[^9] See Joseph Smith, 1832 Manuscript History, in Dean C. Jessee, ed., The Personal Writings of Joseph Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1984), pp. 7-8. The second Anthon Transcript and the apparent Joseph Smith note on it, pp. 223-26 of this book, proved to be forged.
[^10] See the valuable tabulation of surviving pages of the original Book of Mormon manuscript in Dean C. Jessee, "The Original Book of Mormon Manuscript," Brigham Young University Studies 10 (1970):273.
[^11] Book of Commandments 4:4, the earliest datable writing (1833), with subsequent verbal changes in D&C 5:11-14. An undated manuscript of the early form is in the Whitney papers at Brigham Young University, box 1, folder 2.
[^12] Cowdery's priesthood restoration narrative indicates that by May 15, 1829, the translators had passed 3 Nephi 11, which raises the authority question that caused their inquiries on baptism. See Latter Day Saints' Messenger and Advocate 1 (1834):13: "after writing the account given of the Savior's ministry." The next book, Ether, 5:24 contains the promise of witnesses seeing the plates.
[^13] In the next quotation of the text, the Prophet mentions the Book of Mormon promise in language much closer to this 2 Nephi 27 prophecy than to Ether 5:2-4, which suggests that they were in Fayette translating the first two books of Nephi, the period of the lost 116 pages. The non-Cowdery manuscript pages, some of which are apparently done by John Whitmer, also indicate a Fayette translation for the beginning portions of the book. Cp. n. 10.
[^14] Book of Commandments 4:8, with the Whitney manuscript reading "the things which he desireth to view," now D&C 5:24. Cp. n. 11.
[^15] Times and Seasons 3 (1842):897, also cit. HC 1:52-53.
[^16] D&C 17:1-4, first published in the 1835 edition with the dating: "June, 1829, given previous to their viewing the plates containing the Book of Mormon." Early dissenter Ezra Booth saw a manuscript of this revelation in the summer of 1831: "When in Missouri, I had an opportunity to examine a commandment given to these witnesses, previous to their seeing the plates. They were informed that they should see and hear those things by faith and then they should testify to the world." (Letter 3, [Ravenna] Ohio Star, Oct. 27, 1831.)
[^17] Joseph Smith's history suggests that Book of Mormon translation was nearly completed at this time, a correction of Lucy Smith, who did not live in the Whitmer home but only visited. In Lucy's manuscript at the end of the quotation here, "four" is written over an original "three," referring to those who then left the home. Since David remembered being in the field when others came to get him, he may not have been at the morning devotional service. There are other possibilities of time, since we have only glimpses of that morning in the sources.
[^18] The quotation comes from Salisbury's most reliable document, his signed typescript, "Things the Prophet's Sister Told Me," June 30, 1945.
[^19] See Biographical Sketches, pp. 108-9.
[^20] For the date of the move and a summary of persecution, see HC 1:18-19. For aborted plans to take the plates as Joseph was moving, see Biographical Sketches, p. 113.
[^21] HC 1:20-21 gives the approximate translation dates of April 2 to June 14, 1828. For the family tragedy that accompanied the loss of the 116 pages, see Biographical Sketches, pp. 118-22, which is confirmed by the death date of the first son on the gravestone: June 15, 1828.
[^22] HC 1:28 gives a one-sentence summary of Joseph's practical affairs that winter, but his 1832 ledger book manuscript mentions the limited translation: "History of the Life of Joseph Smith, Jr.," p. 6. Cp. Lucy's report of Joseph's conversation this winter; "I have again commenced translating, and Emma writes for me." Biographical Sketches, p. 126.
[^23] For events mentioned, see Biographical Sketches, pp. 128-31. Both Joseph and Oliver gave his arrival as April 5, 1829, with translation beginning immediately afterward. HC 1:32 and Latter Day Saints' Messenger and Advocate 1 (1834):14.
[^24] Emma Smith, Interview between Feb. 4 and Feb. 10, 1879, Saints' Herald 26 (1879):290.
[^25] Joseph Smith III to James T. Cobb, Feb. 14, 1879, Letterbook 2, pp. 85-88, RLDS Archives, courteously shared with me by Smith family scholar Buddy Youngreen.
[^26] Saints' Herald 26 (1879):289.
[^27] Ibid., p. 290.
[^28] Ibid.
[^29] The Whitmer family reactions are told by Lucy Smith, who knew the parents well. Biographical Sketches, pp. 135-37. For further detail see Richard L. Anderson, "The Whitmers: A Family That Nourished the Church," Ensign, Aug., 1979, p. 36.
[^30] Edward Stevenson, Journal, Dec. 23, 1877.
[^31] Orson Pratt and Joseph F. Smith to John Taylor, cit. Deseret News, Nov. 16, 1878.
[^32] Ibid.
[^33] Stevenson, Journal, Dec. 23, 1877.
[^34] Stevenson, Journal, Feb. 9, 1886. Stevenson also noted David's retelling the same incident in the journal entry of January l, 1887, recording another visit.
[^35] Pratt and Smith to Taylor, cit. Deseret News, Nov. 16, 1878.
[^36] Andrew Jenson, The Historical Record, Oct., 1881, p. 621. Edward Stevenson was also present at the visit with John C. Whitmer and approved Jenson's report. See Edward Stevenson, "The Thirteenth Witness to the Plates of the Book of Mormon," Juvenile Instructor 24 (1889):23.
[^37] Letter of J. Frank McDowell to Saints' Herald, July 22, 1884, Olivet, Iowa, cit. Saints' Herald 31 (1884):508.
[^38] Chicago Times, Aug. 7, 1875.
[^39] Richmond Democrat, Jan. 26, Feb. 2, 1888, attributed to "an article written by Joe Johnson. . . . "
[^40] Whitmer, Address to All Believers in Christ, p. 43.
[^41] Journal of Angus Cannon, Jan. 7, 1888. Cp. Cannon's Tabernacle speech, Deseret Evening News, Feb. 12, 1888.
