Richard Lloyd Anderson, Investigating the Book of Mormon Witnesses ( 1981)

15111

151The Case against the Witnesses

151 Public recommendation of Oliver Cowdery. Editorial from the Seneca Advertiser (Tiffin, Ohio), May 5, 1848.

151The title of this chapter is the call of conflict, suggesting the excitement of debate and invincible proof. Similar titles used by anti-Mormon publications deliver this and no more. Argument is a poor tool for discovering truth because it defends a narrow position but usually lacks breadth. Anyone can make a "case" for or against anything. The right way to investigate is to gather comprehensively and then seek to understand. The opposite rule has been adopted for well over a hundred years as anti-Mormon books have downgraded the Book of Mormon witnesses. They typically ignore the great body of information from the witnesses themselves and instead concentrate on irregular statements from secondhand sources, adding liberal amounts of character assassination. But an array of half-truths presented in a combative manner should not satisfy a thinking person—in fact, many a conversion to Mormonism has started by shock at the obvious unfairness of such literature. Since these witnesses were trustworthy but not perfect they can be ridiculed by hypercritical methods, though they stand historically as honest men. But what of the attacks on their testimony of seeing the plates?

152A main safeguard exists for testing claims that a witness modified his testimony—be sure that all statements come from the witness himself. Courts formalize this policy by various rules against hearsay, for one of the main questions about evidence is its directness, whether it is firsthand. David Whitmer complained in print that two encyclopedias published statements that he had denied his testimony, but his correction hardly solved the problem, for other editions and other books perpetuated that error. [^1] In short, accurate evidence from a Book of Mormon witness must come from the witness—not from garbled reports through intermediaries. Almost all of the first generation of anti-Mormon writers ignored this basic rule, and now even educated authors may do no better. An example is the slanted biography of Joseph Smith by Fawn Brodie, who thought that "the three witnesses all told different versions of their experience" because she read this in "the local press of the time." [^2] Her source is the heavily satirical Palmyra Reflector, and in describing it she indicated that "David Whitmer told the editor of the Reflector" a story of seeing the plates but no angel. [^3] But these details are sloppy versions of what originally appeared, for the newspaper editor was not at all quoting David Whitmer, but "our informant," who seems not to have had any notes on his interview' since he "did not recollect precisely" the dimensions of the plates that David Whitmer reportedly gave. [^4] So a verbal diagram of the source of this statement is: Brodie's version, of an editor's version, of his informant's version, of what David Whitmer said (not necessarily to the "informant"). If Brodie had quoted the article, that would have eliminated one stage of the hearsay, but instead she has furnished evidence at least three steps away from the Book of Mormon witness. In history the goal is to present the source itself, and not serve it dangerously spoiled by being warmed over several times.

153Although we are discussing specific objections to Book of Mormon witnesses, the methods of response should be helpful in similar claims not discussed for lack of space. Most discrediting attempts use the inferior type of quotation illustrated above. If a supposed statement of a witness is not in his hand or printed by his authorization, the question becomes whether he was interviewed by a known individual attempting to report him accurately. Since we know some 200 specific individuals who fit these requirements, statements of indefinite origin from anonymous informants have no place. If the witnesses' words move down through a chain of individuals quoting others, the number of links must be evaluated—but above all the first link must be a trustworthy person who heard the witness. As an additional example, this principle is seriously violated by quoting a poem mentioning Oliver Cowdery in the Church newspaper at Nauvoo:

153Or prove the gospel was not true Because old Paul the Saints could kill? Because the Jews its author slew And now reject their Saviour still? Or prove that Christ was not the Lord Because that Peter cursed and swore? Or Book of Mormon not his word Because denied by Oliver? [^5]

153These are central stanzas of Joel H. Johnson's poem arguing that the restored gospel is true no matter who betrayed the cause. One must ask first what he specifically intended to say about Oliver, and then the exact source of his information. Before claiming that Johnson "admitted" Cowdery's denial of his testimony, one must assume that "denied" is used in the narrow sense of renouncing, and not in the more general sense of "setting aside" the Book of Mormon in practice, though passively knowing it true. For instance, it is popularly said that Peter "denied" Christ, one of Johnson's examples. In reality Peter did not deny Christ's divinity, for that was not in question—but he vehemently declined to be linked with Jesus at the high priest's house. Peter's "denial" by disassociating himself from Christ is parallel to Oliver's disassociation from the Book of Mormon by not actively promoting it for a time. This raises the larger question of whether Johnson as a poet intended to use narrow analytical language anyway, for his overstatement is evident in the cases of Paul killing Christians or the Jewish people killing Christ—neither is strictly true.

154Thus one may take Johnson's poem too seriously by even asking where he got his information. But the poem has no evidential value, for when Oliver was excommunicated in Missouri in 1838, Johnson was still in Ohio and afterwards had no known contact with Cowdery. Johnson reviewed his life in this period in his short autobiography: "I helped to organize the Kirtland camp in 1838 and traveled with it as far as Springfield, Illinois; was called by council to stop there and take care of the sick. I commenced preaching and soon gathered a branch of the Church of forty members over which I presided until January 8, 1839, when the Lord showed me by revelation that I must immediately go to Carthage in Hancock County." [^6] Since Johnson was not near Cowdery at excommunication or afterward, "denied by Oliver" is multiple hearsay at best. So after the objector takes one arbitrary meaning of "denied," he is left with Johnson quoting an unidentified number of middlemen, supposedly quoting Cowdery. It does not matter historically if an irresponsible rumor can be proved to be contemporary—it is still rumor without direct evidence to support it. When we ask for real contact with Cowdery, we find that Thomas B. Marsh questioned Oliver carefully right after he left the Church to find that he reaffirmed his Book of Mormon testimony at the height of his resentment against Joseph Smith. [^7] This was quoted in the earlier chapter on Oliver's testimony, which also quoted Elizabeth Cowdery, who said that from 1829 to his death her husband "always without one doubt or shadow of turning affirmed the divinity and truth of the Book of Mormon." [^8] Some people think that a wife would be biased, but from the strict angle of access to Oliver's attitude, who else would know better what he thought throughout his lifetime? Her statement that he never denied the Book of Mormon is made from the most direct and continuous experience possible.

155The above hearsay situations raise the question of whether secondhand evidence started with observation. A related flaw is reporting only a part of what was first said. Lawyers insist on cross-examination to get the whole story, for a firsthand report of a half-truth is still misrepresentation. This kind of reporting occurs in a version of Martin Harris's speech by Stephen Burnett, writing at the height of his angry disillusionment with Joseph Smith. [^9] His letter is contemporary, though heavily interpretive. Burnett stresses what he heard, but undoubtedly bends words to his theory:

155I have reflected long and deliberately upon the history of this church and weighed the evidence for and against it, loath to give it up. But when I came to hear Martin Harris state in public that he never saw the plates with his natural eyes, only in vision or imagination, neither Oliver nor David . . . the last pedestal gave way. . . . I therefore three weeks since in the Stone Chapel gave a full history of the Church since I became acquainted with it . . . I was followed by W. Parrish, Luke Johnson, and John Boynton, all of who concurred with me. After we were done speaking, M. Harris arose and said he was sorry for any man who rejected the Book of Mormon, for he knew it was true. He said that he had hefted the plates repeatedly in a box with only a tablecloth or a handkerchief over them, but he never saw them, only as he saw a city through a mountain . . . For it is said on the 171 page of the Book of Covenants that the three should testify that they had seen the plates even as J.S. Jr., and if they only saw them spiritually or in vision with their eyes shut, J.S. Jr. never saw them in any other way—and if so the plates were only visionary. [^10]

156We are of course seeing Harris through the mind of a frustrated intermediary, one who thinks Mormonism presents a "whole scene of lying and deception." [^11] He thinks that Martin Harris has not really seen the plates. If "only in vision," then Burnett (not Harris) says it was really just "imagination." If the Three Witnesses "only saw them spiritually," then Burnett (not Harris) can explain it as essentially "in vision with their eyes shut." But Martin Harris felt misrepresented, or he would not have stood up in the Kirtland Temple to challenge the explanations of Burnett and his disaffected associates. Note that there are two distinct experiences of Harris: (1) "he said that he had hefted the plates repeatedly in a box with only a tablecloth or handkerchief over them, but he never saw them, only as he saw a city through a mountain"; (2) "he never saw the plates with his natural eyes, only in vision." Getting at the real Martin Harris requires subtracting Burnett's sarcasm that seeps into the above wording. Note the two italicized appearances of only (italics added), used in the sense of merely, to say that besides lifting the box of plates Martin had also seen them "in vision," the point restated at the end of the quotation: "only saw them spiritually or in vision"; "only visionary." In other words, Burnett heard Martin say that he had seen the plates in vision, and when Burnett uses "only" four times to ridicule the experience, that shows his disbelief, not Martin's speech. Martin's candid denial of seeing the plates while translating was sometimes exaggerated into a denial of ever seeing the plates, but even Burnett reports Martin claiming two types of contact with the plates: lifting them thinly covered, plus later seeing them in the hands of the angel. [^12] Some interviews add a third type of contact: handling the plates or turning their leaves. This probably happened long after the earliest experiences with the covered plates.

157So Burnett paraphrased Martin Harris with the evident rationalizations of a skeptic. But Martin knew his own experience and remained a convinced Book of Mormon believer. Study of his interviews shows how strongly he insisted that the sight of the angel and plates was as real as the sight of the physical objects around him. His simple language in an 1870 letter is typical: "I do say that the angel did show to me the plates containing the Book of Mormon." [^13] Here the "what" is more important than the "how." Martin saw the plates, his written testimony says, by means of the "marvelous" revelation of "an angel of God." Martin Harris never applied "only" to that experience. When Burnett says that the witness did not see "with his natural eyes," he fails to add that he still claimed vivid sight. John Gilbert, Book of Mormon typesetter, also remembered this kind of conversation: "I asked Harris once if he had really seen the plates with his naked eyes—his reply was 'No, but with spiritual eyes.' " [^14] But the devout witness was confidently claiming something more, not something less than normal sight. Burnett represents Harris as equating his experience with that of David Whitmer and Oliver Cowdery. And as discussed, David rejected "either-or" by saying that he saw by both spiritual and natural means. The superb interview of Nathan Tanner, Jr. recorded David Whitmer's own words on this point: "He then explained that he saw the plates, and with his natural eyes, but he had to be prepared for it—that he and the other witnesses were overshadowed by the power of God and a halo of brightness indescribable." [^15]

157Oversimplification is distortion. Thus Burnett's report may be quite direct but lacks the second element in the courtroom oath: not only "tell the truth," but "the whole truth." Stephen Burnett's letter claims additional light on the Eight Witnesses, but there is a clear flaw in the source of his information. As discussed, Burnett heard original comments of Martin Harris, and then added that Martin Harris stood up later to refute the dissenters' interpretation of them. After mentioning "Oliver nor David" in the 1838 letter just quoted, Burnett continued his version of Harris's first talk: "and also that the eight witnesses never saw them and hesitated to sign that instrument for that reason, but were persuaded to do it." [^16] When Martin attempted to correct this view of what he said, Burnett attributes this explanation to him: "and said he never should have told that the testimony of the eight was false, if it had not been picked out of him, but should have let it passed as it was." [^17] What was really said? If Harris accused the bitter dissenters of twisting his first comments on the Eight Witnesses, can we trust them not to abuse his explanation? And what was the source of Harris's information anyway? No one claims he was quoting one of the Eight Witnesses. But we know that skeptical rumors thrived in the disbelieving climate at Kirtland, and Harris was probably alluding to one of those, most likely in disagreement. Burnett's letter is only one of several 1838 documents that clearly say that Martin would not give an inch on his testimony: "lie was sorry for any man who rejected the Book of Mormon, for he knew it was true." Beyond Martin Harris, Burnett gives multiple hearsay from an unidentified source, and it has no value when the Eight Witnesses themselves contradict it consistently and clearly.

158Unusual circumstances allowed one of the Eight Witnesses virtually to answer Burnett's letter of April, 1838. By May, Hyrum Smith had migrated from Ohio to Missouri, and on the way he visited Sally Parker, who in an August letter mentions how Warren Parrish and John Boynton were leading an apostate party of about thirty, many of whom denied the Book of Mormon. [^18] Undoubtedly responding to these reports, Hyrum Smith had spoken in defense of the Book of Mormon, emphasizing that he was a witness because he knew by his physical senses. Sally wrote: "I have not heard but one sermon since we have been in the place, and that by Hyrum Smith. As he was moving to Missouri he tarried with us a little while. His discourse was beautiful. We was talking about the Book of Mormon, which he is one of the witnesses. He said he had but two hands and two eyes. He said he had seen the plates with his eyes and handled them with his hands." [^19] There is no responsible report from any of the Eight Witnesses to the contrary. Their last survivor was John Whitmer, who was especially close to Hiram Page and the Whitmer brothers, all of whom left the Church. And John insisted, "I have never heard that any one of the three or eight witnesses ever denied the testimony that they have borne to the book, as published in the first edition of the Book of Mormon." [^20] As discussed, both Hyrum Smith and John Whitmer published direct personal statements that they had "handled" the plates. That should settle Burnett's barb at the Eight Witnesses, for evidence is obviously better firsthand than thirdhand.

159The above hearsay examples are like the party game of whispering a message around a circle—those who have played it realize that what starts through a series of individuals is often laughably garbled as the last version is announced. One put-down of the witnesses illustrates this embellishment of rumor. Governor Thomas Ford, whose administrative weakness contributed to the Prophet's death, retold a story that ought to have humor as its only serious purpose. Ford favored conspiracy to explain the Book of Mormon witnesses, but gave the alternate possibility of deluding the gullible, an epithet that really fits none of the men involved. In his words, "it is related" that the Prophet made faith the condition of seeing the plates, so after the witnesses had brainwashed themselves by fasting and intense desire, Joseph opened an empty box. After exclaiming, "Brother Joseph, we do not see the plates," they were answered with a tirade of divine threats unless they developed "a holy and living faith." Ford sketched two more hours of "fanatical" prayer, "at the end of which time, looking again into the box, they were now persuaded that they saw the plates." [^21]

160A good frontier yarn should be obvious, but this one continues to be used by people who might know better. Governor Ford said that it came from "men who were once in the confidence of the Prophet," no great recommendation of credibility for several Nauvoo braggarts of the stamp of John C. Bennett and Joseph H. Jackson. Thus hostile but anonymous informants are telling Ford what the Prophet supposedly said. Although Ford told the story about all witnesses, Harry Beardsley applied it only to the Three Witnesses and Fawn Brodie narrowed it to the Eight Witnesses. [^22] She also upgrades the vague source—those "once in the confidence of the Prophet" are changed to "Joseph's key men." Thus Brodie gives this as "one of the most plausible descriptions of the manner in which Joseph Smith obtained these eight signatures," though that statement is contradicted when she finds it "difficult to reconcile this explanation" with the physical testimonies of the weight and dimensions of the plates. [^23] Further "scholarly" use of this story appears in Edmund Wilson's anti-Mormon diatribe, based on Brodie's "documented and honest description" of the rise of Mormonism. [^24] Wilson alludes to the Eight Witnesses' testimony of seeing and handling, "though they said that at first when the box was opened it had seemed to them to be empty till Smith had exhorted them to get down on their knees and pray for more faith." [^25] So in educated folklore the original unidentified source gradually became the Eight Witnesses themselves, a result of Wilson quoting Brodie, Brodie quoting Ford, Ford quoting anonymous informants, with the story getting a little better at each retelling. If rationalism generates fictitious evolution in printed records, the careful student is well warned that skepticism, apostasy, and financial frustration went looking for theories of justification while the witnesses were still alive. To reiterate—the witnesses must speak by their own statements or those responsibly passed on through identified reporters.

161True to debate tactics, even Brigham Young is used for the proposition that some official witnesses doubted their testimony. But a single sentence is usually quoted, not the full paragraph, in which Brigham specifically explains himself: "Some of the witnesses of the Book of Mormon who handled the plates and conversed with the angels of God, were afterwards left to doubt and to disbelieve that they had ever seen an angel. One of the Quorum of the Twelve, a young man full of faith and good works, prayed. And the vision of his mind was opened, and the angel of God came and laid the plates before him—and he saw and handled them, and saw the angel, and conversed with him as he would with one of his friends. But after all this, he was left to doubt, and plunged into apostacy, and has continued to contend against this work. There are hundreds in a similar condition." [^26] Although the quotation is often associated with Oliver Cowdery, Brigham Young ruled him out of this situation: "Oliver Cowdery. . . never denied the Book of Mormon, not even in the wickedest days he ever saw." [^27] But note whom Brigham has in mind—"a young man" who was a member of the "Quorum of the Twelve." None of the eleven whose names appear in the Book of Mormon were members of the council of apostles. Yet some others besides the eleven signers can also be called witnesses because they reported a vision similar to that received by the Three Witnesses. For instance, Harrison Burgess wrote of an answer to prayer in 1833: "Suddenly a glorious personage clothed in white stood before me and exhibited to my view the plates from which the Book of Mormon was taken." [^28] Martin Harris's wife had the same spectacular experience, though she violently rejected the restored gospel afterwards. [^29] Other documented cases parallel these two.

162So Brigham Young extended "witnesses of the Book of Mormon" beyond the normal reference to either the Three or the Eight Witnesses. John Taylor did also in an 1837 letter, speaking first of the Three Witnesses and their published testimony and adding, "Since that time angels have appeared to a great number of others, who bear testimony to the same things." [^30] Who was in Brigham Young's mind as the doubting witness? The leading possibility is Luke Johnson, six years younger than Brigham and a member of the Twelve almost three years before his excommunication. A source to be quoted names him as a semi-witness of the Book of Mormon, saying that he even signed a statement, which cannot be verified. George A. Smith's 1838 letter from Kirtland names Luke Johnson as one who opposed the Book of Mormon among the dissenters, agreeing with some others "that it was nonsense." [^31] But he repented and rejoined the Church in time to accompany the first pioneers to Utah, where he became a bishop. So he would fit Brigham Young's description if I "continued to contend against the work" referred to temporary apostasy. Anyway, the following 1846 experience of John D. Lee has striking parallels to Brigham Young's picture of the apostle-witness:

162I went to St. Joseph, Mo. . . . While there I met Luke Johnson, one of the witnesses to the Book of Mormon. I had a curiosity to talk with him concerning the same. We took a walk down on the river bank. I asked him if the statement he signed about seeing the angel and the plates was true, if he did see the plates from which the Book of Mormon was printed or translated. He said it was true. I then said, "How is it that you have left the Church? if the angel appeared to you, and you saw the plates, how can you now live out of the Church? I understand you were one of the twelve apostles . . ." "I was one of the Twelve," said he; "I have not denied the truth of the Book of Mormon. But myself and several others were overtaken in a fault at Kirtland, Ohio. . . . I have come to the conclusion that each man is accountable for his own sins, also that the course I have been pursuing injures me alone, and I intend to visit the Saints and again ask to be admitted into the Church." [^32]

163The "case" against the Three Witnesses normally quotes some of their statements supposedly inconsistent with their testimony. Here the problem is not the truth of the statement as much as the logic of understanding it. For instance, in 1887 David Whitmer took special pains to print his religious position, his Address to all Believers in Christ, arguing that after being directed in the Book of Mormon and the early revelations, Joseph Smith added doctrines not of God, particularly plural marriage. David spent time on how wrong the Latter-day Saints were to excommunicate him, in the process claiming the following: "If you believe my testimony to the Book of Mormon; if you believe that God spake to us three witnesses by his own voice, then I tell you that in June, 1838, God spake to me again by his own voice from the heavens, and told me to 'separate myself from among the Latter-day Saints, for as they sought to do unto me, so should it be done unto them.' . . . I make no farther statements now, but suffice it to say that my persecutions, for trying to show them their errors became of such a nature that I had to leave the Latter Day Saints. And as I rode on horseback out of Far West in June, 1838, the voice of God from heaven spake to me as I have stated above." [^33] These circumstances are well known to Mormon historians; after the excommunications of Oliver Cowdery and David and John Whitmer, Sidney Rigdon had preached his "Salt Sermon," warning dissenters not to interfere with Mormon society. The Whitmers and Cowdery were next told to get out of town, and with turmoil caused by forcible rejection, they left the Mormon center of Far West. Joseph Smith and the Twelve later criticized Sidney Rigdon's aggressive speeches and also the secret threatenings of Sampson Avard, probably the chief mover in this expulsion. What kind of a "voice" did David hear then? David does not really say; he only implies that it was audible by comparing it with the command to testify of the Book of Mormon. [^34] But there are problems with that because David Whitmer did not treat the two experiences equally in his long lifetime. He only mentioned the undefined voice at Far West once, in this last writing to fellow believers—but he had repeatedly testified of an audible voice authenticating the Book of Mormon. [^35] Those with him in 1830 in the New York grove certified that they had also heard God's voice then, but neither Oliver Cowdery nor John Whitmer, both of whom left Far West with David at this time, say anything about the heavenly command of 1838. Whatever came to David Whitmer, the later experience fails to contradict his earlier divine command to testify of the ancient record. David Whitmer could have received true spiritual comfort because of the unjust methods that his former associates were using against him; or he may have only felt that God spoke to him because of the powerful indignation that swelled up in his soul; or if he gave way to the spirit of anger and retaliation, he invited Satan to inspire him and deceive him. For instance, once in later life he was tempted to lead, thereby dictating several revelations that he later considered false. [^36] The Far West "voice" might fall into this category.

164Studying a problem with a Book of Mormon witness will generally lead to better understanding of the witness, the situation with an 1844 report: "Martin Harris is a firm believer in Shakerism, says his testimony is greater than it was of the Book of Mormon." [^37] This word to the Twelve from Phineas Young and others is vague, for we do not know whether these Kirtland Mormons heard Martin Harris say this, or whether they heard it secondhand. His leaning to Shakerism is probably accurate, but Harris's precise wording is all-important if one claims that he testified of Shakerism instead of the Book of Mormon. This "either-or" reading of the document does not fit Martin's lifetime summary of all his interviews: "no man ever heard me in any way deny the truth of the Book of Mormon, the administration of the angel that showed me the plates." [^38] For instance, at the same time as the above 1844 letter, Edward Bunker met Martin in the Kirtland Temple, visited his home, "and heard him bear his testimony to the truth of the Book of Mormon." [^39] And six months later Jeremiah Cooper traveled to Kirtland and visited with Martin Harris: "he bore testimony to the truth of the Book of Mormon." [^40]

165Martin's Shaker sympathies terminated some time before 1855, when Thomas Colburn reported his attitude: "he tried the Shakers, but that would not do." [^41] In the meantime Martin was intrigued by their claims of revelation, though he surely never espoused all Shaker beliefs, for thoroughgoing Shakers renounced the married life that Martin had during these years. [^42] Fully committed Shakers also lived in communities like nearby North Union, whereas Martin remained in Kirtland during this period. Their appeal lay in a Pentecostal seeking of the Spirit and emphasis on preparation for Christ's coming. When Phineas Young mentioned Martin's Shaker belief, a new book of Shaker origin was circulating, "A Holy, Sacred, and Divine Roll and Book, from the Lord God of Heaven to the Inhabitants of Earth." Since it claimed to come from angels to prepare the world for the Millennium, it would be broadly harmonious with Martin Harris's commitment to the Book of Mormon, which in a far more historical and rational sense is committed to the same goal. Indeed, the Shaker movement later tended to slough off the "Divine Roll" as produced by an excess of enthusiasm. [^43] We do not know whether Martin ever accepted this book as true, but he showed one like it to a visitor. This act does not show belief in that book, since it may have been exhibited as a curiosity, but the following journal entry shows that even if Shaker literature was present in 1850, Martin still gave priority to his Book of Mormon testimony: "I went to see Martin Harris. He was one of the 3 Witnesses to the Book of Mormon and said he knew it was true, for he saw the plates and knew for himself. I heard his little girl—she was 7 years old. I read some in what they called the Holy Roll, but no God." [^44] Anyone following this discussion can soon see that authentic statements from the Book of Mormon witnesses are voluminous and always repeat the reality of their experience. Yet the first anti-Mormon book was written in 1834 within a dozen miles of their residences and set the precedent of not contacting them but devoting most space to show them to be either superstitious or dishonest. [^45] This became a formula: ignore the testimony and attack the witness, the same pattern as the detailed current treatments. That method is sure to caricature its victims: lead off with the worst names anyone ever called them, take all charges as presented without investigating, solidify mistakes as lifelong characteristics, and ignore all positive accomplishments or favorable judgments on their lives. Such bad methods will inevitably produce bad men on paper. The only problem with this treatment is that it cheats the consumer—it appears to investigate personality without really doing so. A few central examples are in order.

166David Whitmer is attacked because he allowed William E. McLellin to appoint him president of a reorganized church in 1848, after which David received some revelations. It was an easy decision for David; praying beforehand "his whole frame trembled and shook . . . and he cried out, 'Brethren, lay hands upon me that I may have strength to do my duty.'" [^46] Some months afterward David directed a letter explaining that his actions were not proper and had been made "after three days successive intreaties." [^47] Prior to the 1835 appointment of the Twelve, David Whitmer had been set apart as the successor to Joseph, but he did not use this precedent for personal aggrandizement. The above false start was four years after Joseph's death; it was followed years later by David's Small Church of Christ that claimed the identical organization of 1829-30 while Joseph Smith was at the Whitmer home in New York. William E. McLellin's later letters show constant pressure to reinterest David in a presidency over a reorganized church, which David steadfastly declined. In fifty years out of the Church the main theme of David's career is conservatism and not advancing beyond the first revelations of the Restoration. This reality is virtually the opposite of the "credulous" term currently applied to David. David was in fact religiously opinionated rather than religiously unstable. This witness obviously hoped to be active again in the Church after Joseph's death, so his major miscalculation about his own leadership authority had its own logic at that time. Searching honestly and admitting failure is hardly a moral blot—at least anyone who has seriously investigated other beliefs or changed churches should not think so.

167Martin Harris displays a certain instability not at all characteristic of David Whitmer and Oliver Cowdery, but his lifetime religious positions have a consistency that is clear because of remarkable information from him. As discussed, the Book of Mormon remained the mainstay of a life that was repeatedly confused by the loss of family, wealth, friends, and religious security. His decision to oppose Joseph Smith in Kirtland led him into a series of theological adaptations; eight of them brought him back the full circle to rejoin the Latter-day Saints in the West. This figure has been seized upon for condemnation rather than insight. Furthermore, one early source claims that Martin went through five religious positions before becoming a Mormon, so the "case" against the witnesses adds eight and five to exclaim in shock that Martin made thirteen changes. But this ignores my specific explanations of the eight changes after his 1838 excommunication: except for Shakerism, "every affiliation of Martin Harris was with some Mormon group." [^48] Beginning algebra teachers caution against adding eight oranges and five apples—the answer is not thirteen because the categories do not mix.

168We shall see that the "five changes" prior to Martin's New York conversion are overstated—but differing churches of that period do not mix with Martin's Ohio variations on Mormonism, which he told visitors he had never left. His specific Ohio stages include the following: (1) the Parrish-Boynton party (which he condemned for denying the Book of Mormon at the time he met with them); (2) an 1842 rebaptism by a Nauvoo missionary; (3) an 1846 English mission with a Strangite companion (where documents suggest that the Book of Mormon was really Martin's message); (4) participation in McLellin's attempts to set up Midwest leaders for the Church in 1847-48; (5) concurrent with one or more stages, sympathy for Shakerism without full participation; (6) support of Gladden Bishop in his program of further revelations based on the Book of Mormon; (7) continuation of his original "dissenter" status of stressing the Book of Mormon and early revelations of Joseph Smith—even when occasionally meeting with William Smith and others, he maintained this position for fifteen years after his 1855 conversations with Thomas Colburn; (8) his 1870 return to the Church in Salt Lake. Note that the emphasis could be on the number "eight" or Martin's support of the Book of Mormon through all stages, which blended as different ways of trying to further the Restoration.

169The arithmetic of Martin's five religious changes before Mormonism is also faulty. The claim comes from the hostile Palmyra affidavits published by E. D. Howe; G. W. Stoddard closed his in sarcasm against Martin Harris: "He was first an orthodox Quaker, then a Universalist, next a Restorationer, then a Baptist, next a Presbyterian, and then a Mormon." [^49] Palmyra sources do not yet prove that Martin was a Quaker, though his wife probably was. [^50] And no evidence yet associates Martin with the Baptist or Presbyterian churches. Note that the other two names are religious positions, not necessarily churches—philosophical Universalists dissent from traditional churches in believing that God will save all, and Restorationists obviously take literally the many Bible prophecies of God's reestablished work in modern times. An early Episcopal minister in Palmyra interviewed Martin and reduced his five positions to two: "He had been, if I mistake not, at one period a member of the Methodist Church, and subsequently had identified himself with the Universalists." [^51] Of course Martin could have been a Universalist and Restorationer simultaneously. This view fits what other Palmyra sources say about Martin Harris. In the slanted words of Pomeroy Tucker, who knew him personally, "He was a religious monomaniac, reading the Scriptures intently, and could probably repeat from memory nearly every text of the Bible from beginning to end, chapter and verse in each case." [^52]

169This impression of Martin as Bible student outside of organized religions is just what Martin says in his little-known autobiography of this period:

170In the year 1818-52 years ago—I was inspired of the Lord and taught of the Spirit that I should not join any church, although I was anxiously sought for by many of the sectarians. I was taught two could not walk together unless agreed. What can you not be agreed [is] in the Trinity because I cannot find it in my Bible, Find it for me, and I am ready to receive it. . . . Others' sects, the Episcopalians, also tried me—they say 3 persons in one God, without body, parts, or passions. I told them such a God I would not be afraid of: I could not please or offend him. . . . The Methodists took their creed from me. I told them to release it or I would sue them . . . The Spirit told me to join none of the churches, for none had authority from the Lord, for there will not be a true church on the earth until the words of Isaiah shall be fulfilled. . . . So I remained until the Church was organized by Joseph Smith the Prophet. Then I was baptized . . . being the first after Joseph and Oliver Cowdery. And then the Spirit bore testimony that this was all right, and I rejoiced in the established Church. Previous to my being baptized I became a witness of the plates of the Book of Mormon. [^53]

170The above is Martin Harris's creed, held for the half-century before giving this statement on returning to the Church, plus the five additional years that he lived in Utah. For the dozen years prior to joining Mormonism he was a seeker, like scores of other LIDS converts, and through life never departed from his confidence that the Bible prophecies were fulfilled in the Restoration through Joseph Smith. This core belief was what everything else related to, the structure that stood before, during, and after any gingerbread decorations at Kirtland.

170The purpose here is not to win arguments but bring greater understanding of each main Book of Mormon witness. Oliver Cowdery's inner feelings expressed in his letters out of the Church throw more light on his character than a study of the meaning of overdone accusations after his excommunication. Oliver's letters insisted that these charges were false, and the same writings show what he considered true in the Church. Five years after leaving Far West Oliver answered the Twelve, saying that he felt "sensibly and keenly" about correcting the "falsehoods" in print. [^54] Then his letter extended warmth to his former priesthood brethren, sharing faith that his professional success had come through the Lord's blessing: "I only speak of it here to express the gratitude of my own heart to the Lord our Common Father, who has thus enabled me to provide support for a destitute family." [^55] Above all he expressed brotherhood with the apostles that eight years before had been selected by the Three Witnesses in council with the Prophet—the apostles who had been given a moving charge by Oliver, who had then exhorted them to seek direct revelations from God, after which Oliver took each apostle by the hand to ask if he would accept the responsibility of the ordination just conferred. [^56] His 1843 letter reexpressed confidence in the authority of those men "who once took me by the hand, under the sanction of the Holy Spirit, when they received a high and holy calling." [^57]

171Such language contrasts with the threadbare patchwork of a supposed 1839 pamphlet from this Book of Mormon witness, who in the Church spoke and wrote about receiving priesthood restoration from John the Baptist and later from the ancient apostles Peter, James, and John. [^58] This pamphlet is confused in saying that he is "beginning to doubt" the priesthood, and adding that the voice of John the Baptist "did most mysteriously resemble the voice of Elder Sidney Rigdon." Yet it adds nothing about the great apostolic visitation that Oliver generally mentioned in his priesthood restoration narratives. The suspect pamphlet closes with a convenient revelation of the Savior himself, wherein "the Redeemer instructed me plainly" that Joseph Smith had falsely introduced "high priests, apostles, and other officers" into the Church. If Oliver had really received this revelation in 1839, he would not have referred to the "high and holy calling" of the Twelve in the above letter in 1843.

172What the real Oliver Cowdery was saying out of the Church about the ministry of angels does not appear in this production, titled Defense in a Rehearsal of My Grounds for Separating Myself from the Latter Day Saints (Norton, Ohio, 1839). Not only does Cowdery have no 1839 connection with the place of publication; not only does the supposed location have no known press—but also no known original of this pamphlet has been found. [^59] It came from an anti-Mormon organization in 1906 with the fanfare of new discovery, but was totally unmentioned in Oliver Cowdery's lifetime in Mormon publications (which typically refuted attacks in this period) or non-Mormon publications (which would not have passed up the printed renunciation of the key assistant to Joseph Smith). [^60] Furthermore, when Oliver returned to the Church and was closely questioned on what he had published about Mormonism while out of the Church, the above item was not ever named.

172The spirit of conviction of Oliver Cowdery's own language was reiterated in an 1846 letter to Oliver's brother-in-law, Phineas Young. Speaking privately and spontaneously, Oliver tied his personal integrity to his priesthood restoration testimony, one that stands on the same ground as his similar Book of Mormon testimony. In pleading that the printed record be set straight before his return to the Church, Oliver spoke pointed words applicable to anyone repeating the unsubstantiated libels to which he refers:

172And that I may not be misunderstood, let me here say that I have only sought and only asked that my character might stand exonerated from those charges which imputed to me the crimes of theft, forgery, etc.—those which all my former associates knew to be false. I do not, I have never asked to be excused or exempted from an acknowledgment of any actual fault or wrong, for of these there are many, which it always was my pleasure to confess. I have cherished a hope, and that one of my fondest, that I might leave such a character, as to those who might believe in my testimony after I should be called hence, might do so, not only for the sake of the truth, but might not blush for the private character of the man who bore that testimony. I have been sensitive on this subject I admit, but I ought to be so. You would be under the circumstances, had you stood in the presence of John, with our departed Brother Joseph, to receive the Lesser Priesthood, and in the presence of Peter, to receive the Greater, and looked down through time, and witnessed the effects these two must produce. You would feel what you have never felt, were wicked men conspiring to lessen the effects of your testimony on man after you should have gone to your long sought rest. [^61]

173The above letter is Oliver's disagreement with the most quoted document used against his character. That is the purported ultimatum directed to David Whitmer and Oliver Cowdery causing them to leave Far West—but Oliver's 1843 letter to the Twelve refers to its published form and suggests that he had never seen such a document. [^62] It was published by the State of Missouri as part of Joseph Smith's commitment hearing, which contained only the prosecution's case. The ultimatum was incorporated in the testimony of Sampson Avard, the most disreputable Mormon apostate on record, and his name headed the list of "signers," making it very possible that he wrote the document and filled it with exaggerations. [^63] Even if the document is authentic, the Book of Mormon witnesses fled immediately and were not allowed to respond. Quoting it as evidence against the Cowdery and Whitmer character (with some books carelessly adding Martin Harris, who was not even in Missouri) only proves that "a little learning is a dangerous thing"—dangerous especially to the reputations of men victimized by one-sided use of one-sided documents divorced from their context.

173Two months earlier Cowdery was invited to answer charges at his excommunication, though he chose only to write a letter about three charges, which were dropped. The six remaining charges were for inactivity in the Church, for speaking against Joseph Smith, and for seeking to collect money from an impoverished people through lawsuits. This much was proved at the trial and by independent historical records of Oliver's activities then, including his personal letters to his relatives just before excommunication. But one count was added that is doubtful both by the wording of the high council's charge and its findings: "For disgracing the Church by being connected in the 'bogus' business, as common report says." [^64] Attributing this to "common report" is simply saying "hearsay," raising a special caution, reinforced by very vague and ambiguous testimony at the trial on this point. In fact, the other five findings against Oliver were unqualified, though this "8th charge was sustained satisfactorily by circumstantial evidence," another way of saying that solid proof was lacking. [^65]

174Fortunately for accurate history, every excommunicated Mormon is consulted again at reentrance to the Church, and the issue is inevitably whether the actions that caused excommunication have been remedied. This opportunity for a second look at the real problems of Oliver Cowdery came as the witness returned to the Church in Iowa in 1848, gave his public testimony, and then requested rebaptism from apostles, who referred his case to the high council and high priests quorum. A careful record was kept of the joint meeting, which raised no question about Oliver's honesty, always a requirement for baptism and rebaptism. Instead, Oliver's examination was specifically on not following priesthood leaders on Church issues: "many questions were relative to his course and feelings towards Brother Joseph Smith, etc." [^66] This worthiness hearing not only clarified what the real problems were at the earlier excommunication but gave Oliver Cowdery the opportunity to state that he knew that his life had been virtuous: "I feel that I can honorably return. I have sustained an honorable character before the world during my absence from you. This though a small matter with you, is of vast importance." [^67] This again reveals the spirit of the man who chose hard roads of conscience over popularity in his major conflicts of life. In the manner of his differing personality, each witness did the same. The moral merits of the Book of Mormon witnesses are all the stronger for serious investigation.

David Whitmer, An Address to All Believers in Christ (Richmond, Mo., 1887), p. 8. An illustration is the scholarly Catholic Encyclopedia of 1913 (10:570), which mentioned the witnesses' printed testimonies and added this notable faux pas: "On renouncing Mormonism subsequently, Cowdery, Whitmer, and Harris, the three principal witnesses, declared this testimony false." The statement apparently depends on language of the Encyclopaedia Britannica that David Whitmer complained about.

Fawn M. Brodie, No Man Knows My History (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1946), pp. 77-78.

Ibid., p. 78 (cp. bottom notes, 77-78).

The Reflector (Palmyra, New York), Mar. 19, 1831, p. 126.

Times and Seasons 2 (1841):482.

Joel H. Johnson, Autobiography, Utah Genealogical and Historical Magazine 29 (1938):170-71. For the contemporary summary of these movements, see the February 6, 1840 letter of Johnson in Times and Seasons 1 (1840):76-77.

"History of Thomas Baldwin Marsh," Nov. 1857, also cit. Deseret News, Mar. 24, 1858.

Elizabeth Cowdery to David Whitmer, Mar. 8, 1887, cit. The Return, Dec. 1892, p. 9, with "shudder" corrected to "shadow."

Stephen Burnett appears in journals and minute entries as an early Ohio.

S. Burnett to Lyman E. Johnson, Apr. 15, 1838, Orange Township, Geauga Co., Ohio, cit. Joseph Smith Letter Book 1: 64-66.

Ibid.

Since Harris had physical experience with the covered plates in addition to the vision, one of the early and most quoted Harris interviews apparently merges the two experiences and claims a contradiction. Harris supposedly said of the plates, "I saw them just as distinctly as I see anything around me, though at the time they were covered with a cloth." This is not a direct Harris interview, but instead is John A. Clark's version of the version of "a gentleman in Palmyra" who talked to Harris. Gleanings By the Way (New York, 1842), pp. 256-57.

Martin Harris to Mr. Emerson (Hanna B. Emerson), Nov. 23, 1870, Smithfield, Utah, cit. True Latter Day Saints' Herald 22 (1875):630.

John H. Gilbert to James T. Cobb, Mar. 16, 1879, Palmyra, N.Y., manuscript at New York Public Library.

Nathan Tanner, Jr., Journal, Apr. 13, 1886.

Burnett to Johnson.

Ibid.

Hyrum's move is dated by his journal volume in the hands of Elder Eldred G. Smith: "Arrived in the Far West May 29, 1838." Cp. Mercy Fielding Thompson's recollections in her family letter of Dec. 20, 1880: "We remained there [Canada] until March, 1838, when we were appointed to journey with Hyrum Smith . . . to Far West, Missouri. We arrived there in May, where my daughter Mary Jane was born on the 14th of June, 1838." Also cit. Don C. Corbett, Mary Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1970), p. 52. Cp. Hyrum Smith's affidavit regarding Missouri: "I left Kirtland, Ohio, in the spring of 1838, having the charge of a family of ten individuals." History of the Church 3:373.

Sally Parker to Francis Tufts, Aug. 26, 1838, evidently written at Sunbury, Ohio, but posted at Kirtland Mills. Manuscript is in possession of a descendant.

John Whitmer to Mark H. Forest [Forscutt], Mar. 5, 1876, signed handscript at RLDS Archives, Independence, Mo. Cp. William Smith's similar evaluation of all of the witnesses, with his special knowledge of the Smiths: "nor has either or any one of these witnesses ever to my knowledge counteracted the testimony as given above concerning the real existence of these Mormon tablets." Notes written on "Chambers' Life of Joseph Smith," typescript, pp. 8-9.

Thomas Ford, History of Illinois (Chicago, 1854), p. 257.

Harry M. Beardsley, Joseph Smith and His Mormon Empire (Boston, 1931), p. 67; Brodie, p. 79.

Ibid., pp. 79-80.

Edmund Wilson, The Dead Sea Scrolls, 1947-1969 (New York: Oxford University Press, 1969), p. 279.

Ibid., p. 284.

Journal of Discourses 7:164.

JD 2:257. Cp. Brigham Young's 1870 October Conference address: "Oliver Cowdery . . . always maintained his first testimony that God has sent an angel and revealed to him that the book was true"—a concept on this occasion applied specifically to Martin Harris and by strong implication to David Whitmer. (Ogden Junction, Oct. 12, 1870.)

Harrison Burgess, "Sketch of a Well-spent Life," cit. Labor in the Vineyard (Salt Lake City, 1884), p. 66.

Biographical Sketches, p. 112.

John Taylor to "Rev. and Dear Sir," May 3, 1837, cit. Latter Day Saints' Messenger and Advocate 3 (1837):513.

George A. Smith to Josiah Fleming, Mar. 30, 1838. How much Luke Johnson doubted the Book of Mormon is not known, since Eliza R. Snow pictured him as "jovial" and "more inclined to ridicule than hostility." Biography and Family Record of Lorenzo Snow (Salt Lake City, 1884). In addition to Luke, another possibility is his brother and apostle Lyman Johnson, whom Lorenzo Snow pictured as seeing an angel but being overcome by Satan afterward. See Mathias F. Cowley, Conference Report, Oct., 1901, p. 18, suggested by researcher E. Jay Bell.

John D. Lee, Mormonism Unveiled (Saint Louis, 1877), p. 184.

David Whitmer, Address to All Believers in Christ, pp. 27-28.

For the caution that the 1838 "voice of God" might be the "voice of the Spirit," compare the following statements. Speaking prospectively of the Address that he would publish, David said: "Now God has made it known to me that before I go hence, I must send forth my testimony to the world." (David Whitmer to Joseph Smith III, Dec. 9, 1886, cit. Saints' Herald 34 [1887]:89.) David later made clear that the above revelation came from the Spirit: "But now the Spirit of God has made it manifest to me to make them known." (Address to All Believers in Christ, p. 25.)

For the definition of the 1830 voice as distinctly heard and shared by the senses, see the following. "I . . . distinctly heard the voice of the Lord declaiming that the records of the plates of the Book of Mormon were translated by the gift and power of God." (Kansas City Journal, June 5, 1881.) "I heard the voice of the Lord as distinctly as I ever heard anything in my life declaring that they (the plates) were translated by the gift and power of God." Joseph F. Smith, journal, Sept. 8, 1878, cit. Joseph Fielding Smith, Life of Joseph F. Smith (Salt Lake City, 1938), p. 243.

David called these revelations "errors in doctrine in the past." (Address to All Believers in Christ, p. 28.) See the discussion on pages 166-67 of this chapter.

Phineas Young et al. to "Beloved Brethren" who in the last of the letter are defined as "our brethren, the Twelve," Dec. 31, 1844, Kirtland, Ohio.

Martin Harris, Sr., to H. Emerson, Jan., 1871, Smithfield, Utah, cit. True Latter Day Saints' Herald 22 (1875):630.

Edward Bunker, Autobiography, manuscript, p. 3.

Jeremiah Cooper to E. Robinson, Sept. 3, 1845, cit. Messenger and Advocate of the Church of Christ 1 (1845):319.

Thomas Colburn to Elder Snow, May 2, 1855, cit. St. Louis Luminary, May 5, 1855.

---
Notas:
[^1] Joseph Smith, History of the Church 1:6, also Pearl of Great Price, JS-H 1:19, reprinted also in the LDS pamphlet "Joseph Smith's Testimony."
[^2] Joseph Smith to Emma Smith, June 6, 1832, Greenville, Indiana, manuscript at the Chicago Historical Society.
[^3] HC 1:8, JS-H 1:26.
[^4] Latter Day Saints' Messenger and Advocate 1 (1835):79.
[^5] "Articles and Covenants of the Church of Christ," first published in The Evening and the Morning Star, June, 1832, now D&C 20:6.
[^6] Elders' Journal, July, 1838, pp. 42-43.
[^7] HC 1:19, JS-H 1:61.
[^8] Biographical Sketches, p. 113.
[^9] See Joseph Smith, 1832 Manuscript History, in Dean C. Jessee, ed., The Personal Writings of Joseph Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1984), pp. 7-8. The second Anthon Transcript and the apparent Joseph Smith note on it, pp. 223-26 of this book, proved to be forged.
[^10] See the valuable tabulation of surviving pages of the original Book of Mormon manuscript in Dean C. Jessee, "The Original Book of Mormon Manuscript," Brigham Young University Studies 10 (1970):273.
[^11] Book of Commandments 4:4, the earliest datable writing (1833), with subsequent verbal changes in D&C 5:11-14. An undated manuscript of the early form is in the Whitney papers at Brigham Young University, box 1, folder 2.
[^12] Cowdery's priesthood restoration narrative indicates that by May 15, 1829, the translators had passed 3 Nephi 11, which raises the authority question that caused their inquiries on baptism. See Latter Day Saints' Messenger and Advocate 1 (1834):13: "after writing the account given of the Savior's ministry." The next book, Ether, 5:24 contains the promise of witnesses seeing the plates.
[^13] In the next quotation of the text, the Prophet mentions the Book of Mormon promise in language much closer to this 2 Nephi 27 prophecy than to Ether 5:2-4, which suggests that they were in Fayette translating the first two books of Nephi, the period of the lost 116 pages. The non-Cowdery manuscript pages, some of which are apparently done by John Whitmer, also indicate a Fayette translation for the beginning portions of the book. Cp. n. 10.
[^14] Book of Commandments 4:8, with the Whitney manuscript reading "the things which he desireth to view," now D&C 5:24. Cp. n. 11.
[^15] Times and Seasons 3 (1842):897, also cit. HC 1:52-53.
[^16] D&C 17:1-4, first published in the 1835 edition with the dating: "June, 1829, given previous to their viewing the plates containing the Book of Mormon." Early dissenter Ezra Booth saw a manuscript of this revelation in the summer of 1831: "When in Missouri, I had an opportunity to examine a commandment given to these witnesses, previous to their seeing the plates. They were informed that they should see and hear those things by faith and then they should testify to the world." (Letter 3, [Ravenna] Ohio Star, Oct. 27, 1831.)
[^17] Joseph Smith's history suggests that Book of Mormon translation was nearly completed at this time, a correction of Lucy Smith, who did not live in the Whitmer home but only visited. In Lucy's manuscript at the end of the quotation here, "four" is written over an original "three," referring to those who then left the home. Since David remembered being in the field when others came to get him, he may not have been at the morning devotional service. There are other possibilities of time, since we have only glimpses of that morning in the sources.
[^18] The quotation comes from Salisbury's most reliable document, his signed typescript, "Things the Prophet's Sister Told Me," June 30, 1945.
[^19] See Biographical Sketches, pp. 108-9.
[^20] For the date of the move and a summary of persecution, see HC 1:18-19. For aborted plans to take the plates as Joseph was moving, see Biographical Sketches, p. 113.
[^21] HC 1:20-21 gives the approximate translation dates of April 2 to June 14, 1828. For the family tragedy that accompanied the loss of the 116 pages, see Biographical Sketches, pp. 118-22, which is confirmed by the death date of the first son on the gravestone: June 15, 1828.
[^22] HC 1:28 gives a one-sentence summary of Joseph's practical affairs that winter, but his 1832 ledger book manuscript mentions the limited translation: "History of the Life of Joseph Smith, Jr.," p. 6. Cp. Lucy's report of Joseph's conversation this winter; "I have again commenced translating, and Emma writes for me." Biographical Sketches, p. 126.
[^23] For events mentioned, see Biographical Sketches, pp. 128-31. Both Joseph and Oliver gave his arrival as April 5, 1829, with translation beginning immediately afterward. HC 1:32 and Latter Day Saints' Messenger and Advocate 1 (1834):14.
[^24] Emma Smith, Interview between Feb. 4 and Feb. 10, 1879, Saints' Herald 26 (1879):290.
[^25] Joseph Smith III to James T. Cobb, Feb. 14, 1879, Letterbook 2, pp. 85-88, RLDS Archives, courteously shared with me by Smith family scholar Buddy Youngreen.
[^26] Saints' Herald 26 (1879):289.
[^27] Ibid., p. 290.
[^28] Ibid.
[^29] The Whitmer family reactions are told by Lucy Smith, who knew the parents well. Biographical Sketches, pp. 135-37. For further detail see Richard L. Anderson, "The Whitmers: A Family That Nourished the Church," Ensign, Aug., 1979, p. 36.
[^30] Edward Stevenson, Journal, Dec. 23, 1877.
[^31] Orson Pratt and Joseph F. Smith to John Taylor, cit. Deseret News, Nov. 16, 1878.
[^32] Ibid.
[^33] Stevenson, Journal, Dec. 23, 1877.
[^34] Stevenson, Journal, Feb. 9, 1886. Stevenson also noted David's retelling the same incident in the journal entry of January l, 1887, recording another visit.
[^35] Pratt and Smith to Taylor, cit. Deseret News, Nov. 16, 1878.
[^36] Andrew Jenson, The Historical Record, Oct., 1881, p. 621. Edward Stevenson was also present at the visit with John C. Whitmer and approved Jenson's report. See Edward Stevenson, "The Thirteenth Witness to the Plates of the Book of Mormon," Juvenile Instructor 24 (1889):23.
[^37] Letter of J. Frank McDowell to Saints' Herald, July 22, 1884, Olivet, Iowa, cit. Saints' Herald 31 (1884):508.
[^38] Chicago Times, Aug. 7, 1875.
[^39] Richmond Democrat, Jan. 26, Feb. 2, 1888, attributed to "an article written by Joe Johnson. . . . "
[^40] Whitmer, Address to All Believers in Christ, p. 43.
[^41] Journal of Angus Cannon, Jan. 7, 1888. Cp. Cannon's Tabernacle speech, Deseret Evening News, Feb. 12, 1888.
[^42] Martin remarried Caroline Young before his estrangement from the Church and had children in the years 1838, 1842, 1845, 1849, 1854, and 1856.
[^43] For a survey of the rise and fall of the 1843 "Divine Roll," see Charles Nordhoff, Communistic Societies of the United States (New York, 1874), pp. 245-50.
[^44] James Willard Bay, Journal, Nov. 23, 1850, p. 27.
[^45] E. D. Howe, Mormonism Unvailed (Painesville, Ohio, 1834), pp. 96-99.
[^46] Ensign of Liberty 1 (1849):99-100.
[^47] Hiram Page to Alfred Bonny et al., June 24, 1849, Richmond, Mo., answering "a letter directed to David Whitener," Olive Branch 2 (1849):28-29.
[^48] First printed as Richard Lloyd Anderson, "The Certainty of the Skeptical Witness," Improvement Era, Mar., 1969, p. 63.
[^49] Howe, Mormonism Unvailed, p. 261.
[^50] See Pomeroy Tucker, Origin, Rise, and Progress of Mormonism (New York, 1867), P. 41.
[^51] John A. Clark, Episcopal Recorder 18 (1840):94.
[^52] Tucker, Mormonism, p. 52.
[^53] Testimony of Martin Harris, dictated to Edward Stevenson, Sept. 4, 1870, Stevenson microfilm collection, after journal, vol. 32. Researchers are greatly indebted to descendant Joseph Grant Stevenson for locating and publishing this document in the Stevenson Family History (Provo, Utah: Stevenson Publishing Co., 1955), 1:163-64. Appreciation also goes to Max Parkin for reminding me of the item, no. 1043 in Davis Bitton, Guide to Mormon Diaries and Autobiographies (Provo, Utah: Brigham Young University Press, 1977), p. 146. My text follows my rereading of the microfilm. Martin's view of being baptized right after the first two elders probably refers to events of April 6, 1830.
[^54] Oliver Cowdery to the Twelve, Dec. 25, 1843, Tiffin, Ohio.
[^55] Ibid.
[^56] See HC 2:194-98.
[^57] Cowdery to the Twelve, Dec. 25, 1843.
[^58] See Richard Lloyd Anderson, "The Second Witness of Priesthood Restoration," Improvement Era, Sept., 1968, pp. 14-24.
[^59] See Chad J. Flake, Mormon Bibliography, 1830-1930 (Salt Lake City: University of Utah Press, 1978), p. 182 (item 2544): "All copies are photostat. . . . Whether the pamphlet ever existed is doubtful." Cp. the annotation on Neal's 1906 first publication (p. 455, item 5744): "This is the version from which all copies have been taken."
[^60] The first known appearance of this item attributed to Cowdery is R. B. Neal, Oliver Cowdery's Defense and Renunciation (Ashland, Ky., 1906). Neal was the general secretary of the American Anti-Mormon Association and claimed to discover the pamphlet, though never disclosing where or even discussing its authenticity. In his first printing, he mentions John the Revelator's continuing priesthood, saying, "We made the same argument years ago that Oliver here makes" (p. 15).
[^61] Oliver Cowdery to Phineas Young, Mar. 23, 1846, Tiffin, Ohio. The letter is transcribed quite accurately in Stanley R. Gunn, Oliver Cowdery (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1962), pp. 250-51.
[^62] See Cowdery to the Twelve, Dec. 25, 1843: "I cannot speak definitely of this instrument, as I know nothing of it except what has been related by those who say they have seen it."
[^63] See Sampson Avard et al. to Oliver Cowdery et al., June, 1838, Far West, cit. Document Containing the Correspondence, Orders, etc. in Relation to the Disturbances with the Mormons (Fayette, Mo., 1841), pp. 103-6. This Avard ultimatum is regularly cited without mentioning that it is part of the Sampson Avard testimony, a misleading impression of official approval of a strictly ex parte hearing, in which each piece of evidence has to be judged according to its source. There are serious historical problems in Avard's testimony. For instance, the other document he quoted in addition to the witnesses' ultimatum is the "secret constitution" of the Danite group, but dissenter John Corrill concluded "that but few knew about it, for I never heard one lisp on the subject until Avard exposed it after he was arrested." Brief History of the Church of Christ of Latter Day Saints (Saint Louis, 1839), p. 32. Avard claimed that Sidney Rigdon penned the 'witnesses' ultimatum, but Avard could have invented both documents to produce impressive testimony for his own benefit.
[^64] Far West Record, p. 119, where quotation marks appear around "bogus," also cit. HC 3:16.
[^65] Far West Record, p. 126. The precise wording of the finding was lost in the summary made in HC 3:17.
[^66] Pottawattamie High Council Minutes, Nov. 5, 1848. For the discussion then on Oliver's views of the priesthood while out of the Church, see Richard Lloyd Anderson, "The Second Witness on Priesthood Succession," Improvement Era, Nov., 1968, pp. 14-20.
[^67] Pottawattamie High Council Minutes, Nov. 5, 1848.
