Richard Lloyd Anderson, Investigating the Book of Mormon Witnesses ( 1981)

18112

181The Challenge of the Witnesses

181 Angel with plates, Hill Cumorah Monument. (Statue by Torlief Knaphus).

181Historians collect facts and then evaluate facts. Law courts separate the functions of establishing facts from judging facts, the latter of which is often left to a jury. This study of the Book of Mormon witnesses used strictest historical standards in recovering information—everything possible on their lives and testimonies, sparing no expense or trouble. These materials have been classified, correlated, and tested on the basis of their firsthand value. Statements clearly traced to the witnesses verify the testimonies printed in the Book of Mormon that they saw the plates, and in the case of the Three Witnesses, that an angel displayed them while the heavenly voice declared that the translation was correct. Thus historical tools show that a dozen men (Joseph Smith and all eleven witnesses) repeated the above story with conviction over their lifetimes. They occasionally witnessed to other spiritual experiences supplementing the above, but at no known time did any Book of Mormon witness retract his printed testimony. The first Mormons knew the witnesses and kept track of them through reliable reports—and always insisted that none modified his testimony. For instance, Orson Pratt visited most of the witnesses in New York within months after the publication of the Book of Mormon. He met with them continually prior to their excommunications, and in the perspective of nearly half a century reviewed his personal knowledge and investigation of the Three Witnesses.

182Now did either of these three men . . . ever in any way deny the divinity of the Book of Mormon? Never, no never. Whatever the circumstances they were placed in, however much they were mobbed and ridiculed, however much they suffered by the persecution of their enemies, their testimony all the time was—"We saw the angel of God, we beheld him in his glory, we saw the plates in his hands, and the engravings thereon, and we know that the Book of Mormon is true." . . .

182Oliver Cowdery did not live his faith as he should have done, and he was excommunicated from this Church during Joseph's lifetime. Did he still continue to hold fast to his testimony? He did. Never was he known to swerve from it in the least degree. And after being out of the Church several years, he returned to Council Bluffs, where there was a branch of the Church, and at a conference he acknowledged his sins and humbly asked the Church to forgive him, bearing his testimony to the sacred things recorded in the Book of Mormon—that he saw the angel and the plates, just according to the testimony to which he had appended his name. He was rebaptized a member of the Church, and soon after departed this life.

182Martin Harris did not follow up this people in the State of Missouri; neither did he follow us up to the State of Illinois. But we often heard of him telling in public and in private of the great vision that God had shown to him concerning the divinity of the Book of Mormon. A few years ago he came to this Territory, an old man, between eighty and ninety years of age, and spoke from this stand in the hearing of the people. He then located himself in Cache county, in the northern part of the Territory, where he continued to live until last Saturday, when he departed this life in his ninety-third year—a good old age. Did he continue to bear testimony all that length of time—over forty-six years of his life? Did he at any time during that long period waver in the least degree from his testimony? Not at all. He had a great many follies and imperfections, like all other people, like the ancient apostles, like Elijah the Prophet, but after all, he continued to testify to the very last concerning the truth of this work. . . .

183As I have already mentioned, one more witness remains who saw that angel and the plates. Who is it? David Whitmer, a younger man than Martin Harris . . . Where does he live? In the western part of Missouri. Does he still hold fast to his testimony? He does. Many of the elders of this Church, in going to and fro among the nations, have called upon him from time to time, and they all bear the same testimony—that Mr. David Whitmer still, in the most solemn manner, declares that he saw the angel and that he saw the plates in his hands. [^1]

183Since these facts are clear, the only serious question about the Book of Mormon witnesses is not what their testimony was, but how to evaluate it. History cannot change their words, which by itself is impressive, for religion has attracted its share of pious rascals who obviously manipulated others for their own benefit. On the contrary, the Book of Mormon witnesses suffered for their testimonies, receiving persecution in the Church—and after excommunication enduring ridicule and the great temptation to purge themselves of the scandal that their names continued to support. The Three Witnesses cut religious but not emotional ties with the Church, for they continued to identify with the Mormon people and regret their separation, no matter what their circumstances. In the end all had made the moral decision to finish life with their testimonies on their lips, two of them proclaiming their belief by the action of returning to the Church. History is not a tool for going far beyond external data. But it tells us what almost every interviewer said if he gave his impressions of the witnesses—that here were honest men stating what they obviously believed to be true. In short, no one who knows their lives well has claimed a conspiracy. They spoke too spontaneously of a moving experience when questioned by hundreds.

183After history has done its job of portraying what the witnesses really were, the job of evaluating their testimony must be a matter of conscience. Conscience releases many souls lightly, but the greatest people have been sorely burdened by their inner light. "Necessity is laid upon me," exclaimed the apostle Paul. (1 Cor. 9:16.) The challenge of the witnesses is whether theirs was a God-given burden. Whatever it was, it operated in eleven different personalities throughout divergent lifetimes; they carried it through dramatic danger and the soft whisperings of self-interest. One may easily miss the real point. The question is not whether each agreed totally with Joseph Smith or the Church. Their commission was to speak firsthand of the Book of Mormon. If they did that convincingly while dissenting from other Mormon doctrines, their witness is really more, not less impressive. As the Three Witnesses left the Church, their brethren felt betrayed and bluntly labeled them, though no worse than Christ applying "Satan" to Peter voicing a materialistic gospel. (Matt. 16:23.) Peter and Jude in turn threw a dozen more scathing terms at the apostates of their day, for souls were at stake as they drew lines of authority clearly. One of these labels was the "way of Balaam" (2 Pet. 2:15; Jude 11), and Joseph Smith followed Jude's image to make William E. McLellin the false prophet Balaam and David Whitmer the dumb animal that he rode, since he was being used by McLellin. [^2] This comparison has little to do with David Whitmer's honesty, but applies Jude's language to him as a rebel against God. This is an example of the anti-Mormon quotation being in reality a pro-Mormon argument, for LDS writers have long asked how Joseph Smith would dare to condemn the Book of Mormon witnesses if these men had the power to expose the Book of Mormon as a fraud. Joseph acts independently of them, as B. H. Roberts said, defying them to do their worst, dealing with them on the apparent assumption that their testimony was an eternal obligation.

184The witnesses treat each other similarly, though each took an independent road. For instance, Oliver Cowdery died near David Whitmer in upper Missouri in 1850, and nearly forty years later David said that in the previous year both men saw "that the Book of Doctrine and Covenants contained many doctrines of error." [^3] In retrospect David claimed Oliver Cowdery to support his argument, but the documents from Oliver add other dimensions. Both obviously agreed in skepticism about polygamy, but Oliver Cowdery told the high council at Council Bluffs that he accepted the Nauvoo revelation taking presiding authority away from him and giving it to Hyrum Smith (D&C 124:94-95); afterwards Oliver supported the authority of the Twelve by expressing belief in the "calling of those men who have borne the burden since the death of Joseph." [^4] At the end of 1849, when David said that they agreed totally, Oliver wrote a last letter accepting his Washington assignment from the Twelve and referring to them as "the good brethren of the valley." [^5] David Whitmer gradually developed the position that there was no higher priesthood and no central presidency, but all of Oliver's returning speeches in 1848 emphasized that these offices and keys were given by angels in his presence. [^6] So David is only partially right in claiming that he and Oliver agreed. It is naive to let David speak years later for Oliver when Oliver's contemporary language is now readily available. The point is that each witness separated himself from the others theologically after they separated themselves as a group from the Church. Their own lives and their own interests continued to evolve, but their impressive unity on their Book of Mormon witness remained intact.

185The Three Witnesses were obviously affected in their doctrinal individualism by the number of years out of the Church. Oliver was absent a decade and could be expected to lack understanding on some important things revealed in his absence. This would be more true of Martin Harris after three decades before return, and intensified for David Whitmer after five decades without return. Time and human disillusionment were obviously working on their outlooks. Why not the same process of attrition for their Book of Mormon witness? When Mormonism was new, its young prophet had received a revelation promising the Three Witnesses "a view of the plates" and the ancient objects that accompanied them, with the command and prophecy: "And after that you have obtained faith, and have seen them with your eyes, you shall testify of them by the power of God, and this you shall do that my servant Joseph Smith, Jr., may not be destroyed, that I may bring about my righteous purposes unto the children of men in this work." [^7] Each of the three quarreled with the Prophet's leadership, but scores of years later died after obedience to this 1829 command. Joseph Smith's prophecy was fulfilled in Oliver Cowdery in 1850, in Martin Harris in 1875, and not in David Whitmer until 1888. Time, geography, employment, and personality separated each witness from the others, but their diverging lives were fused by the fire of their testimonies into a sign for God that will continue to touch or to trouble thinking men.

186The ultimate value of truth is that it needs no defense, only investigation. The words of the witnesses do speak for themselves, after analysis clears away garbled versions of what somebody attributed to them. All scriptures promise the Spirit's seal to those who sincerely hear, reflect, and pray. Joseph Smith and eleven more are modern witnesses of ancient scriptures; they are on God's errand to testify, as the above revelation commands, "that I may bring about my righteous purposes unto the children of men in this work." Their declarations concerning the Book of Mormon have been quoted extensively—both to show their historical consistency and to reveal their sincerity. Their words not only document events, but disclose their inner selves. If God indeed called them, their message carries the assuring peace of God. Pope spoke of having "just enough of learning to misquote." The Bible defender can be the offender, for in jealously guarding his limited collection of prophets, he often opposes more revelation with a few stock quotes that migrate from one anti-Mormon book to another without much understanding of the situation that produced them. The thoroughgoing rationalist sometimes seems open-minded by contrast. For instance, the journalist Beardsley studied his subject enough to realize that fraud was out of the question for the Three Witnesses' testimony of the Book of Mormon:

187"But in this particular instance, they apparently spoke what they believed to be the truth, when they asserted that they had seen the plates. All three later apostatized . . . and during their periods of apostasy were approached by numerous foes of the Mormons and enterprising journalists who sought to obtain from them statements refuting their testimony. All remained steadfast until death in their assertion that they had seen the plates and that they believed the Book of Mormon to be of divine origin." [^8] But if the educated investigator better appreciates the impact of the witnesses' testimony, his rationalism is often threatened by miracles. He knows that the train is hurtling down that track, and throws the switch to derail it from a supernatural destination so foreign to a compact, scientific world. But Beardsley's 1920 intellectual climate was more confident than a 1980 environment with so many questions still unanswered. Then it seemed much easier to quote an early psychologist who smugly spoke of these witnesses working up their expectations to "a psychic mirage complete in every detail." [^9] Such rhetoric does not meet the central issue in Joseph Smith's life. Fawn Brodie imitates Beardsley by expecting the Three Witnesses to continue to bear testimony, since Joseph "had conjured up a vision they would never forget." And how is this done? Through "Joseph's unconscious but positive talent at hypnosis." [^10] Fine phrasing, but what does it mean? Those hypnotized are normally aware of entering such a process, and there were enough years apart from Joseph and from each other to reflect well on what had really happened. It may take more imagination to believe such theories about the witnesses than to accept their testimony.

188One person is certain that there can be no more revelation after the Bible, and another is just as certain that there is no such thing as revelation. Both positions are essentially beyond logic, for neither assumption allows serious thought on the question of whether the Three Witnesses and Joseph Smith received revelation. Paul faced the same dilemma in preaching Christ when Jews rejected Jesus' resurrection because it was a "stumbling block" and rationalistic Greeks ridiculed it as "foolishness," or intellectually unrespectable. (1 Cor. 1:23.) But no one who arbitrarily limits his field of investigation can remain confident, because the possibility always exists that significant truth confronted him, and he looked the other way. Men as devout and as intelligent as any believer or skeptic today talked to the witnesses and concluded that they had indeed seen and heard. One of them was the brilliant Orson Pratt, whose logical report on the consistency of the Three Witnesses began this chapter. Another was the thoughtful dissenter John Corrill, who knew the witnesses intimately. He lost faith in the midst of the 1838 persecutions but explained why Mormonism touched him powerfully in the first place. His review of investigating the Book of Mormon witnesses suggests why their testimony must remain a lasting challenge to both Bible believer and skeptic: "As to the origin of the Book, I made every diligent inquiry, and from all I could learn, I became satisfied that Smith was the author, and I never have been able to trace it to any other source. As to its being a revelation from God, eleven persons besides Smith bore positive testimony of its truth. After getting acquainted with them, I was unable to impeach their testimony, and consequently thought that it was as consistent to give credit to them as credit the writings of the New Testament, when I had never seen the authors nor the original copy." [^11]

189What is at stake in the testimony of the Book of Mormon witnesses? A greater conception of the purposes of God, whose revelations reach beyond one area in the world and are not limited to antiquity. A Savior whose power extended to those seeking righteousness before he came upon earth, whose work today reaches out to every human soul, living or dead, ancient or modern. The unsurpassed sermon of all time puts the burden of decision upon every man: "for with what judgment you judge, you shall be judged." (Matt. 7:2.) The author of that sermon sent apostles, promising them that their experiences with him, his authority, and the Holy Spirit would equip them to be witnesses. (Acts 1:8.) To a sincere Roman their leader explained that the resurrected Jesus did not appear publicly, but to "witnesses chosen before of God." (Acts 10:41.) In early Acts the testimony of these apostolic witnesses is alive with inspiration and accountability, for they speak eloquently of God's light upon the humble and his judgment upon the proud. Nothing in religious history so parallels the actions of Joseph Smith, the men that gave their names to attest to new scripture, and new apostles called after them.

189The fervent glow of the early Christian Church was kindled anew in the early meetings at the Whitmer home. As soon as the Book of Mormon could be published, the restored Church of Christ was organized April 6, 1830. Some thirty members and their interested friends gathered June 9 for their first conference, another Pentecost by the accounts of several who were there. [^12] The record includes the first known reading of the initial Mormon doctrinal statement, then called the "Articles and Covenants." (D&C 20.) Minutes also name ten Book of Mormon witnesses, who heard this revelation stress the Book of Mormon as "confirmed to others by the ministering of angels, and declared unto the world by them." [^13] After these "Articles and Covenants" were "read by Joseph Smith, Jr.," they were "received by unanimous voice of the whole congregation, which consisted of most of the male members of the Church." [^14] So the Book of Mormon witnesses personally endorsed this declaration of the eternal force of their testimony, grouped with other great miracles of gospel restoration: "Wherefore, having so great witnesses, by them shall the world be judged, even as many as shall hereafter receive this work, either to faith and righteousness, or to the hardness of heart in unbelief to their own condemnation. For the Lord God hath spoken it, for we, the elders of the Church, have heard and bear witness to the words of the glorious Majesty on high, to whom be glory forever and ever. Amen." [^15]

Journal of Discourses 18:159-161.

See Joseph Smith, Jr. to the Church, Dec. 16, 1838, Times and Seasons 1 (1840):83-84, cit. History of the Church 3:228. Cp. Numbers 22.

David Whitmer, An Address to Believers in the Book of Mormon (Richmond, Mo., 1887), p. 1.

Report to President Brigham Young by Orson Hyde, Apr. 5, 1849, manuscript written by clerk Robert Campbell.

Oliver Cowdery to Phineas Young, written after Aug., 1849, Richmond, Mo., cit. Stanley Gunn, Oliver Cowdery (Salt Lake City; Bookcraft, 1962), p. 261.

For background on Oliver's 1848 statements, see Richard Lloyd Anderson, "The Second Witness of Priesthood Restoration," Improvement Era, Sept. 1968, pp. 15 ff., and also "The Second Witness on Priesthood Succession," Improvement Era, Nov., 1968, pp. 14 ff.

D&C 17:3-4, first published in the 1835 edition as 42:2. Joseph Smith gave the date and circumstances in June, 1829 in HC 1:52-53. Cp. the 1831 manuscript evidence, ch. 1, n. 16: D&C 17:14, first published in the 1835 edition with the dating: "June, 1829, given previous to their viewing the plates containing the Book of Mormon." Early dissenter Ezra Booth saw a manuscript of this revelation in the summer of 1831: "When in Missouri, I had an opportunity to examine a commandment given to these witnesses, previous to their seeing the plates. They were informed that they should see and hear those things by faith and then they should testify to the world." (Letter 3, [Ravenna] Ohio Star, Oct. 27, 1831.)

Harry M. Beardsley, Joseph Smith and His Mormon Empire (Boston:Houghton Mifflin Co., 1931), p. 67.

Ibid., p. 68.

Fawn M. Brodie, No Man Knows My History (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1946), pp. 77-78.

John Corrill, Brief History of the Church of Christ of Latter Day Saints (Saint Louis, 1839), p. 11. Cp. p. 16: "I have thus given a brief account of the investigation I went through in relation to these different subjects." At the end of the book Corrill speaks for "sound reason" by indicating that persecution had spoiled Joseph Smith's plans and prophecies. Like most prophets, Joseph had his plans deferred by persecution, but not destroyed. Corrill explains that he lost faith through 1838 events, not skepticism of the Book of Mormon witnesses, whom he knew intimately.

See especially HC 1:84-85.

Book of Commandments 24:11 (1833), printed there with the preface, "The Articles and Covenants of the Church of Christ," the same title of the two printings in The Evening and the Morning Star, June, 1832, and June, 1833, now D&C 20:10. Although there are minor modifications of D&C 20 for the verses used here, I have followed the first printings as being the closest known to the form of the revelation read on June 9, 1830.

Far West Record, June 9, 1830. Only priesthood holders appear by name, and this includes Joseph Smith and ten of the Book of Mormon witnesses. The unnamed witness, Jacob Whitmer, was undoubtedly there also, since the minutes list as present "most of the male members of the Church," and since he had been baptized April 11, 1830, according to HC 1:81.

Book of Commandments 24:12, the same text appearing in the 1832 and 1833 printings named in note 13 above, also cit. D&C 20:13-16. Note 13: Book of Commandments 24:11 (1833), printed there with the preface, "The Articles and Covenants of the Church of Christ," the same title of the two printings in The Evening and the Morning Star, June, 1832, and June, 1833, now D&C 20:10. Although there are minor modifications of D&C 20 for the verses used here, I have followed the first printings as being the closest known to the form of the revelation read on June 9, 1830.

---
Notas:
[^1] Joseph Smith, History of the Church 1:6, also Pearl of Great Price, JS-H 1:19, reprinted also in the LDS pamphlet "Joseph Smith's Testimony."
[^2] Joseph Smith to Emma Smith, June 6, 1832, Greenville, Indiana, manuscript at the Chicago Historical Society.
[^3] HC 1:8, JS-H 1:26.
[^4] Latter Day Saints' Messenger and Advocate 1 (1835):79.
[^5] "Articles and Covenants of the Church of Christ," first published in The Evening and the Morning Star, June, 1832, now D&C 20:6.
[^6] Elders' Journal, July, 1838, pp. 42-43.
[^7] HC 1:19, JS-H 1:61.
[^8] Biographical Sketches, p. 113.
[^9] See Joseph Smith, 1832 Manuscript History, in Dean C. Jessee, ed., The Personal Writings of Joseph Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1984), pp. 7-8. The second Anthon Transcript and the apparent Joseph Smith note on it, pp. 223-26 of this book, proved to be forged.
[^10] See the valuable tabulation of surviving pages of the original Book of Mormon manuscript in Dean C. Jessee, "The Original Book of Mormon Manuscript," Brigham Young University Studies 10 (1970):273.
[^11] Book of Commandments 4:4, the earliest datable writing (1833), with subsequent verbal changes in D&C 5:11-14. An undated manuscript of the early form is in the Whitney papers at Brigham Young University, box 1, folder 2.
[^12] Cowdery's priesthood restoration narrative indicates that by May 15, 1829, the translators had passed 3 Nephi 11, which raises the authority question that caused their inquiries on baptism. See Latter Day Saints' Messenger and Advocate 1 (1834):13: "after writing the account given of the Savior's ministry." The next book, Ether, 5:24 contains the promise of witnesses seeing the plates.
[^13] In the next quotation of the text, the Prophet mentions the Book of Mormon promise in language much closer to this 2 Nephi 27 prophecy than to Ether 5:2-4, which suggests that they were in Fayette translating the first two books of Nephi, the period of the lost 116 pages. The non-Cowdery manuscript pages, some of which are apparently done by John Whitmer, also indicate a Fayette translation for the beginning portions of the book. Cp. n. 10.
[^14] Book of Commandments 4:8, with the Whitney manuscript reading "the things which he desireth to view," now D&C 5:24. Cp. n. 11.
[^15] Times and Seasons 3 (1842):897, also cit. HC 1:52-53.
