Richard Lloyd Anderson, Investigating the Book of Mormon Witnesses ( 1981)

193Source Note

193Behind every historical fact is a document, and responsible research relies on its most original available form. In this study these may be letters, journal entries, official minutes, newspaper stories, or later recollections. Most of the manuscripts quoted are found in the LDS Church Historical Department, Library and Archives Division. No note is made if a manuscript is held by the Historical Department, though location is indicated for documents at other libraries. Printed versions of manuscript sources are often given for the reader's convenience. In this case "cit." means that I have cited the printed source, though the more usual "also cit." means that I am quoting the original form and merely adding where the printed version may be found.

193The present trend among Mormon historians is to quote documents very literally, including reproduction of misspellings. My practice is not to reproduce misspellings unless there is some special reason. Some documents are dictated, and some misspellings are accidental, but above all I feel an obligation as a researcher who has seen the original to relay it in readable form. Thus all quotations attempt to be exact copies of the manuscript source, with spelling occasionally modified, and punctuation and capitalization added. If there is any doubt on what is intended in spelling or meaning, that is noted.

194The main printed source used in this work is Joseph Smith's history or autobiography, which he began to dictate in 1838 and which began to be published in installments in 1842 in the Times and Seasons as the "History of Joseph Smith." It was later reissued from 1902 on as Joseph Smith, History of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, and is presently available in bound and paperback editions. My practice is to cite it as History of the Church at the first appearance in the chapter footnotes, with the abbreviation "HC" following. Another source frequently used is the history of Joseph Smith's mother, first published as Lucy Smith, Biographical Sketches of Joseph Smith the Prophet and His Progenitors for Many Generations (Liverpool, 1853), which is cited throughout as "Biographical Sketches." Journal of Discourses is cited as Journal of Discourses at the first appearance in the chapter footnotes, with the abbreviation "JD" following. "JS-H 1" refers to the beginning of Joseph Smith's history in the new edition of the Pearl of Great Price. This account was previously referred to as Joseph Smith 2.
