Randal A. Wright, Why Say No When the World Says Yes? Resisting Temptation in an Immoral World ( 1993)

Chapter 1

Avoiding Temptation

Ed and Patricia Pinegar

We are engaged in a war! And if we are to survive the conflict, we need to understand the issues of this war. It started in heaven, where we were victors: "And there was war in heaven: Michael and his angels [all of us] fought against the dragon" (Revelation 12:7). That war continues every day here on earth—"for the devil is come down unto you, having great wrath, because he knoweth that he hath but a short time" (Revelation 12:12). And we can conquer here, too.

To be locked in combat with Satan can be scary, but it is part of the eternal plan. The Lord has said, "It must needs be that the devil should tempt the children of men, or they could not be agents unto themselves" (D&C 29:39). Indeed, opposition in all things is a necessary condition of our mortality (see 2 Nephi 2:11).

Why do the challenges of life have to be so hard? After all, we all want to return to our heavenly home and our Heavenly Father. We all would like to avoid the big mistakes in life. Why couldn't this process be made easier? Why does there have to be so much opposition? Our Father explained the purpose of life to Abraham when he said, "And we will prove them herewith, to see if they will do all things whatsoever the Lord their God shall command them" (Abraham 3:25). We are here to be tested—to see if we will yield to temptation or if we will listen to the promptings of the Spirit. It is within our power to grow and become like God or, by submitting to the persuasions of the devil, surrender our potential and be destroyed by Satan. These are the battle lines.

If the enemy is Satan, how can we best prepare for the battle? How do we know where the adversary will attack? As children of God, we want to feel good, be loved, be treated as adults, and feel self-worth. It is on these needs that Satan concentrates, offering us counterfeit rewards, preying on our basic desires, striving to exploit our weaknesses. He apparently knows where we are vulnerable, and he charges into those areas. President Spencer W. Kimball explained, "Lucifer and his followers know the habits, weaknesses, and vulnerable spots of everyone and take advantage of them to lead us to spiritual destruction" (The Miracle of Forgiveness [Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1969], pp. 218-219).

We have all been tempted and we know how temptation works. Let's say you desperately want an A in one of your classes. To ensure that result, you might be tempted to cheat on an exam or to copy someone else's homework. Satan must be pleased when he is able to discover that we have become so anxious to get something that we are willing to set aside our values to get it—whether it's an A in school, some article out of a store, an immoral experience, or anything else. When we speak of Satan and his servants throwing their fiery darts at us, we mean they are trying to deceive us—to convince us that committing a sin will give us an advantage or make us feel good. For instance, do you so desperately want to be accepted that you will seek membership in a gang even though the cost may be dishonest or violent behavior? Or, in order to feel more important yourself, are you tempted to gossip and find fault with others? Do you want so much to be admired that you would be willing to steal to obtain nicer clothes or a hot car? Do you so much hate being lonely that you might sacrifice eternal values and seek acceptance by joining the crowd in drinking or doing drugs? Or do you want so much to feel appreciated and loved that you would consider accepting an invitation to "go all the way"?

Beware—when you want something "so bad," it usually isn't "so good."

Satan specializes in deception. One of his tactics is to make what is bad, appear good. We also need to be aware that if he discovers any weakness in us—such as pride, selfishness, greed, lust, jealousy, fear, hypocrisy, vanity, apathy, ignorance, or anger—he will try to tempt us in those areas. And, being human, we also suffer from a natural tendency towards sinful behavior. We learn from Moses 5:13 that "they [mankind] loved Satan more than God. And men began from that time forth to be carnal, sensual, and devilish." Those are characteristics we need to resist and overcome.

What are the consequences of yielding to the temptations of Satan? In the end, the fruits are always bitter, no matter how enticing the sin may be made to appear. For instance, those who are tempted to use alcohol or drugs may anticipate a pleasant experience. What results instead are such things as reckless behavior, health risks, trouble with the law, and an unpleasant hangover. The illicit sexual behavior portrayed so often today in literature, music videos, advertisements, and movies is seldom played out far enough to show the pregnancies, abortions, diseases, divorces, and unhappiness that so often follow. The truth is, there is no happiness in wickedness. In fact, the scriptures say that "wickedness never was happiness" (Alma 41:10; emphasis added).

Can Satan fulfill our real needs? Will he stand by us, support us, and love us? Korihor put his trust in the devil and then confessed when his evil scheme failed, "The devil hath deceived me" (Alma 30:53). Being abandoned by Satan, Korihor descended into a wretched condition and was finally "run upon and trodden down, even until he was dead." Alma's commentary on this sad episode might serve as an epitaph for Korihor and everyone else who thinks Satan has any loyalty to his disciples. "And thus we see that the devil will not support his children at the last day, but doth speedily drag them down to hell" (Alma 30:60).

The war is on. Satan is real. He attacks, but we have the upper hand. We have the means to defend ourselves; we know how to prepare ourselves, how to avoid the fiery darts of temptation by putting on the armor of Christ (see Ephesians 6:12-17). We do this by making our will and the Lord's will the same—by choosing what he would want us to choose, doing what he would want us to do, saying what he would want us to say.

In this battle we have a leader—the Lord Jesus Christ. Will we listen to this commander? Of course! If we really believe that this earthly war is real, we will listen to and follow him and his servants. We will humbly and gratefully submit to his will and guidance. We will plead and pray for his direction. We will obey just as the Sons of Helaman did—with exactness—and receive the blessings of obedience which are safety and happiness.

The Savior, our leader, knows we can win this war. He and our Heavenly Father have great confidence in us. And they have promised us great blessings. James assures us, "Blessed is the man that endureth temptation: for when he is tried, he shall receive the crown of life, which the Lord hath promised to them that love him" (James 1:12). Speaking of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, the Lord said, "And because they did none other things than that which they were commanded, they have entered into their exaltation, according to the promises, and sit upon thrones, and are not angels but are gods" (D&C 132:37).

President Gordon B. Hinckley has said this of the youth of the Church: "I have great confidence in our young people as a whole. I regard you as the finest generation in the history of the Church. I compliment you, and I have in my heart a great feeling of love and respect and appreciation for you" ("A Chosen Generation," Ensign, May 1992, p. 69). Power and strength will come to us when we know and understand the great love, confidence, and trust our leaders have in us.

As we take charge of our battles, what are the attributes we will need in order to overcome the temptations of Satan? Our Heavenly Father and the Savior want us to have the attributes that will give us strength. They know that if we are prayerful, humble, teachable, obedient, and charitable, we can gain self-control, self-mastery, and become responsible—that we can be courageous in defending eternal values; that we can be full of faith and full of the love of Christ; that we can be knowledgeable in the word of God and love that word; that we can be slow to anger and capable of bridling our tongues and our passions. They know we can do it. But we ourselves must learn that we can do it.

These attributes can be ours when we submit to the will of the Father, when we seek to do his will, not our will. That is the act of becoming humble, the beginning virtue of all spiritual growth. The battle of "my will" versus "the Lord's will" is the battle of overcoming temptation and yielding to the Spirit of the Lord.

The Lord will validate us by the Spirit when we strive to take upon ourselves these Christlike attributes. Our needs will be met, we will feel good, we'll have a desire to do good—to do justly, to walk humbly, to judge righteously, to be enlightened, to feel joy, to be happy, to have faith. We will feel this approving power in our lives, because we will be accepted of God. Self-worth and self-respect will be ours. Our needs and wants will be met as we conform our needs to the will of our Father. This power will help us win the war.

What specific things can we do to prepare for the battle to resist temptation? What are the Christlike attributes that will help us withstand the buffetings of Satan? We can fortify ourselves and gain these attributes by practicing or experimenting on the word of God and by obeying his commandments. Let us not be deceived by the simplicity of the steps that can bring so much power to our lives.

Pray

Prayer is a powerful behavior that will fortify us. "Pray always, lest you enter into temptation and lose your reward" (D&C 31:12). We must talk to our Heavenly Father, confide in him, and plead for his help. He will give us direction, encouragement, and power; and in his strength we can do all things. When a young man or young woman kneels in private prayer before going on a date, asking for strength to be pure, he or she is building a powerful fortification.

Study the Scriptures

Studying the scriptures and applying them to our lives will also fortify us. Speaking of the word of God, Alma said that it "had [a] more powerful effect upon the minds of the people than the sword, or anything else" (Alma 31:5). The word of God has power to lead us, guide us, and direct us. The scriptures are our Liahona (see Alma 37:37-47). The word of God, displayed on the Liahona, directed Lehi's family through the wilderness. As they acted with faith and diligence and gave heed to the word, they were directed in all things. Through scripture study we hold to the iron rod, which will guide us through the mists of darkness and the temptations of Satan. Scripture study will be a fortress around us as we study and apply the scriptures to our lives and nurture the word of God through faith, diligence, and patience. A caring mother feels peace when she walks by her child's room and sees her child studying the scriptures. She knows that the power of the word will fortify her daughter.

Serve

Service can protect us from the adversary. As we nurture and bless others, we are nurtured and blessed by Heavenly Father and strengthened by his Spirit. As we focus on others and try to serve them, our selfishness and personal wants will decrease. We rarely see an unhappy person who is serving with all his heart. That is why missionaries are so blessed—they are continually serving others.

Attend Church

Another behavior that will fortify us is church attendance. By attending our meetings, we receive strength through renewing our covenants and learning the word of God. Being in the right place at the right time will strengthen us.

Learn Obedience

The word of God teaches us to be obedient, a powerful attribute to experiment on. In his great address, King Benjamin taught, "I would desire that ye should consider on the blessed and happy state of those that keep the commandments of God" (Mosiah 2:41). That verse further advises us, "And if they hold out faithful to the end they are received into heaven, that thereby they may dwell with God in a state of never-ending happiness." Obedience is freedom. When we obey God, we are free from the sins of the world, free from the terrible consequences of sin.

How can we be free with so many rules and commandments to obey? A simple story will illustrate the value of such guidelines.

A little boy and his dad purchased a beautiful kite. Never having flown a kite before, the little boy was excited. The day was perfect. They found an open field. They wound the ball of twine around a stick so the boy could hold on to it, and then they ran, pulling the kite behind them. Finally the wind caught the kite, and it started to fly.

Then they stood still, holding the kite against the wind, and letting out more string. The kite responded by ascending higher and higher. It was exciting, and the little boy was delighted.

After a long while they came to the end of the string, and as they watched the kite, now only a tiny speck in the sky, the little boy suddenly said, "Let's let it go. I want it to be free. I want it to go higher and higher, clear up to Heavenly Father."

The dad replied, "It doesn't work that way, Son. If we let it go, it won't go higher. It will fall instead."

The little boy didn't believe him because the tension on the string made it seem like the string was holding the kite down. To demonstrate what would happen, the dad opened his pocket knife and handed it to his son. The little boy cut the string. In moments, just moments, the kite lost control. It darted here and there, down and down, and soon they had to walk a long way even to find it, a broken heap on the ground.

The little boy couldn't understand. The string had seemed to be holding the kite down. But it wasn't. The string provided an anchor for the kite, without which it lost its ability to fly.

Like the little boy, some of us mistakenly assume that commandments, rules, and values restrict us—that if we were only free of them, we would be liberated. The truth is, the guidelines provide the discipline that will ultimately lift and guide us to our Heavenly Father. Without the commandments, we would be left to drift aimlessly and eventually crash in a broken heap. As we develop personal, private, religious behavior in the form of prayer, scripture study, service, church attendance, and obedience, we strengthen ourselves against sin and accumulate the power we need to be victorious in our war against Satan.

Commit to Follow True Values

One effective strategy we can use in fighting this war is to commit ourselves to true values before the battle ensues—before the crisis, before the moment of confrontation, before the actual temptation. Then, when we need the strength, we won't have to expend our energies in making decisions. That is the principle Joshua sought to teach his people when he counseled, "Choose you this day whom ye will serve" (Joshua 24:15; emphasis added). Once these values are firm in our hearts, then we can respond with conviction and determination. Making decisions ahead of the moment of crisis helps us to resist temptations when they are presented.

An example of how this strategy works may be found in the experience of a young boy who early in his life had made a promise to God that he would never do anything to hurt his mother. Later, after he had grown older, he had made another promise that he would never do anything to offend God. Armed with that dual determination he was eventually confronted with a significant temptation.

His high school football team had won a game, and the players and some other fellows had gathered at a house where they were basking in the joy of victory. When one of the boys asked if he could have a drink of water, the host of the party invited him to help himself. Opening the kitchen cupboard to get a glass, he noticed a bottle of cooking wine on a shelf.

"Hey, you guys. Look what I've found! It's almost full! Let's see what wine really tastes like."

With their curiosity aroused and being in a jubilant mood, many of the boys exclaimed, "Yeah, let's do it!"

Only one boy expressed any reservation. "Hey, guys, we shouldn't do this. It isn't right, and besides, the wine isn't ours. You know darn well we shouldn't do this."

Then the abuse began. "What are you, a goody-goody? Hey, flake off, man. We don't need you telling us what to do."

The young man now had to make a decision. "If I drink it, I'll be their pal. If I don't, they'll make fun of me."

Just then he noticed a boy standing in the doorway. The boy was younger, a deacon in the ward where he was a priest. Recalling the promises he had already made—to his God and to his mother—the older boy put his arm around the younger boy's shoulders and said, "Come on, we don't belong here." They walked away with taunts ringing in their ears but feeling satisfied that they had chosen to do what was right.

You have to wonder what the outcome might have been had the priest not internalized his values and made a decision prior to the temptation—before the moment of crisis.

The most important battle in this war is the one being waged over sexual purity. The Lord has made it clear that we should not engage in sexual transgressions; moreover, even our minds and thoughts should be pure. "Whosoever looketh on a woman, to lust after her, hath committed adultery already in his heart" (3 Nephi 12:28). To lust is to have an unlawful burning desire for, an eagerness to possess, or a yearning to enjoy carnal pleasure. Lust is more than a passing, fleeting thought. It is a thought dwelt on so often that it becomes an emotion or desire that leads to action. Lust is a very common sin in the world, and if we don't guard against it, such temptations can become very real in our lives. The safeguards are to learn to bridle our passions, to control our thoughts, and to focus on the Christlike virtues that can shore us up against this devastating sin.

President Spencer W. Kimball related an experience to illustrate this principle:

"Across the desk sat a handsome nineteen-year-old and a beautiful, shy but charming, eighteen-year-old. They appeared embarrassed, apprehensive, near-terrified. He was defensive and bordering on belligerency and rebellion. There had been sexual violations throughout the summer and intermittently since school began, and as late as last week. . . . Finally the boy said, ‘Yes, we yielded to each other, but we do not think it wrong because we love one another.’ . . .

"As I looked the boy in the eye, I said, ‘No, my boy, you were not expressing love when you took her virtue.’ And to her I said, ‘There was no real love in your heart when you robbed him of his chastity. It was lust that brought you together in this most serious of all practices short of murder. . . .’ I continued, ‘If one really loves another, one would rather die for that person than injure him. At the hour of indulgence, pure love is pushed out one door while lust sneaks in the other’ " (Faith Precedes the Miracle [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1973], pp. 151-52).

Yes, this war is real, and the consequences of sin are real. Sexual sin is destructive in many ways. It causes the loss of the Spirit, the loss of self-esteem and self-worth; it mocks the power of creation, makes of us seekers of pleasure, and entices us to violate the commandments of God.

As we experiment on the word of God and fortify ourselves with spiritual activities, we may be inspired to do some practical things that will help us avoid temptation:

You can add to this list those things that work for you.

In all things, we must be seekers of happiness (see Alma 27:18) and not simply go with the flow or just have fun—acting on no values, no plans, no intent to do righteousness. President Ezra Taft Benson has said, "When it comes to the law of chastity, it is better to prepare and prevent than it is to repair and repent" ("The Law of Chastity," address delivered at Brigham Young University, Provo, Utah, 13 Oct. 1987).

Some of us may nevertheless make mistakes. Some will sin. We may even lose a battle. But we never have to lose the war, thanks to the great gift of repentance. Where we are at this moment is important, but the direction we are headed is even more crucial to our success. If we have faith unto repentance, we can overcome and progress toward perfection. We humans on the earth are not perfect, so how do we become just men and women made perfect? Through perfect repentance. The gift of repentance through the atonement of Jesus Christ is the path by which it is possible to gain exaltation—to win our war against Satan. It is not easy to repent, but it is the only way we can win the war. Repentance is the key, and when we repent we fortify ourselves and strengthen ourselves, by the power of God, against future temptation. So we must start where we stand, never minding the past, just learning from it.

What might help us to remember the standards the Lord has given us? Moroni used the Title of Liberty to remind his people. What can we do to make sure we keep the commandments? How can we avoid temptation? Perhaps we can make ourselves little reminders, like a note on the mirror with the simple word Remember. What might that word do for us? Reading it, you could "remember" the goodness of God in your life, "remember" to keep the commandments, "remember" to be thankful for all things, "remember" to do good to all mankind, "remember" that upon the rock of Christ we are built—"remember, remember." Just a little word to remind us.

Or maybe a penny placed in our shoe might help us to remember: "I am a daughter or a son of God. I have the capacity to become like Father. I want to be good. I'll remember to pray."

You might associate the ringing of the bell at school or of the telephone at home with your determination to remain virtuous. Whenever you hear that ringing, you can think, "Remember who you are. Remember who you can become. Remember to be kind and good. Remember to tell Mom and Dad you love them. Remember to pray. Remember to search the scriptures."

Remember is the key. Maybe a note written to yourself and left in your car or in your purse or wallet might say, "Remember: Do as Jesus would do." When you rise in the morning and kneel down to pray, you can ask, "Who can I bless today?" There are many other reminders you can use, such as your watch (it's time to choose the right) or even your CTR ring.

Think. Think about what you want out of life. Think about how you will feel if you should slip. Think about how you will feel if you are unworthy to go on a mission or to get married in the temple. Now think about what a wonderful thing it will be to enter marriage worthily, without having sinned. Think about how it will be to kneel at the altar if you are clean and virtuous. You can do it! Others have, and so can you.
