Randal A. Wright, Why Say No When the World Says Yes? Resisting Temptation in an Immoral World ( 1993)

Chapter 2

How Many Kisses?

Rand H. Packer

When I was thirteen, my friend who was fourteen asked me, "Rand, you kissed a girl yet?"

"Are you kidding?" I responded with a mixture of pride and embarrassment. "I haven't even been out with a girl yet, let alone kissed one. Have you?"

"Yeah," my friend said with cool candor. "Last night, me and Ruth Ann."

"Really? Well, what was it like? How did it go? How did it feel?"

All my friend could say was, "WOW!" Just, "WOW!"

It didn't take me long to discover that my friend was having a "WOW" experience with every girl he went out with. It was kind of a personal challenge to him, something that was expected or even required before a date could be called successful.

You are aware, are you not, that there are some, perhaps many, young men and women who believe that the whole purpose of a date is to get a kiss or even more?

That reminds me of a story about a guy named Bill. He had a date with a girl named Mickie, and when she refused to give him a good-night kiss, he said, "Look, Mickie. Ordinarily I can understand being refused a good-night kiss on the first date, but this was the junior prom! The ticket cost me twenty dollars, and the flowers were twelve dollars and ten cents."

She wasn't impressed, so he continued. "The tux rental was thirty bucks, and the spot-remover cost me two dollars and ten cents."

Mickie only looked at him a little sorrowfully, and so he babbled on.

"The taxi ride to dinner was eight dollars and three cents, and the dinner was thirty-five dollars and eighty-three cents!"

Not getting the response he wanted, Bill began to scream. "Refreshments were four dollars and eighty-five cents, and the taxi home was nine dollars and thirty-two cents!"

"So," Mickie asked coolly, "What's your point?"

"Well," Bill said plaintively, "Don'tcha think I deserve just a little something?"

So she wrote him out a check for one hundred twenty-two dollars and twenty-three cents.

It is obvious that the only thing Bill was interested in that night was not Mickie's happiness but a selfish gratification of his own physical desires. Mickie's feelings seemed to mean nothing to Bill, for which she paid him back with equal warmth: a cold check for $122.23.

What is a kiss worth, anyway? Better still, what is a kiss for? And what does a kiss do?

Obviously, one effect of kissing is that it stirs the passions that exist in all of us. Those passions were put there by a loving Father whose intent is to help us become like him. The emotions, passions, and desires that are part of our physical makeup are not illegitimate but rather important characteristics that will help us fulfill our ultimate destiny. The Lord has told us that until we are properly married, we are to control these passions. Then, after we are married, we can enjoy the expression of them and they will serve to bring us and our spouse closer together and ultimately make us "one"—both physically and spiritually.

It is interesting that one of the words meaning "kiss" in the Hebrew language is nasaq, which also means "to catch fire" or "to burn or kindle." But this kindling must be done on the Lord's timetable, or the entire forest is in danger of being burned to the ground and left desolate for at least a season. The passions themselves are God-given, hence the commandment, "And also see that ye bridle all your passions, that ye may be filled with love" (Alma 38:12).

The purpose of a bridle is to control and to keep headed in the right direction. A horse without a bridle is like a runaway freight train with no track. I have been on the back of a galloping runaway horse without a bridle, hanging on for dear life and having no control of where I was being taken. If I had only had a bridle, I could have controlled the horse. Instead, he controlled me and dumped me at his own pleasure.

The media has helped convince the world that a kiss is an expression of passion and a prelude to sexual behavior. No longer is it a symbol of loyalty, pure affection, and respect. Merchants intent on selling their wares promise us that if we will just chew their brand of gum, wear their style of clothing, soak ourselves in their sensuous fragrance, drive their make of car, or visit their recommended vacation spot, they can get us kisses. In fact, they imply, they can get us a whole lot more than kisses.

If there is mutual attraction, it is natural for a young man and a young woman to enjoy spending time together. If they do not take care to structure the amount of time they spend and control the places they go together, they are likely to become improperly affectionate with each other. As surely as night follows day, prolonged kissing leads to more intimate expressions—expressions that the Lord has commanded us to reserve for the beautiful and sacred relationship of husband and wife. Kissing soon gives way to necking, kindling the flame of desires more intensely. Necking is defined as passionate kissing, which includes French kissing or "soul kissing," as it is often called. It is easy to see the relationship of such kissing to total sexual expression.

As desires are stoked, petting often ensues. Petting involves the touching and fondling of private, sacred parts of the body and is itself a forbidden sexual activity for single people. It carries a restriction imposed by Heavenly Father, stamped in bold letters, "For Married Couples Only!"

The passions unleashed by this kind of intimacy are so powerful that once they are ignited—like gasoline being splashed on a fire—they become increasingly difficult to control. Those who stimulate themselves in this way—whether innocently or by design—are flirting with unhappy consequences. Many young people have broken their own hearts and forfeited their blessings by foolishly imagining they could trifle with these sacred emotions or use them for recreational purposes.

The sharing of oneself with another in this way is part of the process of becoming "one" with each other. Though it is a physical relationship, it overflows with spiritual implications. There really is no other experience in life quite like it. To give oneself in this way is to give all that one is and ever hopes to be, to someone else. But, this giving requires permission and authority from the great giver of life Himself.

How can the sexual activity that is so destructive before marriage be a sanctifying experience in the marriage? Why does the Lord condone and bless sexual activity after marriage and condemn it before?

Over the course of my life I have had reason to counsel with many unmarried young people who said they loved each other. These couples often ask me, "Why is it so wrong to show our love? We're going to be married anyway. Why is sharing our love in this way evil prior to a ceremony and celestial after some words have been said? How does a ceremony or a signed piece of paper change all that?" These are important questions and deserve to be answered.

If you were to have walked down the streets of Jerusalem in the days of Jesus, you would have noticed certain individuals walking toward you with large keys tied around their neck. The keys were evidence that there was a room somewhere in which great wealth or something of value was stored. The key entitled the bearer to enter the room and to partake of its contents. The only legitimate access to the room was by use of the key. To safeguard the key and reduce the possibility of the keys being stolen, they were secured around the owner's neck. Hence the imagery of "keys," which was often used by the Savior. Certainly thieves could break into the room and steal the riches and wealth. But someday they would be found out and made to pay for their crime, either in this life or the next. The purpose of the key was not only to protect the wealth but to unlock the wealth, making it available to be used.

Even today, keys play a vital role. Outside my office in the parking lot is a little Chevrolet Chevette. Underneath the hood are about forty idle horses not doing anything. Each night I walk out to my car, insert my key, and unleash the power of those forty idle horses, turning them into anxious thoroughbreds ready to take me to my destination. Yes, someone could break into the car, hot wire it, and steal it. But again, sometime, either in this life or the next, the truth will be known and payment exacted.

It is my belief that when a young couple goes to the temple, they receive a celestial key (permission) to use their procreative powers. That is a first step in our journey toward godhood. The marriage ceremony is the way the Lord officially sanctions the right to touch each other, to share ourselves, and to join with God in the creation of life.

It may be useful to think of the physical relationship between a man and a woman as God's gift to the marriage and that we are not to open the present early. I have discovered that after twenty-two years of marriage, all of our original wedding presents, so far as I know, have vanished—except God's gift to our marriage. It remains with us still and will forever. There is nothing quite like this gift.

If we follow our Father's instructions in this matter, the promise is a greater glory, "which glory shall be a fulness and a continuation of the seeds forever and ever" (D&C 132:19). To me this promise means that someday, after my sweetheart and I have learned all that we are supposed to learn, Heavenly Father might say to us, "Rand and Shirlee, go over there about three hundred twenty-nine light years, veer to the left for another seventy-two light years, and then you can be together forever and ever and have a relationship with each other forever and ever and have quarterbacks and cheerleaders forever and ever." I know of no promise that God has given that thrills me more than this one.

If you are still confused about premarital sex or if you are struggling with temptation, consider this. Those who wait until after marriage to share physical intimacies are not only free to discover the pleasure but, unencumbered by guilt, are able to enjoy an astonishing, glorious, and joyful experience. On the other hand, those who elect not to wait forfeit something precious and always describe the experience as being somehow empty, hollow, and disappointing.

We have now come full circle in regard to the question we asked in the beginning about when and with whom to share kisses. The relationship between a man and a woman can be either good or bad, and the starting point of that relationship is a kiss. When should you share a kiss, and where? How many dates before a kiss is appropriate? Is kissing bad? Is it okay to kiss before you are married? Perhaps this little story will provide some answers.

The Kiss

Not even in Camelot were there evenings such as this—evenings undoubtedly created for fireflies to do their magic. Like tiny candles, a trillion little specks of light danced in the fragrant darkness of the palace garden.

A soft hand reached gently into the night and with a velvet grasp held captive a single and frightened flicker.

"Would you like a glimpse into another world?" asked the princess as she brought her hands close to his eyes. The young knight, Sir Jason of Lockton, peered into the darkness of her cupped hands, his eyes chasing every zigzag of the captive dancing flicker. Suddenly, without warning, the princess released her lighted prisoner, and the little creature darted heavenward to conceal itself in the pattern of glittering stars.

"Father always used to call me his little firefly," said the princess as she stared into the darkness.

"Jenny the Firefly," quipped Jason. "I like it. I really like it."

"Oh, I can tell," laughed Jenny. "You mock my father."

"On the contrary," said Jason. "I judge your father correct. Why else is he the king? His wisdom is much greater than his years, and his daughter much more fair to look upon than the clouds at sunrise."

"Jenny the Cloud," smiled the princess. "I like that. I really like that. It has a kind of billowy ring to it, doesn't it?"

"Now you mock me," said Jason. "I've looked forward to this evening for many months and finally it is my turn."

"Turn?" questioned Jenny.

"The knights of the kingdom, Jenny. You know they stand in line to be your escort. I may not get another turn until the March winds blow."

"I see," said the princess. "But, if you are different from them, might I invite you back on the morrow?"

"Oh, if only you would, Jenny. If only you would," pleaded the young knight.

The reflecting pond shimmered as the soft evening breeze wended its way through the palace garden. For the young knight this hour had been a long time coming, and his wait had seemed eternal. With excitement he had anticipated this special moment. The setting was right—a palace garden, fragrant night air, twinkling stars, flickering fireflies, a young knight, and a not so typical run-of-the-palace princess. She controlled not only her own destiny but the destiny also of this young knight. They grew silent as they stood beside the statue of El Tibaar, a monument to the king's faithful and proven steed.

"Now is the time," thought Sir Jason to himself. "This is the moment I have been waiting for and dreaming about." His heart was pounding as he closed his eyes and leaned forward to kiss the object of his desire, anticipating the feel of her lips. But the princess closed not her eyes, and dipping her head gracefully to the side, she watched as the knight laid his lips squarely on the nose of El Tibaar. Feeling the cold, lifeless rock, Jason instantly opened his eyes to find himself staring at the nose of an ungiving and stone-cold horse.

"Do you have no regard for my feelings?" the princess gently chided. "That which you want you cannot take, nor can I give to all. The days of our acquaintance are but few and this our first night. Is there not more for us than the conquest of a kiss?"

A look of despair and defeat came over Jason, and the young warrior and future king retreated, vanishing into the night with heavy thought as his only companion.

For several moments Jenny stared into the night and at a trillion fireflies. Suddenly all was blurry as tears welled to overflowing. She bolted toward the privacy of her chamber, running to beat the flood of emotion that threatened to overwhelm her. As she approached the sloping stairs that would deliver her to the comfort of the castle, a strong pair of hands suddenly reached out from the darkness, and she was held captive.

She cried out in fear.

"Princess, Princess, ‘tis I," said the king. "Be not afraid."

"Oh, Father, you startled me so," said Jenny as she relaxed into his protective arms and buried her face deep in his kingly robe, hoping to hide the moist evidence of a miserable night.

"What are you doing out here?" she asked.

"That's the question I'm supposed to ask," countered King Rourke, good-naturedly. "I suppose it is permissible for the king to walk in his own garden, is it not? I was merely standing here when I was nearly trampled by a certain young knight heading somewhere in great haste. I didn't know that you were that ferocious, my little . . . "

"Oh, Father," Jenny blurted out. "How do you know when it's right to kiss someone, and why is it that almost every young knight who takes my hand thinks that a kiss is his just reward for an evening of gallantry?"

"Ah," sighed the king. "Two very large questions, very large indeed. Perhaps the answer to your first question will allow you to control the second."

"Is there an answer, Father?" asked Jenny.

"There is, my princess, there is. I remember the first time my eyes beheld your mother. Ah, she was as pure as she was beautiful. Not even the first snows of winter were purer than she. Oh, how I longed to kiss her, to take her in my arms and hold her close. But somewhere, I know not where, I had learned that when a kiss is given, it must be not only mine but ‘ours.’ There is an eternal meaning attached to a kiss, Jenny, and there are precious few who understand the real meaning."

"But how did you know that Mother felt the same way? How did you know that it was right to give it, and how many times do you give it, and to how many people? I'm so confused."

"Welcome to the world, Princess. Confusion reigns. But it need not. There are answers. Somewhere in this old king's study is the answer to your question."

"You mean you have a book on kissing?"

"Sort of," smiled the king. "And besides, I've been doing it for years. I'm pretty good, you know."

"Really, Father? It seems so funny to hear you talk this way. I can't imagine you ever kissing or even being young enough to feel what I'm feeling. The way I'm going, I may be the only maiden in the kingdom never to have kissed."

"Well, there's one thing that I'm pretty sure of, my little firefly: if you save all of your kisses for the one you're going to marry, you probably will never find one to marry, knowing young men as I do, mind you."

Jenny opened her eyes wide, and she smiled thinly, puzzled by her father's statement. Then, arm in arm, the princess and her father ascended the steps to the king's library.

That room had always been a little frightening to Jenny. It was there that many great decisions were made concerning the kingdom. Jenny had sometimes peeked in and had overheard the solemn conversations between powerful people. But tonight it was quiet in the study, and there was an almost spiritual feeling in the room.

"Somewhere, up there, Jenny, is a book, a special book."

Jenny peered above the king's head at the rows of bound volumes, their titles illuminated by the dim light cast by a single candle.

"Ah, there it is. I think I see it, Jenny. That's got to be it."

Jenny watched with interest as her father drew from the topmost shelf an old, tattered, large, leather-bound book. Though the volume had obviously once been well used, it was now covered with dust. Holding it reverently, the king gently brushed away the evidence of a dozen years of neglect.

Laying the huge volume on his marble-topped desk, Rourke opened the heavy book and began to search its pages.

Jenny's eyes registered great surprise. "Father? That is holy writ you touch. Is not the vicar the only one authorized to read the words of life? You stand condemned by your own decree."

"Shhhh," quieted the king. "A foolish tradition, Jenny, started ages ago by some foolish prince of darkness. I am bound by senseless law to abide the decree, but someday, when light fills the earth, all will have the words of life and answers to questions."

Finally the king's eyes rested on a single page. Then, looking up, he said, "Long ago, the greatest of kings stood in the midst of rabble as the events of a very sacred evening were intruded upon. The traitor came in the company of evil men and made his way hesitantly toward the king. There, with a kiss, he betrayed him.

"Do you know who I am talking about?" Rourke asked his daughter.

"Yes," smiled Jenny. " ‘Tis our Lord and Savior."

"That's right, Jenny. Now listen to his response to the treachery and try to imagine the pain he must have felt."

" ‘Judas, betrayest thou the Son of man with a kiss?’ It was not the betrayal that hurt the Savior that night, Jenny. He knew that was going to happen. It was the symbol of affection Judas chose to work his evil that hurt the great King so. It was the kiss—a symbol of love, devotion, caring, loyalty, protection, and commitment. Perhaps, Jen, if you think about the meaning of a kiss and what it should represent, it will help you know who to kiss and when. To distribute or collect kisses for mere physical pleasure betrays the true and total meaning of what a kiss is meant to be. The kiss is yours, Princess. It cannot be taken; it can only be given."

Rourke gently closed the sacred volume and looked into the eyes of his precious daughter.

"You know what, Jen? There are few knights in the kingdom who would understand what we have just talked about. To a true knight that understanding will come, but for now he is mostly enthralled with the beauty that he sees and with how it makes him feel."

Jenny gazed silently at the volume on the desk.

"Does that book always have answers like that, Father?"

"Most of the time, Princess, if you are willing to search them out. Now, run along. The hour is late. Just remember that there is precious more to a kiss than kindling a fire within you, although that's an important part too. Keep in mind the beautiful and sacred things a kiss symbolizes, and you'll know when and with whom to share it."

Jenny threw her arms around her father and gave him a hug fit for a king.

"Thank you for being here and listening. Are you always this wise, Father?"

"Always," said Rourke, winking affectionately at his beautiful daughter and holding the book next to his heart. "Always."
