Randal A. Wright, Why Say No When the World Says Yes? Resisting Temptation in an Immoral World ( 1993)

Chapter 3

Controlling Your Thoughts

David A. Christensen

I had an experience a number of years ago that affected my life and the life of a young missionary. My wife and I and our children were living in Sao Paulo, Brazil, setting up the seminary program. I was also serving as a member of the mission presidency.

In an emergency, I was called to be the acting mission president of the Brazil Sao Paulo Central Mission. I was given the challenge to work with 185 missionaries, as well as to try to keep the seminary program going. My wife and I found it a great challenge but a very rewarding one.

As the acting mission president, I had the demanding but enjoyable task of interviewing all the missionaries. One of these interviews made a lasting impression on me. A missionary came into my office. He was a handsome young man. The elder had a wonderful spirit about him, and he was a hard worker. But at the end of the interview he said to me, "President, I have something I would like to talk over with you, if I may." I invited him to tell me the problem and said I would help as much as I could. Then he said, "President, I have a hard time controlling my thoughts, and sometimes they become dirty. I want to be able to stop thinking those kinds of thoughts because they prevent me from having the Spirit of the Lord like I'd like to."

He had been assigned to labor in a very difficult area of the mission, a section of the city near the ocean front in one of the tourist regions. To reach their proselyting area, he and his companion often had to walk along streets bordering the beach. There was a great temptation to look at the sunbathers and swimmers and to think improper thoughts. Because he and his companion were obviously American, they received admiring glances from many attractive young women who sought occasion to walk by them. My young missionary friend said, "President, it's so difficult for me. I try to do so well, but when these young women parade themselves in front of me, I find my mind filled with inappropriate thoughts, and I am having a very difficult time controlling them." The elder was obviously deeply repentant and sorrowful, and he earnestly desired to do the work of the Lord and to keep himself clean and pure, both in thought and deed.

I said to him, "Elder, tell me what you're doing to overcome your problem?" He told me that he had confessed his sins to his Heavenly Father, that he daily sought help from the Lord, and that he had come to talk with me to make sure that his confession was complete. He felt he was doing everything he could to successfully control his inappropriate thoughts. I asked him, "If I teach you a principle, will you live it?" And he said, "I will, President." Together, we opened the Doctrine and Covenants to the forty-third section and read verses 8 and 9: "And now, behold, I give unto you a commandment, that when ye are assembled together ye shall instruct and edify each other, that ye may know how to act and direct my church, how to act upon the points of my law and commandments, which I have given.

"And thus ye shall become instructed in the law of my church, and be sanctified by that which ye have received, and ye shall bind yourselves to act in all holiness before me" (emphasis added).

We talked about that scripture and in particular about the last phrase, "ye shall bind yourselves to act in all holiness before me." I said to this fine young missionary, "I have found that whenever we are obedient to the Lord, he blesses us. If you will be obedient to the principle taught in these verses, the Lord will bless you."

And then we talked about how to bind ourselves to the Lord—how to act in all holiness before him. We talked about the meaning of the word bind. Bind means to commit, or to covenant, or to promise. Therefore, when we bind ourselves to the Lord we commit to him, or promise him that we will act in all holiness. Then I explained that the most important aspect of that binding is our recognition that without his power and strength we cannot accomplish our task, but that with his strength, we can do anything required of us. We talked about the fact that our Father in Heaven has all power, including the power to help us do whatever he requires, whether that might be to proselyte sixteen hours a day or keep our thoughts pure.

The elder promised me that in his morning prayer the next day, he would bind himself to the Lord—that he would commit himself and promise his Heavenly Father that he would do everything in his power to keep his thoughts clean and pure. He promised that when he was tempted to think about something improper, he would immediately put it from his mind. And he promised that he would not intentionally entertain any evil thought. Finally, he agreed that he would plead with his Father in Heaven for strength and power to keep his commitment. He went from my office much encouraged.

I met with him the following evening. When he walked into my office he had a big smile on his face. He seemed a little sheepish as we began our conversation, but he was anxious to explain to me what had happened. He said, "This morning I did as I told you I would do, and I committed myself to Heavenly Father to keep my thoughts clean and pure and to be a worthy servant. I promised him that I would do everything possible to keep my thoughts clean and that when improper thoughts entered my mind I would immediately get rid of them. In addition, I pleaded with Heavenly Father that he would grant me power and strength to keep my commitment, and that I might receive a witness that the promise in the forty-third section of the Doctrine and Covenants was true."

As he and his companion had left their apartment that morning they had to walk near the beach on the way to their tracting area. He was feeling optimistic and happy, but his resolve was soon challenged. A beautiful young woman saw the elders coming and deliberately crossed the street and walked past them.

My young friend then made the fatal Mormon mistake! He said to himself, "I can handle this! I can take one look and still control my mind." So he took a look and found he could not control his mind, which was immediately flooded by inappropriate and dirty thoughts. He said, "I felt so bad I wanted to die."

Obviously he could not throw himself down along the beach and raise his arms to heaven and cry out, "Oh Father, forgive me." But as he walked along, suffering the pains and anguish of having broken his promise to the Lord, he prayed in his heart for forgiveness and strength and power to do better. A few minutes later, when he had another opportunity to think inappropriate thoughts, he remembered his promise and kept them clean.

As the young missionary sat with me that evening he said with a big grin, "President, I only blew it a few times today and that's the best I have ever done." He had begun a process that would ultimately change his life, and he became one of the truly great missionaries in that mission because he grasped the great truth taught by Jacob: "Remember, to be carnally-minded is death, and to be spiritually-minded is life eternal" (2 Nephi 9:39).

The principle talked about in Doctrine and Covenants 43:8-9 is one of tremendous importance to every young man and woman in the Church. Obviously, our thoughts precede our actions, and if there were no inappropriate thoughts, there would be no inappropriate actions. For, as the Lord said, "As [a person] thinketh in his heart, so is he" (Proverbs 23:7).

A former president of the Church, George Albert Smith, related a boyhood experience: "As a child, thirteen years of age, I went to school at Brigham Young Academy. . . . I cannot remember much of what was said during the year that I was there, but there is one thing that I will probably never forget. . . . Dr. [Karl G.] Maeser one day stood up and said:

" ‘Not only will you be held accountable for the things you do, but you will be held responsible for the very thoughts you think.’

"Being a boy, not in the habit of controlling my thoughts very much, it was quite a puzzle to me what I was to do, and it worried me. In fact, it stuck to me just like a burr. About a week or ten days after that it suddenly came to me what he meant. I could see the philosophy of it then. All at once there came to me this interpretation of what he had said: Why of course you will be held accountable for your thoughts, because when your life is completed in mortality, it will be the sum of your thoughts. That one suggestion has been a great blessing to me all my life, and it has enabled me upon many occasions to avoid thinking improperly, because I realize that I will be, when my life's labor is complete, the product of my thoughts" (Sharing the Gospel with Others [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1948], pp. 62-63).

Each of you who reads this chapter has a great mission to accomplish in the earth. You have a great opportunity to exert your influence not only in the Church but also among your friends who may not be members of the Church. In order to fulfill your mission you'll have to be worthy, and in order to be worthy you will have to learn to control your thoughts.

As you make your morning commitment to your Heavenly Father and as you meet the challenge of controlling your thoughts during the day, you might like to remember a wonderful suggestion made by Elder Boyd K. Packer: "The mind is like a stage. . . . Have you noticed that without any real intent on your part, in the middle of almost any performance, a shady little thought may creep in from the wings and attract your attention? These delinquent thoughts will try to upstage everybody. If you permit them to go on, all thoughts of any virtue will leave the stage. You will be left, because you consented to it, to the influence of unrighteous thoughts. . . .

"This is what I would teach you. Choose from among the sacred music of the Church a favorite hymn, . . . one with words that are uplifting and music that is reverent, one that makes you feel something akin to inspiration. . . .

"Go over it in your mind carefully. Memorize it. Even though you have had no musical training, . . . now, use this hymn as the place for your thoughts to go. Make it your emergency channel. Whenever you find these shady characters have slipped from the sidelines of your thinking onto the stage of your mind, put on this record, as it were" ("Inspiring Music—Worthy Thoughts," Ensign, Jan. 1974, p. 28).

This suggestion by Elder Packer has been very helpful in my life. And there are other techniques that you can use to help you keep your commitment to your Father in Heaven. Some youth tell me they have chosen a scripture to memorize that they can recite when it is needed. For myself, I use a very simple technique of talking immediately to my Father in Heaven when such thoughts come into my mind. Or, I talk to myself. For instance, if I'm riding alone in the car, I simply shout out loud, "Get out of there!" Some people may look strangely at me as they go by in their cars, but the battle is between me and Satan, not between me and the passing traffic.

Elder Bruce R. McConkie recommends that we preach a little sermon to ourselves when Satan attempts to plant evil in our minds. Whatever the technique, the important thing is that we have committed ourselves to our Heavenly Father in our morning prayer, that we have pleaded with him for his power and blessing, and that we do everything we can to keep our thoughts pure.

The technique that we use to rid ourselves of evil thoughts is up to us and our own creativity. The Lord has said, "Look unto me in every thought" (D&C 6:36). We can do that. The more fully we learn to control our thoughts, the more capable we will be of doing what Alma counseled us to do—to lift up our thoughts to our Heavenly Father all the day long (see Alma 34).

The Savior's instruction to us is very simple. Speaking of evil things, he said, "Behold, I give unto you a commandment, that ye suffer none of these things to enter into your heart" (3 Nephi 12:29). Can you imagine how world history might have been changed if men and women had just lived by this principle and had stopped their evil thoughts before they became evil acts?

Because of my name, I have always had a great feeling of love for David of the Old Testament. As a teenager I used to read of his astonishing victory over Goliath and imagine myself doing the same thing. Admiring King David as I did, the story of his illicit relationship with Bathsheba always did (and still does) make me sorrowful. To see one of my heroes lose his exaltation has always been difficult for me. But imagine what might have happened if David had just controlled his thoughts. His scriptural story would now read something like this: "And it came to pass in an eveningtide, that David arose from off his bed, and walked upon the roof of the king's house: and from the roof he saw a woman washing herself; and the woman was very beautiful to look upon.

"But David turned himself away and returned unto his house. Yea, and David did sing a hymn; yea, he did quote his favorite scripture. And, behold, he thought no more upon the woman" (see 2 Samuel 11:2-3).

Now, isn't that better? Then Doctrine and Covenants 132:39 would read: "And in none of these things did [David] sin against me . . . and he has [not] fallen from his exaltation." That change would make me so happy! It would also please the Lord. And David would be free to return to his Heavenly Father and to enjoy all the blessings of eternal life.

But we can't change the past. David did not control his thoughts. He did sin with Bathsheba. He did cause the death of Uriah. And he has lost his exaltation. That is the unerasable fact.

Your scriptural story is still being written, however. You can change it if you need to. You and the Lord can bring your thoughts under control. Your whole life is before you!

With all this in mind, can you imagine what you, as one of the youth of Zion, can accomplish for your Father in Heaven and for yourself if you learn to control your thoughts? You can be free from sexual immorality of any kind. You can be free to go on a mission, marry in the temple, and raise a good family. You can also be free to enjoy peace of conscience, revelation, and happiness. But perhaps more than anything else, you can be free to enjoy this wonderful promise made to us by the Lord: "Let virtue garnish thy thoughts unceasingly; then shall thy confidence wax strong in the presence of God; and the doctrine of the priesthood shall distil upon thy soul as the dews from heaven. . . . The Holy Ghost shall be thy constant companion, and thy scepter an unchanging scepter of righteousness and truth" (D&C 121:45-46).

Can you imagine all that? When you learn to control your thoughts and fill your mind with virtue, you have the right to feel confident with Heavenly Father. Your prayers will become better and better. They will be more meaningful. Instead of being a duty, prayer will become a pleasure. You will pray morning and evening because you will want to. You will learn to pray with faith. You will get answers to your prayers.

But besides all that, when you feel confident with God, you will also feel confident with those around you, and that's important to your happiness. Zits and pounds and pressures can all come and go, and you'll still be okay. With the constant companionship of the Holy Ghost, your patriarchal blessing will be fulfilled and you will complete the mission for which your Heavenly Father sent you.

Now, I need to warn you of one great danger. As surely as God lives, so does the adversary. He will constantly try to tell you you can't do it. But you can.

Controlling your thoughts (as you are probably already aware) takes time. Some weaknesses can be controlled quickly, but some take a lifetime to overcome. Perhaps controlling your thoughts seems like it will take you a lifetime. But don't get discouraged! Don't give up! Each day can become better. Each week will bring greater control. Each month will see increased strength. Don't let Satan sell you short. You can learn to control what runs through your mind. Practice does make perfect.

Begin now. Robert Louis Stevenson said something I memorized when I was a teenager. He said, "You cannot run away from weakness. You must sometime fight it out or perish. And if that be so, why not now and where you stand?" That statement has changed my life. It can change yours, too.
