Randal A. Wright, Why Say No When the World Says Yes? Resisting Temptation in an Immoral World ( 1993)

Chapter 5

The Consequences of Sexual Sin

Randal A. Wright

One day while I was sitting at my desk at the LDS institute where I served as director, a former student named Veronica suddenly burst into my office. She was literally jumping up and down with excitement. I couldn't imagine what all the commotion was about. I thought maybe she had won the Publisher's Clearing House million-dollar prize or something. When she finally calmed down enough to speak, she blurted out her news. "I'm pregnant!" she exclaimed. Her excitement was greater than that of most newly expectant mothers because for many years doctors had doubted her ability even to conceive. And now she was pregnant. All of us who knew her were ecstatic over this news.

What a contrast this visit was to another I received. The institute secretary knocked on my door and said a young woman wanted to talk to me. I could tell something was seriously wrong as soon as Maria walked through the door. Concern was written all over her face. When I asked how she was doing, she burst into tears. I had no idea what was wrong and had to wait until she got control of her emotions to find out. At first I thought maybe a loved one had died or that she had some incurable disease. It wasn't either of these things. When she finally managed to compose herself, she announced somberly, "I'm pregnant."

Isn't that interesting? Maria uttered the very same words Veronica had spoken. But there was a marked contrast in the countenances of these two young women and a huge difference in how they viewed their conditions. What do you think made the difference?

The difference lay in the timing and the circumstances of the two pregnancies. Veronica had been married in the temple to a worthy returned missionary. The couple was active in the Church and trying to live the Lord's commandments. They viewed having a child as a blessing. Maria, on the other hand, had decided it was not important to wait for marriage to share sexual intimacies with a young man. She was devastated when, after she informed him of her pregnancy, he said he wanted nothing more to do with her. So, while Veronica's news was greeted with joy and happiness by all who loved her, Maria's news brought regret, shame, sorrow, and misery to her and disappointment to her loved ones.

Between tearful interludes, Maria asked me a compelling question: "Is there an easy way out of this?"

Put yourself in my place. How would you have answered that question? I was unable to think of an easy way out of her problem. I could only wish with her that she had never gotten herself into the situation in the first place. Maria was learning a hard lesson—that there is always a terrible price to pay for disobedience.

President Ezra Taft Benson has said: "The plaguing sin of this generation is sexual immorality. . . . It permeates our society" ("Cleansing the Inner Vessel," Ensign, May 1986, p. 4). As I travel around the Church, the concern I hear most often expressed by priesthood leaders and parents about their youth is that of immorality. It is a matter of great concern to President Benson also. He has declared: "Sexual immorality is a viper that is striking not only in the world, but in the Church today. Not to admit it is to be dangerously complacent or is like putting one's head in the sand" (God, Family, Country: Our Three Great Loyalties [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1974], p. 239).

A friend of mine asked approximately 250 LDS students the following question on an anonymous questionnaire: "If you could commit one ‘free sin’ with no consequences, which sin would you choose?" More than 80 percent of the students said that they would use their "free sin" to break the law of chastity.

Another teacher asked a group of LDS seminary students to rank a long list of sins. The results were alarming. In order of seriousness, these students ranked breaking the Word of Wisdom first and breaking the law of chastity fifth. As I read the results of this survey, the words of Elder Ezra Taft Benson came to mind: "So garbled in values have our morals become that some youth would not dare touch a cigaret but freely engage in petting. Both are wrong, but one is infinitely more serious than the other" ("Three Threatening Dangers," Improvement Era, Dec. 1964, p. 1069). How do you rank breaking the law of chastity?

How did the sin that is described in the scriptures as the "most abominable above all sins save it be the shedding of innocent blood or denying the Holy Ghost" (Alma 39:5) become so commonplace and accepted in our society? How did we get to the point where some, even in the Church, fail to realize the seriousness of sexual sin? We know that Satan loves to see people fall. I think he has a lot to do with this attitude in our society today.

Satan is very clever. After thousands of years of experience, he knows just how to deceive. He knows when and where to strike his victims. He will try everything in his power to keep youth from reaching their divine potential. Commenting on Satan's tactics, President Spencer W. Kimball declared: "He will use his logic to confuse and his rationalizations to destroy. He will shade meanings, open doors an inch at a time, and lead from purest white through all the shades of gray to the darkest black" ("President Kimball Speaks Out on Morality," Ensign, Nov. 1980, p. 94).

Satan is well aware of the strong sexual drive that Heavenly Father has placed within His children. That divinely implanted instinct ensures the perpetuation of the human race, and intimate expressions of affection fill basic needs in all of us. It suits Satan's purposes if he can persuade us to misuse the sacred powers of procreation or to express the intimacies of marriage before it is time. Immoral behavior diverts us from the gospel path, deprives us of the Spirit, and often leaves emotional scars that are carried into adulthood. Many youth have succumbed to this kind of temptation and experienced the sorrow that results.

Before we can consider possible solutions to the "plaguing sin," we need to look more closely at the consequences of immoral behavior. It is not pleasant, but it is necessary if we are to fully understand what we're up against.

Changes in Attitude toward Sexual Matters

Sexual attitudes and behavior have changed dramatically since your grandparents, and even your parents, were teenagers. Premarital sex was less common then and was viewed as morally and socially wrong. From the late 1960s to the present, however, society has adopted a much more liberal attitude toward sexual matters. Today's youth have grown up in a permissive environment and have developed a viewpoint that is often vastly different from that of their parents or grandparents. Many young people are yielding to the idea that there is no need to "wait until marriage." A rapid rise in the proportion of youth who are engaging in heavy petting and premarital sex has alarmed Church leaders and parents.

The sexual revolution seems to have moved from the college campus down to the high school and now is moving into our junior high schools. A 1989 national study revealed that 33 percent of all boys had experienced sex by age fifteen (the year before they should even date). By age sixteen, 50 percent had engaged in sex, and by age nineteen (the age when LDS young men should go on missions), 86 percent of the young men surveyed had had sexual relations (Newsweek, June 1990, p. 27).

Why are so many falling into this sin when the reward is so meager and the consequences so horrendous? Can you think of any good reason to engage in sexual relations outside the marriage covenant? Can anything of value be gained from this behavior? What are the consequences? Dr. Henry A. Bowman made this thought-provoking statement: "When all is said and done, there is nothing gained from pre-marital adventure except immediate pleasure and that at tremendous risk and exorbitant cost. No really intelligent person will burn a cathedral to fry an egg, even to satisfy a ravenous appetite" (quoted by Hugh B. Brown, in Purity Is Power [Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1978], p. 24).

Satan depends for his success on humanity's willingness to disregard long-term consequences in order to satisfy immediate appetites. His work prospers because momentary pleasure appeals to huge numbers of people. Here are two simple formulas that illustrate the difference between the forces that are battling for the minds of men:

Satan = immediate gratification with long-term agony and grief as the "reward."

Jesus Christ = short-term self-discipline with long-term joy and happiness as the reward.

Because the agony and grief that result when we follow Satan is often somewhat delayed, many fail to realize they have been trapped until it is too late.

A young man who is a member of the Church recently told me that he had committed a "serious sin" with his nonmember girlfriend. He said that after the experience, he became physically ill because of the tremendous guilt that overcame him. His comment to me was unforgettable. He said, "All my life I've heard that we shouldn't have premarital sex because it is wrong. But I have also been told that if we make mistakes, we can repent and be forgiven. Repentance sounded so simple and easy." And then came his haunting question, "Why didn't anyone ever tell me about the consequences of sin and the feeling of nausea I would have afterward?" Of course, our prophets have taught this lesson repeatedly, but many youth fail to listen.

Since that experience, I have thought deeply about the consequences of sexual sin and have begun to compile a list of dreadful results. Please realize that this is only a partial list and in no way represents all the dangers. As you think about what you have observed, you will probably think of other things that could be added to the list.

Consequences of Sexual Sin

Personal Peace and Happiness Are Destroyed

Our Heavenly Father has blessed each of us with a conscience or the Light of Christ. We are born with it, and it works something like an alarm. When we walk too close to the line that separates right from wrong, this special warning signal alerts us that we are stepping into dangerous territory. When we break a commandment, the alarm's clamor can be so loud and insistent it can be emotionally agonizing. On the other hand, when we keep the commandments, our conscience remains quiet.

Those involved in sexual sin often suffer from depression, anxiety, guilt, worry, low self-esteem, and remorse. Is it a coincidence that teen suicide rates have increased at almost the same rate as teen sexual activity has increased? A recent study of young adolescents found that "girls who'd had sex were six times more likely to attempt suicide" than those who were still virgins (USA Today, 6 Feb. 1991, Sec. D, p. 1).

The world speaks of getting "protection" for illicit sex. But there is no protection from the unhappiness and guilt associated with this sin. A lifetime of self-discipline and happiness can be ruined in a matter of minutes. Even though the Lord can restore spiritual virtue by deep repentance, there will be only one "first time" physically. Virginity is something that can be given only once; it can never be recovered if it is surrendered. This first experience remains forever embedded in a person's memory.

How much better to be able to remember the "first time" as a sacred act of love made legitimate by marriage in the holy temple, rather than to recall it as a shameful act of lust. Physical love might be compared to money kept in a savings account. Likewise, we might accumulate and safeguard our desires until they can be given to an eternal mate as a wedding present. Imagine the joy and the powerful emotional bonding that would accompany the presentation of such a gift. There is only one path to happiness, and that is through virtuous living.

Reputations Are Damaged

Have you ever heard a rumor that someone you know has broken the law of chastity? The secret always seems to get out. Satan whispers to his victim that "no one will know" about the deed. Partners in sin hope that the other will not tell what happened. Such secrets are rarely kept. Guilt may persuade a young woman to confide in a friend. All too often a young man will brag of his conquest to his buddies. Word soon spreads, and a young woman unknowingly becomes the talk of the locker room. In the end, devastated young men and young women are left with severely damaged reputations.

Rumors spread quickly not only to peers but to adults as well. Bishops, youth advisers, and even parents often find out about the deed from concerned friends within a short time.

We must remember that even if no one on earth is aware of the sin, someone is always watching. Jesus Christ said, "Hearken, O ye people of my church, saith the voice of him who dwells on high, and whose eyes are upon all men" (D&C 1:1; emphasis added).

Those who are tempted to break the moral code should remember the words of Henry Wheeler Shaw: "A broken reputation is like a broken vase—it may be mended, but it always shows where the break was!" (International Dictionary of Thoughts [Chicago: J.G. Ferguson Publishing Co., 1969], p. 625). Though it is possible for the transgressor to repent and change his or her behavior and though the Lord can and will forgive, society always seems reluctant to forget what it learns of this sort of behavior.

Trust in Future Relationships Is Threatened

Trust is the foundation of healthy relationships, particularly the marriage relationship. If marriage partners have been sexually active with others before their marriage, that frequently introduces feelings of insecurity and jealousy. There may be lingering suspicion based on the knowledge that their mate has had previous problems controlling his or her physical desires. Couples who may have otherwise been virtuous but who surrendered to temptation during their courtship and engagement are often troubled by the memory of their immoral behavior. Such memories may well plague their legitimate sexual relationship, robbing them of the joy and happiness that should be present. Premarital sexual experience is often a destructive force that subtly erodes the trust that is so vital in a marriage relationship. One prominent LDS marriage counselor observed that a vast majority of those he sees for counseling have been involved in premarital sex to some degree. These considerations may have been what President David O. McKay had in mind when he said, "He who is unchaste in young manhood is untrue to a trust given to him by the parents of the girl, and she who is unchaste in maidenhood is untrue to her future husband, and lays the foundation of unhappiness in the home, suspicion, and discord" (Stepping Stones to an Abundant Life [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1971], p. 11).

Sexual activity is often a crutch that keeps a premarital relationship together. Contrary to what might be supposed, a sexual relationship does not help an unmarried couple bond in meaningful ways, and sex often becomes a destructive thing. Instead of getting to know each other and finding out if they really are in love, many couples neglect to explore other facets of their relationship and spend their time together giving vent to their passions. With their feelings for each other founded on lust instead of love, many couples marry, only to discover that they are otherwise incompatible. This discovery is particularly harmful if communication skills have not been cultivated. Then the physical alliance begins to dominate. It has been shown that a marriage based mostly on a sexual relationship—where the couple has not bonded spiritually, intellectually, and emotionally—is not likely to endure the stresses life puts on any couple. A virtuous couple is free to build a relationship on trust that can endure the trials of marriage.

Sexually Transmitted Diseases May Be Passed Along

One serious consequence of premarital sex is the danger of getting sexually transmitted diseases. These frightening diseases now exist in epidemic profusion. James Mason gives these alarming figures: "There are twenty-three identified sexually transmitted diseases with 10 million new cases diagnosed annually—two-thirds among young adults" (Church News, 24 Oct. 1988, p. 6).

Medical authorities say that a single sexual encounter can infect a person with as many as five different sexually transmitted diseases. When a person is casual about sexual relations, he or she takes the chance that the partner has also been casual. All of these diseases are frightful, but the introduction of AIDS into the world makes the practice of casual sex one of the most dangerous games imaginable. Medical experts say that the only people who are not at risk of these diseases are those who are monogamous for life with a partner who is also monogamous. That means having only one partner who also has only one partner. No wonder the Lord said, "Thou shalt love thy wife with all thy heart, and shalt cleave unto her and none else" (D&C 42:22; emphasis added).

Pregnancy May Result

Another huge tragedy of premarital sex is illegitimate pregnancy. Infants come from the Lord's presence pure, innocent, vulnerable, and entirely dependent. Clearly, each baby deserves to be born into a safe environment where he or she can be loved, nurtured, and trained. That is best accomplished when the parents are mature, married to each other, and capable of acting responsibly. By trifling with the sacred powers we possess to procreate life, we violate God's plan and offend him by putting one of his precious ones in jeopardy.

When an unmarried young woman becomes pregnant, she and her partner immediately surrender their freedom and are confronted with essentially five choices:

When a young single mother chooses to raise her baby alone, she often experiences some harsh realities. Dating becomes difficult because of the amount of time and attention demanded by her infant and by the stigma the unwed mother often has to bear. Isolation from friends may also result. Think for a moment about being saddled with financial responsibilities, the loss of social relationships, and the drudgery of caring for a child. After a young woman bears a child, there is usually no more hanging out with friends, planning sleep-overs, going out to eat, buying lots of clothes, or having money for recreation.

Sexual Activity May Become Addictive

Like all vices, premarital sexual behavior can be addictive and lead an unsuspecting young person into bondage. Research shows that teens who have had sexual relations seldom stop with one experience. Often their craving for intimacy becomes an obsession, dominating relationships and turning its desperate participants into slaves of sensuality. Like skiing down a steep mountain, the process is much easier to begin than to stop. When sexual opportunities are denied after being fulfilled in the past, lust often finds temporary relief in other immoral ways, such as indulgence in pornography. That may help explain the increase in other sexual perversions in our society.

Resistance to Other Sins Is Weakened

Another dangerous side effect of sexual sin is that it destroys hope and often leads to other sins. A common feeling among those involved is, "I have already messed up, so why even try?" The adversary must love this defeatist attitude. Young people who are discouraged and hopeless often lower their defenses and, as though a protective wall has come down, allow other sins to rush in.

Researchers have found that sexually experienced girls are five times more likely to be suspended from school than those who have never had sex, and they are ten times more likely to have used marijuana. Boys with sexual experience are six times more likely to have used alcohol, five times more likely to have used marijuana, and ten times more likely to have been in a car with a drug-using driver (USA Today, 6 Feb. 1991, Sec. D, p. 1).

Elder Hugh B. Brown was correct when he said, "One of the most lethal weapons used by Lucifer against the first offender is the disarming implication that, having once sinned, there is no hope and that therefore he might just as well surrender and sample all the other ‘scented poisons’ prepared for his complete destruction" (Purity Is Power, p. 31).

The Lord's Spirit Is Lost

Without the guidance and protection of the Spirit of the Lord, we struggle less effectively to overcome temptations. Immorality shatters a person's relationship with the Spirit. President Benson confirmed that when he said: "No sin is causing the loss of the Spirit of the Lord among our people more today than sexual promiscuity. It is causing our people to stumble, damning their growth, darkening their spiritual powers, and making them subject to other sins" (God, Family, Country, pp. 239-40).

Spiritual progress is blocked by immorality. Everything that is really important in life is put on hold unless individuals who have behaved immorally properly repent. "But whoso committeth adultery with a woman lacketh understanding: he that doeth it destroyeth his own soul" (Proverbs 6:32).

Those involved in sexual immorality often lose the desire to pray, to read the scriptures, to share the gospel, or to give compassionate service. They often feel uncomfortable around their parents or their bishop, advisers, and other Church members. Avoiding these contacts, most find it difficult to maintain their activity in the Church, "for every one that doeth evil hateth the light, neither cometh to the light, lest his deeds should be reproved" (John 3:20). Immoral people find themselves feeling terribly alone and abandoned. Most youth who have committed grievous sins struggle even to like themselves.

What Can You Do?

A great deal more could be said about immorality—how it destroys families and nations. But we are not talking about nations. We are talking about what can be done about temptations you may have experienced. How does all this apply in your life, in your relationships, and in the things you are struggling with?

Perhaps you have allowed yourself to fantasize about sexual matters or find yourself in a relationship where you are being pressured to behave in ways you know are not right. Maybe what you have read in books or magazines has confused you—there are many ignorant or evil people in the world who promote premarital sex, petting, and passionate behavior in dating. These things are all glorified in the movies and on television.

Friends who are not clear on this subject will often argue persuasively that it is natural and even healthy to give expression to sexuality before marriage. A young person who is trying to live the commandments can easily become confused by the conflicting voices.

If you are confused on this issue or if you have not made up your mind and are reading this hoping to find some answers or the strength to resist temptation, you can be certain that having sex before marriage is wrong. Doing so is a sin, and it complicates life, results in unhappiness, puts the probability of missionary service and temple marriage in doubt, puts people at risk for disease and pregnancy, and always drives away the Spirit of the Lord.

If you have yielded to temptation and broken the law of chastity, please read chapter 13 in this book. Be assured there is still hope.

But what can you do if you are struggling and are in a situation where pressure is being put upon you? Consider the warnings listed above. Talk about your confusion with your parents, bishop, adviser, or seminary or institute teacher. Pray for strength. Ask for a blessing. Read the scriptures. Avoid suggestive or sexually provocative movies, music, and literature, and get out of dangerous relationships.

Bear in mind the reward for being virtuous. Imagine how you will feel if you are able to sit in your interviews with your bishop or stake president and honestly declare your worthiness to go on a mission or to receive a temple recommend. Think how it will be to take your sweetheart's hand and one day walk into the temple, feeling fresh, clean, virtuous, and worthy in every way to be there. Set a goal to offer yourself as a clean and worthy companion to your marriage partner.

Our Heavenly Father doesn't want us to be forced to make agonizing decisions about out-of-wedlock pregnancies, sexually transmitted diseases, damaged reputations, and addictions, so he has given us a solution—a solution so simple that its obviousness seems to have eluded the supposedly great minds of our society. The answer is abstinence from sexual activity before marriage and fidelity after marriage.
