Randal A. Wright, Why Say No When the World Says Yes? Resisting Temptation in an Immoral World ( 1993)

Chapter 6

The Sin of Fornication

Vikki D. Marshall

She lingered after class until all the others had filed out and then slowly approached my desk. Her whole body warned me that something was troubling her. She had difficulty looking at me. Her head was bowed and her voice subdued. And she looked extremely nervous.

"Sister Marshall, could I speak with you?"

I closed the door to the classroom, anticipating something serious, although I could not have guessed what it might be. This intelligent and energetic seventeen-year-old beauty had never been anything but a delight to have in seminary. She was full of life and promise, and with her senior year nearly behind her, she appeared to enjoy the prospect of a brilliant future.

"Sister Marshall," she said quietly, "this will be my last day in seminary."

Her statement caught me completely by surprise. It was late April and the senior students were already planning graduation activities. Could she and her family be moving? Was this the reason she looked so sad? And then she said the one thing I would never have supposed I would hear from this four-year, straight-A, seminary student.

"I'm pregnant, Sister Marshall."

Royal Generation. Noble and Great Ones. These are just a few of the terms used to characterize Mormon youth of today. I know that many of you are weary of being reminded of everything those titles suggest. I've heard many of my seminary students complain, "We're tired of being called ‘Saturday's Warriors’! It's too much responsibility! Couldn't we have just one weekend off to do what we want, without having to feel the guilt on Sunday morning?"

You may not be comfortable being singled out for this kind of responsibility, but that's the way it is. For many reasons, some of which we may not know, your turn on earth is now—during the time when the earth and its inhabitants are being prepared for the second coming of the Savior. You have the opportunity to play a key role both in the world and in the Church.

You are also living at a time when sinful behavior is increasing in the world. Satan has taken hold of the hearts of many. There is a great deal of evidence that humans are increasingly indifferent to God or defiant of his commandments. Moreover, spokesmen for evil are persuasive, and it is not always easy to tell what is right and what is wrong or who is telling the truth and who is not. This is the world into which you were born. Your challenge is to overcome the evil that surrounds you and keep the commandments. By doing so, you will "prove yourself" and qualify to return to Heavenly Father's presence.

One of the greatest temptations you will confront during your lifetime is the temptation to misuse your sexual powers. I hope you will accept my counsel on this important subject.

Heavenly Father, your parents, and your Church teachers and leaders understand what your mission is, but they are not the only ones. Satan knows, and he will try everything in his power to stop you, much in the same way he desperately tried to stop our Lord from carrying out his atoning sacrifice. After Jesus had fasted and prayed in the wilderness for forty days, Satan came, tempting him with food, with wealth, and with worldly power—appealing in each case to his mortal passions (see Luke 4). Fortunately for us, Christ was able to resist the temptations. By doing so he further prepared himself for his mission and provided us with a powerful example.

Satan tempts us to be disobedient in a similar way—by appealing to our passions. It suits his purposes if he can somehow get us to surrender control of our sexual appetites. The great danger to young people in this regard is sexual immorality and, specifically, the sin of fornication.

Fornication is defined by a latter-day apostle as "illicit sexual intercourse on the part of an unmarried person" (Bruce R. McConkie, Mormon Doctrine, 2d ed. [Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1966], p. 298). To be more specific, if you are unmarried and you "go to bed with," "sleep with," or "make love to" someone, you are guilty of committing fornication. Moreover, it is not a minor transgression but rather one of the most serious sins, "ranking close to adultery in wickedness," according to Elder McConkie. It is a sin that results in serious consequences.

One of the things that is so scary about growing up at this time is that so many people in the world—including young people—do not seem to understand how wrong it is to commit fornication. Too many young people engage in sex recreationally, as though it were an acceptable dating activity.

Trifling with the sacred powers of reproduction grossly offends our Father in Heaven. President Joseph F. Smith explained: "Sexual union is lawful in wedlock, and if participated in with right intent is honorable and sanctifying. But without the bonds of marriage, sexual indulgence is a debasing sin, abominable in the sight of Deity" (Gospel Doctrine [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1939], p. 309). Among other reasons, the sin of fornication offends Heavenly Father because of the suffering it caused Jesus in the Garden of Gethsemane and on the cross. When you are tempted, you might reflect on how he bled from every pore of his precious body (see D&C 19:15-19). In light of that suffering, is it any wonder that our Heavenly Father is offended when his children so carelessly violate this or any other commandment?

You may be wondering what makes fornication sinful. Is the sin in the act of sexual intercourse itself? Certainly not! Intercourse is a sacred act, ordained by God to allow us, his children, to be cocreators with him. When sanctified by marriage, it is a beautiful expression of love and serves to bind the man and woman together, physically, emotionally, and spiritually. Within the bonds of marriage, it is to be enjoyed.

Could the sin lie in the fact that teens and young adults are simply too young to really know what love is? Is it the emotional immaturity of the participants that makes fornication sinful? No. When most members of the older generation think back, they remember that they were never more romantically in love than when they were young. Teen love is a real and tangible thing and is as true an emotion as any you will ever feel. I have all the respect in the world for your emotions. If you tell me, "Sister Marshall, you don't understand. It's different with us. We're in love!" I would never insult you by dismissing your feelings as trivial. The only difference between the love you feel and the love your parents share is that your love hasn't had the time to fully mature. And that is not your fault. You simply have not lived long enough yet. No, your youthful emotions are not what makes fornication sinful.

Could the sin be in the potential for pregnancy? Well, pregnancy outside marriage is certainly something to consider. Becoming pregnant if you are married is one of the great blessings of life. Bringing children into the world is an essential part of the plan of salvation. There is no sin in a newborn baby, regardless of the conditions of its birth. Clothed in their precious little bodies, these spirits come into this world fresh from the presence of the Father. But if we bring an infant into this world outside the bonds of marriage, we put the little one at risk, and we violate the plan the Lord instituted for the birth of children.

May I submit that the sin of fornication, besides being a direct violation of a commandment, lies in the timing. In other words, when you choose to perform that act. If you have sexual relations before being legally married, you have, in fact, sinned. If, however, you have sexual relations after holy, legal, and binding vows are taken, then you have the Lord's blessing to go ahead. It is a matter of timing and obedience.

I took her in my arms and held her there as she and I cried together. Her tears were of remorse and fear of the unknown, mine of anger at Satan for beguiling another of Heavenly Father's choicest children. I thought of how difficult it must have been for her to tell me, her seminary teacher. How much more difficult it must have been when she told her parents and watched as the light left their eyes. And if it was hard for her to tell me and her parents, how much more difficult it must have been for her to confront the father of her baby, a former boyfriend who had graduated from high school the year before and who was trying to get his act together to go on a mission. "Well, unpack your bags, elder. You aren't going anywhere. You have new responsibilities." They will have difficult decisions to make. Will they marry? Will she keep her baby or put it up for adoption? Where will they live? How shall they support themselves? The list seems endless. Not exactly the joyful temple marriage she had always dreamed of.

I have often said there is nothing that anyone can tell your "enlightened generation" about the physical mechanics of lovemaking, that is, how to perform the act. In fact, I used to believe there were a few things your generation could tell ours. But I have changed my mind. As I look around and see how many "babies are having babies," I realize that you may know "how to do it," but you do not necessarily know "how it is done." You need more information. Just because you know how to drive a car and can get from point A to point B, it does not automatically follow that you know how the engine works.

Here is where I will go out on a limb and suggest that by the time you are old enough to read this book, you are ready to know "how it is done." So, where do you go to find out? Certainly not to the "locker room." The information that comes out of there has long since proven itself to be unreliable.

Your first, best source for this information is—are you ready for this?—your parents. Yes, I said, your parents. Right away you are probably thinking, "My parents! Never happen! In your dreams!" My response is, "How do you think you got here?" They do know something about this subject.

And Heavenly Father has given them the obligation to teach you about these sacred things in the home. If you have not heard their version, you are cheating yourself. Or, if you think you already know it all, think again. Besides, when mom and dad sit down with you to answer any questions you may have, angels surround them and choirs sing. They may just bring to the topic some wonder, joy, and excitement you will otherwise miss.

Here's something else to consider. Parents bring perspective to their counsel, partly because they have lived longer. Why did the Lord give you to these two "old people" anyway? Why didn't he just send us all down here at the same time, say at the earthly age of seventeen? Picture it. Mom and dad—seventeen; children—seventeen. Seventeen-year-old mom and dad stay home while their seventeen-year-old children go to school. One day the seventeen-year-old daughter comes home with a broken heart, crying to her seventeen-year-old mom. "What should I do?" Mom looks at her and shrugs, "I don't know. I just got here myself!" With age comes experience.

Nevertheless, I am a realist, and I know that some of you cannot—absolutely cannot—discuss this subject with your parents. And, unfortunately, there are some parents who just cannot—absolutely cannot—speak of these things with their children. If that is your situation, then may I suggest that you find some other responsible adult that you can talk to. Now the operative word here is responsible. I don't mean someone who graduated from high school last year.

If you are confused about who to ask, then my suggestion would be to go knock on your bishop's door. When he asks you what you need, tell him that you need to know more about how your body works. I will bet you anything, upon hearing that, your bishop will either help you himself or immediately find you a "responsible" adult. The point is, it's time for you to know, and it is important for you to learn it from a responsible source.

What started out as a private act between two people soon became public knowledge. Everyone seemed to know, everyone seemed to be talking about it—in the school yard, in the locker room, and at the family dinner table over mashed potatoes. The young couple had bought into Satan's false assurances: "It's okay. You're in love! Besides, no one will ever know." Like all of his promises, they didn't mean a thing. And once they bought into the sin, Satan left them there to suffer the consequences. What may have seemed so urgent and compelling in the dark while passions were inflamed, left a bitter, ugly aftertaste.

If I may be permitted to make an analogy, Satan promises you a thousand-dollar shopping spree at your favorite clothing store. You can hardly believe it, but it's true. You begin wildly grabbing and trying on all the clothes and accessories you can and handing them to the salesperson. It is so exciting! A dream come true! One outfit after another. You'll be the envy of all your friends. Every time you turn around, Satan is there, encouraging you. Finally, exhausted, you reach the thousand-dollar limit. You wait in anticipation as your selections are bagged to take home. The salesclerk rings up your purchases—one thousand dollars exactly. You turn to Satan, and he hands you a crisp, new, thousand-dollar bill, and you hand it to the salesclerk. There is an uncertain moment as the clerk examines the money and then calls for the manager. Glancing at the bill, he icily informs you that the money is counterfeit. You look around for Satan, but he is nowhere to be found. You feel set-up and desperate. But there is nobody to help you. You face embarrassment and, even worse, possible prosecution.

The manager feels generous and allows you to leave, but you cannot take your new clothes home with you. You leave empty-handed.

It is the same with counterfeit love or lust. It may seem terribly exciting in the initial stages. It may make you feel almost euphoric. But then, when the counterfeit is exposed, you are left alone to face the consequences. You can't take this kind of "love" home with you because it isn't real.

Counterfeit love yields its own fruit, however. Sexually transmitted diseases such as AIDS, syphilis, and herpes abound. Other sins such as masturbation, homosexuality, abortion, prostitution, and rape are a common by-product of lust.

The decision to marry had been made. He felt "obligated," and she had convinced herself that they could "learn" to love each other. He had graduated from high school the year before, and she had also managed to finish school. There was the usual celebration—bridal showers, a civil wedding ceremony performed in the cultural hall of the meetinghouse and, of course, a lavish reception afterwards. For a little time they were caught up in the excitement of it all. They were the envy of their friends. In fact, the celebration of their marriage made some young observers wonder, "Why work so hard to be morally clean if all the worldly rewards are available anyway?"

If you break the commandments and "have to get married," is it really fair or right to expect your parents to help "celebrate the sin" with showers, costly receptions, and the like?

Consider this also. For all the excitement and passion that lead young people into temptation and fornication, there immediately follows a sense of remorse and sadness. That is particularly true if the participants have been taught the gospel and if they have a sense of what the sin represents. Many transgressors describe feeling empty, dirty, ashamed, or angry when the temporary euphoria is over.

I had an experience at Disneyland once that will perhaps illustrate what I am trying to say here.

I love Disneyland. I was there the day it opened in 1955, and I have tried very hard to get back there at least once a year since. My favorite attraction is "Pirates of the Caribbean," a ride I will stand in line an hour and a half for. I never tire of the cool darkness and the magical way we are introduced into the world of the Louisiana Bayou country, complete with fireflies, bullfrogs, and moss hanging from the trees, not to mention Grandpa rocking on his porch with his faithful hound dog by his side. Suddenly we are plunged down two water slides and into the bowels of Disneyland where we are caught up in a pirate fantasy.

Have you noticed that the boats move just fast enough that you cannot really focus too long on any one thing? That's what helps create the illusion. On this particular day, however, there was some mechanical difficulty and the boats stopped. We had to be evacuated, and so the tunnel lights were turned on. The illusion was immediately shattered. Instead of lifelike pirates, I saw only machines, painted with garish, luminescent paint. For all its charm in the darkness, seen in real light, the attraction was revealed to be little more than a carnival illusion.

Those who give away their virtue discover quickly that reality is stark and the aftertaste is bitter. Fornication is a sin without glamour. In fact, giving up your chastity is like trading rubies and pearls for a carnival bauble.

For the next year or so they both worked hard at regaining the spirituality they each desperately needed in their lives. They began attending church together and took care to have their child blessed. Even though he was able to find a fairly good paying job, considering he had no degree or work experience, it was still difficult to make ends meet without her leaving their baby and seeking work outside the home. But she was willing to do anything so that they could finally live on their own and not with her parents or his. It was tough when she occasionally ran into old classmates who were attending college or preparing for missions or temple marriages. She envied their carefree lives. It wasn't the struggle she minded as much as it was the regret she felt in her heart for all the things that "might have been."

Earlier, I said that I had all the respect in the world for your emotions. So does Alma in the Book of Mormon. In Alma 38:12 he informs us we are to "bridle [our] passions." Reading that, you might immediately conclude that old Alma can't relate. Wrong! Notice that Alma doesn't use such words as suppress, deny, or avoid your passions. He recognizes they are real. Rather he picked his word very carefully. We are to "bridle" our passions. The last time I checked, a bridle was used for control.

Have you ever had a horse run away with you? If so, then you can appreciate the function of a bridle. I had such an experience on a horse named Dollface. (Right away I should have been suspicious.) Not being a very "horsey" person, I wasn't real confident as I climbed tentatively into the saddle. My friend (some friend) handed me the reins and quickly gave me a few of the basics. Then I was on my own. Holding the reins loosely, I kicked the horse's sides and said one of the few words I knew in horse language—"giddyup." I had no idea it was such a powerful word. Dollface responded to it by breaking into a full gallop across an open field. Being the expert I wasn't, I promptly let go of the reins and took hold of the saddle horn. (Isn't that what it's there for?) Naturally, I now had absolutely no control. I relinquished control of the bridle when I dropped the reins. The horse was able to take me anywhere she wanted, and I was powerless to stop her. Finally, she wore herself out, and after a final jump over a small creek, she stopped. It had been an exciting but scary experience. I sat there with my heart pounding, breathing heavily, and feeling very shaky.

I realized how dangerous the situation had been and how near I had come to being hurt. Moreover, I had not ended up where I had intended to go.

Passions can also run away with you and take you places you don't intend to go. It can be exciting to give them full rein, but it is dangerous.

To help us keep control and steer us away from the brink of disaster, our Church leaders have provided us with some guidelines or standards. These standards are sometimes resented by young people. But the standards are based on the Lord's commandments. And, contrary to what some people think, the commandments are not designed to deprive us of our freedom or to punish us for being young.

Try to imagine a wise and loving Heavenly Father, looking down on us here on earth. From his vantage point he can see all the obstacles and perils in the road ahead. To spare us the sorrow and pain we might encounter, he has given us warnings—watch out for this, beware of that. If we heed the warnings—keep his commandments—he will guide us safely home to him. If we insist on being disobedient—which our agency permits us to do—then we must suffer the consequences.

If you have parents who have taught you the commandments and who are encouraging you to be obedient, you are very fortunate. You're lucky if you have the "meanest mom and dad on the block," who insist you wait until you are sixteen years old to date or who always want to know where you are going, who you are with, and what time you will be home. You may be envious of friends who have been granted absolute freedom to do whatever they please. Nonetheless, such individuals are not only in great peril of losing their way but are justified in feeling abandoned and vulnerable.

So, what if? What if, after all the counsel, all the help from parents and leaders, you have still succumbed to Satan's siren call? I was recently invited to speak about fornication at a stake youth conference. While I was walking toward the stand to take my seat, someone thrust an envelope into my hand. There was a message scribbled on the back of it. It read, "Sister Marshall, please bring out the process of repentance strongly in your talk this evening. We have two young women in our stake who are pregnant out of wedlock, and each has tried to take her own life."

That is always painful to contemplate—that young people in trouble would feel so little hope as to try to destroy themselves. That kind of hopelessness suggests the depressed person does not understand the Atonement.

When Jesus submitted himself to the agony he experienced in Gethsemane, he was providing a way for each of us, personally, to be forgiven of our sins. If we don't take advantage of what he has done, then, in effect, we negate what he did for us and set his suffering aside.

The Savior extends his love to each of us, invites us to repent of our wrongdoing, and promises us he will lift the burden of sin from our shoulders. He has explained, "For behold, I, God, have suffered these things for all, that they might not suffer if they would repent" (D&C 19:16). This promise applies even to those who have committed fornication.

Your bishop is the best friend you can have in such a situation. He is the one ordained of God to set you back on the right path. He can teach you how to repent and guide you through what may look dark and hopeless. If you are in this kind of circumstance, please have the courage to knock on his door and ask him for help. Repentance may seem scary, but it is the only way to get relief, dissolve the guilt, and begin the healing process.

When we read Alma 38:12, we need to consider the whole meaning of the verse: "And also see that ye bridle all your passions, that ye may be filled with love" (emphasis added). The Lord doesn't want to stifle our happiness. So, when he commands us to control our passions, he is not trying to deprive us of joy. Instead, he is trying to ensure that we will obtain the greatest joy possible—in this case, the joy that is available through sexual union. By waiting until marriage you will intensify the experience and spare yourself the pain associated with the sin of fornication.

The scriptures hint at what our reward will be if we truly love the Lord and demonstrate that love by keeping his commandments: "But as it is written, Eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered into the heart of man, the things which God hath prepared for them that love him" (1 Corinthians 2:9).

Think about what you have read here; think about it really hard. Your whole "eternity" may hang in the balance. Start a revolution in your high school, your college apartment, your ward, your stake, and in your heart. Say no, and mean it. Make morality the "in" thing again.
