Randal A. Wright, Why Say No When the World Says Yes? Resisting Temptation in an Immoral World ( 1993)

Chapter 7

Conquering an Unworthy Habit

Brad Wilcox

"Dear Brother Wilcox," the letter began. "I appreciate the time you took to talk to me at youth conference, but I have to apologize. You complimented me on living the standards of the Church and called me an example, but I'm really not." The young man hadn't sent a picture with his letter, but I didn't need one to remember him. He was tall and handsome with a strong, athletic frame and a natural tan that made me envious. He was a student officer in his school and was active in seminary. From the outside, this guy looked pretty perfect to me. But, inside, things were different.

The letter continued: "For years I have struggled with something that I'm not proud of at all. It's a private, personal problem that I've tried so many times to overcome. I just get to where I've gone a long time without doing it and I'm feeling great, and then I blow it again. Is this cycle ever going to end? I'm so frustrated—I feel like pulling my hair out. I've been trying so long to be worthy—really worthy. You said I was strong, yet all I feel is weak and stupid. What should I do? Everything else in my life and at church is great. It's just this one thing. Please help me."

Masturbation—something that everyone seems to know about, many like to joke about, few will talk seriously about, and something that fewer still will address openly. Working with young people across the Church, I have come to realize that it is an all too common problem. I responded to my young friend's plea for help by making some suggestions. Perhaps some of the things I wrote to him may assist you if you are faced with the same struggle:

You Are Loved

Because of your inability to control this habit, you may have imagined that Heavenly Father is disgusted with you. On this subject, Elder Boyd K. Packer has stated, "I want you to know this, if you are struggling with this temptation and perhaps you have not quite been able to resist, the Lord still loves you" (To Young Men Only [Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1976], p. 4).

Turn to God

Turn to heaven for help. Sometimes willpower alone is insufficient to make desired changes. Even sincere commitments can falter under pressure. Your understanding and strength alone may not be enough. You will need divine assistance.

One young person told me, "But I'm not worthy to pray anymore." Elder Richard G. Scott addressed those striving to overcome debilitating habits and said, "If your life is in disarray and you feel uncomfortable and unworthy to pray because you are not clean, don't worry. [Heavenly Father] already knows about all of that. He is waiting for you to kneel in humility and take the first few steps" ("True Friends that Lift," Ensign, Nov. 1988, p. 77).

In the scriptures we read, "I can do all things through Christ which strengtheneth me" (Philippians 4:13). That is a wonderful principle. Truly, the Savior will lend his strength to you. His enabling power begins where your willpower ends. After you try your hardest and do your best, Christ will make up the difference (see 2 Corinthians 12:9).

Go to the Bishop

"But that's scary," young people tell me again and again when I encourage them to talk to their bishop. It can be frightening when we finally face our most personal weaknesses. Even the noble Adam and Eve were afraid after their transgression. They "went to hide themselves from the presence of the Lord God amongst the trees of the garden" (Moses 4:14). But could the trees hide them? No more effectively than silence, avoidance, and procrastination can conceal your deeds and thoughts from Heavenly Father.

Your bishop is the one who has been authorized to receive your confession and who can help you in your struggle. He can offer more than just friendly advice. He can provide true help, counsel, and guidance, and assist you to develop a positive plan of action to break bad habits, grow spiritually, and leave the past behind. He can become your ally in the effort you are making, and by some private signal between the two of you, strengthen and encourage you. You won't be in battle alone.

Some young people are concerned because the bishop also happens to be their dad or their uncle, a cousin, or a grandpa, or maybe even a close family friend. Having a relative for a bishop can sometimes make things a little awkward. But in most cases that won't be a problem for you or your bishop, no matter how closely you are related to him. But if you simply can't go to your bishop, then go to your stake president. He also can help you.

Learn the Facts

The First Presidency has stated, "The Lord specifically forbids certain behaviors, including . . . masturbation" (For the Strength of Youth [Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1990], p. 15). Elder Vaughn J. Featherstone has written, "There is another sexual-related personal problem which besets many young men and some young women. . . . A few of our bishops feel that this personal problem is not too serious because ‘everyone does it.’ This is not true" (A Generation of Excellence [Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1975], p. 164). President Spencer W. Kimball declared: "Masturbation, a rather common indiscretion, is not approved of the Lord nor of his church, regardless of what may be said by others whose ‘norms’ are lower. Latter-day Saints are urged to avoid this practice. Anyone fettered by this weakness should abandon the habit" (President Kimball Speaks Out [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1981], p. 10).

The world views the practice of masturbation as a harmless, natural sexual outlet that is a normal part of growing up. The truth is that, for young men, nocturnal emissions and the dreams that sometimes occur at the same time provide a natural release for the body. When the body requires such a release, it happens naturally, without stimulation. And while there is no evidence that masturbation causes impotence, pimples, or mental illness or that it interferes with physical growth or normal development, there is evidence that the practice carries with it some serious emotional and spiritual consequences:

It is not likely you can overcome this habit without making a plan. Here are some suggestions:

Like stopping on a bicycle when you are approaching a red light at a dangerous intersection, you cannot hope to avoid problems by peddling and braking simultaneously. You must decide to stop, discontinue peddling, and finally, apply the brake. It's up to you. No one can do it for you. A young friend wrote: "This time, I am committed. Before, it's been like I wanted to change but somehow not really. I didn't want to give it up badly enough, but now I'm burning my bridges. There is no going back."

Working on Sunday, listening to inappropriate music, swearing, looking at pornography, seeing R-rated movies—any R-rated movies—hanging around with friends who exert a bad influence, dating before sixteen or, having reached sixteen, pairing up and dating steadily, being idle, lying in bed when you are awake rather than getting up, taking extra long showers—these are all activities that can feed inappropriate thoughts and actions. Let's do as we are counseled by the Savior and cut out of our lives any activities that are causing us to stumble.

But we are not puppets. We are free agents. Stop and think. Ask yourself, "Do I really need this? How will I feel afterwards? Is it worth it in the long run?" Avoid trading the lasting joy of what you want most for the momentary pleasure of what you want now.

Elder Boyd K. Packer writes, "You must leave [your body] alone long enough for it to slow down. Resisting is not easy. It will take weeks, even months" (To Young Men Only, p. 5). Set small goals of abstinence. Start with a day, and then a week, then two. Perhaps you can mark goals and progress on a personal calendar. President Spencer W. Kimball wrote, "Certainly self-mastery is a continuous program—a journey, not a single start" (The Miracle of Forgiveness [Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1969], p. 210). It takes time to get our lives tangled up. They won't be straightened out in a single day.

You have probably heard that singing a hymn is a good idea when you are tempted. You might also try reciting the Articles of Faith, reading good books, listening to uplifting music, or planning the details of a project you look forward to. It doesn't really matter what you choose to do; the idea is simply to keep temptation from taking center stage by focusing your mental spotlight elsewhere.

After repenting and being forgiven of his sins, the brother of Jared was counseled by the Lord, "Go to work and build" (see Ether 2:15-16). That is wonderful instruction for us too. Work on building a worthy habit, and you'll feel as though you're adding something valuable to your life instead of just depriving yourself of a long-established indulgence.

Obviously, there are times when you will be alone. You can't bring everyone in your Sunday School class over to watch you go to sleep every night or to help you get ready every morning. If those are the times when you typically struggle, leave your bedroom door ajar or the bathroom door unlocked. That small gesture signals your intention and also provides a measure of caution. Knowing that you could instantly be entertaining a little brother or sister might be just enough incentive to keep you from entertaining tempting thoughts.

"Oh sure," some might say. "I'm going to just run up to my dad or the bishop and ask him to bless me to stop doing this." Dads and priesthood leaders understand much more than you might think. If, however, you feel uncomfortable, you do not need to tell anyone the specific reason you are requesting a blessing. A sensitive priesthood holder will simply serve as a mouthpiece. You will receive your special blessing and counsel from an all-knowing and all-understanding Heavenly Father.

But what happens when you resist a personal temptation? Usually no one knows except God and you. So it's up to you to throw the party! Celebrate private victories as if your school had just taken state. Praise yourself. Reward yourself. Feel the Spirit that Heavenly Father sends. That peace and joy can reinforce and encourage you to make the same positive choice again in the future.

Satan would have you dwell on your mistakes and wallow around in discouragement. Learn to examine your failures and try to determine what led up to the mistake, then set it aside, and move on. We must make the important distinction between our problems and ourselves. Failure is not a person, it is an incident, and it is always temporary in the context of the restored gospel of Jesus Christ.

Sometimes, especially as one gets older, this unworthy habit can be an indicator of a deeper problem such as low self-esteem, an inability to deal with pressure and stress, ineffective communication skills, or a lack of sufficient spirituality and testimony. If you are able to identify and take care of these kinds of problems, then changes in your behavior can become permanent.

This is a fight you can win for sure. You will feel more joy and satisfaction than you ever dreamed possible. You can shed the past and conquer this unworthy habit for good. Then, you'll feel like another young man who wrote: "I'm doing terrific. No problem at all any more. I was just called to be first assistant in the priest quorum and to be a youth missionary in our stake. I've finished reading Alma and am on Helaman 5 right now. I'm so happy I could burst. I never thought I could do it. I tried so many times before, but this time I finally did it. I found out that with God, nothing is impossible."
