Randal A. Wright, Why Say No When the World Says Yes? Resisting Temptation in an Immoral World ( 1993)

Chapter 8

Withstanding Sexual Pressure

Jack R. Christianson

Withstanding the sexual pressures of our day is an incredible challenge. It is not just a challenge for the young and inexperienced. It is a pressure most people face, regardless of age. It is a challenge that can be overcome and must be met with strength and courage. For it seems that Satan has unleashed every vile practice in order to destroy and blind the sons and daughters of God. Surely, "the mists of darkness" spoken of by Father Lehi and in which Satan performs his labors, have descended over the earth as a thick blanket of confusion. Elder Boyd K. Packer of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles described modern sexual pressures this way:

"The rapid, sweeping deterioration of values is characterized by a preoccupation—even an obsession—with the procreative act. Abstinence before marriage and fidelity within it are openly scoffed at—marriage and parenthood ridiculed as burdensome, unnecessary. Modesty, a virtue of a refined individual or society, is all but gone.

"The adversary is jealous toward all who have the power to beget life. He cannot beget life; he is impotent. He and those who followed him were cast out and forfeited the right to a mortal body. His angels even begged to inhabit the bodies of swine. (see Matt. 8:31) And the revelations tell us that 'he seeketh that all men might be miserable like unto himself'" (2 Ne 2:27). ("Our Moral Environment," Ensign, May 1992, p. 66).

Isn't that last line perceptive? The purpose of sexual pressure and other temptations is to make us miserable! Satan desires us to be sickeningly unhappy!

Elder Packer continues: "With ever fewer exceptions, what we see and read and hear have the mating act as a central theme. Censorship is forced offstage as a violation of individual freedom.

"That which should be absolutely private is disrobed and acted out center stage. In the shadows backstage are addiction, pornography, perversion, infidelity, abortion, and—the saddest of them all—incest and molestation. In company with them now is a plague of biblical proportion. And all of them are on the increase" ("Our Moral Environment," p. 66).

With so many voices in the world screaming at you to abandon your standards of morality and come and join in the party, how do you stand? Are you committed, determined, and straight? The purpose of this chapter is to share the principles that will help you to resist the temptations that come from every direction.

Many years ago I read an article by Elder Vaughn J. Featherstone that has had a great influence on me. I have used it often in sermons and speeches because its message is the key to withstanding the sexual pressures all around us. The story is about the son of King Louis XVI of France.

"King Louis had been taken from his throne and imprisoned. His young son, the prince, was taken by those who dethroned the king. They thought that inasmuch as the king's son was heir to the throne, if they could destroy him morally, he would never realize the great and grand destiny that life had bestowed upon him. [Sounds exactly like Satan's plan for us today! Destroy our morals and we never do realize who we are or why we're here.]

"They took him to a community far away, and there they exposed the lad to every filthy and vile thing that life could offer. They exposed him to foods the richness of which would quickly make him a slave to appetite. They used vile language around him constantly. They exposed him to lewd and lusting women. They exposed him to dishonor and distrust. He was surrounded 24 hours a day by everything that could drag the soul of a man as low as one could slip. For over six months he had this treatment—but not once did the young lad buckle under pressure. Finally, after intensive temptation, they questioned him. Why had he not submitted himself to these things—why had he not partaken? These things would provide pleasure, satisfy his lusts, and were desirable; they were all his. The boy said, 'I cannot do what you ask for I was born to be a king'" ("The King's Son," New Era, Nov. 1975, p. 35).

What a heroic response! The prince would not give in to all the pressures because he knew he had been born to be a king! You and I are also born to be kings and queens, priests and priestesses. Our Father is a King. He is the King of kings—the King of all things. He is God.

All our children are daughters, and we desire to remind them of who they are and for what purpose they were born, so, hanging on the wall beside our front door is a framed plaque that reads: "I was born to be a queen." Some may scoff and say that this approach to withstanding sexual pressure is too idealistic or too simple. But, as far as I'm concerned, it is the "very key" to withstanding the pressures exerted by the outside world.

Elder Boyd K. Packer has also stated: "You are a child of God. He is the father of your spirit. Spiritually you are of noble birth, the offspring of the King of Heaven. Fix that truth in your mind and hold to it. However many generations in your mortal ancestry, no matter what race or people you represent, the pedigree of your spirit can be written on a single line. You are a child of God! . . .

"Within your body is the power to beget life, to share in creation. The only legitimate expression of the power is within the covenant of marriage. The worthy use of it is the very key to your happiness. Do not use the power prematurely, not with anyone. The misuse of it cannot be made right by making it popular.

"Your spirit operates through your mind, but cultivating your intellect is not enough. Reason alone will neither protect nor redeem you. Reason nourished by faith can do both" ("To Young Men and Women," Ensign, May 1989, p. 54).

There has never been an idea more destructive to happiness or one that has produced more sorrow and pain and destroyed more families than the idea that we are not the children of God but are instead only advanced animals following and giving in to every urge and desire.

With the knowledge that you are a son or daughter of the heavenly King rooted firmly within you, it is possible to understand the whys of complete chastity. Then you will be fortified with the courage and strength that will enable you to withstand the "mists of darkness" that shroud the world.

The First Presidency has declared: "A correct understanding of the divinely appointed roles of men and women will fortify all against sinful practices. Our only real safety, physically and spiritually, lies in keeping the Lord's commandments" (14 Nov. 1991).

This correct understanding can help each person comprehend why sexual intimacy is so sacred and why the Lord requires self-control and purity before marriage and full fidelity after marriage. We begin to understand why the physical relationship between a husband and a wife can be beautiful and sacred. This relationship is ordained of God for two purposes: the procreation of children and the expression of love within a marriage (see For the Strength of Youth [Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1990], pp. 14-15).

I have often heard young people ask: "Why does a little piece of paper make such a difference? Why in one minute are sexual relations not okay and the next minute, after a brief ceremony, they are okay?"

Many seem to feel that as long as they are "safe" and a pregnancy does not occur or a disease is not contracted, then everything is okay. You need to understand that having sexual relations outside of marriage is not wrong simply because a pregnancy may occur or because a deadly disease, like AIDS, may be contracted. Those are definitely two of the reasons you need to be morally clean, but they are not the major reasons. The most important reasons run far deeper, and if you understand them, that understanding will help you withstand sexual pressures.

"And again, verily I say unto you, if a man marry a wife by my word, which is my law, and by the new and everlasting covenant, and it is sealed unto them by the Holy Spirit of promise, by him who is anointed, unto whom I have appointed this power and the keys of this priesthood; and it shall be said unto them—Ye shall come forth in the first resurrection; and if it be after the first resurrection, in the next resurrection; and shall inherit thrones, kingdoms, principalities, and powers, dominions, all heights and depths—then shall it be written in the Lamb's Book of Life, that he shall commit no murder whereby to shed innocent blood, and if ye abide in my covenant, and commit no murder whereby to shed innocent blood, it shall be done unto them in all things whatsoever my servant hath put upon them, in time, and through all eternity; and shall be of full force when they are out of the world; and they shall pass by the angels, and the gods, which are set there, to their exaltation and glory in all things, as hath been sealed upon their heads, which glory shall be a fulness and a continuation of the seeds forever and ever. . . .

"Verily, verily, I say unto you, except ye abide my law ye cannot attain to this glory" (D&C 132:19, 21).

"And the husbands and fathers of those women and children they have slain; and they feed the women upon the flesh of their husbands, and the children upon the flesh of their fathers; and no water, save a little, do they give unto them.

"And notwithstanding this great abomination of the Lamanites, it doth not exceed that of our people in Moriantum. For behold, many of the daughters of the Lamanites have they taken prisoners; and after depriving them of that which was most dear and precious above all things, which is chastity and virtue -

"And after they had done this thing, they did murder them in a most cruel manner, torturing their bodies even unto death; and after they have done this, they devour their flesh like unto wild beasts, because of the hardness of their hearts; and they do it for a token of bravery" (Moroni 9:8-10).

Why are chastity and virtue more "dear and precious" than "all things"? Why are they of more value than life itself? Because they are the very source of life! Thinking, breathing, feeling human beings are brought into existence through the magnificent act of procreation. Nevertheless, as Elder Packer has said: "The source of life is now relegated to the level of unwed pleasure, bought and sold and even defiled in satanic rituals. Children of God can willfully surrender to their carnal nature and, without remorse, defy the laws of morality and degrade themselves even below the beasts. If we pollute our fountains of life, there will be penalties 'exquisite' and 'hard to bear' (see D&C 19:15), more than all of the physical pleasure ever could be worth" ("Our Moral Environment," pp. 67-68). Simply put, "Wickedness never was happiness" (Alma 41:10).

Why would the misuse of these sexual powers be next to murder in seriousness? When an individual murders someone, the murderer forces the victim's spirit out of his or her body. That leaves the body and spirit separated until the resurrection. The murderer has presumed to interfere with another's agency and has forced the murdered person into the spirit world, thus depriving the murdered person of any further earthly experience and leaving a wake of sorrow and pain for those who remain in mortality.

When two people misuse their creative powers and a pregnancy occurs outside a regularly constituted family, a spirit is forced to leave the premortal existence and enter into the newly created body. In this way too an individual's agency is tampered with and God's plan is violated.

Because of eternal ramifications, the Lord has reserved to himself the prerogative to decide the proper time for his children to either enter or leave mortality. It is God who "hath made of one blood all nations of men for to dwell on all the face of the earth, and hath determined the times before appointed, and the bounds of their habitation" (Acts 17:26). The Lord simply has forbidden the taking of spirits out of bodies and the bringing of spirits into bodies without his permission, saying: "Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself. Thou shalt not steal; neither commit adultery, nor kill, nor do anything like unto it" (D&C 59:6). Furthermore, he has reserved his most severe punishments for those who presume to trifle with the sanctity of life.

A marriage certificate is a permission slip, so to speak, from the Lord, that allows us to participate with him in his plan to "multiply, and replenish the earth" (Moses 2:28)—to provide bodies for his spirit children. And it is only in marriage that men and women are authorized so to act and to express their love in the most intimate ways.

The order, then, is to make a covenant, participate in an ordinance, and then renew the covenant. Should marriage, "the new and everlasting covenant" (D&C 132:19), be any different? We make a sacred covenant with our spouse to give ourselves completely to each other. We are sealed or married by proper authority (the ordinance). Then, we renew the covenant we have made to give all that we have and to be "one flesh." How do we renew the covenant? One of the ways is to express our love by giving ourselves completely to our spouse in a sexual relationship. As Elder Jeffrey R. Holland has said, the sexual union between a husband and a wife is in a sense a "sacrament," or renewal of the marriage covenant ("Of Souls, Symbols, and Sacraments," Brigham Young University 1987-88 Devotional and Fireside Speeches [Provo: Brigham Young University Press, 12 Jan. 1988], pp. 74-85).

The violation of the law of chastity, then, is a violation of one of the most sacred covenants or sacraments that men and women ever enter into while in mortality.

Those are some of the reasons why the Lord has condemned any sexual relationship outside the bonds of marriage. Happiness can never come from such relationships or acts because participants in immorality "are without God in the world, and they have gone contrary to the nature of God; therefore, they are in a state contrary to the nature of happiness" (Alma 41:11).

Now that we have a better understanding of "why" morality is so important, we are prepared for a few suggestions on "how" to withstand sexual pressures.

As you read these few suggestions, I hope you will not dismiss them because they are so simple. I understand most of you will have heard these things all your life. That's the point! We must now learn "not only to say, but to do according to that which I [the Lord] have written" (D&C 84:57; emphasis added).

Our Divine Heritage

The first defense against sexual pressure is to truly believe that we are the sons and daughters of God. We must then try to understand the whys of chastity—that chastity is more than merely avoiding pregnancy or disease but is a matter instead of "souls" (life), "symbols" (commitment to intimate relationships), and "sacraments" (commitments to the making and keeping of sacred covenants) ("Of Souls, Symbols, and Sacraments," pp. 74-85).

Prayer

Then we must involve ourselves in the most basic of religious practices. We must learn to pray. Not just learn to say prayers but truly to pray. "Verily, verily, I say unto you, ye must watch and pray always, lest ye be tempted by the devil, and ye be led away captive by him. . . . Behold, verily, verily, I say unto you, ye must watch and pray always lest ye enter into temptation; for Satan desireth to have you, that he may sift you as wheat" (3 Nephi 18:15, 18).

Imagine the effect it would have if, while preparing to go out on a date, every young man and young woman would pray for the strength to withstand temptation.

Charity

What should we pray for? May I suggest that we learn to pray with all our energy of heart for the gift of charity. I believe there is a direct relationship between charity and chastity. "Charity. . . thinketh no evil, and rejoiceth not in iniquity but rejoiceth in the truth. . . [and] endureth all things" (Moroni 7:45). Charity is the "pure love of Christ, and it endureth forever" (Moroni 7:47).

But charity is a gift and must be asked for—and not just asked for casually. "Wherefore, my beloved brethren, pray unto the Father with all the energy of heart, that ye may be filled with this love, which he hath bestowed upon all who are true followers of his Son, Jesus Christ; that ye may become the sons of God; that when he shall appear we shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is; that we may have this hope; that we may be purified even as he is pure" (Moroni 7:48). We must pray for purity with "all the energy of heart." That's one thing we must be praying for in every situation.

When we have prayed for and received this gift of charity (which must happen over and over in our lives), and when we are letting "virtue garnish our thoughts unceasingly," something wonderful happens to us. "Let thy bowels also be full of charity towards all men, and to the household of faith, and let virtue garnish thy thoughts unceasingly; then shall thy confidence wax strong in the presence of God; and the doctrine of the priesthood shall distil upon thy soul as the dews from heaven.

"The Holy Ghost shall be thy constant companion, and thy scepter an unchanging scepter of righteousness and truth; and thy dominion shall be an everlasting dominion and without compulsory means it shall flow unto thee forever and ever" (D&C 121:45-46).

If we are virtuous, our confidence will be strong, we will have the Holy Ghost, and thus we will see clearly. And then we can resist evil.

Controlling Our Thoughts

When we do not have charity and thus lose control of our thoughts, we put ourselves in danger of transgression: "And he that looketh upon a woman to lust after her shall deny the faith, and shall not have the Spirit; and if he repents not he shall be cast out" (D&C 42:23). What this scripture means is that lustful thoughts deprive us of the companionship of the Holy Ghost, and without that, our testimonies falter. Then, unable to see things clearly (see Jacob 4:13) and blinded by desire, we might surrender to our carnal desires and transgress. If we don't repent, we will be cast out and, as it says in Doctrine and Covenants 63:16, we "shall fear." Rather than have confidence, we will fear! We must pray specifically for charity. Elder Marvin J. Ashton has commented: "Real charity is not something you give away; it is something that you acquire and make a part of yourself. And when the virtue of charity becomes implanted in your heart, you are never the same again" ("The Tongue Can Be a Sharp Sword," Ensign, May 1992, p. 19).

Avoid Evil

Speaking of young Latter-day Saint men and women, President Spencer W. Kimball has said: "The devil knows how to destroy them. He knows, young men and women, that he cannot tempt you to commit adultery immediately, but he knows too that he can soften you up by lewd associations, vulgar talk, immodest dress, sexy movies, and so on. He knows too that if he can get them to drink or if he can get them into his 'necking and petting' program, the best boys and the best girls will finally succumb and will fall" (The Miracle of Forgiveness [Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1969], pp. 230-31). We must avoid situations in which either we have had trouble in the past or we know we could have trouble in the future. We must avoid the pitfalls!

President Kimball has also counseled that we avoid long, lusty, passionate kissing: "Kissing has been prostituted and has been degenerated to develop and express lust instead of affection, honor, and admiration. To kiss in casual dating is asking for trouble. What do kisses mean when given out like pretzels or robbed of sacredness?" (Spencer W. Kimball, in Sydney Australia Area Conference Report, Feb. 29, 1976, p. 55).

The pamphlet For the Strength of Youth contains many practical suggestions on how to resist sexual pressures. In one place it deals with modesty in dress and appearance. "Servants of God have always counseled his children to dress modestly to show respect for him and for themselves. Because the way you dress sends messages about yourself to others and often influences the way you and others act, you should dress in such a way as to bring out the best in yourself and those around you. However, if you wear an immodest bathing suit because it's 'the style,' it sends a message that you are using your body to get attention and approval, and that modesty is not important" (p. 8).

The scriptures contain many examples of those who have succeeded in standing up to the pressures and who were conditioned to "shake at the appearance of sin" (Nephi 4:3). If we are to succeed, we need to run from evil and not be afraid of what others may think of us. I realize how difficult that is, but don't we run from things that would destroy us physically? Then why not run from evil—that which will destroy us spiritually?

Shun Pornography

President Gordon B. Hinckley has given us some wonderful counsel on the subject of pornography. He said: "You cannot afford in any degree to become involved with pornography, whatever its form. You simply cannot afford to become involved in immoral practices—or to let down the bars of sexual restraint. The emotions that stir within you which make boys attractive to girls and girls attractive to boys are part of a divine plan, but they must be restrained, subdued, and kept under control, or they will destroy you and make you unworthy of many of the great blessings which the Lord has in store for you" ("A Chosen Generation," Ensign, May 1992, p. 71).

What greater example could be found of successfully withstanding sexual pressure than Joseph of Egypt? From the days of my youth, his story has inspired me. Joseph is one of my greatest heroes. He knew he was a son of our heavenly King. He avoided the "pitfalls," and when the time came to withstand the pressure, his only concern was not to "sin against God" (Genesis 39:9).

As you know, Joseph had been ripped away from his beloved father Jacob and sold as a slave into Egypt by his jealous brothers. Even in slavery the Lord was with Joseph, and the young man prospered. With the continued blessing of the Lord, Joseph rose to a position of authority in the household of Potiphar, second only to Potiphar himself. As Joseph carried out his duties in his master's house, Potiphar's wife began to lust after this handsome, strong, young Israelite. "And it came to pass after these things, that his master's wife cast her eyes upon Joseph; and she said, Lie with me.

"But he refused, and said unto his master's wife, Behold, my master wotteth not what is with me in the house, and he hath committed all that he hath to my hand;

"There is none greater in this house than I; neither hath he kept back any thing from me but thee, because thou art his wife: how then can I do this great wickedness, and sin against God?

"And it came to pass, as she spake to Joseph day by day, that he hearkened not unto her, to lie by her, or to be with her.

"And it came to pass about this time, that Joseph went into the house to do his business; and there was none of the men of the house there within.

"And she caught him by his garment, saying, Lie with me: and he left his garment in her hand, and fled, and got him out" (Genesis 39:6-12).

Joseph ran!

Joseph remembered. He knew he was a son of God. He knew the whys of chastity. He knew why it was not just wrong but why it was "great wickedness" to express his sexuality outside of marriage. He did not want to disappoint his Father, his heavenly King.

Oh, that each of us might respond to the sexual pressures in our lives as Joseph did! Then the "mists of darkness" would begin to fade and our lights would shine through the darkness of this sin-stained world to bless not only our own lives but the lives of many of our King's sons and daughters. We are all born to be kings and queens. We all need help to stay on the well-lighted path that leads to the "tree whose fruit was desirable to make one happy" (1 Nephi 8:10).

Repentance

There is little doubt that some readers will have struggled and fallen at times or given in to the enormous weight of today's sexual pressures. Please, dear reader, believe that there is hope. You have not gone too far. You can return.

Elder Boyd K. Packer has taught us that there is hope ("Our Moral Environment," p. 68):

"In the battle of life, the adversary takes enormous numbers of prisoners, and many who know of no way to escape and are pressed into his service. Every soul confined to a concentration camp of sin and guilt has a key to the gate.

The adversary can not hold them if they know how to use it.

The key is labeled repentance. The twin principles of repentance and forgiveness exceed in strength the awesome power of the adversary.

"I know of no sins connected with the moral standard for which we cannot be forgiven. I do not exempt abortion. The formula is stated in forty words: 'Behold, he who has repented of his sins, the same is forgiven, and I, the Lord, remember them no more.

"'By this ye may know if a man repenteth of his sins—behold, he will confess them and forsake them'" (D&C 58:42-43).

However long and painful the process of repentance, there is hope. There is hope through the atoning sacrifice of Jesus Christ. There is hope that through understanding the "whys" of chastity and putting into practice the "hows," we can withstand the sexual pressures of our modern world. There is hope because as children of our heavenly King, we were born to be kings and queens.
