Randal A. Wright, Why Say No When the World Says Yes? Resisting Temptation in an Immoral World ( 1993)

Chapter 9

We Believe in Being Virtuous

Elaine Cannon

We believe in being virtuous because virtue is what enables us, in this life, to enjoy the constant companionship of the Holy Ghost. It is his influence that insulates us against the evils of the world and that permits us to discern what is truth and what is a lie, to distinguish between friends and enemies, to understand what is right and what is wrong, to sense the presence of danger, and to feel the flood of sweeping assurance that Jesus is the Christ—that he is alive and that he is waiting to be gracious to us.

We believe in being virtuous because virtue is what will qualify us to enjoy the companionship of the Lord Jesus Christ and God our Heavenly Father in the life after this.

Virtue is purity, goodness, and moral rectitude. To be virtuous is to be innocent, clean, and chaste. One who is virtuous attempts to do what is right and endeavors to keep God's commandments.

To be virtuous is to resist temptations to do evil or behave in any way that would stifle your spiritual growth or that would harm your physical body, which is the temple that houses your eternal spirit.

Virtue is the quality that makes you want to live after the manner of the Lord Jesus Christ—our leader, teacher, and example, our Savior and Redeemer. And virtue is one of the characteristics of goodness that will qualify you for eternal life.

You may feel as though you are going to live forever. That is one of the attributes of youth—a sense that death is a long way off, something to be considered at a much later date. But look around you. Young people are moving on through the veil of death all the time! Ready or not, you (any one of us) could be taken from this life in an instant. It would be well to ask yourself this question: "If I were taken now, how would the Lord evaluate my life and what would happen to me?"

To emphasize the importance of being virtuous, a dramatic presentation entitled "The Flight of Life" was made to the youth of one ward during a standards night program. The youth boarded an imaginary airplane for a festive flight to some unnamed destination and were asked to pretend they were the victims of a crash in which there were no survivors. The young men and young women proceeded into "Heaven's Waiting Room." There, a priesthood leader dressed in white clothing greeted them and extended a welcome as he explained the organization of God's heaven and described the kind of people who will ultimately enjoy dwelling there. He stated that only those who are pure and virtuous would be invited into the presence of the Father, citing the scripture "no unclean thing can dwell with God" (1 Nephi 10:21). Then he asked for a show of hands. "All of you who would like to go to the celestial kingdom, raise your hand."

Of course, all raised their hands except one twelve-year-old young woman seated on the front row.

"Mary Nell, don't you want to go to the celestial kingdom?"

"I can't," explained the girl sadly. "My mother told me to come straight home."

Don't you imagine that is the same instruction we were given by our heavenly parents as they sent us forth to enter mortality and experience life on planet Earth? "Come straight home, beloved spirit!"

But returning home just isn't going to be possible if you aren't virtuous. You have perhaps learned that oil and water don't mix. Similarly, the blessings of heaven cannot be obtained by those who are unclean—virtue and vice don't mix, either.

Preparing yourself to return home to Heavenly Father is something like working to pass your classes so you can move on to the next level in school. To get from one grade to another or from high school to college, you need to accumulate a certain number of credits. In the school of life you keep the commandments so that you can enjoy the continuing companionship and guidance of the Holy Ghost—so you can qualify for a mission and temple endowments and marriage, and eventually, so you can gain admission into the celestial kingdom.

It is not virtuous to shoplift, to lie, to cheat on tests or interviews, to pass damaging rumors about others, to be disrespectful of your parents, whom God has said you should honor. It is not virtuous to use profanity, pursue pornographic entertainment, or dress or behave immodestly. It is not virtuous to engage in sexual activity of any kind until after you are legally married. That is God's will, no matter how the world may view or promote premarital sex. The standard the Lord has established is one of chastity and abstinence until the right time.

Richard was talking with his mother about how much he loved Sherry. The two young people were in the same seminary class and had many of the same interests. There was heavy chemistry at work in their relationship, too. Neither was prepared for the strong feelings they began to feel for each other or for the desire that had begun to tug at them to express their affection. They'd never felt like that before, and it was wonderful and a little scary all at the same time. They knew the rules, but they couldn't understand the rules when it seemed so right, so natural, for them to be as close as possible to each other.

"Son, waiting until after marriage to share your bodies and physical intimacies with each other is what God expects of you and Sherry. Regardless of what others may say or do, you must not surrender to your desires. Why? Because if you submit to sexual drives out of wedlock, you step onto Satan's turf. He wants you to fall. He wants to render you ineligible for a mission or for temple marriage. He wants you to be denied the spirit of the Holy Ghost and the precious gifts of that companionship. Self-control—spirit over body—is what you should think about. Reach for God's help to keep his plan, not Satan's."

Richard's mother wasn't just lecturing. She loved her son and was making an earnest effort to help him avoid a tragic disaster in his life. She praised his admirable qualities and reminded him of his potential. Together, they read his patriarchal blessing and noted the promises and cautions contained in it. She gave him good advice about building a friendship with Sherry—a friendship that would last all their lives, a friendship free from sin or guilt. She explained that sin isn't hurtful because it is forbidden but rather that sin is forbidden because it is hurtful!

Richard and Sherry kept their virtue, and though they remained friends, circumstances led them apart. Each eventually married someone else. Then one day, years later, Sherry sat across a desk from Richard. He was now her bishop, and she had been called to be the ward relief society president. They would be working closely with each other. Each was grateful to be able to do so with a clear conscience, without shame of any kind. They were qualified to serve the Lord and the people of their ward, and nothing in their former relationship lurked in their memories to hinder their effectiveness. They had been blessed by being virtuous.

Being virtuous also brings immediate rewards. Every time you succeed in keeping a commandment of God, you get a good feeling. Your determination to do right becomes stronger. You build moral fiber that will protect you against future temptations.

Think of Joseph who was sold as a slave to one of the most powerful leaders of Egypt. Potiphar found in Joseph a faithful servant and entrusted him with many responsibilities. Joseph was loyal to his master and performed his duties faithfully. But Potiphar's wife was a seductress who used all her feminine charms and enticements to get the handsome young Israelite to succumb to her sexual advances. He continually declined her invitations, saying, "How then can I do this great wickedness, and sin against God?" Then one day, as he was resisting yet another of her immoral invitations, she took hold of his garment. Determined to preserve his virtue, Joseph turned from her and "got him[self] out," fleeing both her clutches and the consequences of immorality (Genesis 39:1-13).

That is one of the great stories in the scriptures, and reading it many thousands of years after it occurred, we remember Joseph for his integrity. Confronted with such a test today, how would you respond? It is quite likely that unless you have made up your mind beforehand and have already decided what you would do in a similar situation, you will not have the determination to resist. If, however, you have previously declared your faith in God and made a decision to remain morally clean, and if you don't entertain fantasies or deliberately put yourself in the way of temptation, you too can resist evil.

Here are some famous last lines: "Whew! I made it! I am safely graduated, safely home from 'Prom Night,' safely ordained, safely through the bishop's interview, safely on a mission, safely married in the temple, safely finished with mortality, and safely encircled in the arms of Jesus!"

Famous (safe) last lines may be spoken after a lifetime of virtuous living. A virtuous life, well lived, will ensure happiness now and eternal life hereafter.

The age you are as you read this isn't as important as how together you are, how close to the Lord you are, and how guided by the Holy Ghost you are. You are a child of God. Therefore, you are "somebody." How intensely does God, your Heavenly Father, love you?

You are part of an exciting plan, a plan that stretches from premortal life through your turn on earth and into the reaches of all eternity.

You have a destiny—a glorious purpose for living.

You are boosted forward and supported along the way by your membership in the Lord's true church—The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

You have been blessed with the gift of the Holy Ghost to guide you, warn you, and teach you.

You live during a time when there is a flood of knowledge, when you have a whole host of good options for how you will live your life.

You are supported by the leaders of the Church—both local and general.

You have full access to eternal principles in the holy scriptures.

As long as you keep your hand on the iron rod, your feet on the path of righteousness, and your heart close to God, Satan will have no power to inhibit your progress.

Satan is interested in destroying you because he is at war with the kingdom of God on earth. You are on God's team. You have a certain destiny to prepare yourself to spread the gospel. Being virtuous is keeping spiritually fit for the great battle.

You train for being virtuous. You train for it just as you would train to excel in any worthwhile endeavor by taking skiing, music, or sewing lessons or by working with weights to build your body.

What's so great about virtue? It is its own reward. Wholesomeness, purity, and goodness smooth out the path that leads to forever. If you live a virtuous life, there will be fewer disappointments, delays, and detours to negotiate on the road of life. That doesn't mean you will be spared all pain or temptation. It does mean that you will have the strength to overcome.

History and experience both confirm that neither individuals nor nations have any peace or experience much joy when virtue is lost. But what about you? Why virtue? What's in it for you?

Well, first of all, you need to be virtuous because God said so. Why do you suppose God said so? Because wickedness never was happiness and never will be (see Alma 41:10). You see, heaven and happiness just can't happen among sinners—among thieves and lecherous rogues, among abusers and power mongers, and among all the rest who cultivate anti-Christ qualities.

The pure joy of God's love is not to be found among lustful people who scoff at God's moral laws. Immoral persons choose to ignore the eternal ramifications of their behavior. They go along, participating in illicit sexual activities, making babies, falling into and out of intimate relationships, participating in deviant behavior of all kinds, contracting a variety of sexual diseases, and suffering the dissatisfaction and restlessness that are the products of their behavior. Though some people don't know any better, you do! Avoid such anguish no matter what!

To be virtuous is a wonderful condition for a young person to be in. When you have clean hands and a pure heart, when you are obedient to God's commandments, and when you are able to ignore the temptations of the world, you enjoy a wonderful sense of peace and well-being.

On the other hand, immorality destroys the mind, the heart, the body, and eventually the soul. Individuals who seek only to satisfy their immoral appetites are generally selfish, uncaring, and profoundly unhappy. There is a longing in them that can never be satisfied. They have separated themselves from the Spirit of the Lord and, unless they repent, they are in jeopardy of losing the eternal blessings reserved for the righteous.

How do you become virtuous? Virtue is not hereditary. Virtue is not a gene thing. It helps to be reared in a close, protected family circle where God's truths are taught and virtuous living is a constant goal. But even if you are in that kind of fortunate situation, you, yourself, will still have to choose to be virtuous. Like the process of finding a testimony of Jesus Christ, the pursuit of virtue is an individual thing. Moreover, you cannot put virtue on and take it off like a convenient cloak. You can't break the commandments in one way or another on Saturday night and then show up at the sacrament table on Sunday, presuming to participate in sacred priesthood ordinances. That isn't right! For one thing, such behavior is a violation of the trust the Lord has placed in you. If you have ever tried to live that kind of lie, you know how uncomfortable a guilty conscience can make you—the still small voice becomes a roar of condemnation. Only absolute humility and repentance will ease that kind of pain. If you think you can live both ways and program your conscience out, you are suffering from denial and will eventually find you can't continue to live like that forever.

Virtue is not contagious. It is earned. It helps to choose good friends who have similar ideals and goals. It is easier to do what is right when everyone else is.

Virtue is achieved daily (by seconds, minutes, hours) by adhering to the way of light and life according to the Creator's plan for us.

Young people often ask, "What does anything anybody had to say two thousand years ago have to do with me?" The answer is loud and clear. Everything! If you want to boggle your mind, consider what was said more than four thousand years ago to Adam and Eve! They were also given standards of behavior by God. Such standards are the rules of the game of life, tips from the owner's manual.

How do you remain virtuous?

Hang true. You know, like a carpenter's plumb line hangs true. You can't pull up carrots if you plant corn. You can't pretend to be something you are not. Remember, you have made promises to God—promises when you were baptized, when you have partaken of the sacrament, when you received the priesthood. Be true to your commitments, and the Lord will bless you.

Hang in there. Don't allow somebody else's lack of virtue or rebellion to ruin your life! Maybe they don't understand, but you do. So keep moving in the direction you are supposed to go, doing what you are supposed to do. Stay alert for the potholes along your particular highway of life.

Hang loose. Keep calm. Relax, but don't give in, give up, or create trouble for others. The Lord has promised that if we will let virtue garnish our thoughts unceasingly, our confidence will grow strong in his presence (see D&C 121:45). He will help you, so why be uptight and self-conscious? You have a personal witness that Jesus lives. It is his mission to help you! Remember, he said, "For behold, this is my work and my glory—to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man" (Moses 1:39).

Hold on. Hold on to dear life. Fasten your seat belt. Put on your life jacket, your helmet, your running shoes or cleats. And keep your hand in the Lord's, too. Life comes just once to a customer.

One day I answered a knock at our door and was surprised to see a friend of our family standing there. He was supposed to be in Europe on a mission. What was he doing home now? He lunged through the door and fell into my arms, sobbing. "Oh, why did I do it? Why did I do it?" he wailed. When he was finally able to talk, he told me that within thirty hours of his arrival in the mission field, he had committed a sexual sin with a young woman he met. He had confessed, been excommunicated, and sent home in dishonor. His parents were out of town when he arrived home, so he had come at once to our house. As we talked, he asked a significant question. "If I couldn't resist temptation when I had the Holy Ghost, how will I ever make things right now? How will I get through the rest of my life?"

You see, if you are excommunicated, the blessings of Church membership, including the gift of the Holy Ghost, are removed from your life. This young man had already begun to sense what that feels like. He was heartbroken, miserable, and desperate, and he looked forward with dread to all the things he would have to confront. He wondered if he would have the strength to repent and eventually recover his membership in the Church.

As I listened to his story and observed his sorrow, my heart went out to him. He was paying a heavy price for the fleeting moment of gratification he experienced when he surrendered his virtue.

The Lord has revealed this important principle to us: "There is a law, irrevocably decreed in heaven before the foundations of this world, upon which all blessings are predicated—and when we obtain any blessing from God, it is by obedience to that law upon which it is predicated" (D&C 130:20-21).

To understand how this principle works, think about the world we live in. For example, if you want to attend college, you must keep your grades up and graduate from high school. Obey the law—reap the benefit. Similarly, if you want the blessings of a temple marriage, you must live in such a way as to be able to pass the temple recommend interview. The blessings based on obedience to the law of chastity are particularly desirable and include freedom of conscience, freedom from sexually transmitted diseases, increased spirituality, the privilege of going to the temple or of going on a mission, and the joy of becoming a worthy parent.

To ensure the greatest amount of happiness in this life, you must learn to bridle all your passions and appetites. Bad habits enslave us and restrict our freedom. We must learn to control such things as sexual desires; a tendency to overeat; addictions to tobacco, alcohol, or drugs; the tendency to lie, cheat, or steal; the use of pornography; or even the practice of wasting time. By living in harmony with gospel principles you will be filled with the Holy Ghost and be further strengthened to resist temptation.

We believe in being virtuous because it is the best way to live—for now and forever!
