Randal A. Wright, Why Say No When the World Says Yes? Resisting Temptation in an Immoral World ( 1993)

Chapter 10

Modern Media and Morality

Randal A. Wright

When I was fourteen years old, the Church built a new chapel in the area of Texas where I was living. That was during the time when the members helped in the construction of buildings, so my friends and I loved to go down and watch. One of the last projects was to pour a cement base for the steeple. After the contractors left, one of my friends suggested that we write our names and the date in the wet cement. He reasoned that the steeple would cover the names but that in the future we could tell our children that our names were under there.

That sounded like a great idea, so we all got sticks and wrote our names and the date in the wet cement. When the steeple was actually erected, we were surprised to discover that it was not built the way we had expected. The builders left each corner of the foundation exposed. Looking at the base of the new steeple, I was shocked to see my name still showing right next to the sidewalk leading into the chapel. My friend Marshall's name was also showing on the opposite side.

How I wanted to erase that name and say I'd never written it. But there was no rubbing it out. It was there for all to see. Years passed, and I became director of the seminary and institute program and Marshall became a stake president, both of us in the very area where the chapel was located. Instead of looking forward to telling our children about our names being underneath the steeple, we dreaded the day they would notice.

One day my young son came running into the meetinghouse and said, "Dad, guess what! Your name is by the steeple outside. How did it get there?" What do you say? "Well, Son, sometimes youth are so outstanding that the bishop just wants to do something in their honor"? I had no choice but to tell him that I'd made a mistake and that I should have thought before I acted.

Our minds are a little bit like wet cement in the sense that whatever we inscribe there is not easily erased. The things we see, think, and hear are apparently permanently embedded in our minds. It follows that we should carefully monitor what we watch or listen to in the media, because the images we see on television or in the movies or what we listen to on the radio or stereo remain permanently filed away, subject to recall.

How influential is the media industry in our society? Several reports conclude that the media ranks third behind peers and parents in the amount of influence it has on the values and behavior of today's teens. In single-parent or dysfunctional families, movies, television, and music may have passed parents on the scale. When I was a teenager, the media ranked eighth in influence, far behind parents, peers, teachers, relatives, and religious leaders. There is no question that the entertainment media is an increasingly dominant force in our society.

Recently, our two teenaged sons were out playing basketball in the front yard. One child in our neighborhood, a very blond, light-skinned four-year-old named Nathan, came to watch. During a pause in the action, the little boy exclaimed, "When I get big, I'm gonna be Michael Jordan! And I'm gonna be black!" No doubt our little white friend had been influenced by the powerful "be like Mike" commercials seen frequently on television. Media influence begins early, and it remains a powerful force throughout our lives.

In the early 1950s few people in our area had television sets. Our family was one of the first to purchase one. I can still remember having visitors come to our home to watch such shows as "Dennis the Menace" and "Leave It to Beaver." They were shows that depicted harmless boyhood mischief and family life within a neighborhood—all very innocent but true to life in that era. We also had an AM radio that was about five feet tall. Our family gathered around it on Friday nights and listened to innocent comedy shows. Things have changed drastically since that time. Our society is now immersed in suggestive and frequently blatant sexual programming.

Have you ever wondered how much electronic media is available to the youth of our day? The following media were found in homes and bedrooms of high school students during a recent study.

TEENAGERS' HOMES TEENAGERS' BEDROOMS

Television 99.5% Stereo system 91%

Stereo system 98.6% Television 68%

VCR 91.5% Cable television 41%

Cable television 76.5% VCR 26%

Not only has the number of electronic media devices dramatically increased, but the amount of time spent watching or listening to them has also risen sharply. The average man, woman, or child in the United States watches twenty-eight hours of television per week. That, however, does not fully explain how much our society is actually involved with the electronic media. How much additional time is spent using radios, cassette players, and video games and going to the movies?

How about you? How much do you depend on these electronic machines for entertainment? What is the first thing you do when you wake up in the morning? The vast majority of American teenagers turn on the radio. How much do you listen to music as you drive or ride in a car? When you get home, how much time do you spend with radio, CD recordings, cassette tapes, television, music videos, video games, or movies each week? For many youth, the last ritual at night is turning off some type of electronic media. And increasing numbers leave radios and televisions playing all night. In a recent study conducted among high school teenagers, the students estimated they spend more than forty hours per week listening to and watching the electronic media.

We would all do well to ask ourselves what our own involvement with the media is. How important is it in your life? One way to think about this is to answer the following two questions:

Q. How much money would it take to get you to be away from your family for thirty days? From your Mother $_____ Father $_____ Brothers and Sisters $_____

Q. How much money would it take to get you to give up the following electronic media for thirty days? Television $_____ Movies $_____ Music $_____

If a large sum of money would be required to get you to give up media and not much to be away from the members of your family, perhaps you should examine how important media entertainment is in your life.

Considering the availability of media and the time being spent with it, perhaps we all should ask ourselves, "What kind of influence is the media having on my thoughts, attitudes, and behavior?" Let's examine popular music, television, and movies somewhat more closely to more accurately determine the influence they may be having.

Popular Music

In 1988 I was fortunate to be able to serve as the session director for Brigham Young University's "Especially for Youth" program held at Texas A&M University. It was a wonderful experience to see their lives change as the youth drew closer to Christ. Many tears were shed during the testimony meetings and at the special firesides and classes. I think everyone dreaded the thought of going back to the "real world."

The sessions ended too quickly, and I found myself beginning the long ride home on a chartered bus with members of one of the stakes from my area. Conversation on the bus centered on the spiritual feelings and experiences of these participants for about the first thirty minutes. It was a special time for me as the youth talked about sacred things.

Then one of the young men asked the bus driver to play a pop music cassette over the bus stereo system. The second song on the tape was titled, "I Want Your Sex." The song was the number one hit of that summer in many areas. It was disappointing to hear about half the youth on the bus sing along with the suggestive words to that song.

I can't fully explain what happened that day on the bus, but I can testify that the Spirit immediately left when the song began. In fact, I didn't hear another thing mentioned about EFY the rest of the way home.

No wonder President Ezra Taft Benson has warned us not to listen to degrading music. He said, "Much of the rock music is purposely designed to push immorality" (The Teachings of Ezra Taft Benson [Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1988], p. 322). Not only can inappropriate music expel the Spirit but it can fill our minds with immoral thoughts. The time youth spend listening to rock music is alarming. Approximately 2,940 more hours are spent listening to music than are spent in school between the seventh and twelfth grades (Stewart Powell, "What Entertainers Are Doing to Our Kids," U.S. News and World Report, 28 Oct. 1985, pp. 46-49). Do you think it is possible to spend almost five hours a day listening to music without being affected by its content?

Music videos broadcast on MTV are currently very popular with youth and young adults between the ages of twelve and twenty. Unfortunately, many of these videos are explicitly sexual. One researcher found that 75 percent of MTV's music videos contain sexual themes. He concluded that "watching rock music videos is not passive adolescent entertainment; simply watching them can alter viewers' perceptions of the social world" (C. Hansen, "Priming Sex-Role Stereotypic Event Schemes with Rock Music Videos," Journal of Basic and Applied Social Psychology, Dec. 1989, pp. 373-91).

In a survey conducted by the author among 455 American high school students, an interesting correlation between music and sexual attitudes was discovered. The students were asked what kind of music they enjoyed listening to most. They were also asked to answer this question: "If you really cared about someone, would you be willing to have sexual relations with that person even though you were not married?"

Here are the percentages of young people who said they would be willing to have premarital sex, listed by their favorite type of music: classical 35 percent; soft rock 56 percent; top forty 65 percent; country 69 percent; punk rock 71 percent; rap 73 percent; alternative 80 percent; and heavy metal 84 percent. Surely music can influence those who are spending large amounts of time listening to it.

I also believe that listening to music can be addictive. If you doubt that, consider how it would affect you or your friends to go without music of any kind for seven days. This challenge has been given to thousands of teenagers, who were also asked to keep a short journal of their experience. Most will not agree to attempt it for even one day, much less seven. A small number of youth, however, do make it through the experiment. Those who do almost always go through severe withdrawal pains.

The following was written by Stacey, a nineteen-year-old LDS young woman who accepted the challenge to go three days without listening to music. Her journal entry is typical of others I have received. She wrote:

"I discovered that I am very addicted to music! The first night, on the way home from institute, I felt really strange and out of place without the radio on. I heard so many weird sounds—my tires screeching when I took off, my muffler, and all kinds of squeaks that I had never heard before. I had decided to do this, though, even if it killed me! It practically did! I concluded that I can't go to sleep without my radio. My car sounds like it's about to fall apart, and my mood and attitude change when there is no music! I seriously had to listen to meditation (ocean sounds) tapes just to go to sleep. Then the last day, I really found myself depressed.

"These past three days have been really hard for me. But I found that I studied a lot more and I talked to my parents more than I ever had. If there is such a thing as being addicted to music, then I am—100 percent. "P.S. Thanks for three days of torment!"

It almost sounds as if Stacey was trying to quit smoking or using drugs, instead of giving up music for three days. Music can be either a virtue or a vice, depending on the type and lyrics. Can you think of any vices that are not addicting? Whether it is gambling, tobacco, alcohol, pornography, drugs, or immorality, initial experimentation often leads to addiction. Is it any wonder that the unworthy music of our day can also be addicting?

Television

While serving as a member of a bishopric several years ago, I was often asked to give spiritual thoughts to the Primary children during sharing time. One Sunday, speaking to the younger group, I asked them to raise their hands if they knew the answer to this question: "How many of you can name the four Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles?" Except for two very young girls, every child in the entire Primary raised his or her hand. The first four children I called on each gave me a name of one of the four turtles. I then asked a four-year-old how she knew their names. She proudly announced with a huge grin, "Because I watch them every day!"

Then I said, "Okay, kids, I have another question for you." They were visibly excited. I said, "Name one of the four sons of Mosiah in the Book of Mormon." At first they looked at me with that "what-channel-do-they-come-on" look. Then they looked at each other with blank stares. After a long silence one little girl slowly raised her hand and asked in an uncertain tone, "Is one Michelangelo?" "No," I replied. "That's a good guess, but it's not right. Can anyone else think of one?" After many confused looks, they all gave up. I then turned back to the little four-year-old girl I had begun with, and asked why she didn't know the names of the four sons of Mosiah. She was quick to answer. "Because I don't watch them every day."

Clearly, what they see on television makes strong impressions on little children. There is compelling evidence it influences older people as well—determining in many cases what we know and shaping our attitudes and perceptions. Television viewing has a profound effect in the lives of most youth, particularly those who are spending four to five hours a day in front of their sets. The typical high school graduate will have spent almost twice as much time watching television as he has spent in the classroom—the equivalent of ten years of forty-hour weeks (E.H. Methvin, "TV Violence: The Shocking New Evidence," Reader's Digest, Jan. 1983, pp. 49-53).

Unfortunately, television communicates the same information to everyone simultaneously, regardless of age, level of education, or experience. Young minds may have difficulty reconciling behavior portrayed in television programming with values they are being taught by parents and Church leaders. There is also a great deal of concern about the violence and brutality so often shown on television and about the effect its portrayal is having on viewers and on our society.

Producers of many television shows have turned increasingly to sexually oriented subjects and depictions that were previously considered inappropriate. For instance, a 1986 study showed that there were 176 sexual references and situations shown weekly on prime-time network television. By 1992 that number had increased to 386 implications per week. At this rate, the average teenager viewer would see more than 20,000 sexual references and situations per year. Moreover, intimate physical relations are most commonly portrayed among unmarried characters in the programming. These sexual scenes are often shown with almost no reference to the consequences of illicit sex (Stanley Greenberg, et al., "Project Cast: Sex Content on Soaps and Prime-time Television Series Most Viewed by Adolescents," Michigan, 1986). The effect of such viewing is too damaging for anyone who is concerned about morality to simply sit in front of the television, indiscriminately absorbing all the trash the machine spews out.

Movies

Some of the most pleasant memories of my youthful years are of attending good movies. There was no bad language, no immorality shown, and for the most part, good always triumphed in the end. Many of the movies of those days were targeted toward youth audiences.

Teenagers are still a prime target audience for movie-makers, because youth make up the majority of those buying movie tickets. Moviegoing for youth is a popular social activity, and the results of one study showed that a typical teenager watches approximately 177 movies per year.

When 1200 students were asked what kinds of movies they enjoyed viewing, 73 percent favored R-rated films, 22 percent preferred PG-13 movies, 5 percent liked PG-rated shows, and 0 percent listed G-rated movies as enjoyable. Clearly, youthful viewers disdain movies whose content is suitable for all audiences, preferring entertainment that by its rating is guaranteed to portray some measure of sex, violence, and profanity. What should also be of concern is the availability of these films to young, impressionable viewers. Theaters do little to enforce attendance guidelines, and cable television and video players are widely accessible. Many people—both youth and adults—rationalize their viewing of vulgar movies, pretending not to notice the "bad parts" or arguing that the films are otherwise so artistic or entertaining they simply must be seen. Are we being fooled? Are we being desensitized to things that are inappropriate?

I recently interviewed an eleven-year-old boy named Allen about the movies he had watched during the last year. I noted that most of the movies he named were R-rated. Knowing that his family was very active in the Church, I asked him if he'd actually seen all the movies he named. He described the details of the films in a way that convinced me he had.

I said, "Allen, who rents the movies that you watch?" He replied, "My dad and my brothers." I asked him what his mother thought about his watching these movies. "She doesn't care," he quickly replied. I then said, "Allen, tell me what good things you learned from these movies." He laughed and said that he "could not think of anything good." I told him to think harder. He finally said, "I learned how to break people's arms and necks and the other stuff." I asked him what he meant by "other stuff." He said, "You know, the sex stuff." I could hardly believe what I was hearing from one so young. He then got out of his chair and demonstrated how he could break my arms and neck. When I got him to sit down again, I asked how he felt about the prophet's counsel not to watch R-rated movies. His reply shocked me. He said, "I don't care what he says." Now I ask you, has this young Latter-day Saint boy been affected by his exposure to inappropriate movies?

President Ezra Taft Benson has given us clear direction in this matter of entertainment. He said: "We counsel you . . . not to pollute your minds with such degrading matter, for the mind through which this filth passes is never the same afterwards. Don't see R-rated movies or vulgar videos or participate in any entertainment that is immoral, suggestive, or pornographic" (The Teachings of Ezra Taft Benson, p. 222).

The Thought Process

One of the biggest dangers from watching movies with sexual or erotic content is that by doing so we fill our minds with carnal images and thoughts. Viewing such scenes stimulates the imagination and creates strong desires. The resulting feelings and emotions are difficult to control and often lead to transgression. A stake president recently told me that never once when he was a bishop, did any youth come to him who had sexually transgressed who had not first viewed movies with some sexual content. His observation fits well with a statement made by Elder Neal A. Maxwell: "If we entertain temptations, soon they begin entertaining us" ("Overcome . . .Even As I Also Overcame," Ensign, May 1987, p. 71).

It is also true that once a sexual image is introduced into our minds, it is not easily removed. Such things can be recalled through voluntary or involuntary flashbacks. Recalling the scenes renews the temptation, drives away the Spirit, and puts us in repeated danger of transgressing.

Several years ago I worked with a young woman named Teri. She loved attending movies. She frequently told me about the latest movies she had seen. I noticed that she didn't seem to care how the movies were rated. We had several discussions about the R-rated movies she was watching. I tried to teach her that they could have a negative effect on her. She tried to convince me that I was being needlessly concerned. She insisted she simply didn't "pay attention to the immoral scenes."

In time Teri received a mission call. After her release eighteen months later, she stopped by to see me. Guess what the first thing she said to me was? She said, "You were right about the R-rated movies." She went on to say that time after time, while trying to teach the discussions to investigators, images from the vulgar movies she had viewed in the past would flash into her mind. When this happened, she had to turn the teaching over to her companion, because she was unable to focus on her message. Not only do our minds have the ability to recall things we've allowed to enter them but those thoughts and images are often brought back at the most inopportune time.

President Spencer W. Kimball warned: "The body has power to rid itself of sickening food. That person who entertains filthy stories or pornographic pictures and literature records them in his marvelous human computer, the brain, which can't forget this filth. Once recorded, it will always remain there, subject to recall" (The Teachings of Spencer W. Kimball, ed. Edward L. Kimball [Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1982], p. 283).

How many times have young couples sat in darkened theaters, viewing sexual behavior portrayed to the accompaniment of beautiful music, and had their minds filled with lust? Then, stimulated by what they have viewed, how many of those same youth have succumbed to temptations before returning home? We must stop the flow of evil thoughts into our minds if we want to avoid the evil acts that follow those thoughts.

To do that, we must first realize that the thoughts themselves are sins and we will be held accountable for them. The Book of Mormon teaches that "our words will condemn us, yea, all our works will condemn us; . . . and our thoughts will also condemn us; and in this awful state we shall not dare to look up to our God" (Alma 12:14). It is important to control our thoughts because they are the seeds of our acts. Fortunately, a person has time to expel a thought when it first arises, but a thought that is not controlled can lead to transgression. Controlling thoughts is not an easy task in our sex-drenched society. In fact, for some individuals, it is one of the most difficult things they will face in mortal life. But there are ways. Let's look at some ideas for establishing personal guidelines in using electronic media.

Before you attend, buy, rent, or borrow any movie, learn all you can about its content. An excellent service is called the Entertainment Research Report. This publication analyzes every movie that is released to the theaters and also those that come out on video. Many magazines and newspapers carry movie reviews that may also be helpful. You might talk to people who have seen the film in question. Ask specific questions: What was the language like? Any violence? Any immorality? Who are the stars? What other movies have they appeared in? Call the theater and ask the staff about the movie.

By carefully selecting the movies we view, we can increase the chance that our experiences will be uplifting and wholesome. Remember, if you still have doubts after making these inquiries, don't go!

Occasionally you may be exposed to inappropriate material that you did not know would be included. What will you do in that situation? We can follow Joseph's example when Potiphar's wife made advances toward him. The scripture says, "And she caught him by his garment, saying, Lie with me: and he left his garment in her hand, and fled, and got him out" (Genesis 39:12). Decide now that you will flee anything that is obscene. Most theaters will refund your money if you are offended by the material in a film. Whether the lewd material occurs in a video, in a television show, in a song, or in a book, decide now that you will turn it off or get rid of it immediately.

Before attending or during every movie or TV program you see, ask whether this is the type of movie you would feel comfortable seeing if your parents, your bishop, the prophet, or the Savior were seated beside you. If you would feel embarrassed or uncomfortable in any way, the material is not appropriate. You would be wise to choose another form of entertainment that you can feel good about.

Consider whether or not it will make any difference in a few years if you see the movie. Even if everyone else you know is attending but the film contains things you know you shouldn't see, don't go. Too often we subject our minds to material that becomes part of our thoughts just because everyone else is doing it. Choose only those movies that will help make you a better person, regardless of what the critics are saying or your friends are doing.

How often have you heard someone say, "It was a great movie, except for that one bad scene," or "The film has a good message, if you can get past the filthy language"? Avoid such films. Think back on a movie you may have seen that contained "just one bad scene." Can you still see that scene in your mind? If so, then any temporary pleasure or benefit you may have received from viewing it has been nullified.

You need to become your own movie, music, and television critic. After determining the content of the movie or program, you can use your own criteria for rating it. You may identify as X-rated a film rated PG by the seven-member MPAA board. Keep the dictionary definition of pornography in mind when establishing your guidelines. The American Heritage Dictionary defines pornography as "written or pictorial matter intended to arouse sexual feelings." Can movies with so-called good ratings actually be pornographic? What about the content of some television programs or the lyrics to popular songs? The answer is yes!

Another way to help protect yourself from the negative influences of inappropriate media is to openly discuss your values with friends. By letting them know where you stand on unsuitable movies, they will often quit pressuring you to participate. Word spreads just as quickly about those with high standards as it does about those with low standards. You will begin to attract people who have similar values, people you want to be around. Others may disagree with your stand, but that is okay. I have found that when a "Nephi" stands up to the pressure, a "Sam" almost always follows.

The Book of Mormon declares "But behold, that which is of God inviteth and enticeth to do good continually; wherefore, every thing which inviteth and enticeth to do good, and to love God, and to serve him, is inspired of God. . . . But whatsoever thing persuadeth men to do evil, and believe not in Christ, and deny him, and serve not God, then ye may know with a perfect knowledge it is of the devil" (Moroni 7:13, 17).

We would do well to apply that standard to the things we watch, listen to, read, or think about.

You might want to try viewing movies and television with a pencil and paper in hand, so you can analyze the content. You will be amazed at the messages—both good and bad. In analyzing the content, use gospel principles to determine what is negative or positive. Here are some aspects to consider:

Watching a movie or program critically and using a pencil and paper to keep counts and make notes will likely open your eyes to things you have been watching without realizing it. You will see things that you have never noticed before, and in the process build up a wall of protection, becoming more aware and eliminating from your view those films that do not meet your standards.

"Through music, man's ability to express himself extends beyond the limits of the spoken language in both subtlety and power. Music can be used to exalt and inspire or to carry messages of degradation and destruction. It is therefore important that as Latter-day Saints we at all times apply the principles of the gospel and seek the guidance of the Spirit in selecting the music with which we surround ourselves" (First Presidency, Priesthood Bulletin, Aug. 1973, as quoted in Boyd K. Packer, "Inspiring Music—Worthy Thoughts," Ensign, Jan. 1974, p. 25).

One stake president in an area where I lived challenged all the youth in the stake to get a basket and go through their homes. He asked them to gather up anything they would be ashamed to have the Savior see, including records, tapes, CDs, posters, videos, magazines, and books, put them in the basket, and then dispose of them. Elder Richard L. Evans observed, "We ought to be committed to the principle of not making evil profitable" (in Conference Report, Apr. 1969, p. 74). Youth can stop the barrage of filth if they will only stand up for the right and refuse to participate.

Recently I heard a young man give a thought-provoking talk about deceit. He told a story about the devil and his helpers sitting around trying to figure out how to deceive LDS youth. One proposed the idea of telling the youth that there is no God. This idea was quickly rejected, the group agreeing that the youth of the Church were too well-versed in Church teachings and doctrine to be deceived by such a lie. Another suggested that they teach them there is no devil. That idea was also thrown out because parents of youth and the scriptures so clearly teach that the adversary is indeed real. Finally, one suggested that they teach the LDS youth that there is no hurry. That plan was quickly adopted.

Although this story is obviously make-believe, it illustrates an important point. I hear many of our youth say, "I'll change when I get older." The time to change is now. I challenge you to ponder your involvement with the media and quickly make any changes that may be needed.
