Randal A. Wright, Why Say No When the World Says Yes? Resisting Temptation in an Immoral World ( 1993)

Chapter 11

Dating and "The Summer of the Lambs"

Jayne B. Malan

The day school let out at the beginning of each summer, our family would go to our ranch in Wyoming. There, on the ranch with my parents and brothers and sisters and a few cousins mixed in, was where I learned about family loyalty, love and concern, birth and death, and that one must finish a job once it is started. I also learned—to quote my father—"There are only two things important: the family and the Church."

One year my father was waiting for us when we arrived at the ranch. He said that he had a big job for my brother, Clay, and me to do that summer. I was about twelve at the time and Clay was two years older. Pointing into the field by the side of the house, he said, "Do you see all of those lambs? I'll share the money we get for the ones you raise when we sell them in the fall." We were excited. Not only did we have a significant job to do but we were going to be rich! There were a lot of lambs in that field . . . about 350 of them. And all we had to do was feed them.

There was one thing my father hadn't mentioned, however. The lambs had no mothers. Just after shearing, a violent storm had chilled the newly shorn sheep. Dad lost a thousand ewes that year. The mothers of our orphaned lambs were among them.

To feed one or two baby animals is one thing, but to feed 350 is something else! It was hard. There was plenty of grass, but the lambs couldn't eat the grass. They didn't have teeth. They needed milk. So we made long V-shaped feeding troughs out of some boards. Then we made a thin mash by mixing ground grain and milk in a great big, tin washtub. While my brother was pouring the mash into the troughs, I rounded up the lambs, herded them to the troughs, and said, "Eat!" They just stood there looking at me. Although they were hungry and there was food in front of them, they still wouldn't eat. No one had taught them to drink mash out of a trough. So I tried pushing them toward the troughs. Do you know what happens when you try to push sheep? They run the other way. And when you lose one, you could lose them all because the others will follow. That is the way with sheep.

We tried lining up the lambs along the troughs and pushing their noses down into the milk, hoping they'd get a taste and want more. We tried wiggling our fingers in the milk to get them to suck on our fingers. A few of them would drink, but most of them ran away.

Many of our lambs were slowly starving to death. The only way we could be sure they were fed was to hold them in our arms, two at a time, and feed them with bottles, as you would a baby.

And then there were the coyotes. At night the coyotes would sit on the hill and howl. The next morning we would see the results of their night's work, and we would have two or three more lambs to bury. The coyotes would sneak up on the lambs and scatter the herd and then pick out the ones they wanted and go after them. The first to be killed were those that were weak or that got separated from the flock. Often in the night when the coyotes came, and the lambs were restless, Dad would take out his rifle and shoot in the air to scare the coyotes away. We felt secure when Dad was home because we knew the lambs were safe when he was there to watch over them.

Clay and I soon forgot about being rich. All we wanted to do was save our lambs. The hardest part was seeing them die. Every morning we would find five, seven, ten lambs that had died during the night. Some the coyotes got, and others starved to death, surrounded by food they couldn't or wouldn't eat.

Part of our job was to gather up the dead ones and help dispose of them. I got used to that and it wasn't so bad until I gave one of the lambs a name. It was an awkward little thing with a black spot on its nose. It was always under my feet, and it knew my voice. I loved my lamb. It was one that I had held in my arms and fed with a bottle like a baby.

One morning my lamb didn't come when I called. I found it later that day, under the willows by the creek. It was dead. With tears streaming down my face, I picked it up and went to find my father. Looking up at him, I said, "Dad, isn't there someone who can help us feed our lambs?" After a long moment he said, "Jayne, once, a long time ago, someone else said almost those same words. He said it three times. He said, 'Feed my lambs. . . . Feed my sheep. . . . Feed my sheep'" (John 21:15-17). Dad put his arms around me and let me cry for a time, and then he went with me to bury my lamb.

It wasn't until many years later that I fully realized the meaning of my father's words. I was pondering the scripture in Moses that says, "For behold, this is my work and my glory—to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man" (Moses 1:39). That's all mankind. As I thought about the mission of the Savior, I remembered the summer of the lambs, and, for a few brief moments, I thought I could sense how the Savior must feel with so many lambs to feed—so many souls to save. I knew in my heart he needed my help.

From what I've observed, you're not unlike our lambs. You, too, are hungry . . . hungry for things of the Spirit that will make you grow strong and keep you safe from the "coyotes" that are out to destroy you. You are capable and willing to do your part in building the kingdom when you are taught how.

You need someone to love you, someone to listen to and understand you. You need to be needed. You need opportunities to come together in a safe environment, a safe fold, so to speak, where you can share with one another and develop wholesome friendships based on brother-sister relationships rather than romantic involvement, which should come later. You need opportunities to experience the joy of sacrifice and service, of caring for and loving one another in the same way the Savior loves us.

Within the gospel we have what you need, but you need to reach out and accept it. The Savior wants you to be happy while you are fulfilling your mission here on earth. Such happiness comes from knowing and living the gospel. He wants you to prepare to return to him, with honor, when the time comes. Now is the time for preparation.

You may ask, "But how does all of this relate to dating?"

During the dating years and in dating situations many of your needs can be filled. This is also the time when you will be making important decisions that will influence your life forever. They involve choices—choices in regard to friends, education, career, mission, marriage, parenthood—the things that will influence the kind of person you will become. This is a time of testing to see who you will choose to follow and who will follow you.

The years when you are dating can be the most rewarding or the most destructive of your entire lifetime. It will all depend on where you go, what you do, and with whom. This is a critical time for you when hormones are racing, feelings are intense, and relationships are tenuous. It is the time of your life when you are most vulnerable to the powers of Satan. He knows the hearts and minds of young people, and, like the coyotes, he'll sneak up on you when you're the weakest. He would have you for his own. You must not let that happen. It's so sad to lose a lamb.

Guidelines for Dating

A cedar post and wire fence surrounded the field where Clay and I kept our lambs. Every day or so we'd check the fence to see that there weren't any holes in it and that it was secure enough to keep the lambs from wandering away and getting lost.

The guidelines for dating can be likened to the fence around our field of lambs. They suggest appropriate behavior that will help keep you safe during the years when you are forming important relationships. The guidelines have been adapted from the booklet on standards prepared under the direction of the First Presidency entitled For the Strength of Youth.

I hope you will view these dating guidelines as a protection and a guide for you, not as a fence to lock you in. They identify safe boundaries and have been written to help you have fun and enjoy the dating years to the fullest. They could also be compared to the food we prepared for our lambs. The food would have helped more lambs survive, but many of them wouldn't eat. If you will accept Heavenly Father's standards, you will be in a better position to govern yourself, make the right choices, and avoid the disastrous consequences of poor decisions.

Guideline 1: Begin now to prepare for a temple marriage

Dating guidelines have been established by the Church to help you prepare for temple marriage. Proper dating will help protect you and keep the "coyotes" away that are out to destroy you as you progress toward that goal.

No hard and fast rules can answer all of your questions about proper dating because everyone's needs are different. Proper dating depends on how old you are, what your cultural background may be, what opportunities for dating are available to you, what your relationship is with your parents and how they may feel about your dating, what your experience with dating has been, and especially, what your future goals may be.

I've often been asked, "What's a date?" A date is sometimes described as the sharing of a planned experience or event by two people of the opposite sex. Dating has also been defined as "a social engagement of two young people with no commitment beyond the expectation that it will be a pleasurable event for both" (Ernest Watson Burgess and Harvey J. Locke, The Family: From Institution to Companionship [New York: American Book Co., 1953], p. 331).

In some cultures there's no dating at all. Marriages are arranged by parents or another intermediary, and the pairing off of young men and young women before marriage is not acceptable behavior. In other areas, where dating is allowed, a chaperon must go along.

In American culture, dating is a well-accepted fact of life. It provides a way to become acquainted with members of the opposite sex and to learn the social skills that are essential in the relationship between husbands and wives. It would be a tragedy if unwholesome activities or inappropriate behavior were to intrude into your dating experience, particularly if those things should prevent you from eventually marrying in the temple.

Guideline 2: In cultures where dating is appropriate, do not date until you are sixteen years old

President Spencer W. Kimball advised us not to date before the age of sixteen. The counsel of the Church has not changed since he said: "When you get in the teen-age years, your social associations should still be general acquaintance with both boys and girls. Any dating or pairing off in social contacts should be postponed until at least the age of sixteen or older, and even then there should be much judgment used in selections and in the seriousness" ("The Marriage Decision," Ensign, Feb. 1975, p. 4).

The years before you begin dating are years of self-discovery. They could be described as the "wonder" years. You wonder who you are and what you're supposed to do and why. You wonder if the time will ever pass until you're sixteen and can date. If you're older than sixteen and not yet dating, you wonder if you ever will.

Avoid getting overanxious about dating. You're here on earth to be tested. Many young people aren't ready to date during their teen years and others simply need more time before forming serious relationships. A recent survey showed that more than half the young women who graduated from high school had never had a date. You don't need to date to build memories and have fun.

Take advantage of this time in your life to develop the qualities in yourself that you hope eventually to find in those you date. Those qualities might include honesty, patience, kindness, understanding, and courage to stand firm in the face of negative peer pressure. It's your time to grow physically, mentally, socially, and spiritually. This is the time to study hard in school and to learn more about the gospel along with ways to live and share it. It's the time to take advantage of every opportunity that comes along to develop your talents and make friends—lots of friends. Friends who are young men. Friends who are young women.

The best way to make friends and get acquainted is to do a variety of fun and worthwhile things together before you begin dating. Work together in quorum and class presidencies and on projects and in committees at church and school. Team sports and individual sports such as tennis, golf, and swimming are particularly good to help you get acquainted. Participate in roadshows, drama, music, dancing. Find ways to be of service to others. As you share experiences such as those, you'll learn from each other and grow socially. You'll learn to understand and to respect each other's differences. You'll discover that men and women are different, even at this age. They have different interests and different talents, and they don't react the same or think the same. It has always been so. An understanding of this fact will be helpful when you begin to date.

If you are under the age of sixteen and wondering whether to accept a date or not, it is a real test, especially if all of your friends, both members and nonmembers, are accepting dates. Joseph Smith said it was his practice to teach correct principles and let the people govern themselves. You were born with your agency, and you're free to choose whether to date or not. There's no law against it, only the counsel of the prophets.

Do you believe what the prophets teach? Are you willing to abide by their counsel? Or do you think this is an example of one place they are out of touch with reality? "After all," you may rationalize, "I'm almost sixteen and it's only a date. What difference will it make?" In part, this issue is a matter of obedience and trusting the Lord. I'm impressed with how many young people, all over the Church, are choosing to obey this counsel and discovering the rewards of waiting. As one young woman put it, "When you start dating too soon, it's like opening all of your presents before Christmas. I'm glad I waited."

Youth who learn to be obedient master a principle that will be a continuing source of strength in their lives.

There's nothing magic about the number sixteen. Research has shown, however, that age sixteen seems to indicate a level of maturity that makes young people more responsible for their actions. They are more likely to have long-range goals and to think before they act. As a result, fewer unwed pregnancies occur among young people who wait until age sixteen to begin dating than occur among those who begin dating before that time.

Even one unwed pregnancy is too many. It could be possible to eliminate this unhappy circumstance among Church members, along with the heartache and suffering it brings, if young people would discipline themselves on their dates and adhere to this and the other guidelines established by our prophet for proper dating.

Guideline 3: When you begin dating, go in groups or on double dates

Avoid pairing off exclusively with one partner. It's all right to be nervous about first dates. Everyone is, especially if you don't know the person you're dating very well. It's a matter of wanting to do things right and desiring to be accepted as someone of worth when you don't really know what's expected. I noticed that my son was even more nervous than my daughter when he first started dating. It takes time to learn the "rules" of successful dating. It takes time to get acquainted with yourself and to determine how you're going to react to unfamiliar feelings and circumstances.

It is good counsel to go in a group when you're beginning to date and later on as well. If there is just you and your date, then you are really on the spot to keep the conversation going. In a larger group, others can fill in the quiet spots and their personalities can be depended on to keep things going and interesting. Group activities allow you to observe a variety of people and learn from each of them. Then, too, you are not left alone with someone who might put pressure on you to do things you know are not right.

There are a number of things you need to know about dating. One is that you do not have to feel obligated to "pay" for your date by becoming intimate in return for favors or generous treatment. Invitations to compromise your standards need not be tolerated. You would do well to remember that dating is "a social engagement . . . with no commitment beyond the expectation that it will be a pleasurable event for both." The only thing that you "owe" your date is to be congenial and courteous. And that does not include granting sexual favors. If your date demands behavior of you that you are not comfortable with, then you know you have a "coyote" on your trail and you'd better get out of there, FAST! Don't think twice. JUST GO! And then don't let there be a "next time." Stay away from people, places, and situations that could cause this to happen again! It isn't worth the risk.

If a mission is part of future plans for either you or your date, you need to be extra careful. Limit your dating to groups or go with another couple and DON'T PAIR OFF! There is nothing "coyotes" like better than preying on future missionaries. Obeying this guideline will help you and your date stay within the boundaries of proper dating and postpone making lasting commitments until after the mission is successfully completed. Then is the time for more serious dating that can lead to temple marriage and an eternal relationship.

Going steady indicates a level of commitment to each other that often excludes association with others and limits friendships. Ardeth Kapp, the former Young Women general president, had this to say about steady dating: "It increases the risk of developing intimacy, which threatens your obedience to the commandments and your loyalty to eternal covenants, and it imposes temptations, which Satan uses to get [young] people under his influence and rob them of the blessings that come through obedience" (The Fight for Right: Strength for Youth in the Latter Days [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1992], p. 10).

The proper time for going steady is when you're ready to get married and you are in the process of selecting your eternal companion. Even then, you need to be watchful. It's doubtful that you'll have your father along with his rifle to keep you safe. If the time comes—and it will come if you follow the natural tendencies of most young people in love—when you're alone and it's dark and things seem to be getting out of hand, you could always whisper, "I think I heard a coyote." And by the time you have explained to your date all about coyotes and how they destroy helpless lambs, the moment of danger will have passed and you can be in control again. Don't let down your guard for a minute.

While you are searching for that perfect mate, going steady can be helpful. When you have an increased level of commitment, you will most likely find more time to be together and become acquainted with your date's strengths and weaknesses. At the same time, you will be determining how well your personalities blend. That is important before marriage. But you'll never really get acquainted if all you do is go to movies or watch television together. You need variety in your dating.

In our family, we found that taking our dates to the ranch for a weekend was a wonderful way of seeing how much we liked each other and how compatible we were. It gave us an opportunity to be with our dates over an extended period of time in a chaperoned setting where we could see how they reacted to a wide variety of situations and circumstances. Those who passed the "test," we continued to date. As for the others, the trip was worthwhile, but too long for everyone. And that was the end of that.

Not everyone has a ranch to go to, but anyone can plan creative dates. We'll talk about that under Guideline 4. The important thing is to find ways to discover what you need to know about each other. One way would be to take a group of disabled children to the park. Think of all the things you could learn about each other from that experience.

You may find that you will go steady with several different dates before you finally know which one is right for you. Don't be in a hurry. Eternity is a long time. It's a date that never ends.

Some do end, however. I keep thinking about the lambs we tried to raise without their mothers. It would have been so much easier if their mothers had been there. Likewise, I think of children who are being raised by single parents because of divorce. Please take your time in selecting your marriage partner. Date long enough—associate with each other long enough—to become good friends before you become husband and wife and mother and father. Then, maybe, just maybe, this terrible trend of "falling out of love" can be reversed and there won't be so many broken homes in which children are being raised by single parents.

Guideline 4: Plan positive and constructive activities to do when you are together

Do things that will reveal the various facets of your personalities. People behave quite differently in church than they might at a water park or while eating in a fine restaurant. Take care also to go places where there is a good environment and avoid settings where you might be confronted with temptations.

The kinds of positive and constructive things you can do that will help you get to know each other better are limited only by your imagination. By using a creative approach to dating, you can have fun wherever you are—at home, at church, around your neighborhood, in your city, or out in nature. The setting doesn't matter nearly as much as having the right people there to share it with you.

A special friend of mine once said, "Fun is an attitude, not an event." That is true. If you go someplace thinking you're going to have fun, you will. You'll look for the happy things and the funny things that are happening and ignore the rest. Try it.

One of the best ideas for adding variety to your dates is to go with groups of friends that include both young men and young women. That eliminates the need to be anyone's specific girlfriend or boyfriend, and everyone can relax and have fun. You can enlarge your circle of friends in this way and broaden your experience. It's a lot more fun when four, six, or eight of you do things together. Why not five, seven, or nine? Then you can include others who don't usually date. There's no rule that says you must go two by two. The people in the groups that I dated with when I was in college are the ones who have become my lifelong friends. We cared about each other and loved each other. Some of us even married each other. This was my "safe fold." You can create your own.

The next time you're wondering what to do on a date, use the Creative Dating Chart shown on page 159 and design your own personalized list of possible dates. All you have to do is gather your favorite people together and challenge them to come up with some ideas. Then fill in the blanks. Some ideas may be too creative, but write them down anyway. You don't have to use them. When this chart is full, get another piece of paper and keep thinking.

Guideline 5: Date only those who share your values and respect your standards

Don't compromise your determination to be prepared for a temple marriage and the opportunity to raise your children in the Church. You don't want to take the chance of not being worthy to receive the promised blessings of glory, immortality, and eternal life that are available to you in the temple of the Lord. Therefore, date only those people who have high standards, respect your standards, and in whose company you can maintain the standards of the gospel of Jesus Christ. Your Heavenly Father knows you and cares about what you are doing. You have a vital role to fill in his eternal plan. You have been chosen by the Lord to come to earth at this time to fulfill your special mission and assist the Savior with his work here on earth—to help feed his lambs.

Reach out to those around you. Encourage them. Support them in making wise choices, especially when decisions are difficult and may not be popular with the group. Reach out to your nonmember friends and involve them in your positive and constructive activities. Let them see the gospel in action and in your actions wherever you go, whatever you do.

Make dating a wholesome, happy activity in your life. Rally your friends around you. Band together in the strength of the Lord and lead out in righteousness. Reach out with loving arms and understanding hearts to those who are weak or wandering. Help bring them back to the fold where they can learn of the Good Shepherd and grow close to him.

Please choose carefully the paths you walk, for others will follow. That is the way with sheep. Of our little flock we saved only one third. And what of the Savior's flock? He has said, "Feed my lambs. . . . Feed my sheep."
