Randal A. Wright, Why Say No When the World Says Yes? Resisting Temptation in an Immoral World ( 1993)

Chapter 12

Resisting Temptation in an Immoral World

Richard Peterson

We live in a world that is preoccupied with sex. Nearly every national magazine aimed at teenaged or young adult readers has a regular feature on sexuality. Written without regard to the marital status of readers, advice is given on the most intimate subjects—masturbation, contraception, and intercourse. The assumption is that even young teens are interested in and need this kind of information.

Look at advertising strategies. Whether it's automobiles, clothing, perfume, liquor, tobacco products, tools, vacation spots, airline travel, sports equipment, grooming aids, luggage, or even food products, it is a rare advertisement that doesn't use sex or sex appeal to attract the attention of the potential buyer.

Popular music, movies, fiction, videos, and television shows are also frequently filled with sexual innuendos, descriptions, or portrayals.

Comedians and entertainers frequently make reference to sexual subject matter, often in coarse and vulgar terms—in their albums, in their public performances, and on television.

Of this trend, Elder Boyd K. Packer has said: "The rapid, sweeping deterioration of values is characterized by a preoccupation—even an obsession—with the procreative act. Abstinence before marriage and fidelity within it are openly scoffed at—marriage and parenthood ridiculed as burdensome, unnecessary. Modesty, a virtue of a refined individual or society is all but gone. . . . That which should be absolutely private is disrobed and acted out center stage" ("Our Moral Environment," Ensign, May 1992, p. 66).

And all this is true without mentioning anything about the increased availability of pornography and all the sexual perversions it promotes.

This is the moral environment in which you are growing up. The question is, how is it possible for you to withstand the pressures being exerted on you? What can you do to successfully live the law of chastity given to us by the Lord and taught by his Church?

The Challenge

As you grew into adolescence there developed in you the physical ability to procreate life. If you are a young woman, you became capable of getting pregnant. If you are a young man, you developed the ability to father children. With this development there also came an awakening of the desire to express those powers. You began to take an increased interest in members of the opposite sex.

What you must not lose sight of is the guideline the Lord has established for the use of these sacred powers. He has expressly forbidden any of us to have sexual intercourse, except with the partner to whom we are legally married. If you are single, you have no license to express your sexuality—either with someone of your own sex, the opposite sex, or by yourself. That means no masturbation, fondling, petting, or oral sex.

Violations of the law of chastity are sinful. In fact, the Lord has instructed us that the commission of sexual sins, such as fornication and adultery, is such a serious matter that it can have eternal consequences.

Your challenge is to keep yourself sexually pure in an environment where mistaken, uninformed, or evil people will attempt to convince you that there is no sin in any of this and that the expression of your sexuality is natural and of no consequence.

How Can You Avoid Sexual Transgression?

The most obvious way to avoid sexual transgression is to develop appropriate relationships with members of the opposite sex. Our Church leaders have consistently taught that there is danger in early dating, and they have told us that we should not date until we are sixteen or older. But it should also be noted that many young people lose their virtue before they ever have a traditional date.

There is danger in such seemingly innocent activities as playing together in neighborhoods after dark or in spending time together alone in unsupervised settings—in such places as someone's house after school before parents arrive home in the evening. Whenever or wherever young people are together in social settings, there is danger unless you take care to treat your boyfriends or girlfriends with respect and resolve not to experiment on any level with forbidden activities.

When you are old enough to arrange or accept dates, you must take care that you don't put yourself in situations where you may be overcome by temptation. One of the best safeguards is to refrain from single dating. By going with other couples or in groups, you will not likely be left alone with your date or get into a situation where physical intimacies can take place.

Here is another consideration. Each of us is naturally inhibited in our first experiences with members of the opposite sex. That is why it is so terribly awkward the first time you go out with a date to eat, or to a dance, or even on a walk. By spending time together, you probably begin to feel less awkward and become more sure of yourself. Gaining confidence makes dating more fun, but spending too much time together promotes familiarity and can eventually entirely erode the inhibitions. That is why you have been counseled against "going steady" or spending too much time with any one date. As a safeguard against too much intimacy, some young people decline consecutive dates with the same person.

Older young adults, those who have perhaps dated a great deal and who might even have become engaged, must take special care to ensure their commitment to marry isn't used to justify inappropriate intimacy. The engagement does not provide any additional license for sexual expression. Great care must be taken at this point in a relationship to control expressions of affection. Some engaged couples put their bishop and stake president in a very difficult position when they come for their temple recommend interviews after having been guilty of heavy petting or fornication. They act unfairly in expecting the priesthood leader to issue them a recommend so they won't be embarrassed by having to cancel their plans for a temple marriage.

Some Specific Warnings

Some Strategies to Help You Succeed

The Pitfalls of Steady Dating

I once knew a wonderful young woman I'll call Candice. During her high school years, she was attractive and lively and had many friends and admirers, but in spite of her popularity, she was insecure and often moody. She spent a lot of time evaluating her appearance, worrying about her complexion, wishing she were taller and her figure more willowy.

Candice attended school with a young man I'll call Brad. He was a year ahead of her in school. Brad was also popular—a good athlete and handsome—and he had what everybody in their school agreed was a hot car. But Brad was also more insecure than anyone might have suspected. He needed the constant reinforcement he received through playing on the school teams. He kept his car immaculately clean and highly polished. He liked it when people looked at him admiringly or praised him for playing a good game.

Candice and Brad started to date regularly after he invited her to the homecoming dance in the fall when she was a junior and he was a senior. From that point on, neither of them had any interest in dating anyone else. Besides, everyone at school knew they were "going together," and so no one ever thought to ask either of them for a date.

One reason they went together so much was that they found they had a lot in common. The night of their first date, they admitted to each other that they were not as happy as their friends assumed. Brad's parents were divorced, and even though his dad gave him money and attended all his games, Brad was confused about his parents' relationship and hated the tension he felt whenever his mom and dad were together. Candice told Brad how much she wished she looked different and how she was always worrying about what her friends might be saying about her behind her back. They admitted things to each other during that first date together that they had never shared with anybody else. They both enjoyed the date immensely, and by the time they said goodnight on her doorstep, they were starting to fall in love.

It was only natural they would want to be together again and often. And so began a relationship that intensified during that school year. At first they were content just to be together—between classes, after games, at the movies, at school dances, at the library, and at lunch. Candice's parents liked Brad because he was always polite, and Brad's mother thought Candice was "just a doll." Both sets of parents were pleased their children had found such an impressive friend, and they were allowed to date pretty much whenever and however they wished.

The trouble started sometime following Christmas. After going to a movie in which there was a provocative love scene, Brad drove to a secluded lookout on the hills above the city. They sat for a time, looking at the lights and talking. They held hands and then began to kiss. This wasn't the first time they had done so, but stimulated by what they had watched together in the theater, they both surrendered to their desires. Ignoring their feelings that what they were doing was wrong, they permitted their hands to wander and were soon locked in a passionate embrace neither of them had the willpower to break.

You can finish the story. You can perhaps imagine how Brad and Candice must have felt later that night, as each went home and then lay in bed agonizing over the mistake they had made. Maybe you can put yourself in their shoes some time later as they told their parents that Candice was pregnant, or as they went to their bishop to confess their transgression, to pour out their sorrow, and to begin the difficult process of repentance. Maybe you can imagine how it was for them at school when news of their hastily arranged marriage circulated through the halls and in the cafeteria. Perhaps you can feel how Brad felt when he realized there would be no mission call for him. Or you might think about how Candice felt about giving up her senior year in high school to have and then care for their baby.

Conclusion

Teenagers and young adults who get into this kind of trouble usually don't plan to do so. But, caught in the powerful currents of their youthful passions, they can be swept along, helpless to control where the flow takes them. The only safety is not to venture out into the river.

As you read this, think about what the Lord has told us about morality. Think about the consequences of disobedience. Perhaps more importantly, consider the happiness that you will experience if you keep yourself morally clean, if you are worthy of a temple recommend, and if you can go to your marriage knowing that you are pure and virtuous. Resisting temptation and keeping the commandment to be morally clean really is worth it.
