Randal A. Wright, Why Say No When the World Says Yes? Resisting Temptation in an Immoral World ( 1993)

Chapter 13

The Blessings of Repentance and the Rewards for Righteousness

Brent L. Top

Though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be white as snow; though they be red like crimson, they shall be as wool.

Isaiah 1:18

A few years ago my wife and I had the opportunity to travel in the Middle East for several weeks. During our visit to Egypt, we experienced some feelings that we will never forget. It was there that we had our first encounter with the conditions of poverty and uncleanliness that prevail in so many of the underdeveloped countries of the world. Our accommodations did not include the conveniences of sanitation and privacy to which we were accustomed. Complicating these conditions was the extraordinary heat of an unusually hot and dry Egyptian summer. We were exposed to intense heat as we visited the tombs and temples of the ancient pharaohs. The physical exertion and strain of walking the dusty paths in the almost unbearable desert heat soon left us sweaty, stinky, grimy, grouchy, and exhausted. At the end of a visit to any particular site, there was often a hurried retreat to the oasis-like comfort of our air-conditioned tour buses. All too often, however, the buses overheated and the air-conditioning failed.

After one particularly long day of this "touring torture," during which we had no chance to bathe or change clothes, we boarded a late-night train for a return trip to Cairo. We were cramped in hot and stuffy sleeping quarters in the old Luxor train, which seemed to have square wheels as it bumped and bounced along. It was futile to attempt to sleep during the fourteen-hour trip. The unpleasant odor of the dirty and sweaty travelers commingled with the stench coming from the primitive sanitation facilities, adding queasiness to our discomfort. Oh, how we longed to return to the comforts of our four-star hotel in Cairo.

I can't remember ever feeling so dirty, so fatigued, and so uncomfortable. I did not want to go another mile, see another ancient site, or learn another important historical fact. I knew that I might never be able to visit these places again, yet all I cared about was getting back to the hotel. I just wanted to be clean! It seemed like the longest day of my life as I counted the hours, minutes, and even the seconds until the bus finally arrived at our hotel.

Never before had a shower, a shampoo, and a shave felt so exquisite. It felt so good finally to be clean again. It felt so good to be able to rest. It felt so good to be, in a small way, at peace.

That experience of being physically dirty in Egypt has helped me understand something Isaiah said about the spiritual side effects of sin: "But the wicked are like the troubled sea, when it cannot rest, whose waters cast up mire and dirt. There is no peace, saith my God, to the wicked" (Isaiah 57:20-21).

Perhaps only a few of us have had an experience similar to this one, but all of us have had encounters with the uncomfortable consequences of sin. The preacher in Ecclesiastes declared, "For there is not a just man upon the earth, that doeth good, and sinneth not" (Ecclesiastes 7:20). The apostle Paul reminds us that "all have sinned, and come short of the glory of God" (Romans 3:23). Each of us has indeed sinned, and though the nature of our sins and the burdens of guilt may vary, we all know well the spiritual discomfort that accompanies our iniquities. Who among us has not experienced feelings, to a greater or lesser degree, like those described in the Book of Mormon by Alma? "But I was racked with eternal torment, for my soul was harrowed up to the greatest degree and racked with all my sins.

"Yea, I did remember all my sins and iniquities, for which I was tormented with the pains of hell; yea, I saw that I had rebelled against my God, and that I had not kept his holy commandments.

". . .yea, and in fine so great had been my iniquities, that the very thought of coming into the presence of my God did rack my soul with inexpressible horror.

"Oh, thought I, that I could be banished and become extinct both soul and body, that I might not be brought to stand in the presence of my God, to be judged of my deeds.

". . .I [was] racked, even with the pains of a damned soul" (Alma 36:12-16).

Each of us could describe just such painful emotions resulting from our own disobedience. We have learned through personal experience that sin destroys our self-esteem, damages our faith, and can lead to hopelessness and despair. The burden of sin creates a feeling of worthlessness as well as unworthiness. Thus, when we are weighted down with the burdens of sin, our souls are truly like the river of filthy waters which Nephi saw in vision (see 1 Nephi 15:26-30), made turbulent by the constant churning of guilt and shame.

Satan would love to keep us in this miserable state forever. He wants us to feel that we cannot possibly be loved by our Heavenly Father or Jesus Christ after we have defiled ourselves with worldly ways. The father of lies is delighted when we convince ourselves that it is impossible for us to be completely forgiven and cleansed from the stains of sin. He knows that the feelings of being unlovable and unforgivable are towering roadblocks to repentance. They cause us to be tormented with doubts about ourselves and our Savior. "What if this burden of sin and shame can never be lifted?" and "What if I must feel 'eternal torment' and the 'pains of hell' forever?" Surely these thoughts strike within us the feeling described by Alma as "inexpressible horror."

In fact, these "what ifs" would have become reality except for the loving intercession of our Savior, Jesus Christ. Without his "infinite atonement," not only would we have been left to suffer the pains of hell but we would have continued to carry the burdens of the sin we acquired in mortality. Lacking the power to rid ourselves of the effects of sin, "our spirits must have become like unto him [the devil], and we become devils, angels to a devil, to be shut out from the presence of our God, and to remain with the father of lies, in misery" (2 Nephi 9:7, 9). Because of their eternal and incomprehensible love for us, our Heavenly Father and his Beloved Son have prepared "a way for our escape from the grasp of this awful monster; yea, that monster, death and hell" (2 Nephi 9:10). Troubled souls can be soothed and calmed. The stains of sin can be removed. Hope can replace despair, and the tears of sinful sorrow can be wiped from our faces. Joy can swallow up guilt. "Though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be as white as snow; though they be red like crimson, they shall be as wool" (Isaiah 1:18). That is the great hope we have in Jesus Christ.

Thus, we must not fall prey to Lucifer's lies. No matter who you are, no matter how low and unworthy you may feel, you are not rejected, nor alone, nor forgotten—God loves you still. Elder Richard G. Scott of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles, testified of God's love and the Savior's atonement and counseled us to pray for the spiritual strength required for our repentance:

"I cannot comprehend [God's] power, his majesty, his perfections. But I do understand something of his love, his compassion, his mercy.

"There is no burden he cannot lift.

"There is no heart he cannot purify and fill with joy.

"There is no life he cannot cleanse and restore when one is obedient to his teachings. . . .

"He is your Father; pray to him. If your life is in disarray and you feel uncomfortable and unworthy to pray because you are not clean, don't worry. He already knows about all of that. He is waiting for you to kneel in humility and take the first few steps. Pray for strength. Pray for others to be led to support you and guide you and lift you. Pray that the love of the Savior will pour into your heart. Pray that the miracle of the Atonement will bring forgiveness because you are willing to change. I know that those prayers will be answered, for God loves you. His Son gave his life for you. I know they will help you" ("True Friends That Lift," Ensign, Nov. 1988, p. 77).

Repentance Is Not a "Checklist"

As Elder Scott so kindly pointed out, God is patiently waiting for us to take the first few steps. Sometimes, though, we make of repentance only a series of steps to be taken or items on a checklist to be completed for each sin that we may commit. We may teach these steps as the "Rs of Repentance" or some other catchy name. Such a checklist approach may serve as a memory device or a teaching method, but it does not accurately or completely teach the true nature and doctrine of repentance. It tends to leave out the most important ingredient of all—faith in the Lord Jesus Christ.

Although the familiar "Rs" or other similar approaches to repentance are good and important actions, they will not produce a remission of sins without the good motive, the real and righteous intent that springs from true faith in Christ. Moreover, a preoccupation with outward performances may overshadow the inward "workings of the Spirit" that will ultimately result in a thorough change of life. Perhaps the following true stories will best illustrate some of the problems with "checklist repentance."

A young woman approached the bishop of her ward minutes before sacrament meeting. "I need to talk with you," she told the bishop. The bishop looked at his watch and offered to make an appointment with her after the meeting. She insisted that what she needed to say would only take a moment.

"Last night I committed fornication," she announced to the bishop. "I am here to confess that transgression to you, since I know that confession is one of the steps of repentance."

The bishop explained that they would need to meet together right after sacrament meeting to discuss the matter further, resolve problems, and talk about the true meaning of repentance. She resisted and responded that she could not understand why an additional interview would be necessary since she had already recognized her sin, felt remorse, confessed to the bishop, and resolved that the sinful act would not happen again. In her mind she had completed all of the "steps of repentance" that she had been taught. Yet, she demonstrated little understanding of the central role of faith in Christ and his atonement in the repentance process.

A man appearing before a Church disciplinary council grew angry when asked by the stake president to share his innermost feelings about repentance. "What do my feelings have to do with it, anyway?" he replied with disgust. "I have done everything required of me to repent. I have completed all of the steps of the repentance process. What more is there for me to do? I have made a complete confession, made the proper restitution, and resolved the matter. Isn't that repentance? My feelings are personal and are none of your business. They are irrelevant, since I have taken all of the steps necessary to repent." This person also had focused his efforts on a series of designated actions but rejected the notion that genuine repentance also changes inward attitudes.

These true-to-life case studies are representative of hundreds of examples of people, young and old, most with good intentions and noble motives, who view repentance merely as a series of steps to be taken or actions to be completed rather than an all-encompassing process of being, changing, feeling, and doing. There are at least three serious problems with trying to repent in this limited way.

First, under such a program a person may never really "catch up." As one goes through the so-called requirements of repentance, he will find that he has committed other sins that also need his attention. To apply the "checklist" to every sin ever committed would be like taking one step forward and two steps backward. It would be impossible to conscientiously go through the process for every sin.

A second problem with such a process is that for some sins and situations there are not enough "Rs of repentance." For other sins there are items on the "checklist" that cannot be completed. President Spencer W. Kimball wrote that "there are some sins for which no adequate restitution can be made, and others for which only partial restitution is possible" (The Miracle of Forgiveness [Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1969], p. 194).

Finally, and most problematic of all, is that when we overemphasize "steps," or outward actions, we tend to elevate man's doings at the expense of Christ's cleansing power. We make repentance appear as though it is something that we can do by ourselves. Such a serious misconception minimizes the miraculous atonement of Jesus Christ and the grace of God that grants us forgiveness. When we focus all of our attention and effort on the things we must do to repent, we tend to overlook what he did to make repentance possible. Thus, the worst danger of this narrow view of repentance is that it all too often causes us to leave out the most important element, the most important "R" of repentance: Redeemer.

Faith unto Repentance

President Ezra Taft Benson has declared: "True repentance is based on and flows from faith in the Lord Jesus Christ. There is no other way" (The Teachings of Ezra Taft Benson [Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1988], p. 71). The scriptures—especially the Book of Mormon—contain many examples and teachings on faith as the first and foremost ingredient of repentance. After Enos spent an entire day praying for a witness of the truthfulness of his father's words, he was rewarded with a remission of his sins. When he asked, "Lord, how is it done?" The Lord taught him, "Because of thy faith in Christ, . . . thy faith hath made thee whole" (Enos 1:7-8). The terrible agony experienced by Alma the Younger, referred to earlier in this chapter, was relieved only when he remembered the teachings of his father concerning one Jesus Christ and his atonement. Even as he merely attempted to exercise faith in Christ, he suddenly and mercifully experienced the miracle of forgiveness.

"Now, as my mind caught hold upon this thought, I cried within my heart: O Jesus, thou Son of God, have mercy on me, who am in the gall of bitterness, and am encircled about by the everlasting chains of death.

"And now, behold, when I thought this, I could remember my pains no more; yea, I was harrowed up by the memory of my sins no more.

"And oh, what joy, and what marvelous light I did behold; yea, my soul was filled with joy as exceeding as was my pain!" (Alma 36:18-20).

A remission of sins was extended to Enos and Alma because they exercised faith in the atonement of Christ. Their abandonment of sinful practices, their restitution for past mistakes, and their continued commitment to the kingdom of God came afterward. These "steps" did not have to be accomplished in a certain order or be totally completed before forgiveness was granted. The "faith unto repentance" which these men exercised also led them to a natural desire to do the works of righteousness.

The prophet Amulek affirmed that faith must precede repentance for the mercy of the Messiah to be enjoyed.

"And thus he shall bring salvation to all those who shall believe on his name; this being the intent of this last sacrifice, to bring about the bowels of mercy, which overpowereth justice, and bringeth about means unto men that they may have faith unto repentance.

"And thus mercy can satisfy the demands of justice, and encircles them in the arms of safety, while he that exercises no faith unto repentance is exposed to the whole law of the demands of justice; therefore only unto him that has faith unto repentance is brought about the great and eternal plan of redemption" (Alma 34:15-15; emphasis added).

Truly, then, repentance stems only from faith in the redemptive and cleansing power of the blood of the Lamb of God. Without the merciful atonement there could be no forgiveness of our sins, no matter what we might do. Although there really is no set recipe or checklist of steps that must be taken in every case of repentance, we must still do all that we can, to demonstrate our faith. The Lord himself has given us no list of "Rs" to complete in the repentance process. Other than teaching that repentance begins with and flows from faith in Christ, he has given only this simple but important formula that includes all other actions and attitudes of repentance. He declared, "By this ye may know if a man repenteth of his sins—behold, he will confess them and forsake them" (D&C 58:43).

Confession: Attitudes and Actions

As we see from this passage of scripture in the Doctrine and Covenants, confession is a sign of true repentance. Confession is much more than just admitting we have sinned, however. Sincere repentance requires an attitude of confession in the heart as well as an action of confession coming from the mouth. Whether it be a private, personal confession of sins, confession to priesthood leaders, or a more public confession to the Church congregation, the act of confession serves as an outward sign of what should be happening inside of us.

It would be hypocritical for us to confess our sins merely to complete one of the steps of repentance if we are not sincerely sorry for our wrongdoing. The kind of confession that will truly bring us forgiveness comes only from a deep sense of what the apostle Paul called "godly sorrow"—what the Book of Mormon refers to as "a broken heart and a contrite spirit" (2 Nephi 2:7). As Paul explained to the Corinthians, there is a difference between this righteous sorrowing and worldly sorrow. "Now I rejoice, not that ye were made sorry, but that ye sorrowed to repentance: for ye were made sorry after a godly manner. . . . For godly sorrow worketh repentance to salvation. . . but the sorrow of the world worketh death" (2 Corinthians 7:9). Being sorry, regretful, or remorseful does not by itself necessarily bring about repentance. We have probably all known persons who have been sorrowful and who have suffered for their mistakes but who have done nothing to change or to come unto Christ and comply with the requirements of the gospel. The "godly sorrow" of which Paul spoke arises from true faith in the Savior and not from a fear of being caught or punished. It is the only kind of sorrow which "worketh repentance to salvation."

How, then, do we know when the grief we feel because of our sins is "godly sorrow"? There are two important elements that are always a part of this righteous sorrowing.

An awful awareness of our unworthiness before God. Before sinners can obtain a remission of sins, they must experience what King Benjamin described as "an awful view of their own guilt and abominations, which doth cause them to shrink from the presence of the Lord" (Mosiah 3:25). If we do not even recognize our sins and don't see ourselves as we really are, how can we feel sorry? If we don't realize or care that our sins will separate us from God, how can we care about repenting? As Alma declared to his wayward son, Corianton: "Let your sins trouble you, with that trouble which shall bring you down unto repentance. . . . Do not endeavor to excuse yourself in the least point because of your sins, . . . but do you let the justice of God, and his mercy, and his long-suffering have full sway in your heart; and let it bring you down to the dust in humility" (Alma 42:29-30). Accompanying the "awful awareness" of our unworthiness before the Lord is the yearning to be cleansed and to stand approved before him once again.

Willing submission and surrender to God's will for us. Perhaps one of the most important tests of godly sorrow is our willingness to submit to whatever the Lord requires of us in order to obtain a remission of our sins. It is not uncommon for some to desire to repent on their own terms rather than on the Lord's terms. They want to make repentance easy, pain-free, and convenient, when in reality it is sometimes difficult and demanding and may require some humiliation, public embarrassment, pain, restrictions, or inconvenience. It is not "godly sorrow" if a person—

* Confesses a major sin to the appropriate priesthood leader but is unwilling to follow the counsel or correction he or she receives.

* Procrastinates his confession and repentance until he gets into the mission field so he will not be embarrassed at home by having to wait a little longer before he can serve.

* Resents the restriction not to partake of the sacrament because he or she is worried about what others might think.

* Disguises the severity of the sin in confessing to the priesthood leader so he or she may gain admission to a Church-owned university or college.

President Spencer W. Kimball offered these questions as a way of determining the extent to which a person had repented and the depth of his or her conviction—

* Do you wish to be forgiven?

* Could you accept excommunication for the sin if deemed necessary?

* Why do you feel you should not be excommunicated?

* If you were, would you become bitter at the Church and its officers?

* Would you cease your activities in the Church?

* Would you work your way back to baptism and restoration of former blessings even through the years?

* Have you told your [spouse] or parents?

* Have you confessed your total sins?

* Are you humble now? Is your humility the result of "being forced to be humble?"

* Have you wrestled with your problems as did Enos?

* Has your soul hungered for your soul's sake?

(See The Miracle of Forgiveness, pp. 160-61).

If we possess the proper attitude of confession, our hearts will be broken with a piercing sorrow for sin and an "awful awareness" of our unworthiness. Our spirits will be humbled, and we will desire to submit to God's will and do whatever he requires to have the heavy burden of sin lifted from our shoulders.

A student once asked me this important question: "What can you do to feel that kind of godly sorrow? What if you don't feel genuinely sorry for your sins? Can you still repent?" As I pondered those questions, I could think of numerous people with whom I had counseled who really felt no remorse, let alone godly sorrow, for their sins. As I struggled with that dilemma, I learned that there really wasn't anything that I could do to bring them to that desired state. The Spirit testified to me that godly sorrow is a spiritual gift. It is bestowed upon us through our faith in Christ. In order to receive it, we must desire and pray for it with all our hearts, exercising faith in our Savior by whom it comes.

Once we have been blessed with the right attitude of confession, the appropriate action will naturally follow. "What sins must I confess?" and "To whom should I confess?" are questions commonly asked by young people. In the Book of Mormon, the Lord taught Alma that if a transgressor would "confess his sins before thee and me, and [repent] in the sincerity of his heart, him shall ye forgive, and I will forgive him also" (Mosiah 26:29; emphasis added). Perhaps we can better understand why we need to go both to the Lord and to his earthly priesthood authorities by learning why we are commanded to confess. Confession to the Lord and to the proper priesthood leader is not just telling them what they need to know. It is the expression of a commitment or the making of a covenant with them concerning what we are going to do. Just admitting our sins remains an incomplete confession unless it leads to two higher and more important purposes.

Confession as a covenant. For our own benefit, we disclose our deeds to the Lord, even though he already knows them, and to priesthood leaders, who may or may not know them. Such open acknowledgment of our evil actions demonstrates a spirit of humility and signals a desire to change. It gives us the chance to promise our Lord, our priesthood leader, and ourselves that we will make the necessary changes in our lives. This spoken promise, if sincere, will give us added power to help us reform our lives. Confession without a commitment to change is almost meaningless and will have little effect in helping us to repent fully.

Confession as an opportunity to receive direction. Confessing sins to friends, roommates, or even family members may seem helpful at first. There may be a temporary lifting of the heavy burden of guilt, but this feeling is fleeting. The lasting healing of both mind and spirit can come only from the Great Physician himself—Jesus Christ. When we come unto Christ through a complete confession and a commitment to change our ways, we are then in a position to be taught by the Master. His guidance far surpasses any emotional support or well-meant advice from mere mortals. In addition, his inspired servants—the common judges in Israel (bishops, branch presidents, mission presidents, and stake and district presidents)—have been ordained and set apart to a special stewardship that qualifies them alone to lift the burdens of those who confess major sins and to forgive them in behalf of the Church. It is for these reasons that the Lord requires that a confession be made to judges in Israel for moral transgressions and other serious sins. That procedure is not designed to punish or humiliate us. These authorized leaders, regardless of their background or station in life, represent our Savior and by inspiration can provide the repentant sinner with the counsel, direction, and the discipline needed for full repentance.

Thus, once we have acquired a sincere attitude of repentance and an understanding of and a desire for the blessings and help that can come to us through the action of confession, we will begin to see confession as more than a "step" to be completed on our checklist. We will not need a "list" of sins that require formal confession. Instead, we will be prompted by the workings of the Spirit and by our own need to be forgiven to approach the proper priesthood leader, as necessary, in humble confession and to seek his counsel and support. Our confession to others whom we may also have wronged should also be guided by the whisperings of the Holy Ghost and the counsel of priesthood leaders. If we are truly repentant, we will be willing to be obedient to these promptings and such counsel, doing all that we can to be forgiven rather than searching for some less demanding course.

Forsaking Sin: "The Mighty Change"

Through the attitude of confession—a manifestation of godly sorrow—we open the gate; through the action of confession, we step onto the "strait and narrow path" leading to forgiveness; however, repentance is not yet complete without fulfilling the second requirement in the Lord's formula—forsaking sin. As important as confession is, the final and most telling test of true repentance is in the way we live our lives after our confession.

Forsaking sin is all too often misunderstood to mean that one merely stops committing the particular sin of which he or she is repenting; however, the Lord's definition of forsaking sin implies the abandonment of sinfulness in every aspect of our lives and character. Consider the incompleteness of repentance in the following two examples:

In each of these examples, it is apparent that although these individuals may have forsaken one specific sin, they really have not yet changed their tendencies and desires to sin. Each has attempted to give up one sin while clinging tightly to others. Such half-hearted repentance will have little power to keep them from falling back into their former sins. Forsaking, like confessing, comprises attitudes as well as actions. It is not just the abandonment of an action—it is the changing of one's entire being. Alma called the acquisition of this kind of attitude a "mighty change in your hearts" (Alma 5:14).

Like "godly sorrow," the "mighty change of heart" comes to us as a gift through the grace and mercy of Jesus Christ. Nevertheless, the scriptures and the prophets of God have declared that we are able to receive this gift of a "new heart" (Ezekiel 36:26) only through the exercise of our faith as we demonstrate our sincere repentance.

As we strive to be worthy of this gift, perhaps we should consider some other "Rs" of repentance that must not be overlooked. There must be a reeducation of our minds, a reordering of our priorities, a redirecting of our desires, and a reshaping of our characters. President Spencer W. Kimball further taught that forsaking sin may also require a change of friends and associations, a change of circumstances and environments. He then reminded us that "it is not a simple matter for one to transform his life overnight, nor to change attitudes in a moment, nor to rid himself in a hurry of unworthy companions" ("What Is True Repentance?" New Era, May 1974, p. 7).

Repentance is a serious, demanding, and continuing process. We cannot do it halfway and expect complete forgiveness. We must not attempt to be on both sides of the imaginary line between good and evil. "Ye cannot serve God and mammon," declared Jesus (Matthew 6:24). Such divided loyalties block the development of the faith needed to receive the "mighty change of heart" that will lead us to forsake our sins. We cannot, figuratively speaking, have one hand reaching for the fruit of the "tree of life" while continuing to dance and dine in the "great and spacious building," for it requires both hands and our whole heart and soul to cling to the "iron rod" (1 Nephi 11:8-36).

As we make the necessary changes required for true repentance, we will be worthy of the "new heart" that only the Lord can bestow on us. Often we struggle mightily, trying to overcome our sins through our own efforts alone. We may feel overwhelmed and frustrated and hopelessly unable to change when we think we must rely on our own puny human willpower. We can never achieve repentance in this way, but if through our faith and works we are endowed with the "mighty change" of heart, we will find the desire to have evil purged from us by the power of the Holy Ghost and we will also enjoy greater power to do good.

Indeed, forsaking evil includes not only refraining from sin but also a new determination to do righteous works. In the true spirit of repentance, it is not enough simply to cleanse a filthy vessel. The cleansed vessel must then be filled with a pure substance to ensure that it is not contaminated again. The Savior taught a parable that illustrates this principle—

"When the unclean spirit is gone out of a man, he walketh through dry places, seeking rest; and finding none, he saith, I will return unto my house whence I came out.

"And when he cometh, he findeth it swept and garnished.

"Then goeth he, and taketh to him seven other spirits more wicked than himself; and they enter in, and dwell there: and the last state of that man is worse than the first" (Luke 11:24-26).

Although the "house" had been swept or cleansed, the evil spirit took more spirits like himself and returned to the unoccupied house and reentered it. In a similar way, our lives may be like the empty house after our sins are swept away. We remain open to a reinvasion of all manner of temptations and trouble if our lives are not filled with renewed acts of righteousness, greater devotion to God, and increased service to others. We must become so filled with goodness that there is not room for our "former sins [to] return" (D&C 82:7). As Elder Boyd K. Packer counseled: "Do not try merely to discard a bad habit or a bad thought. Replace it. When you try to eliminate a bad habit, if the spot where it used to be is left open it will sneak back and crawl again into that empty space. It grew there; it will struggle to stay there. . . . Replace it with unselfish thoughts, with unselfish acts. Then, if an evil habit or addiction tries to return, it will have to fight for attention. . . . You are in charge of you. I repeat, it is very, very difficult to eliminate a bad habit [or sin] just by trying to discard it. Replace it" ("That All May Be Edified" [Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1982], p. 196).

Thus, forsaking means not only turning away from sin but also turning back to God, keeping his commandments, serving our fellowmen, and doing all that we can to pay our debt to the Savior, whose marvelous atonement made it possible for us to be made clean again and to once again enjoy a soul at peace.

Prevention Is Better than Redemption

We are most blessed to have this great gift of forgiveness available to us when we make mistakes. Yet some people actually believe that in some ways they are better off because they "sowed their wild oats." These people often feel that by virtue of their "experience" they may be better able to empathize with and help those who are struggling to repent of sin. Others may feel that they appreciate and understand the Atonement better by having needed its cleansing power so desperately. Still others claim that they could have learned certain important lessons only in the "hard knocks" school of sin. These are all mistaken ideas about repentance. Though we teach and testify of the glorious blessings associated with repentance, we cannot neglect the even greater blessings that flow from obedience and continued righteousness. "The more I see of life," stated President Harold B. Lee, "the more I am convinced that we must impress you young people with the awfulness of sin rather than to content ourselves with merely teaching the way of repentance" (Decisions for Successful Living [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1973], p. 88).

We must always bear in mind that there are blessings and opportunities that come from steadfast faith, obedience, and continued good works that we may lose during seasons of inactivity or sinful behavior. Even though we repent and are forgiven, opportunities for growth and spiritual development may be lost to us. For this reason, President Spencer W. Kimball stated: "Prevention is far better than redemption" (in Conference Report, Oct. 1977, p. 34). The blessings of obedience and the rewards for righteousness are far greater than the results of repeated repentance.

One subtle and successful strategy used by the adversary is to convince Latter-day Saint youth that since we are blessed with the possibility of repentance, we have a spiritual safety net to catch us whenever we choose to fall. There are many dangerous pitfalls in this way of thinking, however. A person who plans to sin and then to repent mocks the Atonement and may find sincere repentance much more difficult than he imagined; partly because he has felt that he can use the sacred Atonement for his own selfish purposes—a serious sin in itself. Moreover, if he repents to meet his own timetable (that is, for a mission, for temple marriage, etc.), rather than because of genuine godly sorrow, he might think he has been forgiven because he has completed certain "steps" of repentance, when in truth, he has not exercised real "faith unto repentance." Finally, sinfulness—whether it be an extended relationship with worldliness or a brief flirtation with iniquity—has its own long-term consequences that may continue even after we have received forgiveness. Some of these include regret that stays with us all of our lives, the loss of blessings and opportunities, and even the possibility of becoming so depraved that we lose the will or capacity to repent at all.

A Lifetime of Regret

Recounting his conversion, Alma the Younger said:

"And now, for three days and for three nights was I racked, even with the pains of a damned soul.

"And it came to pass that as I was thus racked with torment, while I was harrowed up by the memory of my many sins, behold, I remembered also to have heard my father prophesy unto the people concerning the coming of one Jesus Christ, a Son of God, to atone for the sins of the world.

"Now, as my mind caught hold upon this thought, I cried within my heart: O Jesus, thou Son of God, have mercy on me, who am in the gall of bitterness, and am encircled about by the everlasting chains of death.

"And now, behold, when I thought this, I could remember my pains no more; yea, I was harrowed up by the memory of my sins no more.

"And oh, what joy, and what marvelous light I did behold; yea, my soul was filled with joy as exceeding as was my pain!

"Yea, I say unto you, my son, that there could be nothing so exquisite and so bitter as were my pains. Yea, and again I say unto you, my son, that on the other hand, there can be nothing so exquisite and sweet as was my joy" (Alma 36:16-21).

That is the blessing of repentance—the anguish of sin can be swallowed up in the joy of forgiveness. But even though we may find the peace of conscience and the joy that accompany a remission of sins, the memory of our sins does not necessarily leave us in this life. That is particularly true where our sinful behavior may have adversely affected or influenced others. For instance, consider parents whose poor example may have been partly responsible for the lack of spirituality or for the inactivity of one or more of their children. Even though the parents may ultimately repent, embrace the gospel, perhaps go to the temple, and even become a powerful force for good in the Church, in light of the effect their poor example has had on their children's attitude, how do you suppose mom and dad will view their former sins?

A student in one of my religion classes at BYU described that kind of lingering regret. This student granted permission for me to use his experience anonymously to help others realize that even repentance cannot wipe out all the "side effects" of sin. He wrote:

"I have come to a personal awareness of the effects of the Atonement in my life, but it is a bittersweet awareness. I have learned that neither repentance nor forgiveness is free or simple. I rejoice greatly in the peace I have found. I know in a measure the feeling of having my guilt swept away, and I will be eternally grateful for the extent of the Savior's love for me. But I sorrow that this awareness came as it did.

"Sinning, with the idea of repenting later, is such an easy deception to fall into. This attitude makes it seem like you can have the world's fun and enjoyment—do the things you are commanded not to do—as long as you plan to repent. The fallacy is in thinking that when you do repent, all is forgotten. But there are things lost that cannot be regained. After the process is complete (repenting and being forgiven), the guilt and pain are taken away but regret remains—regret at having sinned. I find for me that as my love and understanding of the Savior and his love increase, so does my regret. I regret having knowingly done that which was not right. I regret having wasted so much time and stifling my progression. But more and more, I have regret for the suffering that a loving Brother endured, suffering for my sins, suffering because of my selfishness.

"Beyond regret—even in forgiveness, all is not restored as at first. When we sin against a greater light, the light in us is darkened, and that kind of darkness stains the mind and soul. It is easy to fall into a hole, but even after you repent and are forgiven, you still have to climb out, and that climb can be a long hard process. The stains of darkness take a lot of scrubbing to be completely removed.

"Some people imagine that you have to 'taste the bitter,' or that certain experiences will make them a better person. But sinning is full of deception, and much of what a person 'learns' through sinning must later be 'unlearned.'

"Forgiveness is a wonderful reality and a glorious hope. But nothing, no willful misuse of free agency for either momentary pleasure or the satisfaction of curiosity, can compensate for that which is lost. Whether all can be replaced eventually, I don't know, but the process of climbing back up to where we were, the process of cleansing the 'stains' of darkness (even after the darkness is gone), the process of catching up to where you could have been, is a constant struggle, a great effort, and takes time that could have been spent basking in a greater light and a greater peace. You have to win battles that were better off not fought."

Loss of Blessings and Opportunities

In addition to the painful regrets, there are also blessings and opportunities for growth and service that are lost because of sinful vacations taken from living the gospel. President Harold B. Lee taught: "But now, please do not misunderstand. . . . One may not wallow in the mire of filth and sin and conduct his life in a manner unlawful in the sight of God and then suppose that repentance will wipe out the effects of his sin and place him on the level he would have been on had he always lived a righteous and virtuous life. . . . The Lord extends loving mercy and kindness in forgiving you of the sins you commit against him or his work, but he can never remove the results of the sin you have committed against yourselves by thus retarding your advancement toward your eternal goal" (Decisions for Successful Living, p. 100; emphasis added).

Thus, we are never better off for having sinned. The Savior's greatness and his expansive spiritual character were the consequences of righteousness, not the fruits of repentance. We lose blessings through disobedience and sin and gain blessings through faithfulness and obedience. Believing that sinning and eventually repenting yield important experience or knowledge is also a false idea. Groveling in the gutters of wickedness may make us "streetwise" in worldly ways, but such knowledge does not compare to the "intelligence, or, in other words, light and truth" which is the "glory of God" (D&C 93:36). Feeling that we can better understand and strengthen other sinners because of our shared experience is also a well-intended but mistaken idea. Such understanding is not the same as the compassion for sinners that comes only from charity—"the pure love of Christ"—a spiritual gift that God bestows "upon all who are true followers of his Son, Jesus Christ" (Moroni 7:47-48).

For these reasons we cannot go back and do the good we failed to do, anymore than we can undo all of the harm that may have been caused by our evil actions. On the other hand, righteousness and continued obedience enlarge our capacities and expand our opportunities to contribute to the building of the kingdom. "What adventure in that great and spacious building would you trade," asked Bishop Glenn L. Pace of the Presiding Bishopric, "for the thrill and excitement of building the very kingdom the Savior will come to the earth to govern?" ("They're Not Really Happy," Ensign, Nov. 1987, p. 41).

For those who have already strayed from the "strait and narrow" and who have lost blessings and opportunities they might have had, it is not too late. Do not focus on what you have lost; focus on what you may still accomplish. Sometimes repentant sinners work so diligently and steadily to make up lost ground that they may actually surpass those Saints who have never wandered far from the path but who have never "lengthened their stride," either.

Loss of Desire or Power to Repent

The Book of Mormon prophet Amulek cautioned against putting off the day of repentance, warning the people of the binding power of sin: "For behold, if ye have procrastinated the day of your repentance. . .," he warned, "ye have become subjected to the spirit of the devil, and he doth seal you his; therefore, the Spirit of the Lord hath withdrawn from you, and hath no place in you, and the devil hath all power over you" (Alma 34:35). Although the Savior stands with open arms of mercy and beckons us to repent, we must never selfishly think that we can return to him whenever we like, for we may discover the sad truth that President Spencer W. Kimball has described: "Sin is intensely habit-forming and sometimes moves men to the tragic point of no return. . . . As the transgressor moves deeper and deeper in his sin, and the error is entrenched more deeply and the will to change is weakened, it becomes increasingly near-hopeless, and he skids down and down until either he does not want to climb back or he has lost the power to do so" (The Miracle of Forgiveness, p. 117).

Staying on the Lord's Side of the Line

How can we be sure that we will never reach that "tragic point of no return"? How can we avoid the regret and the loss of blessings and opportunities? Perhaps the answer to all of these questions is found in the inspired words of President Ezra Taft Benson: "It is better to prepare and prevent than it is to repair and repent. The first line of defense . . . is to prepare ourselves to resist temptation and prevent ourselves from falling into sin" ("The Law of Chastity," BYU Speeches of the Year [Provo, Utah: Brigham Young University Press, 1987-88], p. 51). To do that, we must be constantly watchful as well as prayerful to ensure that our thoughts, words, and deeds stay in a spiritual "safe zone." President George Albert Smith spoke of the safety found in keeping ourselves on "the Lord's side of the line":

"My grandfather used to say to his family, 'There is a line of demarcation, well defined, between the Lord's territory and the devil's. If you will stay on the Lord's side of the line you will be under his influence and will have no desire to do wrong; but if you cross to the devil's side of the line one inch, you are in the tempter's power, and if he is successful, you will not be able to think or even reason properly, because you will have lost the spirit of the Lord.'

"When I have been tempted sometimes to do a certain thing, I have asked myself, 'Which side of the line am I on?' If I determined to be on the safe side, the Lord's side, I would do the right thing every time. So when temptation comes think prayerfully about your problem, and the influence of the Spirit of the Lord will enable you to decide wisely. There is safety for us only on the Lord's side of the line" (Sharing the Gospel with Others [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1948], pp. 42-43).

Where do we get the strength to resist temptation and stay on the Lord's side of the line? Such strength, like repentance, godly sorrow, the mighty change of heart, and charity, comes to us through faith in the Lord, Jesus Christ. The prophet Alma counseled his son Helaman, who was about to embark on a mission, to teach the people "an everlasting hatred against sin and iniquity. . . . Teach them to withstand every temptation of the devil, with their faith on the Lord Jesus Christ" (Alma 37:32-33). Such faith will naturally lead us to do many of the other things required to help us resist temptation—humble ourselves, "watch and pray continually, that [we] may not be tempted above that which [we] can bear, and thus be led by the Holy Spirit" (Alma 13:28), keep the commandments, serve others, and love God with all our hearts.

Repentance Is a Lifelong Process

From all that we have discussed, it is obvious that repentance is not simple, easy, or quick. Whether our sins be serious or small, we are never finished repenting. As we strive to keep moving in our lifelong journey of repentance and obedience, though at times it may seem like climbing a spiritual Mount Everest, the words of King Benjamin are important to remember. He cautioned that a person should not "run faster than he has strength" (Mosiah 4:27). The Lord does not expect us to attempt to do more than we can—or to be perfect right now. He does desire that we diligently and steadily keep moving in the right direction, doing our own individual best. Elder B. H. Roberts, a general authority in the early days of the Church, noted, "It is by resisting temptation today, overcoming a weakness tomorrow, forsaking evil associations the next day, and thus day by day, month after month, year after year, pruning, restraining and weeding out that which is evil in the disposition, that the character is purged of its imperfections" (Gospel and Man's Relationship to Deity [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1965], pp. 197-98).

Even as we do all we can to reach perfection one step at a time, we will never be expected to achieve perfection on our own. Our Savior will once again do for us that which we cannot do for ourselves. For if we "come unto Christ," he will ultimately perfect us by the grace of God, "through the shedding of the blood of Christ" (Moroni 10:32-33).

I testify of the cleansing power of the blood of Christ. I have experienced in my own life the mercy and love of Jesus Christ and have witnessed the steady as well as the spectacular changes wrought in the lives of others through God's gift of repentance. Heavy hearts are lifted and sin-seared souls are miraculously healed by the Great Physician. Sins that are "as scarlet" can truly become as white as newly fallen snow.
