Neal A. Maxwell, Men and Women of Christ ( 1991)

Chapter 2

"Enlightened by the Spirit of Truth"

Those who are "enlightened by the Spirit of truth" (D&C 6:15) and who continue faithful are those whom the Lord will lead "in a strait and narrow course across that everlasting gulf of misery" and "land their. . . immortal souls at the right hand of God" (Helaman 3:29-30). One thing is certain: there is no "natural man . . . that knoweth" (Alma 26:20-21) about this special journey.

To begin with, the journey must not seem so intimidating that it remains unattempted! In the Greek from which it was translated, the term perfect in Matthew 5:48 of our Bible means "fully developed," to become "finished" as to our individual potential and to have "completed" the course God has set forth for us to follow (see Matthew 5:48, LDS Edition of the Bible, page 1195, footnote 48b). All of the godly attributes, to the degree developed through our "diligence and obedience," will actually rise with us in the resurrection, giving us "so much the advantage in the world to come" (D&C 130:19). After we leave this life there will be no sudden setting apart that will, for instance, make us instantly perfect in the attribute of patience. Instead, we are to "work out" this dimension of our exaltation now and subsequently. Hence it is best to aim for steady progression rather than to be intimidated and immobilized by the concept of being perfect or "finished or completed." We should display diligent discipleship but not expect it all to happen either at once or easily.

In this connection, my frustrated golfing friends once urged me to improve my poor putting by imagining around the cup concentric circles with diameters of two or six or even eight feet—"Just get closer!" We can liken this to our discipleship as we strive to "get closer" to each specific characteristic of Christ.

Whenever one holds up the demanding standards of the gospel, even in such a simplified way as the putting analogy, some may still worry about whether just aspiring to develop spiritually adds inordinate stress to life. In this important matter, many scriptures help us to be "enlightened by the Spirit of truth."

Certainly there can be no moderation as regards keeping the seventh commandment, "Thou shalt not commit adultery" (Exodus 20:14). There can be no relief from gospel requirements in which abstinence rather than moderation is the commandment. But in any case individuals are most severely stressed by sin. It constitutes the greatest burden, other burdens and other stresses being small by comparison. And this stress is removable!

The stress most faithful Church members feel arises out of the shared pressures of daily life, the temptations and afflictions common to mortals. These real pressures are unnecessarily increased when some unwisely place upon themselves unrealistic expectations. As to this avoidable stress, the Lord's instructions are very clear:

Do not run faster or labor more than you have strength and means provided to enable you to translate; but be diligent unto the end (D&C 10:4).

And see that all these things are done in wisdom and order; for it is not requisite that a man should run faster than he has strength. And again, it is expedient that he should be diligent, that thereby he might win the prize; therefore, all things must be done in order. (Mosiah 4:27.)

Paced progress not only is acceptable to the Lord but also is recommended by Him. Divine declarations say: "Ye are little children and ye cannot bear all things now" (D&C 50:40); "I will lead you along" (D&C 78:18). Just as divine disclosure usually occurs line upon line, precept upon precept, here a little and there a little, so likewise we will achieve our spiritual progress gradually (see D&C 128:21; 98:12).

Rather than seeing ourselves as failing simply because we do not become immediately perfect, such as in the attribute of mercy, we should seek to become ever more merciful "in process of time." Even amid diligence, there need not be unrealistic expectations. Though imperfect, an improving person can actually know that the course of his life is generally acceptable to the Lord despite there being much distance yet to be covered. (See LDS Bible Dictionary, "Faith," pp. 669-70.)

Many modest people are actually further along than they realize in developing certain of the key Christian virtues. Having first of all brought with them some important "luggage," representing their earlier progress in the premortal world, they are "added upon." As they make still further progress here and now, this will give them much-needed inner satisfaction and confidence. This quiet reassurance can help to temper the outer stress arising from other roles and circumstances in life. A further stress-reducer is that as we become more merciful and long-suffering we will be less badgered by disappointments over the failures of others. As we become more patient, life, though still demanding, will be less hectic.

If we are keeping our covenants and progressing, though gradually, in the cardinal attributes, this is what matters most! Other things matter much, much less! A simple, settled focus on keeping covenants and on developing the cardinal characteristics can do much to provide proper perspective about the "weightier matters." The cardinal qualities, though unevenly developed, will also bring an added measure of spiritual poise.

These qualities constitute a community of interactive attributes that support each other. They give us greater strength to overcome the lust, pride, grief, and selfishness, tendencies that, if unevicted, especially fatigue us. These negative drives not only put us "on the rack" but if unchecked can also turn into obsessions, making us "like the troubled sea, when it cannot rest. . . . There is no peace . . . to the wicked." (Isaiah 57:20-21.)

Spiritual synergy is therefore a treasured and promised blessing of discipleship. If we keep our covenants, serve others (both in our callings and otherwise), worship, study, and pray, at the same time we are quietly hastening our spiritual development of the cardinal virtues.

Some cautions are in order, however. While we should be "anxiously engaged," we need not be hectically engaged. We can be diligent and still do things in "wisdom and order"—without going faster than we "have strength and means" (Mosiah 4:27; D&C 10:4).

The costs of discipleship are nevertheless real. They can be paid neither at wholesale rates nor in one lump sum:

And whosoever doth not bear his cross, and come after me, cannot be my disciple.

For which of you, intending to build a tower, sitteth not down first, and counteth the cost, whether he have sufficient to finish it?

Lest haply, after he hath laid the foundation, and is not able to finish it, all that behold it begin to mock him,

Saying, This man began to build, and was not able to finish.

Or what king, going to make war against another king, sitteth not down first, and consulteth whether he be able with ten thousand to meet him that cometh against him with twenty thousand?

Or else, while the other is yet a great way off, he sendeth an ambassage, and desireth conditions of peace.

So likewise, whosoever he be of you that forsaketh not all that he hath, he cannot be my disciple. (Luke 14:27-33.)

While we cannot expect discipleship to be cost free, we can receive God's helping grace, including compensatory blessings, along with inner joy over what is jettisoned in putting off the natural man. Thereby we can, for instance, end the gnawing stress of being unsettled: "Wherefore, settle this in your hearts, that ye will do the things which I shall teach, and command you" (JST, Luke 14:28).

We can ease the stress induced by our inconsistency, pain through which we put ourselves repeatedly. Unfortunately, like Oliver Cowdery, we do not always "continue as [we] commenced" (D&C 9:5). As with our wasteful automobile driving habits that consume extra energy because of quick starts and stops, so it may be that with inconsistent discipleship we actually inflict costs on ourselves in the face of divine counsel.

Lowered self-esteem results from such needless exhaustion. The enthusiasm of "I'll baptize a thousand on my mission!" is best tempered by "I'll go where you want me to go, dear Lord . . . I'll do what you want me to do," letting "God give the increase" (Hymns, no. 270; 1 Corinthians 3:6).

We can be overwrought by seeking the praise and honors of the world. Such individuals are "anxiously engaged" in putting points on a local scoreboard. Heavy stress occurs in gaining the whole world while losing our souls (see Mark 8:36).

We can also end the genuine stress which goes with unrepented-of sin by pleading, "More holiness give me," and by receiving the "peace. . . which passeth all understanding" (Hymns, no. 131; John 14:27; Philippians 4:7).

We can likewise diminish (at least our portion of) the painful stress that accompanies unresolved interpersonal differences: "Moreover if thy brother shall trespass against thee, go and tell him his fault between thee and him alone: if he shall hear thee, thou hast gained thy brother" (Matthew 18:15).

We can end the exhausting stress that goes with jealousies and fears (see D&C 67:10).

We can end the subtle but awful stress of resisting conscience (see Mosiah 4:3).

We can dissolve the stress of wearily listening to "so many kinds of voices in the world" (1 Corinthians 14:10). A true disciple need tune in on only one channel: "My sheep hear my voice" (John 10:27). Like ancient Athenians, some today spend their energies and "their time in nothing else, but either to tell, or to hear some new thing" (Acts 17:21). A true disciple will not listen to the voices that deny the divinity of Jesus or of His latter-day work, that deny the apostolic foundations of the Restoration, or that suggest compromising with the world.

So it is that we can end much stress in life, if we will. Genuine discipleship is a way of shedding the sources of stress discussed above.

Neither need we experience overwrought anxiety concerning our weaknesses. Such fretting can become a substitute for doing something about them. Nor should we let a mistake or a disappointment mire us in self-pity.

On the other hand, we should not be passively or defensively self-contented by constantly excusing ourselves rather than earnestly proving ourselves. Rather than being an intimidation, the very act of noticing our failures and our weaknesses can be an invitation, an invitation to overcome them patiently and "in process of time."

Meanwhile there are more opportunities for service all around us, lying conveniently within our individual circles of influence—more than we ever use. Rendering service not only helps others but gets our minds off ourselves, putting our own problems in perspective.

Reflection too is required in order to assimilate all of our on-rushing experiences. Unless the lessons from our past are humbly harvested, our storehouses of memory will contain too few relevant remembrances. Patience facilitates such pondering and reflecting. Pondering sorts things out, rearranging some of the furniture of the mind while giving place for new furnishings.

Faith hastens repentance. Faith induces the quiet scrubbing of the soul that is part of our being anxiously engaged. Spiritual housework is done room by room and corner by corner. In some seasons of our lives, this is supplemented by inspirationally induced bursts of spring cleaning. Even so, we are to do our spiritual housework in wisdom and order, without trying to run faster than we have strength and means provided (see Mosiah 4:27; D&C 10:4).

After all, real repentance consists of turning away from that which is wrong and also turning to God. A full revolution! This is the most lasting and beneficial of all revolutions!

In contrast, those in an uncompleted process of repentance are stranded. In this circumstance their inadequacies are highlighted cruelly and repeatedly, because their ambivalence prevents a full revolution. By turning fully to God, however, they receive His helping graces, including the needed reinforcing spiritual experiences. (See Alma 32.)

But even when that full revolution has been made, in self-improvement there is a straight and narrow path. A wise pace is vital here too, for we are at risk if we slip off either side. On one side is the precipice of fretful anxiety and guilt; on the other, steep self-contentment. To run faster than we are able is dangerous. So are dawdling, looking back, and zigging and zagging.

Similarly, being deeply discouraged makes the trail risky. Often we tally our failures with great precision and self-depreciating fanfare while failing to inwardly record our successes. For instance, after a disappointing personal act of expressing our ego we may exclaim inwardly, "I have done it again!" Clearly, even God's long-suffering cannot excuse us; nevertheless He still waits for us to move from recognition on through to remission. "His arm is extended to all people who will repent" (Alma 19:36). He thereby provides fresh "space" and encouragement "all the day long" (2 Nephi 28:32). He is ever encouraging us to regroup and try again. And there are no restrictive office hours for receiving returning prodigals—night and day He awaits us!

It is worth noting too that, as regrettable as an act of impulsive ego can be, it may helpfully, though painfully, underscore our need for more meekness. Too much cleverness by half may finally and fortunately embarrass us sufficiently to cause us to develop more empathy. When at length we tire of putting people down, this self-inflicted fatigue can give way to the invigorating calisthenics of lifting people up.

If we are too eager to push ourselves forward, the sudden shame of such over-reaching can cause us to hold back at last. Harsh as the exposure of such a weakness can be and subduing as the self-realization of such shortfalls is, this circumstance can be a spur to improvement if we have the meekness and faith to repent; whereas if we had not been jarred sufficiently, perhaps the need to work on something we were lacking would have been obscured.

Improving does not always mean restraining, either. It can mean venturing, as with spiritual growth. Here the shy who need to venture can do so—but without expecting perfection in their early assertions; they will gain some needed experience along with some incremental improvement. On the other hand, if a person is impulsive but finally succeeds somewhat in holding back, he should rejoice but not think this is full humility all at once; however, he will still gain the needed experience of instructive waiting in the wings instead of occupying center stage. Alter all, when we learn to "shine as lights in the world" (Philippians 2:15) there is no need to be in the spotlight. Such lesser incandescence is of no interest. If we have an irrepressible urge to manage things, this pattern can be made to yield to taking turns and also to profiting more from the leadership of others. Besides, the "take charge" mentality is out of alignment with the meekness of Jesus. The divine counsel "Be still, and know that I am God" (Psalm 46:10) is a required basic lesson not only in self-restraint but also in deference. "Stop, and stand still until I command thee, and I will provide means whereby thou mayest accomplish the thing which I have commanded thee" (D&C 5:34).

To play at being God, even in micro ways, is evidence of too little faith in Him and too much confidence in ourselves. Such presumptuousness clearly leaves us unprepared to live with God "in humble reverence. . . forever and ever" (D&C 67:93).

We must be meek even in our minor developmental successes. A difficult situation may have actually been resolved by the grace of God "after all we can do." To recognize this fact inwardly is good, but to confess it openly is even better.

After His moment of great personal triumph and of supernal service, when in supreme success Jesus had "descended below all things" and "below them all," in order to comprehend all things (D&C 88:6; 122:8), when He had "trodden the winepress alone" (D&C 76:107), He nevertheless said, "Glory be to the Father" (D&C 19:19). He claimed no glory for Himself.

By our giving the honor, praise, and glory to God, we are actually being intellectually honest; unprofitable servants had best not claim too much credit. Similarly, giving deserved credit to others not only enhances our graciousness but it also can help us to steer the narrow channel between the dangerous rocks of self-adulation and destructive self-criticism.

As we thus begin to sprout spiritually "in that thing" (Alma 32:34)—whatever quality we are experimenting upon—we accumulate our own reinforcing evidence, which reassures us that we are on the right path and helps to keep us there. Of course, many other things are still left undone. But the process is under way, and we know it. When thus assured inwardly and spiritually, we need not go away sorrowing because of all we yet lack (see Luke 18:22-23).

Once having turned fully to the Lord, we are now more free to follow him—"I will go before your face. I will be on your right hand and on your left." (D&C 84:88.) This is just the guidance we need on the straight and narrow path. Things then unfold—"here a little, and there a little," "line upon line, precept upon precept," for we "cannot bear all things now" (D&C 128:21; 98:12; 50:40). And every step forward mercifully brings with it its own reinforcing.

This is all done, then, in process of time, as described by the Prophet Joseph Smith, who knew the process well:

The nearer man approaches perfection, the clearer are his views, and the greater his enjoyments, till he has overcome the evils of his life and lost every desire for sin; and like the ancients, arrives at that point of faith where he is wrapped in the power and glory of his Maker and is caught up to dwell with Him. But we consider that this is a station to which no man ever arrived in a moment. (Joseph Fielding Smith, comp., Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1976], p. 51.)

It is understandable, therefore, that we encounter no instant Christians—only reasonably constant disciples.

As we strive to continue faithful we especially need God's help in our moments of disappointment. That is when we could lose our courage, our bearings, and whatever spiritual momentum we have gained. It is precisely when we have done something foolish that we most need direction from God's omniscience. When we are drenched in self-disappointment we most need the reminders of who we really are. When we have been unfair we need the reassurance of His perfect love and His ever-extended arm of mercy.

How marvelous our Father and Jesus Christ are! [^1] They are perfected in all their attributes, thus enabling us to place full confidence in them without reservation.

While the egoistic urge of the natural man is to invite others, "Look at me," instead we should increasingly say, "Look to God and live" (Alma 37:47). When our natural instinct is to claim credit, increasingly we should ponder what they have done for us—a rescuing which we mortals were absolutely powerless to effect for ourselves. No wonder we are comparatively "unprofitable servants" (Mosiah 2:21).

Though we are "unprofitable," however, the Lord has not said we are worthless. In fact, He has said the worth of each soul is great in His sight (D&C 18:13-15). But the vast differences between what He has done for us and what we do for Him truly make us comparatively unprofitable. Nevertheless we are His servants. More important, we are His children! And He is a perfect and nurturing Father.

That choice relationship gives us another one-spirit siblings everywhere. Of these, in the shared journey of discipleship we hope true friends will blow away the chaff of our mistakes. But we must also do some of this for ourselves while conserving the kernels.

Putting one's hand to the plow without looking back means turning firmly and resolutely away from the past and focusing one's energies on the future. By pressing forward we hasten any needed forgetting (see Philippians 3:13-14). Thus we obtain a fresh view instead of perpetually letting ourselves "droop in sin" by sagging intellectually or in courage (2 Nephi 4:28).

As to that portion of our past which is relevant and instructive, the Holy Ghost will bring things to our remembrance. He will also comfort us, so that any remembrance can be redemptive in its effect rather than debilitating or discouraging. The Holy Ghost, as our meekness makes possible, is ever working to ensure that we are in a preparation to hear the word" (Alma 32:6), including that portion of the word most relevant to our circumstances.

On the road to Damascus, Saul may have already been in a preparation," perhaps brooding and pondering before his great vision. In fact, he was told that it was hard for him to kick against the goads (see Acts 9:5; 26:14). Then the Lord revealed Himself in His true identity—as Jesus! There could be no mistaking by Paul. Thereafter he had a healthy attitude: "forgetting those things which are behind . . . I press [forward]" (Philippians 3:13-14). We are likewise to press forward and continue faithful, having come this far by faith.

As we do so, not only will the Holy Ghost prompt us but also, if we will listen, there will be helpful Jethros in our lives too, encouraging us and saying, "You can do better!"

An ironical slant is that, while initially turned to God, if we are not meek we may be less patient with those who have the same unresolved weaknesses as we have. Oh, we know those symptoms so well! While any similarities should evoke more mercy and empathy from us, instead they may merely be irritating reminders. Since we have yet to take the full cure ourselves, the same symptoms in others may be provoking.

Other provocations too may occur. For instance, when we are in the process of improving, discouraging things will surely arise. The safe passage of a soul across the gulf of misery never occurs without his encountering some stormy seas. Our defects may even be openly cited by others, even though some genuine spiritual improvement is visibly under way.

But as real as the challenges are in putting off the natural man, doing so is necessary in order for us to become the children of Christ; and of such is the kingdom of heaven.
