Neal A. Maxwell, Men and Women of Christ ( 1991)

Chapter 3

"The Children of Christ"

A significant portion of King Benjamin's towering and enlightening sermon was given to him by an angel, and even angels speak by the power of the Holy Ghost (Mosiah 3:2; 2 Nephi 32:3). At the center of the sermon is the masterful declaration about the exclusive means of salvation: "There shall be no other name given nor any other way nor means whereby salvation can come unto the children of men, only in and through the name of Christ, the Lord Omnipotent" (Mosiah 3:17; see also Mosiah 4:7).

Once spiritually enlightened, the "children of men" can become "the children of Christ." The latter phrase is shown to be more than a vague goal, because our Savior has taught us specifically. Thus it is not only the divinity but also the specificity of King Benjamin's sermon that marks it as outstanding. Years later father Helaman, in sending his two sons, Lehi and Nephi, on a mission to the land of Nephi, exhorted them, "Remember, remember my sons the words which king Benjamin spake unto his people" (Helaman 5:9).

In Restoration scriptures, therefore, not only salvation is specific but so also is the identity of the Savior, as the various scriptures foretold. A Savior was to be provided in the meridian of time (Moses 5:57). His name was to be Jesus Christ (2 Nephi 25:19). Christ volunteered for that mission premortally (Abraham 3:27). He was to be born of Mary, in Bethlehem, a Nazarene, hence He would be known as a Nazarene; a matter over which some stumbled in the meridian of time.

Many of the people therefore, when they heard this saying, said, Of a truth this is the Prophet.

Others said, This is the Christ. But some said, Shall Christ come out of Galilee?

Hath not the scripture said, That Christ cometh of the seed of David, and out of the town of Bethlehem, where David was?

So there was a division among the people because of him. (John 7:40-43. See also Micah 5:2; Luke 2:4; Matthew 2:23; 1 Nephi 11:13; Alma 7:10.)

There would even be a new star celebrating His birth (Helaman 14:5; 3 Nephi 1:21).

The sacrifice of the Father's firstborn in the spirit, His Only Begotten Son in the flesh, was the sacrifice of a Creator—God. The Atoner was the Lord God Omnipotent, who created this and other planets (see D&C 76:24; Moses 1:33; Mosiah 3:5). Therefore, unlike any sacrifice a mortal could have made, Christ's was an infinite atonement made possible, declared King Benjamin, by the infinite goodness and mercy of God and by His willingness to see His Son suffer and be slain (see Mosiah 4:6; 2 Nephi 9:7; Alma 34:10, 12; Mosiah 5:3).

Not only was the coming of the Mortal Messiah prophesied but also his being disregarded, and even crucified. Said Benjamin:

And lo, he cometh unto his own, that salvation might come unto the children of men even through faith on his name; and even after all this they shall consider him a man, . . . and shall scourge him, and shall crucify him (Mosiah 3:9).

And Nephi wrote:

And the world, because of their iniquity, shall judge him to be a thing of naught; wherefore they scourge him, and he suffereth it; and they smite him, and he suffereth it. Yea, they spit upon him, and he suffereth it, because of his loving kindness and his long-suffering towards the children of men. (1 Nephi 19:9.)

The denigrating of Jesus' divinity has, alas, continued in our time. C. S. Lewis wrote: "The sweetly-attractive human Jesus is a product of 19th century skepticism, produced by people who were ceasing to believe in His divinity but wanted to keep as much Christianity as they could" (Letters of C. S. Lewis [London: Geoffrey Bles, Ltd., 1966], p. 181).

Regardless of how mortals view Him, however, there is no other saving and atoning name under heaven (Mosiah 3:17; Moses 6:52). "O remember, remember, . . . that there is no other way nor means whereby man can be saved, only through the atoning blood of Jesus Christ, who shall come; yea, remember that he cometh to redeem the world" (Helaman 5:9). All other "gods" but Him will finally fail and fall, including all the "ism" gods of this world and the many secular Caesars who, as we see currently, continue to come and go in "an hour of pomp, an hour of show."

The Restoration scriptures constitute the affirmative answer to what Amulek called "the great question": Is there really a redeeming Christ? (See Alma 34:5.)

If it were not true, as Abinadi prophesied, that Christ would rise as the first fruits of the resurrection, with all mortals to follow, then life would end in hopelessness (see Mosiah 16:6-7). But He is risen, and because of that life has profound purpose and rich meaning, which include our striving to become like Him. One day, said King Benjamin, such knowledge of the Savior would spread "throughout every nation, kindred, tongue, and people" (Mosiah 3:20). This spreading is happening in our day. At a still later day the degree of divine disclosure will be total and remarkable: "The day cometh that. . . all things shall be revealed unto the children of men which ever have been among the children of men, and which ever will be even unto the end of the earth" (2 Nephi 27:11).

There will be much to disclose, since all the prophets have testified of the coming of Jesus Christ (Mosiah 13:33), and we do not yet have all their words. Jesus, the Lord of all the prophets, even called them all "my prophets" (3 Nephi 1:13). Then how could He, as some aver, merely be one of them? Worse still, some consider Jesus only as another "moral teacher." In contrast, repeated pronouncements such as Abinadi's underscore Jesus' transcending triumph:

And thus God breaketh the bands of death, having gained the victory over death; giving the Son power to make intercession for the children of men—

Having ascended into heaven, having the bowels of mercy; being filled with compassion towards the children of men; standing betwixt them and justice; having broken the bands of death, taken upon himself their iniquity and their transgressions, having redeemed them, and satisfied the demands of justice (Mosiah 15:8-9).

Certainly no moral teacher, no prophet, however impressive, could break the bands of death or take our iniquities upon him and thus satisfy the demands of justice! Thought-leaders and founders of other world religions have made no such declarative claims of atoning divinity for themselves, though millions upon millions venerate these leaders. No wonder the Book of Mormon was urgently needed for "the convincing of the Jew and Gentile that Jesus is the Christ" (Book of Mormon title page). Passive acknowledgment of Jesus is not enough. Uninformed, however, many remain unconvinced. Hence such testifying and convincing is the purpose of all scripture, just as John stated: "But these are written, that ye might believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God; and that believing ye might have life through his name" (John 20:31).

Of the Christ-centered plan of salvation, Lehi declared, "How great the importance to make these things known unto the inhabitants of the earth" (2 Nephi 2:8). Each portion of the Restoration not only affirms the reality of a redeeming Christ but also informs us that He has set the example for us as to the qualities we are to develop. Each divine disclosure deepens our regard for Him, our exemplar.

Jesus is even described as the Father, because under Elohim's direction he is the Father-Creator of this and other worlds (see D&C 76:24). Furthermore, He is the Father of all who are born again spiritually. When we take upon ourselves His name and covenant to keep His commandments, it is then that we become His sons and daughters, "the children of Christ." (See Mosiah 5:3-7; 15:1-5; 27:24-29.)

As observed by the First Presidency and Twelve in a doctrinal statement:

Men may become children of Jesus Christ by being born anew—born of God. . . . Those who have been born unto God through obedience to the Gospel may by valiant devotion to righteousness obtain exaltation and even reach the status of godhood. . . . By the new birth—that of water and the Spirit—mankind may become children of Jesus Christ, being through the means of Him provided "begotten sons and daughters unto God" (D&C 76:24). .

If it be proper to speak of those who accept and abide in the Gospel as Christ's sons and daughters—and upon this matter the scriptures are explicit and cannot be gainsaid or denied—it is consistently proper to speak of Jesus Christ as the Father of the righteous, they having become His children and He having been made their Father through the second birth—the baptismal regeneration. (In James E. Talmage, The Articles of Faith [Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1966], p. 470.) Is it possible, regardless of their varied intensity and frequency, that the nature of the tests each of those receives who display "valiant devotion to righteousness" is essentially the same? Readily granted are the differences in degrees and "mix" as to our individual needs for particular developmental experiences. But since the desired outcomes—the cardinal qualities—are the same for all, should we be surprised at the striking similarity in the shaping clinical experiences? We too, by experiences, are to "know according to the flesh" (Alma 7:11-12). We are also to learn by our own experience. As a result of this process, things sink into the marrow of our souls; these become a portable part of us.

Looking to God, however, often involves waiting upon His timetable: "Stop, and stand still until I command thee, and I will provide means" (D&C 5:34). Waiting is difficult for children. We can accept His declarations more easily if we realize that God has told us "all things must come to pass in their time" (D&C 64:32). Further, He will hasten His work (see D&C 88:73). On the one hand we must be very careful about trying to get ahead of His timetable; yet on the other, by its very nature, superficial discipleship is impatient.

The mother of James and John sought special status for her children in the world to come: to sit on Jesus' right and left. Jesus replied, "Ye know not what ye ask" (Matthew 20:22). We can ask amiss if we are not careful (see James 4:3; 2 Nephi 4:35). We can trample revelations under foot so that they are lost in the shuffle of daily life (see 1 Nephi 19:7). We can "despise . . . the revelations of God" (Jacob 4:8). We can find ourselves persuaded by those who are not commanded of God (see D&C 30:2). But if we are seeking to be true disciples we will not ask the Lord for that which we "ought not" (D&C 8:10). We will not trifle childishly with sacred things (see D&C 6:12).

The world desperately needs divine declarations and instructions concerning what we worship, why we are here, and how we should live—certitude about what is right and wrong, conviction on what is true and what is false. Much needed, therefore, is the Restoration's verification of the reality of the resurrection. Likewise so needed is its clarification as to the nature of God and of man. Much needed as well is the Restoration's enunciation of the divinely determined purposes of this mortal existence.

Those who have lived in the midst of the famine foreseen by Amos, one of not hearing the full word of God (Amos 8:11-12), have never known the taste and nourishment of the whole-grain gospel. Instead, some have subsisted on the fast foods of philosophy. When Jesus described himself as the nourishing Bread of Life, it caused some to walk no more with Him (see John 6:66). No wonder Jesus was moved to say, "Blessed is he, whosoever shall not be offended in me" (Matthew 11:6; see also John 6:61). To which it might be added, "Blessed is he who is not offended by the Restoration"!

Too little attention is paid to the remarkable refreshment, both spiritual and intellectual, brought by the Restoration. First, God the Father really lives. Next, Jesus, God's beloved first-born Son and the Only Begotten in the flesh, lives and has been resurrected. Next, fresh scriptures not only testify that Jesus is the Christ but also that life has meaning and purpose, and that all mankind will be resurrected. Further, besides the Savior Himself many other resurrected beings have ministered, giving instructions and ordinations and conferring priesthood keys, all needed to help in the perfecting of the Saints. There were many angels at the dedication of the Kirtland Temple on March 27, 1836. The Prophet elsewhere refers to "divers angels, from Michael or Adam down to the present time" (D&C 128:20-21). Those heavenly visitors were not mute. Joseph was ordained by them, received keys from them, and was instructed and directed by them.

The Restoration is really just beginning its spreading influence among the human family. This freshening is occurring at a time when, for many humans at least, the long interval without divine manifestations and revelations has created doubt and uncertainty. The freshening has come at a time when the weight of the world's cares is too much with us. For many, alas, there has been too much elapsed time, causing relapsed religion. True, even though the earthly interval during which individuals are to walk by faith is never very long, the seemingly long period of cumulative and collective time is used against God by disbelievers and the indifferent.

In any case, the world is marching ever more determinedly to its own cadence, dealing religion out as being irrelevant.

Not many welcome the Restoration: it interferes with the seemingly uninterrupted flow of secular things, symbolized by the repetitive "eating, drinking, and giving in marriage," or the routine focus of life. Peter foresaw that scoffers in the last days would say: "Where is the promise of his coming? for since the fathers fell asleep, all things continue as they were from the beginning of the creation." Peter observed further that the Lord's long-suffering would even be used against Him, since the scoffers were "willingly ignorant." He then reminded members of the Church, "What manner of [persons] ought ye to be" as differentiated from those "of the world." (2 Peter 3:4, 5, 11.)

The coming of the Restoration with its inspiring and initiating First Vision set in motion the possibility of correcting the enormous error which besets so much of mankind. The Restoration brought correct views about the nature of man, about the nature of God, and about the nature of man's relationship to God. Yet as the Prophet Joseph observed, very few mortals will try to understand, having little interest in comprehending "that which is past" (Joseph Fielding Smith, comp., Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1976], p. 343). Laman and Lemuel did not understand the dealings of the God who had created them (1 Nephi 2:12). It was prophesied that in the last days other skeptics would be "willingly ignorant" regarding the doings of people who lived in another time and place (see 2 Peter 3:5). Just the opposite, the Restoration promises that one day we will have the scriptures of the lost tribes of Israel, and we will understand further God's dealings with another people in another time and place (see 2 Nephi 29:13).

Where people fail to comprehend the redemptive designs of God they fall into an enormous error. The pattern of living which then emerges is one in which people tend to get on with the routine of life, which carries its own concerns. Thus the protracted period of human history without prophets is seen by many mortals as a negation of God, or at least as an indication of a God uninvolved with people on this planet.

How vital, therefore, for us to know the realities: There is a plan of salvation; there was an apostasy; and now there has been a restoration. God has given man moral agency, leaving him free to believe or disbelieve, or to disregard the divine and spiritual evidence. Thus an incredible irony emerges: As people become less believing there are fewer spiritual experiences, and this is twisted by the disbeliever into confirmation of his premises.

Mortality is divinely designed so that we are to walk by faith, but even this is used against God. As people come to have less and less faith, some are more demanding of absolute proof if they are going to believe at all.

The Restoration was not just a single instance of God's having been seen by man; rather, it features a series of remarkable episodes with striking interior consistency. This relieves the routineness of the mortal scene—at least for those who have eyes to see and ears to hear. Otherwise, doubt and despair result in a view that "man is alone," with variations of the view "eat, drink, and be merry . . ., for tomorrow we die" (2 Nephi 28:8) and the assumption that when a man is dead "that [is] the end thereof" (Alma 30:18). If, therefore, man is alone, why not please himself, and as much as he likes? How different a course from that pursued by those striving to become the men and women of Christ!

The pages of Restoration scriptures ripple and resound with innumerable essential truths. For example, through revealed Christology we learn about Christ's premortal pinnacle as a Creator-God; and that, despite this preeminence, only later did He receive a fulness (see D&C 93:12-13, 16).

The Lord has told us how important it is to understand not only "what" we worship but also "how" to worship (see D&C 93:19; see also John 4:22). Real adoration of the Father and Jesus results in the emulation of them! How shall we know how to become more like them if we do not know about their character and nature? Inquired King Benjamin of the consequences of estrangement, "How knoweth a man the master whom he has not served, and who is a stranger unto him, and is far from the thoughts and intents of his heart?" (Mosiah 5:13.)

The Restoration also helps us understand how the schoolmaster law of Moses was a preparing and foretelling type, without which we will not understand dispensationalism, including the particular place of meridian Christianity in the stream of religious history.

It is expedient that ye should keep the law of Moses as yet;

but I say unto you, that the time shall come when it shall

no more be expedient. .

[For] God himself should come down among the children of men, and take upon him the form of man, and go forth in mighty power upon the face of the earth. (Mosiah 13:27, 34; see also 13:29-35; 16:14; 3:15; Galatians 3:24.)

For moderns, the relevancy of the Restoration message is special. For instance, we are clearly indebted to our British ancestors for our precious King James Bible. Yet that nation subsequently suffered from a wave of irreligion. Academic Vice-President Stan L. Albrecht of Brigham Young University wrote of that wave of irreligion:

In the middle 1850s [there began a] pattern of downturn in religious activity in British society......"Agnosticism [was made] respectable if not universal by the turn of the century." . . . By the early 1900s Arnold Bennett could say, " . . . The intelligentsia has sat back, shrugged its shoulders,

given a sigh of relief, and decreed tacitly or by plain statement: 'The affair is over and done with.'"

. . . By the 1970s only about 5 percent of the adult population in the Church of England even attended Easter religious services, and the percentage continues to decline. (Stan L. Albrecht, "The Consequential Dimension of Mormon Religiosity," BYU Studies, Spring 1989, p. 98.)

Yet if we read the scriptures repetitively they will inform and inspire us; they will enthrall us, again and again. Neglected scriptures mean agnostic citizens. Ordinary books contain comparative crumbs, whereas the Bread of Life provides us with an endless feast.

We learn from the scriptures that salvation is specific, not vague; it includes individual resurrection and triumph over death. We will stand before God, as individuals, and kneel and confess (see Alma 12:13-15, 34-35). The faithful will even sit down, as individuals, with the spiritual notables of ages past, for God has said He will "land their souls, yea, their immortal souls, at the right hand of God in the kingdom of heaven, to sit down with Abraham, and Isaac, and with Jacob, and with all our holy fathers, to go no more out" (Helaman 3:30; see also Alma 7:25; Matthew 8:11; D&C 124:19).

We will not be merged into some unremembering molecular mass. Nor will we be mere droplets in an ocean of consciousness. In one way or another, sooner or later, all individuals will plead, as Alma did at his turning point, "O Jesus, thou Son of God, have merry on me" (Alma 36:18).

Thus as Latter-day Saints and children of Christ we have enlarged perspectives, because "through the infinite goodness of God, and the manifestations of his Spirit, [we] have great views of that which is to come" (Mosiah 5:3).

In contrast many today, like some among the Book of Mormon peoples, believe that "when a man [is] dead, that [is] the end thereof" (Alma 30:18). For such, there are certain existential "givens." Two examples are: "There is no built-in scheme of meaning in the world" (Irvin D. Yalom, Stanford University psychiatrist, "Exploring Psychic Interiors," U. S. News & World Report, October 30, 1989, p. 67). "No deity will save us; we must save ourselves" ("Humanist Manifesto II," "Liberal Family," The Encyclopedia of American Religions: Religious Creeds, J. Gordon Melton, ed. [Detroit: Gale Research Company, 1988], p. 641).

No wonder the Restoration is so relevant and so urgent, having been given so "that faith also might increase in the earth" (D&C 1:21).

Compared to the great, divine declarations which are central to real faith, what else matters? To illustrate, two Book of Mormon prophets in referring to a lesser concern, death, used the phrases "it mattereth not" or "it matters not" (Ether 15:34; Mosiah 13:9).

Fortunately for mankind, the reality of the Atonement does not depend upon either our awareness of it or our acceptance of it! Immortality is a free gift to all, including the presently unappreciative and unbelieving (2 Nephi 2:4).

Meanwhile, even those who are spiritually sensitive feel less than full joy in this life because "our lifelong nostalgia, our longing to be reunited with something in the universe from which we now feel cut off, to be on the inside of some door which we have always seen from the outside, is. . . the truest index of our real situation" (C. S. Lewis, A Mind Awake [New York: Harcourt, Brace & World, Inc., 1968], p. 23).

In that sense we are all prodigals! We, too, must come to ourselves, having determined "I will arise and go to my father" (Luke 15:18). This reunion and reconciliation is actually possible. Because of the Atonement, we are not irrevocably cut off.

The "children of Christ," the "children of light," in any dispensation willingly make the sacrifice of a broken heart and a contrite spirit (see 3 Nephi 9:20; D&C 59:8; Psalm 51:17; Ephesians 5:8). The children of Christ are meek and malleable—their hearts can be broken, changed, or made anew. The child of Christ can eventually mature spiritually to become the "new" man or woman, the man or woman of Christ.

But first we must become men and women "in understanding" (1 Corinthians 14:20).
