Neal A. Maxwell, Men and Women of Christ ( 1991)

Chapter 4

"The Man of Christ"

The virtues of the children of Christ who become the men and women of Christ are cardinal, portable, and eternal. They reflect the outcome of serious discipleship. For instance, true disciples will continue to grow spiritually, because they have "faith unto repentance," giving them the vital capacity to improve (see Alma 34:16, 17; 13:10). To the degree developed, these cardinal qualities will finally rise with us in the resurrection and will give us "so much the advantage in the world to come" (D&C 130:19). Their development represents that "[laying] hold upon the word of God" that can "lead the man [and woman] of Christ" to a place "at the right hand of God in the kingdom of heaven" (Helaman 3:29-30).

As we contemplate the qualities in this cluster, each reminds us of the need to tame our egos. Blessed is the person who is progressing in the taming of his or her egoistic self. King Benjamin, for example, had not the least desire to boast of himself (see Mosiah 2:16). He was unconcerned with projecting his political image, because he had Christ's image in his countenance. We are instructed not only in what we are to become, but also in what we are to avoid. Abinadi noted that Jesus suffered temptation but yielded not (Mosiah 15:5). Unlike many of us, Christ gave no heed to temptations (D&C 20:22). This is yet another instructive example to His children, for, even when we later evict temptations, we so often have entertained them first.

The development of the cardinal virtues is central to God's plans for each of us. Lack of this perspective about His plans for us is part of the failure of Laman and Lemuel: "And thus Laman and Lemuel, . . . did murmur because they knew not the dealings of that God who had created them" (1 Nephi 2:12; see also Mosiah 10:14). Though the brass plates were in their possession, they missed the significance of "the doings of the Lord in other lands, among people of old" (1 Nephi 19:22).

How "plain and precious," therefore, are the holy scriptures, which tell us of the dealings and doings of the Lord over the sweep of history! Are not all of us in need of such perspective?

The men and women of Christ understand the importance of feasting regularly on sacred records that testify of Jesus (see 2 Nephi 31:20; 32:3; Jacob 2:9; Joseph Smith-Matthew 1:37). Without such records, belief in Him and in the glorious resurrection can quickly wane:

And at the time that Mosiah discovered them, . . . their language had become corrupted; and they had brought no records with them; and they denied the being of their Creator (Omni 1:17).

There were many of the rising generation that could not understand the words of king Benjamin, being little children at the time he spake unto his people; and they did not believe the tradition of their fathers.

They did not believe what had been said concerning the resurrection of the dead, neither did they believe concerning the coming of Christ. (Mosiah 26:1-2.)

Parents who are either untaught or unheeding of the essential gospel truths will probably witness the lapse of real faith in Christ in their children.

As we accept Christ and become His children, a change begins in us—even a "mighty change." As we earnestly strive to become one with Him, being swallowed up in His purposes, we come to resemble Him. Christ who has saved us thus becomes the father of our salvation, and we have His image increasingly in our countenances and conduct. (See Mosiah 5:7.)

Since His qualities are to be emulated by His children, as the Prophet Joseph Smith taught us, it is vital for us to comprehend the character and personality of God (see Joseph Fielding Smith, comp., Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1976], p. 343). Hence the value of the scriptures, if we are really to comprehend ourselves.

As we strive in our growing maturity to truly emulate Jesus' example we will thereby encounter the costs of discipleship. Through our own micro-experiences we will come to know what it is to suffer and to be reproached for taking upon ourselves the name of Christ (see Luke 6:22; 1 Peter 4:14). Therefore, our fiery trials, said Peter, should not be thought of as "some strange thing" (1 Peter 4:12). As we are believing and trusting we become more Christ-like; and this becomes more evident in our daily lives, whether in the treatment of the poor (see Mosiah 4:16) or in our share of the management of civic affairs. Ammon taught, for instance, of how those who so change will truly be "of great benefit to [their] fellow beings" (Mosiah 8:18). Alma learned from the Lord that the enlightened individual can actually evoke faith in other people by "his words alone" (Mosiah 26:15-16; see also 3 Nephi 11:2; D&C 46:13-14). King Benjamin said, "I would that ye should. . . always retain in remembrance, the greatness of God, and your own nothingness, and his goodness and long-suffering towards you" (Mosiah 4:11; see also Moses 1:9-10). We who have the Restoration scriptures have further reasons to feel overwhelmed by the greatness of God. Those scriptures tell us that there is no space in which there is no kingdom (see D&C 88:37). God's works are without end, and He has created worlds which are "innumerable unto man" (see Moses 1:4, 33, 35). The very heavens and planets witness that there is a Supreme Creator (Alma 30:44). On Judgment Day, declared the repentant Alma, everyone at that assemblage will "confess that [God] is God" (Mosiah 27:31). What could be more basic for mortals who have walked after the image of their own god? (See D&C 1:16.)

When one considers history's disbelieving notables who will be there, these next lines are especially subduing: "Then shall they confess, who live without God in the world, that the judgment of an everlasting punishment is just upon them; and they shall quake, and tremble, and shrink beneath the glance of his all-searching eye" (Mosiah 27:31; see also Mosiah 16:1; Alma 12:15).

The faithful, however, are in a much happier situation. They "shall stand before him" and "see his face with pleasure" (Enos 1:27). His all-searching eyes will likewise emanate perfect, overwhelming love, a love which, alas, too few will have reciprocated. The sense of undeservingness will be deep and profound!

Meanwhile, if during this life we are without enlightenment as to the plan of salvation we will continue to experience the unwelcome sense "of having ended a chapter. One more portion of one's self slipping away into the past." (C. S. Lewis, Letters of C. S. Lewis [London: Geoffrey Bles, Ltd., 1966], p. 306.)

In her study Memory, Mary Warnock wrote: "Anything that is over. . . . is a lost possession. . . . The past is a paradise from which we are necessarily excluded." (As quoted in Dan Jacobson, "Of Time and Poetry," Commentary, November 1989, p. 52.)

Thomas Hardy's memories, Dan Jacobson wrote, "speak constantly to him of experiences once shared that are now his alone. . . . The past continually comes to him; but he knows that he can never go back to it." ("Of Time and Poetry," p. 52.)

But one day it will come back fully and resplendently for those who are to be eternally enlightened!

But even now as Latter-day Saints we know whose we are, whence we came, why we are here, and what manner of men and women we are meant to become (see 2 Peter 3:11; 3 Nephi 27:27). Still, like Alma, we will "long to be there" (Alma 36:22), in the "royal courts on high." It is the only destination that really matters. Resplendent reunion awaits us! What is more reasonable and more wonderful than children going home? Especially to a home where the past, the present, and the future form an everlasting and eternal now! (See D&C 130:7; 38:2; Smith, Teachings, p. 220.)

Therefore, let us "believe in God; believe that he is, and that he created all things, both in heaven and in earth; believe that he has all wisdom, and all power, both in heaven and in earth; believe that man doth not comprehend all the things which the Lord can comprehend" (Mosiah 4:9).

In this life, meanwhile, how can there be refining fires without heat? Or greater patience without some instructive waiting? Or more empathy without first bearing one another's burdens? Not only that their burdens may be lightened, but that we may thereby be enlightened by greater empathy. Or how can there be increased individual faith without some customized uncertainty? Or learning to live in cheerful insecurity without some insecurity? How can there be later magnification without some present deprivation?

Except we are thus tutored, how else shall we grow spiritually to become men and women of Christ? In this brief span of mortality, therefore, with so much to learn, reveries are often quickly, even rudely, elbowed aside by tutoring adversities. As faithful children, we are to learn to be "willing to submit" to our perfect Father (Mosiah 3:19).

At times we may feel overwhelmed by our callings and circumstances. Then we genuinely need vital perspective and reassurance about what matters most—which is keeping our covenants.

At other times we may feel underwhelmed and underused in terms of our formal Church callings or civic chores, but we can never honestly feel underwhelmed in terms of the call we all have from Jesus to become, virtue by virtue, as He is (see 3 Nephi 27:27). For the moment, official duties and official roles may seem, for some, insufficient. But as a neighbor no one of us will ever fully use the abundant opportunities for service which lie all about us.

There are clear and basic scriptures describing the spiritual substance and qualities that men and women of Christ are to strive to achieve in their lives. When significantly developed, these qualities convey the added authority of example. Thus, rather than be intimidated by the general concept of "perfection," if we will strive specifically to become more loving, more patient, and so forth, genuine progress is possible.

These qualities are cardinal and eternal. They are portable and at death will go with us through the veil. Jesus Himself set the standard: "What manner of men ought ye to be? Verily I say unto you, even as I am." (3 Nephi 27:27.)

King Benjamin defined the saintliness to be achieved. The disciple was to

[become] a saint . . . submissive, meek, humble, patient, All

of love, willing to submit to all things which the Lord seeth

fit to inflict upon him, even as a child doth submit to his

father (Mosiah 3:19, italics added).

After all, Latter-day Saints should have a special interest in what is required to become a Saint. Here are other directive scriptures that confirm the necessity of certain key qualities and add a few others.

And now I would that ye should be humble, and be submissive and gentle; easy to be en treated; full of patience and long-suffering; being temperate in all things (Alma 7:23, italics added).

Be led by the Holy Spirit, becoming humble, meek, submissive, patient, full of love and all long-suffering (Alma 13:28, italics added).

Our spiritual substance will be reflected in our worship and our life-style. We are to work

by persuasion, by long-suffering, by gentleness and meekness, and by love unfeigned; by kindness (D&C 121:41-42, italics added).

The same central attributes are necessary in order for us to qualify for the ministry.

And faith, hope, charity and love, with an eye single to the glory of God, qualify him for the work.

Remember faith, virtue, knowledge, temperance, patience, brotherly kindness, godliness, charity, humility, diligence. (D&C 4:6-7.)

The Lord advises us that "no one can assist in this work except he shall be humble and full of love, having faith, hope, charity, being temperate in all things" (D&C 12:8). Thus we see not only the centrality but also the needed constancy of these qualities. This is true of all levels of service in God's kingdom; for instance, He has instructed that the decisions of the First Presidency, the Quorum of the Twelve, and the Quorums of Seventy are to be made in ways that reflect these same cardinal virtues: "The decisions of these quorums, or either of them, are to be made in all righteousness, in holiness, and lowliness of heart, meekness and long suffering, and in faith, and virtue, and knowledge, temperance, patience, godliness, brotherly kindness and charity" (D&C 107:30). In a Church and world full of imperfect people we are wise to make allowances for individual differences and also for the shaping variations in our individual experiences and gifts. We surely do come in different packages! Even so, the present "package" which constitutes oneself should not be the ultimate package or self.

Too often when we seek to excuse ourselves it is ironical that we are excusing "the natural man." Yet scriptures inform us that the natural man is to be put off; he is too heavy and too fatiguing to carry (see Mosiah 3:19). He should not be kept on because of a mistaken and self-demeaning sense that the natural man constitutes our individuality.

There are a few matters of mere preference which involve no moral content, such as one's favorite color. But we must take care not to expand the legitimate zone of personal preference naively and carelessly. It is one thing to have little interest in developing a garden and quite another to have little interest in developing people—especially developing oneself in the cardinal virtues.

Perhaps of a few things we can properly say, "That's how I am!" But of the many things—all those involving spiritual consequences, some obvious, some subtle—we cannot justifiably say, "That's how I am!" Instead, we have a solemn obligation to strive to become like Jesus by putting off the natural package, and this also helps by lightening our load for the journey along the straight and narrow path.

It is one thing to say we have little interest in sports and quite another to say that we have little interest in becoming more patient in our relationships with others. How can we become as the Savior is if we remain impatient?

We may enjoy listening to a symphony but disdain listening to children. Yet can we conceive of praying to a non-listening God?

What is being urged on these pages is not frantic self-concern, immobilizing guilt, or destructive self-criticism; rather, it is simply coming to terms, over time and wisely, with the differences between what we are and what we should be and have the power to become. We must be wise and tolerant, making allowances for the frailties and differences in each other. Nor should we be too harsh in judging ourselves, either; instead, we need to continue in patience in spite of recognizing our faults.

Thus serious discipleship neither expects perfection in others nor denies the need to progress toward it in oneself.

One person might have abilities demonstrably greater than those of his peers, yet this would be no excuse to avoid the wise delegation of significant tasks to them. After all, a perfect God shares His work with us.

There are too many scriptural examples of pointed tutoring for us to ignore them. One might have commendable loyalty for others, but this is no reason to forego giving them needed developmental counsel while speaking "the truth in love" (Ephesians 4:15). Jethro surely did his duty with Moses, to whom he doubtless was loyal and nurturing (see Exodus 18:13-23).

Oliver Cowdery, eager to translate, was told after he failed that it was because he was intellectually lazy and did not continue as he commenced (see D&C 9:5, 7). The righteous young man who had kept the commandments from his youth up was told deliberately by Jesus, "One thing thou lackest." We read of the inquiring young man that "Jesus beholding him loved him"—loved him enough to tutor him. (See Mark 10:21.)

Jesus, our perfect model, had His own perfect model:

Then answered Jesus and said unto them, Verily, verily, I say unto you, The Son can do nothing of himself, but what he seeth the Father do: for what things soever he doeth, these also doeth the Son likewise (John 5:19).

Just what was seen and emulated by Jesus (in both first and second estates) we do not know, but the point is clear. The following exemplifications and admonitions as to attributes make it clear that these are not optional if we would follow Him:

Ye shall be holy; for I am holy (Leviticus 11:44).

And the Lord passed by before him, and proclaimed, the Lord, the Lord God, merciful and gracious, longsuffering, and abundant in goodness and truth (Exodus 34:6).

I say unto you, if ye have come to a knowledge of the goodness of God, and his matchless power, and his wisdom, and his patience, and his long-suffering towards the children of men. . . (Mosiah 4:6).

Be ye therefore merciful, as your Father also is merciful (Luke 6:36).

For I have given you an example, that ye should do as I have done to you (John 13:15).

Jesus Christ [shows] forth all long-suffering, for a pattern to them which should hereafter believe on him to life everlasting (1 Timothy 1:16).

Christ also suffered for us, leaving us an example, that ye should follow his steps (1 Peter 2:21).

And again, it showeth unto the children of men the straitness of the path, and the narrowness of the gate, by which they should enter, he having set the example before them (2 Nephi 31:9).

Be ye therefore perfect, even as your Father which is in heaven is perfect (Matthew 5:48).

After His perfection, Jesus included Himself as our model:

Therefore I would that ye should be perfect even as I, or your Father who is in heaven is perfect (3 Nephi 12:48).

Therefore, what manner of men ought ye to be? Verily I say unto you, even as I am. (3 Nephi 27:27.)

Ye know the things that ye must do in my church; for the works which ye have seen me do that shall ye also do; for that which ye have seen me do even that shall ye do (3 Nephi 27:21).

Behold I am the light; I have set an example for you (3 Nephi 18:16).

The Prophet Joseph Smith taught:

If you wish to go where God is, you must be like God, or possess the principles which God possesses (Smith, Teachings, p. 216).

While we should be understanding of imperfections, we should also understand how, with our responsiveness to God's tutoring, weak things can actually enable us to "become strong," and why childish things must be "put away" (Ether 12:26-27; 1 Corinthians 13:11).

We all need encouragement, but we need it without indulgence. Moses did not say to Jethro, "Look, I work diligently. This is how I am!" By the way, Moses quickly took the counsel to delegate, doubtless because, scriptures inform us, he was the most meek man "upon the face of the earth" (Numbers 12:3).

From what we have discussed, it follows that "working out our salvation" and exaltation includes keeping the commandments, but it also includes working out the development of these virtues in our lives.

Given the tremendous importance of these cardinal virtues, both in this world and in the world to come, should we be surprised if, to hasten the process, the Lord regularly, if not daily, gives us the relevant and necessary clinical experiences? In this way the impatient will be given chances to become more patient, the unmerciful to become more merciful.

By serving Jesus and by thinking of Him we draw closer to Him and are enlightened. Otherwise, we become estranged from His exemplification as well as from Him (see Mosiah 5:13).

In summation, these cardinal virtues are intertwined, interactive, and interdependent:

We Are to Be: We Are Not to Be: 1. Meek and humble Self-concerned, dismissive, proud, seeking ascendancy, needlessly making others anxious and insecure

He who is most meek and lowly has instructed us, "Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me; for I am meek and lowly in heart" (Matthew 11:29). Accepting that yoke means that we too need to be meek and lowly.

Lest we worry overmuch that our meekness might be an open invitation for others to abuse us, it is well to note some of its less-understood features. For example, meekness may not always "win", especially in worldly matters or in the short run; but in the long run the meek will inherit the earth. And meekness is not the acceptance of imposition; it can still be firm, still insist on fairness, even reprove with sharpness on occasion. Meekness also can ask inspired, piercing questions. Meekness impels us to speak the truth in love. Meekness brings its own compensatory blessings, especially that of an enhanced direction from the Holy Spirit.

Nor is meekness without its mortal models who have succeeded even in the world's views. A prominent example is George Washington, of whom it has been written: "In all history few men who possessed unassailable power have used that power so gently and self-effacingly for what their best instincts told them was the welfare of their neighbors and all mankind" (James Thomas Flexner, Washington: The Indispensable Man [New York: Plume, 1984], p. xvi).

As to scriptural examples, "The man Moses was very meek, above all the men which were upon the face of the earth" (Numbers 12:3). And the great prophet John the Baptist, who could blisteringly denounce as vipers the hypocritical leaders who appeared at his Jordan River baptisms (see Matthew 3:7), meekly defended Jesus and His proselyting success with the self-effacing words, "He must increase, but I must decrease" (John 3:30).

The ultimate model of meekness is Jesus, the most effective and the most intelligent person who has ever lived. It is no coincidence that He also was the most meek. Meekness, then, is a saintly quality, and therefore of Deity. When we take his yoke upon us, in our small ways we can best learn of Jesus and of His meekness and lowliness. Then, as divine attributes are painfully and slowly developed in us, we marvel the more at His having perfected these attributes. Appreciation of Him yields to adoration and emulation of Him!

His gospel—whether truths about the nature of God, or of man, or of the universe—as taught in holy scriptures and holy temples is remarkable. The gospel is stunning as to its interior consistency, and it is breathtaking as to its exterior expansiveness. Rather than being without the gospel and thus in a mortal maze, "I stand all amazed!" (Hymns, no. 193.) The spiritual facts that emerge soon encompass and testify about "the goodness of God, and his matchless power, and his wisdom, and his patience, and his long-suffering towards the children of men" (Mosiah 4:6).

For us to know such transcending things helps us to endure the journey and the ironies of life as we mature into men and women of Christ who can endure well and hold fast—even when there are injections of irony.
