Neal A. Maxwell, Men and Women of Christ ( 1991)

Chapter 5

"Endure it Well. . . . Valiantly

The following wintry verse instructs and reminds us of one of the most central and regular challenges for the men and women of Christ:

Nevertheless the Lord seeth fit to chasten his people; yea, he trieth their patience and their faith (Mosiah 23:21).

Such declarations of divine purpose ought to keep us on spiritual alert as to life's purposeful adversities, especially as we seek to become more saintly. Disciples will escape neither adversity nor the irony forming the hard crust on the bread of adversity.

Irony tries both our faith and our patience. Irony can be a particularly bitter form of chastening because it involves disturbing incongruity; it involves outcomes in violation of our expectations, including what we feel we "deserved." Sometimes it lays waste our good-intentioned and best-laid plans.

On occasion we even set up our own ironies by being too declarative and too certain. Such was the case with Peter, who said he would never deny Jesus. Peter was quickly reminded by the Savior that soon, before the rooster crowed, Peter would deny Him three times. (See Matthew 26:31-35.) In like manner today our rigidities and deficiencies sometimes may actually invite tutoring.

Perhaps a person is visibly and patiently prepared for an important role amid widespread expectation of his impending promotion. What follows, however, ends up lasting only a very narrow moment in time. A political victory may seem so near; then it recedes, and finally vanishes altogether. Without meekness such ironical circumstances are very difficult to manage.

In a marriage a careless, ego-filled declaration hardens into a rigid, well-defended position that then becomes more important than communication or reconciliation. An intellectual stand is proudly and stubbornly defended even in the face of tutoring truth or correcting counsel. Even when a position clearly proves indefensible, pride stays resolutely and stupidly at its post. This is unfortunate, because occasionally, as we all know, humbly backing off is really going forward.

With its inverting of the anticipated consequences, irony becomes the frequent cause of an individual's being offended. The larger and the more untamed a person's ego, the greater the likelihood of his being offended, especially when tasting his portion of vinegar and gall. Words may issue: "Why me?" "Why this?" "Why now?" It is hoped such words will give way to subsequent spiritual composure; but when such words precede bitter inconsolability, then it is a surprisingly short distance to bitterness. Amid life's varied ironies we may begin to wonder: "Didn't God notice this torturous turn of events? And if He noticed, why did He permit it? Am I not valued? Didn't I deserve better?" Our planning usually assumes that our destiny is largely in our own hands. Then come intruding events, first elbowing aside, then evicting, what we had anticipated and even earned. Hence we can be offended by events as well as by people.

Irony may involve not only unexpected suffering but also undeserved suffering. We feel we deserved better, and yet we fared worse. We had other plans—even commendable plans; did they not count? For example, a physician who trained laboriously to help the sick cannot do so now because of his own illness. For a period, because of constraining circumstances, a diligent prophet of the Lord was an "idle witness" (Mormon 3:16). Frustrating conditions keep more than a few of us from making our appointed rounds. Customized challenges are thus added to that affliction and temptation that Paul described as "common to man" (1 Corinthians 10:13).

In coping with irony, as in all things, we have an exemplary teacher in Jesus, whose divinity was assaulted almost constantly. For Jesus, irony began at His birth. Truly, He "suffered the will of the Father in all things from the beginning" (3 Nephi 11:11). This whole earth was Jesus' footstool (see Acts 7:49); He created it; yet at Bethlehem there was "no room . . . in the inn" (Luke 2:7) and "no crib for his bed" (Hymns, no. 206).

At the end, meek and lowly Jesus partook of the most bitter cup without becoming the least bitter (see 3 Nephi 11:11; D&C 19:18-19). The most innocent one suffered the most. Yet the King of kings did not break, even when some of His subjects did to Him "as they listed" (D&C 49:6). Christ's unyielding capacity to endure such irony was truly remarkable. You and I are so much more brittle. For instance, we forget that, by their very nature, many tests are unfair.

In heaven, Christ's lofty name was determined to be the only name on earth offering salvation to all mankind (see Acts 4:12; 2 Nephi 25:20; see also Abraham 3:27), yet the King of kings, the Mortal Messiah, willingly lived modestly, wrote Paul, even as a person "of no reputation" (Philippians 2:7).

What a contrast to our maneuvering over relative recognition and comparative status! How different, too, from the ways in which some among us mistakenly see the size and response of their audiences as the sole verification of their worth! Yet those fickle galleries to which we sometimes play have a way of being rotated and emptied. They will surely be empty on Judgment Day; everyone will be somewhere else—on their knees.

As the Creator, Christ constructed the universe; yet in little Galilee He was known merely as "the carpenter's son" (Matthew 13:55). In fact, the Lord of the universe was without honor even in His own Nazarene countryside. Though astonished at His teachings, his neighbors "were offended at him." Even meek Jesus "marvelled because of their unbelief." (Mark 6:3, 6.)

As Jehovah, Jesus issued the original commandment to keep the Sabbath day holy, but during His mortal messiahship He was accused of violating the Sabbath because on that day He gave healing rest to the afflicted (see John 5:8-16). Can we absorb the irony of being hurt while trying to help? When, having done good, we are misrepresented, can we watch the feathers of false witness scatter on the winds without our becoming rattled or resentful?

Long, long ago as Creator, Christ provided habitable conditions for us on this earth, generously providing all the essential atmospheric conditions for life, including essential water (see Moses 1:33; D&C 76:24). Yet on the cross, when He was aflame with thirst, "they gave him vinegar to drink mingled with gall: and when he had tasted thereof, he would not drink" (Matthew 27:34; see also Psalm 69:21). Even so, Jesus was not a railing man but a forgiving Christ (see Luke 23:34).

Christ was keenly aware of the constant irony: "Foxes have holes, and birds of the air have nests; but the Son of man hath not where to lay his head" (Luke 9:58). He asked a treacherous Judas, "Betrayest thou the Son of man with a kiss?" (Luke 22:48.) And earlier he uttered the soulful lament: "O, Jerusalem, Jerusalem, . . how often would I have gathered thy children together, even as a hen gathereth her chickens under her wings, and ye would not!" (Matthew 23:37.) The ritual of rejection was happening to Jesus all over again.

We all know what it is like not to be listened to, but, worse, how about disdain or even contempt? Whatever its decibel level, however, there is a difference between noticing rejection, as Jesus did, and railing against rejection, as He did not.

As the Creator, Christ fashioned "worlds without number" (Moses 1:33), yet with His fingers He fashioned a little clay from dirt and spittle, restoring sight to one blind man (see John 9:6). Thus the greatest meekly ministered "unto one of the least of these" (Matthew 25:40). Do you and I understand that the significance of our service does not depend upon its scale?

Within a few hours Christ would rescue all mankind, yet he heard the manipulated crowd cry, "Barabbas," thereby rescuing a life—taking murderer instead of life—giving Jesus (see Mark 15:7-15).

Can we remain true amid false justice? Will we do our duty against the will of the roar of the crowd? In the Master Teacher's tailoring of His tutoring, depending upon the spiritual readiness of His pupils, we see instructive irony even in some of these episodes.

To the healed leper returning with gratitude, Jesus' searching but simple query was, "Where are the [other] nine?" (Luke 17:17.) To a more knowledgeable mother of Apostles, desiring that her two sons sit on Jesus' right and left hands, Jesus reprovingly but lovingly said, "Ye know not what you ask. . . . [This] is not mine to give." (Matthew 20:22-23.) To a grieving but rapidly maturing Peter, still burning with the memory of a rooster's crowing, thrice came the directive, "Feed my sheep," but also a statement signifying "by what death" the great Apostle would later be martyred (John 18:25-27; 21:15-19). How much more demanding of Peter than of the leper!

When a sudden, stabbing light exposes the gap between what we are and what we think we are, can we, like Peter, let that light be a healing laser? Do we have the patience to endure when one of our comparative strengths is called into question? A scalding crisis may actually be the means of stripping corrosive pride from a virtue.

To the humbly devout woman of Samaria who expected the Messiah, Jesus quietly disclosed, "I that speak unto thee am he" (John 4:26). Yet an anxious Pilate "saith unto Jesus, Whence art thou? But Jesus gave him no answer." (John 19:9.)

Can we remain silent when silence is eloquence—but may be used against us? Or will we murmur, just to let God know we notice the ironies?

Even with all the negative ironies there is the glad irony of Christ's great mission. He Himself noted that, precisely because He was "lifted up upon" the cross, He was about to "draw all men unto [him]," and after He had been "lifted up by men even so should men be lifted up by the Father" (3 Nephi 27:14).

But how can we fortify ourselves against the irony in our lives and cope better when it comes? By being more like Jesus, such as by loving more. Loving increases our absorptive capacity.

And the world, because of their iniquity, shall judge him to be a thing of naught; wherefore they scourge him, and he suffereth it; and they smite him, and he suffereth it. Yea, they spit upon him, and he suffereth it, [Why?] because of his loving kindness and his long-suffering towards the children of men. (1 Nephi 19:9.)

There are other significant keys for coping daily with irony. "And he said to them all, If any man will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his cross daily, and follow me" (Luke 9:23). Wise self-denial shrinks our swollen sense of entitlement.

Another cardinal key is to "live in thanksgiving daily, for the many mercies and blessings which [God] doth bestow upon you" (Alma 34:38).

Life's ironies, serious as they may seem to us, are much more than offset by heaven's many tender mercies. We cannot count all our blessings every day, but we can at least carry over the reassuring bottom line from the last counting.

Jesus exemplified another vital way of coping. Though He suffered all manner of temptations (see Alma 7:11), He "gave no heed unto them" (D&C 20:22). Unlike some of us, He did not fantasize, reconsider, or replay temptations. How is it that you and I do not seem to understand that while initially we are stronger and the temptations weaker, dalliance turns things upside down?

Jesus' marvelous meekness prevented any "root of bitterness" from springing up in Him (Hebrews 12:15). Ponder the Savior's precious words about the Atonement after He had passed through it. There is no mention of the vinegar. No mention of the scourging. No mention of having been struck. No mention of having been spat upon. He does declare that He "suffer[ed] both body and spirit" in an exquisiteness and soreness which we simply cannot comprehend. (See D&C 19:15, 18.)

We come now to the last and most terrible irony of Jesus: His feeling forsaken on Calvary at the apogee of His agony. The apparent withdrawal of the Father's Spirit then evoked the greatest soul cry in human history. (See James E. Talmage, Jesus the Christ [Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1916], pp. 660-61.) This deprivation had never happened to Christ before—never. Yet thereby Jesus became a fully comprehending Christ, and thus He was enabled to be a fully succoring Savior (see D&C 88:6; Alma 7:11-12). Moreover, even in the darkest hour, while feeling forsaken, Jesus submitted Himself to the Father. No wonder the Savior tells us that the combined anguish in Gethsemane and on Calvary was so awful that He wished it were possible to shrink from drinking that bitter cup. "Nevertheless," He finished His "preparation." (See D&C 19:18-19; 3 Nephi 11:11.) The word nevertheless reflected deep, divine determination.

Even after treading the winepress alone (see D&C 76:107), which ended in His stunning, personal triumph and in the greatest victory ever, majestic Jesus meekly declared, "Glory be to the Father"! (D&C 19:19.) This should not surprise us. In the premortal world Jesus meekly volunteered to be our Savior, saying, "Father, thy will be done, and the glory be thine forever" (Moses 4:2). Jesus was true to His word.

"Glory be to the Father"—first, for rearing such an incomparable Son! "Glory be to the Father" for allowing His special Son to suffer and to be sacrificed for all of us! Certainly on Judgment Day none of us will want to rush forward to tell our Father how we, as parents, suffered when we watched our children suffer.

Enduring irony, though a real challenge on the way to becoming men and women of Christ, is but one dimension of the larger and regular challenge of enduring.

On one of those rare occasions when His very voice was heard, the Father testified: "Yea, the words of my Beloved are true and faithful. He that endureth to the end, the same shall be saved." (2 Nephi 31:15.) Of all that the Father might then have said, He stressed endurance. Why?

The major reason is that God has repeatedly said He would structure mortality to be a proving and testing experience (see Abraham 3:25; Mosiah 23:21). He has certainly kept His promise and carried out His divine intent. Thus even our fiery trials, said Peter, should not be thought of as "some strange thing" (1 Peter 4:12). Hence enduring is vital, and those who so last will be first spiritually! Enduring is more than lasting, however: we are to "endure it well" and to endure it "valiantly" (D&C 121:8, 29). By taking Jesus' yoke upon us and enduring, we learn most deeply of Him and especially how to be like Him (see Matthew 11:29). Even though our experiences are micro compared to His, the process is the same.

There are many things to be endured, trials like illness, injustice, insensitivity, poverty, aloneness, unresponsiveness, being misrepresented and misunderstood, and sometimes seeing friends become enemies. Paul reminds us that meek and lowly Jesus, though the Lord of the universe, "endured . . . contradiction of sinners against himself" (Hebrews 12:3). Smaller variations of these contradictions or hostilities will be felt by His disciples.

We tend to think only in terms of our endurance, but it is God's patient long-suffering that provides us with our chances to improve, affording us urgently needed developmental space or time (see Alma 42:4-5).

Paul observed, "Now no chastening for the present seemeth to be joyous, but grievous: nevertheless afterward it yieldeth the peaceable fruit of righteousness" (Hebrews 12:11). Such peaceable fruit comes only in its appointed season, after the buds and the blossoms.

If this were not so, if certain mortal experiences were cut short, it would be like pulling up a flower to see how the roots are doing. Put another way, make too many anxious openings of the oven door and the cake falls instead of rising. Moreover, enforced change usually does not last, while productive enduring can ingrain permanent change (see Alma 32:13).

Patient endurance is to be distinguished from merely being "acted upon." Endurance is more than pacing up and down within the cell of our circumstance; it is not only acceptance of the things allotted to us but also the determination to "act for ourselves" by magnifying what is allotted to us (Alma 29:3, 6).

If, for instance, we are always taking our temperature to see whether we are happy, we will not be. If we are constantly comparing to see if things are fair, we are being unfair to ourselves.

True enduring therefore represents not merely the passage of time but also the passage of the soul—and not merely from A to B, but amid "mighty change" all the way from A to Z. To endure in faith and do God's will thus involves much more than putting up with a circumstance (see D&C 63:20; 101:35).

Rather than shoulder-shrugging, true enduring is soul trembling. Jesus bled not at a few pores but "at every pore" (D&C 19:18).

Sometimes spiritual obedience requires us to "hold on" lovingly, such as to a rebellious child, while others, despairing, cry, "Let go!" Enduring may likewise mean, however, letting go when everything within us wants to hold on, such as to a loved one "appointed unto death" (D&C 42:48).

Patient endurance permits us to cling to our faith in the Lord and our faith in His timing when we are being tossed about by the surf of circumstance. Even when a seeming undertow grasps us, somehow in the tumbling we are being carried forward, though battered and bruised.

When, for the moment, we ourselves are not being stretched on a particular cross, we ought to be at the foot of someone else's—full of empathy and proffering spiritual refreshment.

With enduring comes a willingness, therefore, to "press forward" (2 Nephi 31:20) even when we are bone weary and would much rather pull off to the side of the road. Hence, one prophet was especially commended by the Lord for his unwearyingness (see Helaman 10:4; 15:6).

Paul wrote that, even after faithful disciples had "done the will of God," they "[had] need of patience" (Hebrews 10:36). How many times have good people done the right thing initially only to break under subsequent stress? Sustaining correct conduct for a difficult moment under extraordinary stress is very commendable, but so is coping with sustained stress subtly present in seeming routineness. Either way, however, we are to "run with patience the race that is set before us" (Hebrews 12:1); and it is a marathon, not a sprint.

When you and I are unduly impatient, we like our timetable better than God's. And thus, while the scriptural phrase "in process of time" means "eventually," it also denotes an entire spiritual process: "The Lord showed unto Enoch all the inhabitants of the earth; and he beheld, and lo, Zion, in process of time, was taken up into heaven" (Moses 7:21; see also D&C 38:13; Genesis 4:3; 38:12; Exodus 2:23; Judges 11:4; 2 Chronicles 21:19).

By itself, of course, the passage of time does not bring an automatic advance. Yet, like the prodigal son, we often need the process of time in order to come to our spiritual senses (see Luke 15:17). The touching reunion of Jacob and Esau in the desert, so many years after their sibling rivalry, is a classic example. Generosity can replace animosity. But reflection and introspection require time. A great many spiritual outcomes require that saving truths be mixed with time, forming the elixir of experience, that sovereign remedy for many things.

Hence the ongoing-ness of it all. So perhaps we can be forgiven for wondering, "Is there no other way?" Indeed there is no other way, for personal, spiritual symmetry emerges only from the shaping of prolonged obedience. Twigs are bent, not snapped, into shape.

Without patient and meek endurance we will learn less, see less, feel less, and hear less. We who are egocentric and impatient shut down much of our receiving capacity.

The enlarging of the soul requires not only some remodeling but also some excavating. Hypocrisy, guile, and other imbedded traits do not go gladly or easily, but if we "endure it well" we will not grow testy while being tested. We note too that sorrow can actually enlarge the mind and heart in order to "give place," providing expanded space for later joy.

Thus enduring is one of the cardinal attributes, but it simply cannot be developed without time or the laboratory of this second estate. All the other cardinal virtues—love, patience, humility, mercy, purity, submissiveness, justice—similarly require endurance for their full development.

The harrowing of the soul can be like the harrowing of the soil; to increase the yield, things are turned upside down. Moses experienced such topsy-turvy change. A lesser individual could not have forsaken Egypt's treasures and privileged status only to be later hunted and resented as a prophetic presence in the royal courts, courts which he had doubtless known earlier as an insider. Yet we are told that Moses, because of his esteem for Christ, endured by faith (see Hebrews 11:24-29). As a Father, God is delighted with our first and further steps, but He knows how straight, how narrow, and how long the ensuing path is. Again, how vital is endurance!

Meanwhile, with spiritual endurance we can have felicity amid poverty, gratitude without plentitude. There can even be meekness amid injustice. One never sees the "root of bitterness springing up" (Hebrews 12:15) in the enduring meek. While in the midst of all these things, if we are wise like Job we will avoid charging God foolishly (see Job 1:22).

As with every virtue, Jesus is the exemplar. While shouldering Jesus' yoke we can better come to "know according to the flesh how to succor [each other]" (Alma 7:12).

Likewise, by seeing life's experiences on through to the end, on our small scale we can finally say, as Jesus did on the cross, "It is finished" (John 19:30). We too can then have "finished [our] preparations," having done the particular work God gave each of us to do (D&C 19:19; see also John 17:4). But our tiny cup cannot be taken from us any more than the Savior's huge one could from Him. For this reason we too have come into the world (see John 12:27).

In a small but nevertheless sufficient way we will experience what it is to suffer "both body and spirit" (see D&C 19:18). Some afflictions are physical, others mental, or they begin so. Often, however, they are interactive in both areas, forming a special pain. One of the most powerful and searching questions ever asked of all of us in our sufferings hangs in time and space before us: The Son of Man hath descended below them all. Art thou greater than he?" (D&C 122:8.) Jesus both plumbed the depths and scaled the heights in order to comprehend all things (see D&C 88:6). Jesus therefore is not only a fully atoning but also a fully comprehending Savior!

Included in the challenge of enduring is enduring the process of being improved. Remodeling is always costly and painful. How can putting off the old man and putting on the new man be otherwise?
