Neal A. Maxwell, Men and Women of Christ ( 1991)

Chapter 6

"In a Preparation"

There can be no improvement without positive change and without our also enduring the preparatory things. It is therefore wise for us to ponder what especially facilitates such positive change; and further, what we can do to take advantage of and even create the "in a preparation" moments.

Though spiritual improvement is usually gradual, clearly there are pivotal moments. These shining moments, if used before time tarnishes them, can bless us and others significantly. While some of these involve us personally, sometimes we can, in the words of the resurrected Jesus, become "the means of bringing salvation unto" other individuals (see 3 Nephi 18:32).

Whether in any instance we would be helpers or would be helped, humbly invoking the presence of the Spirit is vital. We are clearly not wise enough to manage things by ourselves (see Alma 31:34, 35). The Holy Ghost, however, can tell us "all things what [we] should do" (2 Nephi 32:3, 5). The help of the Spirit is especially needed when we are being enrolled in a spiritual seminar for which we did not sign up! The Spirit not only gives us much needed access to "God's files" but also customizes the counsel flowing from these files.

As individuals we are at risk if we "seek to counsel in [our] own ways" (D&C 56:14), drawing only upon the limited framework of our experience. For instance, we cannot always judge wisely until the Lord makes certain things known to us: "But as you cannot always judge the righteous, or as you cannot always tell the wicked from the righteous, therefore I say unto you, hold your peace until I shall see fit to make all things known unto the world concerning the matter" (D&C 10:37). Wheat and tares can look so much alike to the untutored and undiscerning eye.

The resurrected Jesus similarly counseled leaders in the Nephite society not to give up impatiently on the lost sheep, for "ye know not but what they will return and repent" (3 Nephi 18:32). Because we are not fully able to know the hearts of others without help from the Lord, the role of the Spirit is crucial.

The presence of some divine discontent or dissonance in our lives or in the lives of others is another facilitating factor. The Lord has often so "arranged" things that we find individuals already "in a preparation to hear the word" (Alma 32:6). For instance, sorrow can be a facilitator; as one of many ways in which life's terrain can be shaken it can prepare the mind and heart and stir us to pondering. Deeply despondent as sorrow may make us, however, self-pity is not the same thing as godly sorrow. Soaking in the hot tub of self-pity does not do for us what godly sorrow does—namely, brace us! Godly sorrow is like going from a sauna into a snowbank; it produces a tingly, spiritual stimulation. Unchallenged luke-warmness and apathy, on the other hand, leave little room for bringing about improvement: "I would thou wert cold or hot," the Lord said (Revelation 3:15). Dissonance has its dangers, but apathy surely does not bring about "a desire to believe."

Just as there is "faith unto repentance" (Alma 34:15) there is likewise real sorrow that works true repentance (Mormon 2:13-14).

In contrast there is the "sorrowing of the damned," which occurs when people can no longer have it both ways; they can no longer take happiness in sin, and yet they remain unrescued because they have not turned completely to God (see Mormon 2:12-14).

Some breakthroughs toward positive change are immediate, as on the day of Pentecost in ancient Jerusalem: "Now when they heard this, they were pricked in their heart, and said unto Peter and to the rest of the apostles, Men and brethren, what shall we do?" (Acts 2:37.)

Some insights are sudden if we catch hold of them, as in Alma's dramatic conversion:

And it came to pass that as I was thus racked with torment, while I was harrowed up by the memory of my many sins, behold, I remembered also to have heard my father prophesy unto the people concerning the coming of one Jesus Christ, a Son of God, to atone for the sins of the world.

Now, as my mind caught hold upon this thought, I cried within my heart: O Jesus, thou Son of God, have merry on me, who am in the gall of bitterness, and am encircled about by the everlasting chains of death. (Alma 36:17-18.)

At other times "preparation to hear the word" is gradual, finally cresting in a moment of decision—as with the prodigal son: "And when he came to himself, he said, How many hired servants of my father's have bread enough and to spare, and I perish with hunger! I will arise and go to my father, and will say unto him, Father, I have sinned against heaven, and before thee." (Luke 15:17-18.)

The Lord can commence His initial work with us while requiring surprisingly little from us. Alma explained: "But behold, if ye will awake and arouse your faculties, even to an experiment upon my words, and exercise a particle of faith, yea, even if ye can no more than desire to believe, let this desire work in you, even until ye believe in a manner that ye can give place for a portion of my words" (Alma 32:27).

Imagine, only "a particle of faith" and "no more than [a] desire to believe" are actually enough to begin!

Golden questions also can create golden moments of truth. Framing the moment of truth with directness and loving concern can be very helpful.

It may be well, at the right time, to pose today's equivalents of these questions: "What have you against being baptized [or becoming active]?" (Mosiah 18:10) and "If ye have felt to sing the song of redeeming love, . . . can ye feel so now?" (Alma 5:26.) In this way we can help righteous and responsive nostalgia to play a real role.

"If thou canst believe said Jesus. The anxious but honest father replied: "I believe; help thou mine unbelief." (Mark 9:23-24.)

Inspired questions not only elicit helpful comments but also assist us in determining the individual's existing degree of doctrinal or spiritual knowledge. Former-day examples are: "He said unto them, Have ye received the Holy Ghost since ye believed? And they said unto him, We have not so much as heard whether there be any Holy Ghost." (Acts 19:2.) "Have ye received his image in your countenances?" (Alma 5:14.)

"What place does Jesus have in your life now?" is a good question in this context. When people have been "in a preparation" and when the Spirit is present, meek, intellectual integrity is likely.

And Aaron answered him and said unto him: Believest thou that there is a God? And the king said: I know that the Amalekites say that there is a God, and I have granted unto them that they should build sanctuaries, that they may assemble themselves together to worship him. And if now thou sayest there is a God, behold I will believe. This spiritual surrender led to the king's first attempt at prayer:

O God, Aaron hath told me that there is a God; and if there is a God, and if thou art God, wilt thou make thyself known unto me, and I will give away all my sins to know thee, and that I may be raised from the dead, and be saved at the last day. (Alma 22:7, 18.)

We may also ask questions to get on-the-record responses rather than information, as in "Whom say ye that I am?" (Matthew 16:15.) On occasion, questions may even elicit questions to which, finally, resounding response may be given: "Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me?" "Who art thou, Lord?" "I am Jesus." (Acts 9:4-5.)

Questions may be tutorial, as with the brother of Jared: "What will ye that I should do that ye may have light in your vessels? For behold, ye cannot have windows, neither fire." (Ether 2:23.)

In any case, the power of inspired words is great indeed.

The word had a. . . more powerful effect upon the minds of the people than . . . anything else (Alma 31:5).

And if now thou sayest there is a God, behold I will believe (Alma 22:7).

Blessed art thou. . . because of thy exceeding faith in the words alone of my servant (Mosiah 26:15, 16).

And again, more blessed are they who shall believe in your words because that ye shall testify that ye have seen me, and that ye know that I am. Yea, blessed are they who shall believe in your words, and come down into the depths of humility and be baptized, for they shall be visited with fire and with the Holy Ghost, and shall receive a remission of their sins. (3 Nephi 12:2.)

And Ammon said unto her: Believest thou this? And she said unto him: I have had no witness save thy word, and the word of our servants; nevertheless I believe that it shall be according as thou hast said. (Alma 19:9.)

And many of the Samaritans of that city believed on him for the saying of the woman, which testified, He told me all that ever I did (John 4:39).

Valued and saving as the words of others are, having one's own personal witness is still to be preferred.

So when the Samaritans were come unto him, they besought him that he would tarry with them: and he abode there two days.

And many more believed because of his own word;

And said unto the woman, Now we believe, not because of thy saying: for we have heard him ourselves, and know that this is indeed the Christ, the Savior of the world. (John 4:40-42.)

To some it is given by the Holy Ghost to know that Jesus Christ is the Son of God, and that he was crucified for the sins of the world.

To others it is given to believe on their words, that they also might have eternal life if they continue faithful. (D&C 46:13-14.)

The Holy Ghost so teaches us that spiritual truths are helpfully connected with each other:

And now, my beloved brethren, and also Jew, and all ye ends of the earth, hearken unto these words and believe in Christ; and if ye believe not in these words believe in Christ. And if ye shall believe in Christ ye will believe in these words, for they are the words of Christ, and he hath given them unto me; and they teach all men that they should do good. (2 Nephi 33:10.)

The Lord can compensate for our communication weaknesses. Nephi wrote: "And the words which I have written in weakness will be made strong unto them." What key things did he convey? "For it persuadeth them to do good; it maketh known unto them of their fathers; and it speaketh of Jesus, and persuadeth them to believe in him, and to endure to the end" (2 Nephi 33:4, italics added).

Nephi had a preferred way of communicating: "Neither am I [Nephi] mighty in writing, like unto speaking; for when a man speaketh by the power of the Holy Ghost the power of the Holy Ghost carrieth it unto the hearts of the children of men" (2 Nephi 33:1).

Yet, as Joseph Smith learned by his 1820 experience, and in ways which have benefitted millions, the Holy Ghost powerfully endorses the Lord's written word too: "If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God, that giveth to all men liberally, and upbraideth not; and it shall be given him" (James 1:5).

Whether in writing or by the spoken word, "he that receiveth the word by the Spirit of truth receiveth it as it is preached by the Spirit of truth. Wherefore, he that preacheth and he that receiveth, understand one another, and both are edified and rejoice together." (D&C 50:21-22.)

On occasion, these golden times involve moments of spiritual stillness that is more than the absence of sound. Rather, it is a stillness which focuses us, and we feel it. This stillness subdues the soul, bringing as it were the powerful presence of something else, something superior. Yet this powerful presence is unforced; in fact, it will flee before doubt or resistance; it can quickly be driven out by disdain. In these moments of stillness we learn by inspiration and even revelation.

In summation, golden moments happen in many ways and in many situations. They are caused and furthered under direction of the Spirit. Such moments are usually framed in "a tiny moment" of time but involve all eternity! Such moments usually involve directness and candidness in both questions and answers.

Even if not pursued, at least such moments can produce an on-the-record response, as with King Agrippa: "Almost thou persuadest me" (Acts 26:28). Few experiences produce such positive change as do full-time missions. Without attempting to be exhaustive or definitive, one may suggest reasons why full-time missions usually are such a significant period of spiritual progress.

Dedicated full-time missionaries have fewer distractions in their lives. They are serving others intensively and in a known, compressed time frame, working against the clock while serving the purposes of eternity. In the missionary environment there is usually more consistent self-discipline than at home. There is the wise and regularized "overseership" of a mission president. There is usually the presence of a reminding and reinforcing companion. Missionaries usually live closer to the Lord through regular prayer and by searching His scriptures. There is more stretching of the self in their service because more is specifically required, such as in the development of empathy and interest in others even if such feelings are unreciprocated. The missionaries usually honor the formula for faith and study, service, prayers, and worship.

Conversely, why is it that so often "at home," even with good parents and Church activity, we do not necessarily see similar spiritual progress? First, at home our youth are more inclined to focus on self, though some of this is understandably needed since career choices are to be pursued and a wise selection of an eternal companion is to be made. At home too there is often more pleasing of oneself and less structure and less self-discipline than in the mission field. Furthermore, service at home is often limited mainly to one's formal Church calling, a part-time thing at best.

In addition, the young person at home lacks a full-time companion to encourage the personal development. He usually does less daily scripture study. And too little that is really meaningful in getting young persons outside the tiny theater of self-concern is required by loving parents and leaders, though it need not be so.

The contrasts—some unavoidable—are worth thinking about. Generally the remarkable growth we often see as a result of full-time missions dwarfs the more "slack" yield we frequently see at home.

It is clear that the possibilities for greater positive change are enormous for all of us at home! They lie all around us! There is so much to do and so little time, and so few golden teaching moments.

Inasmuch as we can "be the means of bringing salvation" to others, we should each consider the following questions: What is our doctrinal impact on those we serve or influence? What is our personal impact on those we serve or influence? What is our training impact on those we serve or influence? Or is our influence non-specific and merely marginal?

It may be that what is needed is to remonstrate or reassure, correct or commend, verify or clarify, counsel or listen, and so forth.

If reproving counsel is needed, we are to show an increase in love after administering the reproof (D&C 121:43). Brigham Young said that we should not chasten beyond the capacity of our healing balm (see Journal of Discourses 9:124-25). Paul said we are also to comfort and to forgive, lest the errant one "be swallowed up with overmuch sorrow" (2 Corinthians 2:7).

Much helping is likewise accomplished through appreciation, encouragement, commendation, reassurance, and variations of "You can do it!" In this way horizons are expanded, precious perspective is provided:

And the night following the Lord stood by him, and said, Be of good cheer, Paul: for as thou hast testified of me in Jerusalem, so must thou bear witness also at Rome (Acts 23:11).

The ends of the earth shall inquire after thy name, and fools shall have thee in derision, and hell shall rage against thee (D&C 122:1).

And when Enoch had heard these words, he bowed himself to the earth, before the Lord, and spake before the Lord, saying: Why is it that I have found favor in thy sight, and am but a lad, and all the people hate me; for I am slow of speech; wherefore am I thy servant?

And the Lord said unto Enoch: Go forth and do as I have commanded thee, and no man shall pierce thee. Open thy mouth, and it shall be filled, and I will give thee utterance, for all flesh is in my hands, and I will do as seemeth me good.

Say unto this people: Choose ye this day, to serve the Lord God who made you. (Moses 6:31-33.)

Now the Lord had shown unto me, Abraham, the intelligences that were organized before the world was; and among all these there were many of the noble and great ones;

And God saw these souls that they were good, and he stood in the midst of them, and he said: These I will make my rulers; for he stood among those that were spirits, and he saw that they were good; and he said unto me: Abraham, thou art one of them; thou wast chosen before thou wast born (Abraham 3:22-23).

Before I formed thee in the belly I knew thee; and before thou camest forth out of the womb I sanctified thee, and I ordained thee a prophet unto the nations (Jeremiah 1:5).

The sometimes stern Duke of Wellington, in the sunset of his life, was asked how he could do better if he were to live his life over again. Said he, "I should have given more praise" (Elizabeth Longford, Wellington: The Years of the Sword [New York: Harper and Row, 1969], p. 486). How many of us display that same deficiency?

Helping also includes showing "how," teaching specific doctrines, clarifying the problem, and bringing a fresh view, as in the divine help given the brother of fared regarding building barges (see Ether 2:16 to 3:5).

The Prophet Joseph Smith emphasized the importance of our understanding the character of God, one of whose attributes is love.

Love is one of the chief characteristics of Deity, and ought to be manifested by those who aspire to be the sons of God. A man filled with the love of God, is not content with blessing his family alone, but ranges through the whole world, anxious to bless the whole human race. (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 174.)

There are but very few beings in the world who understand rightly the character of God. The great majority of mankind do not comprehend anything, either that which is past or that which is to come, as it respects their relationship to God. They do not know, neither do they understand the nature of that relationship; and consequently they know but little, . . . more than to eat, drink, and sleep. This is all man knows about God or his existence, unless it is given by the inspiration of the Almighty.. . . If men do not comprehend the character of God, they do not comprehend themselves. (Teachings, p. 343.)

It is the first principle of the Gospel to know for a certainty the Character of God. (Teachings, p. 345.)

When we understand the character of God, and know how to come to him, he begins to unfold the heavens to us, and to tell us all about it. When we are ready to come to him, he is ready to come to us. (Teachings, p. 350.)

While we may crave dramatic change and sudden improvement, most often this progress will be gradual. Therefore we should come to value the small things that make up such a large share of the Lord's large blessings.
