Neal A. Maxwell, Men and Women of Christ ( 1991)

Chapter 7

"Things As They Really Are"

Often, becoming men and women of Christ involves seemingly micro-movement on our part. We surely see God's guidance in the small, personal things as well as in the larger and spectacular things. There is guiding revelation in the slightest divine inflection. After all, divine tutoring occurs not only massively but incrementally—"line upon line, precept upon precept" (see Isaiah 28:10; D&C 98:12).

The parting of the Red Sea was certainly spectacular, but those roiling waters soon resumed their more placid place. In the perspective of eternity, was that dramatic parting any greater than God's gradually opening the way for a reconciliation between Esau and Jacob? or His dramatically opening the curtains of Peter's understanding to envision that Christ's gospel was for Gentiles as well as for Israel?

Day in and day out the same Lord who parted the Red Sea so that Israel might escape Egypt provides ways for us to escape temptation (see 1 Corinthians 10:13). "By very small means," Alma told his son, "the Lord. . . bringeth about the salvation of many souls" (Alma 37:7). Scale, therefore, is not the sole measure of spiritual significance; for "out of small things proceedeth that which is great" (D&C 64:33).

Whether in geologic convulsion or in geologic gradualism, God once parted the continents and oceans (see Genesis 10:25; D&C 133:24). He can also part the curtains of our individual understanding by helping us see "things as they really are" (Jacob 4:13). Has He not said He will guide us by His being on our left and right hands, showing us the way, disclosing "here a little, and there a little"? (D&C 128:21; see also 84:88.)

A marvelous insight is given to us by the brother of Jared, who observed that even when the Lord shows "forth great power" it can, ironically, nevertheless look "small unto the understanding of men" (Ether 3:5). The natural eye not only misses the small things of the Lord but also misjudges them as to source. This is an enormously important clue in understanding the ways of the Lord, which are higher than man's ways (see Isaiah 55:8). We think of God's power as being massive and galactic, and it is; but often it is expressed in small ways, and hence its significance is misread by mortals. Could it be that the higher ways of God consist partly of His competency in His expansive effectiveness but also in micro matters? Indeed!

When the special phrase about seeing things "as they really are" is employed, it brings to mind the episode of the young man who served with the prophet Elisha. They were encompassed about with enemy chariots. Understandably alarmed, the young man said, "Master! how shall we do?" Elisha, hoping to comfort the young man, responded, "Fear not: for they that be with us are more than they that be with them." To the natural eye, this clearly was not the case; the forces of righteousness were obviously outnumbered by those of their enemy. So the prophet prayed for the young man that his eyes might be opened, that he, too, might see. Then came the great blessing: "The Lord opened the eyes of the young man; and he saw: and, behold, the mountain was full of horses and chariots of fire." (See 2 Kings 6:13-17.)

It is that process of enlightenment that is vital. We cannot fully or clearly see with the natural eye. It is too uncurious, too myopic, too interested in nonspiritual things. But with the eye of faith we can truly see things as they really are.

If we are meek, God can guide our smallest steps, leading us into needed light or deflecting us from a seemingly small misstep, such as a temptation that incrementally might alter our life's course. He can inspire us to hold fast when our weary grip yearns to relax.

In the miracle of the loaves and the fishes many of those benefitted were doubtless hungry again the very next day. Is the miracle of the manna greater than the miracle of forgiveness? The miracle of the Restoration brings to us the fulness of the Bread of Life, so that we need "never hunger" (John 6:35). Jesus Himself observed that those who ate the miraculous manna were long since dead. They would have remained so, too, except for the miracle of Christ's atonement and the resurrection.

God is certainly present in the dramatic, spiritual "about faces," such as occurred on the road to Damascus, but He is also in the smaller course corrections. He surely helps the willing prodigals come to themselves, but just as surely and significantly He also steadies the unstraying who quietly and faithfully do their duties, season after season, without the recognition and celebration of the "fatted calf" (see Luke 15:11-32).

The glory God promises us is beyond our imagination—eye hath not seen nor ear heard......(1 Corinthians 2:9.) Those who know not "the dealings of that God who. . . created them," however, thus refuse to see or to believe the big picture (1 Nephi 2:12). Lacking this precious perspective about God's "doings in other lands" (1 Nephi 19:22), they say "it is not reasonable that such a being as a Christ shall come." Furthermore, they exclaim, why doesn't He show himself to us? (Helaman 16:18.)

Some worried much about how Moses "ruled over" them (Numbers 16:13), even after the miracle of the parting of the Red Sea. But no aspirants had sought to take charge on the day when Pharaoh's armies drew menacingly close. Small minds forget large blessings! Proud minds ceaselessly inquire of God, "What have you done for me lately?"

If one is without the faith that remembers, past benefactions are forgotten because of present deprivations. Thirst for water caused some to forget that they were once rescued from far too much water at the Red Sea. It is ironical that the very repetition of some blessings can routinize these blessings. The ration of the daily miracle of manna was taken for granted, even complained about by some.

It is therefore not surprising that miracles, by themselves, neither create faith nor sustain it. For the meek and faithful, however, miracles—including blessings large and small—add to their gratitude and wonder. Far from feeling entitled, they feel overwhelmed at God's continuing goodness, graciousness, and mercy! Thus in small and various ways God leads the meek in a course across the gulf of misery and lands them safely on the other side (see Helaman 3:29-30).

Jesus, the strict Lord of the "narrow gate and the needle's eye," is also generous Jesus, He who waits for the repentant "with open arms" (Mormon 6:17). In Him is both divine exactness and divine receptiveness, both divine scrutiny and divine generosity.

The Lord's greatness is seen in the expansiveness of His works as well as in their intricacies. They reflect overwhelming vastness and also incredible personal-ness. There is stunning majesty and beauty in the handiwork of the heavens (D&C 88:47), likewise in the intricacy and beauty of the "arrayed" lilies of the field (Matthew 6:29), and in the reported double-helical symmetry of the DNA molecule (see Elizabeth L. Newhouse, ed., Inventors and Discoverers: Changing Our World [Washington, D.C.: National Geographic Society, 1988], p. 292). Indeed, "all things bear record of [God]" (Moses 6:63).

There are both macro- and micro-miracles (see Alma 37:41). The heavens surely witness God's majesty (D&C 88:47), but no more so than in His softening of the hard human heart.

How big is God's work of which we are part?

How large the Church will become on this earth we do not know, but the Lord has said He wants His spiritual army to become "very great." He also wants it to become "sanctified." (See D&C 105:31.) Obviously we look to spiritual as well as numerical growth, but we are probably talking about attaining Church membership of tens of millions living on this side of the veil, among earth's population, currently five-plus billion.

In addition there is the vast redemptive work in the spirit world. Demographers estimate that some 60 to 70 billion people have lived on this planet thus far. How extensive the work in the spirit world is we do not know, but it too is likely to number in the millions of converts.

As if all this were not overwhelming enough, the Lord told Moses, "but only an account of this earth, and the inhabitants thereof, give I unto you" (Moses 1:35). We know little of the Lord's work beyond what we have been told about this planet, but its vastness is strongly indicated: "That by him, and through him, and of him, the worlds are and were created, and the inhabitants thereof are begotten sons and daughters unto God" (D&C 76:24).

Thus the work of the Lord is breathtaking in its scope! We have only glimpses and scriptural inklings—enough to know we do not worship a one—planet God!

Yet despite all the universe's vastness it is also characterized by its moving personal-ness! Enoch, who was permitted to see much, exclaimed to the Lord, "Yet thou art there" (Moses 7:30).

It would be unwise, of course, for the Church to tie itself to the provisional truths of science at any point in science's unfolding history. Ultimately, scientific truth will align with divinely revealed truth; meanwhile we can applaud genuine scientific advances, noting them without depending overly much upon them. In that perspective, the following observations, quotations, and comparisons are offered.

As to divine design in the universe, a prophet was told, "worlds without number have I created" (Moses 1:33). Today,

Astronomers in Cambridge, Mass., say they have discovered the largest structure ever seen in the universe, a collection of galaxies so extensive that it defies explanation by any present theory.

Dubbed the "Great Wall," the galaxies form a sheet at least 500 million light years long, or 3,000 billion billion miles.

The Great Wall's estimated length, at 500 million light years, defies almost any standard of comparison. Earth's own galaxy, the Milky Way, is only 100,000 light years across . . . "We keep being surprised that we keep seeing something bigger as we go out farther." (David L. Chandler, "Largest Structure Found in Universe Defies Explanation," Sacramento Union, November 19, 1989, p. 22.)

The vastness confirms God's declaration, "There is no end to my works" (Moses 1:38).

Divine design denotes order among the planets. The Lord revealed to Abraham that another celestial body "governs all these which belong to the same order as that upon which thou standest" (Abraham 3:1-3, 4). Indeed, Kolob stands above the earth.

Meanwhile, independent of such revelations, some scientists say that

part of the cosmos looks more like a regularly patterned honeycomb than a random explosion of matter. . . . Vast galaxies apparently are clustered in a regularly spaced pattern. (Stephen Strauss, Globe and Mail, February 5, 1990.)

Revelations teach that in creating this planet the Gods said, "There is space there . . . and we will make an earth" (Abraham 3:24). One astrophysicist believes the 12 other Great Walls of galaxies have roughly the same thickness. Our galaxy, the Milky Way, is located in one of the relatively empty spaces between the Great Walls. (Stephen Strauss, Globe and Mail, February 5, 1990.)

Within this breathtaking and precious perspective about macro and micro things, let us examine the challenges of daily life and how better to keep these in proportion as we strive to perfect what is lacking in our faith; for it is faith that moves us to action to our emulation of Jesus.
