Neal A. Maxwell, Men and Women of Christ ( 1991)

Chapter 8

"Perfect That Which Is Lacking in Your Faith"

All that Jesus does by way of teaching and exemplifying for his disciples is designed to increase our faith. The meridian disciples were surely aware of their need. After the Master taught them a particularly difficult doctrine, the need for repeated forgiveness, "the apostles said unto the Lord, Increase our faith" (Luke 17:5).

We are to "walk by faith, not by sight" (2 Corinthians 5:7). Also, we are to "overcome by faith" (D&C 76:53). Yet, as Paul declared, we can live with confidence, because faith provides "the evidence of things not seen" (Hebrews 11:1). It is real evidence, but because it is of a special type many mortals dismiss it, for "the natural man receiveth not the things of the Spirit of God: for they are foolishness unto him: neither can he know them, because they are spiritually discerned" (1 Corinthians 2:14).

Powerful and centered in truth as it is, "faith is not to have a perfect knowledge of things; therefore if ye have faith ye hope for things which are not seen, which are true" (Alma 32:21).

There can be no spiritual faith, however, that "stands in the wisdom of men" (1 Corinthians 2:5).

Enos was commended for having faith in Jesus, whom he had not then seen (see Enos 1:8). As with so many faithful disciples after their faith has been tried, Enos found that "greater things [were] made manifest" (3 Nephi 26:9). So did the once-reproved but carefully tutored and commended brother of fared: "And because of the knowledge of this man he could not be kept from beholding within the veil; and he saw the finger of Jesus, which, when he saw, he fell with fear; for he knew that it was the finger of the Lord; and he had faith no longer, for he knew, nothing doubting" (Ether 3:19).

We are children, children who "have not as yet understood how great blessings the Father hath . . . prepared for [us]" (D&C 78:17). However, He will lead us along. He will be in our midst even though we cannot bear all things now (see D&C 78:18; 32:3; 50:40). The more we become men and women of Christ, the more we can bear, and hear, and do!

Great faith, born of doing simple things, is the key to much that matters. When we give place in our lives for developing such faith, this faith facilitates the development of other vital qualities and outcomes as well.

First, we must have sufficient "faith unto repentance" (Alma 34:15). Faith helps us to put our lives in order; without it we simply would not bother. Successful repentance then produces more faith.

No wonder that in our time of little faith the love of many in the world waxes cold (see Matthew 24:12). Faith always companies with charity and hope, qualities likewise greatly needed in times of despair (see 1 Corinthians 13:13; D&C 4:5). There is similar interplay between faith and patience (see D&C 6:19). In a pushy, selfish world, how vital patience is in deferring certain gratifications, lest in our "me-ness" and "now-ness" we go on, for instance, placing our grandchildren more deeply in debt!

True faith will also lead to good works, of which there is surely no surplus. Ponder how much human deprivation and discouragement result from the scarcity of good works arising from a scarcity of faith! (See James 2:14.)

To our faith we will add virtue, which will help us to be portable lights to the world (Philippians 2:15).

Little wonder, therefore, that faith is the first principle of the gospel of Jesus Christ! It is no surprise that this first principle is so clearly, obviously, and necessarily connected with the first great commandment—to love God with all our strength, mind, and soul.

As essential as faith is, it is strange that we should stumble so often over how to increase it. Why should we be so slow to discern specifically what is lacking to keep us from strengthening our faith? (See 1 Thessalonians 3:10.) The simple remedies for increasing our faith lie within easy reach.

To supply what is lacking in our faith we must first make room for its conscious development—in our souls and in our schedules.

What happens after we really "give place" for the gospel in our lives? It is analogous to a seed that begins to "swell," "fill," and "enlarge [one's] soul," and " to enlighten [one's] understanding." Of the results of such verifiable outcomes, asked Alma, "Would not this increase your faith?" (Alma 32:28-29.) He continued, observing that the seed "swelleth," and "sprouteth," asking, "behold, will not this strengthen your faith?" Through this process of personal verification we can, accurately and experientially, come to say, "I know that this is a good seed," and thus faith yields to knowledge "in that thing" (Alma 32:30, 34). But we cannot have the results of the experiment without performing the experiment. Some of us "give" only postage stamp "place" in our lives, and yet we expect the yield of an acre! "Place" means time, thought, and service.

In the process of building faith, wrote Alma, we must "experiment on the word" of the Master, giving "place" sufficient to experiment upon each essential "thing" the gospel requires of us. Out of such cumulative experience comes the real, cumulative evidence.

Nevertheless, inquirers after more faith are often disappointed or are put off when told to "study, serve, pray, and worship." They expect to hear something else, something more. As with Naaman, a reminder is needed: "If the prophet had bid thee do some great thing, wouldest thou not have done it?" (2 Kings 5:13.)

As we speak in terms of worshipping, serving, studying, and praying, we perceive that there are many implications attached to those well-worn words. Certainly by serving we hasten the shedding of selfishness and quicken our commitment to the second great commandment. Likewise, studying facilitates our remembering—not only do we recall the things out of our personal lives but also we have placed before us the enlarged memory of holy scriptures with all of the relevant accounts out of mankind's spiritual history (Alma 37:8). More important, by studying we come to know God the Eternal Father and His Son Jesus Christ. Not only is this essential to life eternal; also it gives us a symmetry as between things intellectual and spiritual.

By praying, we begin to experience what it is like when we see the interplay of man's moral agency and God's directing hand. These are things to be learned only by experience. We learn how important our intentions are, since we are instructed to pray for that "which is right" (3 Nephi 18:20). Our prayers will be better if they are in fact inspired prayers.

Thus worshipping, serving, studying, praying, each in its own way squeezes selfishness out of us; it pushes aside our preoccupations with the things of the world.

Our objective, of course, is to increase our faith in the Lord, in His plan, in His timing, and in His love. Studying helps us push forward the borders of our understanding, revealing God in His fulness and inspiring awe in us as we understand that He truly is able to do His own work (see 2 Nephi 27:20-21). As we serve, by magnifying our calling, including practicing "pure religion and undefiled" (James 1:27), we gain experience in appreciating all that God has done for us and what taking His yoke upon us truly does to help us learn of Him.

From our own experiences—worshipping, serving, praying, and studying—we learn not only that God is actually there but also that He is truly worthy of our total trust and full faith. Moreover, we see how He delivers on His promises, and this equips us to face further challenges. The young Nephi had reached that point: "And it came to pass that I, Nephi, said unto my father: I will go and do the things which the Lord hath commanded, for I know that the Lord giveth no commandments unto the children of men, save he shall prepare a way for them that they may accomplish the thing which he commandeth them" (1 Nephi 3:7).

Possessed of faith, we need not understand all things all at once in order to know the most basic things: "I know that [God] loveth his children; nevertheless, I do not know the meaning of all things" (1 Nephi 11:17).

Thus faith is experiential, producing "evidence of things not seen" but which are nevertheless true (Hebrews 11:1). As the Lord cumulatively reveals Himself to us, this enables "the mind of man to place confidence in Him without reservation" ("Faith," LDS Bible Dictionary, p. 669). Therefore, obeying and learning go together—just as do studying and serving.

When Paul wrote of his desire to help members at Thessalonica "perfect that which [was] lacking in [their] faith" (1 Thessalonians 3:10), later in the epistle he wrote of their need to serve and to love one another, to "pray without ceasing," to "despise not prophesyings," and to be more holy and pure. He also taught them of the resurrection and Christ's second coming. Did the members at Thessalonica thereafter "give place" for Paul's words? Did they "experiment upon" Paul's words and do the simple things "commanded"? The opportunity was there to increase their faith, but was it heeded?

To "come unto Christ, and be perfected in Him" (Moroni 10:32) means moving toward Him, becoming more like Him, step by step. Delaying will not lessen the vast distance to be traveled. Procrastinating will not bring the emergence of new alternatives. All the anxiety and energy expended in milling about does not move us one inch forward on the path of discipleship. (See Joel 3:14.)

At the center of what is lacking is usually the reluctance to choose, or to "give place," or to get started, or to resume the journey. We should choose, for refusing to choose is actually a decision as between life's two fundamental alternatives: "Wherefore, men are free. . . . to choose liberty and eternal life, through the great Mediator of all men, or to choose captivity and death, according to the captivity and power of the devil; for he seeketh that all men might be miserable like unto himself." (2 Nephi 2:27; see also Alma 3:26; 41:11.)

Without realizing the inherent inconsistency, some want happiness along with worldliness—which cannot be (see Alma 41:10). We "are free to choose," and choose we will, either subtly or dramatically. But the alternatives and consequences will not change.

The Lord clearly recognizes that not all have faith: "And as all have not faith, seek ye diligently and teach one another words of wisdom; yea, seek ye out of the best books words of wisdom; seek learning, even by study and also by faith" (D&C 88:118).

There must be the hearing of the word, because faith comes by that hearing (Romans 10:17). But hearing, by itself, is not always enough. Some individuals, even when so informed, may not acknowledge the "dealings of the God who [has] created them" (1 Nephi 2:12; Mosiah 10:14) or His "doings" elsewhere and with other peoples (1 Nephi 19:22; Helaman 16:19, 20).

Doing all this requires some time and the genuine focusing of attention. If we are too busy or too lazy, or too inconsistent in our efforts, we have given place to other things.

No wonder the scriptures say the time will come when "they that murmured shall learn doctrine" (Isaiah 29:24). At that time, they shall learn about things "as they really are" (Jacob 4:13).

Jesus asks us to "doubt not"—to give place attitudinally so that what at first may appear to be only a possibility can next become a probability and then a reality. To receive His work with a doubtful or slothful heart is to skew the experiment; either no place or insufficient place is given (see Matthew 21:21). These individuals have actually decided before they have truly and fully experimented. True disciples are initiators willing to cross developmental lines, for "he will give unto the faithful line upon line, precept upon precept" (D&C 98:12). These are they who "overcome by faith" (D&C 76:53). One promise is: "I will tell you in your mind" (D&C 8:2). Yes, such whisperings are "spiritually discerned." Yes, these lie outside the hearing of others. But they are audible to the disciple who has ears to hear.

Spiritual experiences provide repeated verifications, telling us again and again what we already know. Life even seems geared to repeat certain lessons. However, unremembered experiences cannot help us. Hence having a poor spiritual memory diminishes discipleship.

Better to walk by faith and receive its quiet evidence of things not seen than to see extraordinary things and then stumble over but ordinary challenges.

Similarly, disputes over milk or over a misspelled name in a revelation, murmuring over minor imperfections in Joseph Smith, concern over getting more credit, and so on, have all combined in the past to overcome other individuals in one degree or another. At this historical distance we may think, "How silly!" But without meekness, faith is vulnerable; and for pride, nothing is too petty to be seized upon.

Faith can falter when some of those who have played significant roles in the past feel left out later on as this great work moves on. From his jail cell even the great prophet John the Baptist sought reassurance (see Luke 7:19-23). Lack of mortal appreciation for past performances can occur. It did when there arose in Egypt a new king "which knew not Joseph" (Exodus 1:8). Yet Joseph had done so much and so admirably, including helping to feed thousands of Egyptians.

When what we personally have contributed in the past is now less noticed, if we are not meek we may notice more the imperfections of current leaders. As we cease giving place we "neglect the tree," and the "heat of the sun . . . scorcheth it" (Alma 32:37, 38). The meek, however, even in disappointment, will continue to nurture the tree of testimony by worship, service, study, and prayer.

Oliver Cowdery's readmission to the Church—tender, humble, and sweet—is a reminder of how, as we can understand, even then he wanted people to know he had played a leading part in the beginnings of this great work, as he surely did.

High status and unusual spiritual experiences are not guarantees of spiritual survival. These may even bring extra burdens. Regardless of our station, however, the yoke is easy to bear at any stage—but only if we are meek and lowly. It takes meekness to give place and to continue to give place for the nurturing and nourishing of faith to develop what we lack.

As we worship God with all of our mind, soul, and strength we move from appreciation to adoration and on to emulation. Our minds are involved in studying and pondering. Our souls are extended in service. Finally we reach a consecration of all things.

To be passed over can be wrongly construed as being unvalued by God or by one's colleagues. Yet in the kingdom of God to be uncalled is clearly not to be unworthy, or unable! The meek understand this. Hyrum Smith never worried that younger Joseph, in a sense, "ruled over him." No wonder the Lord praised Hyrum for the integrity of his heart. The man or woman of Christ is not easily offended.

If we do not remember how "we have proved [God] in days that are past," then the experimental evidence can be lost. Hence going through the files of faith, counting our blessings, is needed. It aids intellectual honesty and serves as an internal auditing.

The cardinal virtues, including faith, are all necessary for overcoming this world but are all likewise essential for happy survival in the next world. Since faith helped frame the universe and since "faith . . . is the moving cause of all action" (Lectures on Faith 1:10), how would one fare amidst the galaxies and eternities without faith?

How could one assist the Lord's work in the world to come without having learned, here and now, obedience to the laws upon which all blessings are predicated? By its very geometry, there are no corners to be cut on the straight and narrow path.

How could one honor the moral agency of others without having the faith to develop significant patience and longsuffering? How could we behave redemptively without having developed the attributes of mercy and love?

To develop further all these cardinal and eternal qualities is to equip oneself for further service both now and in the world to come. In that world, as here, the focus of the Lord's work will be people; it will not shift suddenly to the manufacture of cosmic widgets!

If the cardinal virtues remain less developed in us we can, to be sure, still lead decent, useful, and honorable lives. But clearly we will be lacking in certain things. To the extent that here we have been diverted from those virtues, we have not been "valiant in the testimony of Jesus" (D&C 76:79).

His yoke, when fully and squarely placed upon us, is much lighter than the weight of sin. No burden is as heavy as the burden of the "natural man"! The annoying load of ambivalence and the hecticness of hesitation produce their own aggravations and frustrations.

Pride often blocks the path to the development of greater faith and the cardinal attributes essential to the man and woman of Christ. The best way to swallow our pride is to be "swallowed up" in the Father's will, as was Jesus: "The will of the son (was] swallowed up in the will of the Father" (Mosiah 15:7). At the apogee of agony, though consumed with pain, Jesus was able to proceed because He was fully consumed in doing Father's will: "These things I have spoken unto you, that in me ye might have peace. In the world ye shall have tribulation: but be of good cheer; I have overcome the world." (John 16:33.)

He has set the pattern for us and shown us the way: "Saying, Father, if thou be willing, remove this cup from me: nevertheless not my will, but thine, be done" (Luke 22:42).

He had been thus committed for a long, long time: "And behold, I am the light and the life of the world; and I have drunk out of that bitter cup which the Father hath given me, and have glorified the Father in taking upon me the sins of the world, in the which I have suffered the will of the Father in all things from the beginning" (3 Nephi 11:11).

In Jesus' spiritual submissiveness there was the shining but subdued elegance of marvelous meekness. On our small scale initial meekness may consist of being willing simply to give place to develop that which is lacking in our faith.

We are not far into the process of giving place before we encounter our well-developed selfishness: Our schedule is too full to visit the sick. Other papers must be attended to before scriptures can be searched. Private prayers are put off till weariness limits both the quality and the quantity of our pleadings and appreciations. The cares of the world crowd out inward and reflective worship at a sacrament meeting.

Selfishness need not be gross in order to call the cadence in our lives. It merely needs to deflect us from thinking about an act of service to thinking about needing a new pair of shoes; or from making a nurturing phone call to watching a soap opera.

Sometimes our intentions lack full implementation because of waning energy. At other times an incipient righteous desire is overcome by pervasive fatigue. Good thoughts are dissolved by a loss of concentration amid weariness. Truly, "the spirit indeed is willing, but the flesh is weak" (Matthew 26:41). 'While we must beware of excusing ourselves too much, we do need to make some allowance for that fundamental fact.

Spiritual stimuli, for instance, can be choked out by the steady stimuli of the world. Thirst, hunger, fatigue—all can magnify the attractiveness of a mess of pottage.

As the Apostle Peter declared, we are in bondage to that which overcomes us (see 2 Peter 2:9). Such bondage is a needless burden and prevents happiness.

Selfishness, one type of bondage, magnifies our sufferings. In an early revelation of August 1831 the Lord warned Sidney Rigdon that he had "exalted himself in his heart, and received not counsel, but grieved the Spirit" (D&C 63:55). Sidney Rigdon's ego was not fully tamed. The Lord counseled him to "remain with my people" (D&C 124:104), but he did not.

Sidney Rigdon complained bitterly over his difficulties in Liberty Jail. These sufferings were real, but so was his stubborn self-pity. It elbowed out earlier and extraordinary spiritual experiences.

Sidney was let out of the jail secretly at night, through the friendship of the sheriff and the jailor, "after having declared in prison that the sufferings of Jesus Christ were a fool to his," from which it appears that Sidney's sufferings, of the body and mind together, were almost more than he could bear (John Jaques, "Life and Labors of Sidney Rigdon," Improvement Era, February 1900, pp. 265-66).

Only six years after being lifted up by the Lord in the glorious theophany in Hiram, Ohio (see D&C 76), Sidney, though truly tried, felt put upon by the Lord! He first lost his heart and then his way.

To give place thus requires us to push wrong things out, including fear. Fear and faith are not good companions. The failure to give place, with all that that phrase implies, is usually part of what is lacking in the development of our faith.

As we put off more and more pride, thereby we can give place for more of the mulch of meekness in which faith grows steadily. Likewise, as we shed more selfishness, there is, for instance, more room to try the experiment of serving the sick. As Alma declared, each gospel principle, each gospel task, carries its own verifications and satisfactions.

But the tree of faith, though it grows quite quickly, nevertheless needs to be nourished "with great care" and over time, or it will wither. Though we gain direct knowledge in this or "in that thing, . . . neither must ye lay aside your faith" (Alma 32:34, 36).

The same things necessary to successfully planting the seed are necessary to the nourishment of the growing tree—worship, service, study, and prayer, with all of the specifics implicit in each of these.

When we search the scriptures we enlarge our memories (see Alma 37:8) by accessing the divine database instead of relying solely on our small set of experiences.

With regard to worship, prayer, study, and service, the words given to a king of Old Testament times should be observed: "Be strong, and do it" (1 Chronicles 28:10). The root system must be deep and wide to withstand wind and heat. If we "take no thought for its nourishment," this does not reflect on the quality of the seed or fruit. Rather, it reflects that "your ground is barren." What is ironical is that it is we who, when the tree withers, "pluck it up and cast it out." (Alma 32:38-39.) How many have so exited from the field of faith!

It takes faith to withstand the secular society. We who seek to serve in this day and time are, for instance, asked to be more loving at a time when the love of many waxes cold. We are asked to be more merciful, even as the Saints are persecuted. We are asked to be more holy as the world ripens in iniquity. We are asked to be more filled with hope in a world marked by growing despair because of growing iniquity. When, as in the world, there is more impatience, we are asked to be patient and full of faith even as other men's hearts fail them. We are asked to be peacemakers even as peace has been taken from the earth. We are asked to have enough faith to have fidelity in our marriage and chastity in dating even as the world celebrates sex almost as a secular religion.

As our people mature spiritually, however, we will reach the day foreseen by Nephi: "The power of the Lamb of God, descended upon the saints of the church of the Lamb, and upon the covenant people of the Lord, who were scattered upon all the face of the earth; and they were armed with righteousness and with the power of God in great glory" (1 Nephi 14:14).

All this is to be accomplished in deteriorating circumstances such as are recorded in the ninth chapter of Moroni. For many people life is already without hope, without order, without mercy, without civilization. Many are already "past feeling" (Moroni 9:20). To perfect that which is lacking in our faith will be no small accomplishment!

Yet the Lord has promised that he will lead the man and woman of Christ across the gulf of misery and back to His heavenly kingdom.

Thus the Lord we worship is not an inscrutable and invisible force in the universe whose purposes are unclear. Instead, He is the loving Father who has told us specifically what His plan of happiness for us is and what our duties are.

Moreover, the more we keep the first great commandment, the more God will help us to keep the second great commandment. As for a time we experience His long-suffering, we are more inclined to extend our long-suffering to others. As we continue the journey of discipleship, more and more we will see things as they really are and also see people for who they really are. God's answers are abundant, and so are His instructive questions.
