Neal A. Maxwell, Men and Women of Christ ( 1991)

Chapter 9

"Answer This Question Yourselves"

The Lord has given us all the vital answers we need in order to be saved and to become men and women of Christ; in fact, "enough and to spare." But His questions are also revealing, as are the questions emanating from His prophets. As with those already noted in chapter 6, these questions also often contain implicit answers; they can brace us by reminding us of eternal realities.

Clearly the Lord uses questions for His teaching purposes: "Let us reason. . . with one another. . . that you may understand. . . wherefore, I the Lord ask you. . . this question" (D&C 50:11-13). Of many of His inquiries he might well say to us too, "Answer this question yourselves" (D&C 50:16). His questions are always deep in their implications; for instance, "Unto what were ye ordained?" He desires that we "answer" such questions so that we work through all the implications. Think of it: Our Lord, who has created many worlds besides this one, having the patience and the love required to engage in such tutorials with seemingly insignificant individuals on this obscure planet at the edge of an ordinary sized galaxy!

Some of the special exchanges pile questions upon questions, all to the end that the Lord can more fully teach responsive persons. It is a mark not only of the Lord's love and patience but also of His long-suffering toward the learners. These tutorials show the Savior as the Master Teacher. He is always anxious to share more with us, as soon as we are ready.

Of course, as we consider inspired questions these are in contrast to our own foolish questions, which even God cannot answer. C. S. Lewis wrote: "All nonsense questions are unanswerable. How many hours are there in a mile? Is yellow square or round? Probably half the questions we ask—half of our great theological and metaphysical problems—are like that." (A Mind Awake [New York: Harcourt, Brace, and World, 1968], p. 61.)

We can also avoid answering inspired searching questions. We can likewise hedge in our responses to searching questions. But if we possess meekness, this meekness will supply the readiness to hear and to learn.

Being humble enough to ask inspired and significant questions is important. Elias Higbee's sincere question about what is meant by Isaiah 52:1 (see D&C 113:7) would not be on a par with the questions of Enoch and Joseph Smith inquiring why God can weep (see Moses 7:29) and asking Him "'Where is the pavilion that covereth thy hiding place?" (D&C 121:1.) There is no democracy among our questions.

Some questions are asked not for information but to put our verification on the record: "And he said unto them, 'When I sent you without purse, and scrip, and shoes, lacked ye any thing? And they said, Nothing." (Luke 22:35.) Confirmations put reminders on the record, and they sober and instruct us for what lies ahead (see Luke 22:36-38).

Why not, therefore, take full advantage of the answers contained in the tutoring questions and their emerging and instructive one-liners from the Lord? Though asked of others, these questions are full of generic insights and needed directions for us as well as for the actual addressees.

The questions asked by the Lord also tell us much about the questioner and His substance and style, which we are to emulate. Thus these interrogatories are placed in the holy scriptures to inspire us, to encourage us, and to be pondered by us.

While some of the episodes cited involve corrective counsel, given long ago to individuals, surely in the elapsing years the meek among those individuals have long since worked things through with the Lord. Thus we are not "picking" on people when we cite them as examples; rather, we are trying to identify correct principles in order to help us with our own deficiencies. Therefore, since these episodes have been preserved for us for a wise purpose, let us so use them—but without being unduly judgmental of, or condescending toward, the individuals involved.

One superlative illustration of how the Lord used questions to instruct the improving disciple is His exchange with Enoch. The Lord and Enoch "reason with one another," that Enoch "may understand." Enoch bore record that he actually saw the God of heaven weep. Indeed, the heavens "shed forth their tears as the rain upon the mountains." Perplexed Enoch then asked how God, involved with "millions of earths like this," could weep. (Moses 7:28-31.)

In response, the Lord rehearsed events from the time of the Garden of Eden, telling that, despite being commanded to love one another, many people had become "without affection," and that instead of choosing Him, many had chosen Satan as their father—hence, "misery shall be their doom." The Lord then answered Enoch's question with a question: "'Wherefore should not the heavens weep, seeing these shall suffer?" (Moses 7:32-37.) The Lord, longsuffering and loving, weeps over needless human suffering and misery.

Enoch wept, too. At first he "refuse[d] to be comforted." But in His mercy the Lord gave Enoch further perspective: "Lift up your heart, and be glad; and look." Enoch then saw the forthcoming day of the great rescuing mission of Jesus, His atoning sacrifice, and the Resurrection. And the Lord described to him the restoration of the gospel in the last days and the other events associated with His second coming, and showed Enoch "all things even unto the end of the world." (Moses 7:41-67.)

In difficult moments as we witness needless human suffering, such perspective can and should comfort us, too. Nor need we be immobilized by human suffering. Ever since God gave "unto man his agency" (Moses 7:32), avoidable human misery has been largely caused by wrong choices and wrong behavior. Without gospel perspective, however, some cite human misery as a reason to doubt or to deny God. Failing to understand God's plan, some even imply their own moral superiority because, unlike God, they really "care" about human suffering!

In His exchange with Enoch, the mercy and love of God and certain causes of mortal misery are made abundantly clear. Even so, God will not suspend His "plan of happiness," though man's misuse of moral agency causes such gross human misery. There is no other way.

At yet another level of significance, our unmeek questions reveal the need for our further tutoring. In this dispensation the Lord warned that one might "do many mighty works, yet if he boasts in his own strength . . . he must fall" (D&C 3:4). This declaration parallels an ancient lesson: "And [Moses] said unto them, Hear now, ye rebels; must we fetch you water out of this rock?" (Numbers 20:10, italics added.) President Spencer W. Kimball observed: "Moses had integrity in great measure, but in that unguarded moment he had presumptuously taken credit for the Lord's miracle." (Faith Precedes the Miracle [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1972], p. 243.)

The pronoun-problem "we" reflected a momentary confusion about causality. It also reflected Moses' understandable fatigue, weariness, and exasperation. Instead of considering each case anew with fresh empathy and resolve, busy, weary priesthood leaders conducting "back-to-back" interviews can likewise be similarly rushed, pressed, fatigued. The flesh is weak, and as a result we say and do things we would not if we were fresh and meek, or if we had time to ponder and to remember.

Our Lord, though full of empathy, nevertheless asked weary Apostles, "Couldest not thou watch one hour?" (Mark 14:37.) Some moments transcend not only our energy but also our capacity to appreciate. Some supernal opportunities seem too big to be taken easy advantage of, especially as mortal frailties assert themselves.

The most sobering questions are often also the most brief, as when the Lord asked, "What is property unto me?" (D&C 117:4.) Can we become men and women of Christ if property means too much to us? The Lord continued with yet another question involving perspective: "[Why] covet that which is but the drop, and neglect the more weighty matters?" (D&C 117:8.) Oh, how we need this precious perspective!

Perceptive questions have a special way of framing the moments that matter, eliciting answers and responses otherwise unpreferred. Meekly responded to, honest questions may also provide opportunities for full spiritual surrender to the Lord.

In the honest questions Enoch, Moses, and others asked of the Lord there was a sense of unpreparedness but not an unwillingness. Prophets do feel their inadequacies: Enoch asked of the Lord: "Why is it that I have found favor in thy sight, and am but a lad, and all the people hate me; for I am slow of speech; wherefore am I thy servant?" (Moses 6:3.)

Moses said to God, "'Who am I, that I should go unto Pharaoh, and that I should bring forth the children of Israel out of Egypt?" (Exodus 3:11.) Subsequently, after experiencing difficulty, "Moses returned unto the Lord, and said, Lord, . . . why is it that thou hast sent me?" (Exodus 5:22.) Nevertheless, after some needed tutoring, Moses loyally did as he was divinely bidden, just as did Enoch!

Yet another episode shows the role of an inspired question in evoking surrender: "And Aaron answered him and said unto him: Believest thou that there is a God? And the king said: I know that the Amalekites say that there is a God, and I have granted unto them that they should build sanctuaries, that they may assemble themselves together to worship him. And if now thou sayest there is a God, behold I will believe." (Alma 22:7.)

The questioning facilitated the king's disclosing what really bothered him: "Behold, this is the thing which doth trouble me" (Alma 22:5). How often in our ministering to the people do we get at what is really troubling them? If we questioned more often under the direction of the Spirit, then we too could help others more often to surrender.

Much as with Saul of Tarsus, questions were asked of another whom the Lord needed to rescue by crisp inquiry. "Alma, rise and stand forth, for why persecutest thou the church of God?" (Mosiah 27:13.) Again we witness the directness and the first-name personal-ness of the Lord's entreaties.

When in Egypt, Joseph successfully resisted temptation, showing how instructive the questions of the meek can be. After rehearsing his loyalties to God and to Potiphar, Joseph asked Potiphar's wife a searching question; it was drenched with integrity: "How then can I do this great wickedness, and sin against God?" (Genesis 39:9.)

Even early on when Jesus was a lad, He was found in the temple asking learned doctors questions (see Luke 2:46). Not only did Jesus, the lad, ask questions of the learned in the temple, but upon receiving reproof from His anxious mother He also asked her and Joseph a profound question: "And he said unto them, How is it that ye sought me? wist ye not that I must be about my Father's business?" (Luke 2:49.) He knew so much, so young, including how to put tutoring questions.

Later on, His deft and inspired questions exposed hypocrisy:

And Jesus answered and said unto them, I will also ask of you one question, and answer me, and I will tell you by what authority I do these things.

The baptism of John, was it from heaven, or of men? answer me.

And they reasoned with themselves, saying, If we shall say, From heaven; he will say, Why then did ye not believe him?

But if we shall say, Of men; they feared the people: for all men counted John, that he was a prophet indeed.

And they answered and said unto Jesus, We cannot tell. And Jesus answering saith unto them, Neither do I tell you by what authority I do these things. (Mark 11:29-33.)

The questions Nephi asked of Laman and Lemuel reveal not only his perspective about the Lord's competency but also his capacity to remember. It was just the opposite with Laman and Lemuel, who did not want to risk venturing into Laban's "establishment" in order to get the brass plates. Noting that Laban was a "mighty man" and could slay them, skeptically they asked Nephi, "How is it possible that the Lord will deliver Laban into our hands?" (1 Nephi 3:31.) In response Nephi asked, "[Since] the Lord is mightier than all the earth, then why not mightier than Laban and his fifty, yea, or even than his tens of thousands?" (1 Nephi 4:1.)

The difference in individual perspective among these three was further illustrated: "And it came to pass that I, Nephi, said unto my father: I will go and do the things which the Lord hath commanded, for I know that the Lord giveth no commandments unto the children of men, save he shall prepare a way for them that they may accomplish the thing which he commandeth them" (1 Nephi 3:7).

Still further illumination as to his intellectual integrity is shown by Nephi's likewise asking the brothers: "Wherefore can ye doubt? Let us go up; the Lord is able to deliver us, even as our fathers, and to destroy Laban, even as the Egyptians." (1 Nephi 4:3.)

Forgotten spiritual experiences are no help, either. Nephi asked Laman and Lemuel, "How is it that ye have forgotten that ye have seen an angel of the Lord?" who had delivered them out of Laban's hands (1 Nephi 7:10; see also 1 Nephi 7:11).

Laman and Lemuel's different spiritual disposition is evident from many comments in the record, such as, "They did not look unto the Lord as they ought" (1 Nephi 15:3).

Amid their disputations, Nephi asked Laman and Lemuel a simple question that revealed his trust in a simple process: "Have ye inquired of the Lord?" (1 Nephi 15:8.) Laman and Lemuel represent a vast army of humans to whom the idea of inquiring of the Lord does not even occur as an option!

The questions we ask can make plain our paucity of perspective. One of the reasons why Esau was willing to sell his birthright is disclosed thus: "Behold, I am at the point to die: and what profit shall this birthright do to me?" (Genesis 25:32.) If Esau saw his birthright as pertaining only to this life, he surely did not have an eternal perspective! Faith, after all, involves perspectives that stretch both ways—beyond today by remembering of the past, and by extrapolating our faith into the future. Such is part of both the utility and the beauty of faith: a mess of pottage remains a mess of pottage and no more.

The fact that the wicked often seem to profit and do very well in this life may fill us with questions: "Ye have said, It is vain to serve God: and what profit is it that we have kept his ordinance, and that we have walked mournfully before the Lord of hosts?" (Malachi 3:14.)

Yet is it not true that "the triumphing of the wicked is short, and the joy of the hypocrite but for a moment?" (Job 20:5.) The Lord Himself confirmed that those who follow the ways of man have "joy in their works [but] for a season (3 Nephi 27:11).

Inspired questions often bring forth immediate and inspired one-liners, as in these responses to questions.

And Samuel said, Hath the Lord as great delight in burnt offerings and sacrifices, as in obeying the voice of the Lord? Behold, to obey is better than sacrifice, and to hearken than the fat of rams. (1 Samuel 15:22.)

And he said unto me: knowest thou the condescension of God?

And I said unto him: I know that [God] loveth his children; nevertheless, I do not know the meaning of all things. (1 Nephi 11:16-17.)

An inspired question may also be followed by a telling silence I "How long halt ye between two opinions? If the Lord be God, follow him, but if Baal, follow him. And the people answered him not a word." (1 Kings 18:21.)

Insightful questions can call forth major doctrinal insights: "And his disciples asked him, saying, Master, who did sin, this man, or his parents, that he was born blind?" And the answer: "Neither. . . but that the works of God should be made manifest in him." (John 9:2, 3.)

Questions by those in distress may draw forth divine reassurance about God's plans and His timing, because real faith in God includes faith in His timing. Job asked, "Is there not an appointed time to man upon earth?" (Job 7:1.) Near the end of his life, Joseph Smith was reassured that his life would not be cut unprovidently short: "Thy days are known, and thy years will not be numbered less" (D&C 122:9).

Our human worth is raised in various questions: "What is man, that thou shouldest magnify him? and that thou shouldest set thine heart upon him?" (Job 7:17.) Throughout holy scripture we see how valued we actually are. God does desire to magnify us! His heart is set upon us! We are the sheep of His fold and the people of His pasture! (See Psalm 95:7.) We are His spirit sons and daughters! (D&C 93:23, 29; Hebrews 12:9; Moses 3:5; 6:36, 51.)

Divine determination is noted in this question: "He is in one mind, and who can turn him? And what his soul desireth, even that he doeth." (Job 23:13.) A matching reflection is found in the Book of Abraham: "There is nothing that the Lord thy God shall take in his heart to do but what he will do it" (Abraham 3:17).

Meek individuals, being humble, are introspective enough to ask searching questions which set the stage for insights that should lift us all. "O then, if I have seen so great things, if the Lord in his condescension unto the children of men hath visited men in so much mercy, why should my heart weep and my soul linger in the valley of sorrow, and my flesh waste away, and my strength slacken, because of mine afflictions?" (2 Nephi 4:26.)

Nephi continued his productive introspection: "And why should I yield to sin, because of my flesh? Yea, why should I give way to temptations, that the evil one have place in my heart to destroy my peace and afflict my soul? 'Why am I angry because of mine enemy?" Then came his pleading questions to the Lord: "O Lord, wilt thou redeem my soul? Wilt thou deliver me out of the hands of mine enemies? Wilt thou make me that I may shake at the appearance of sin?" (2 Nephi 4:27, 31.) The interplay of feelings and pleadings clearly occurs in the framework of faith.

Joseph Smith was similarly introspective, apparently even in his youth: "In the midst of this war of words and tumult of opinions, I often said to myself: What is to be done? Who of all these parties are right; or, are they all wrong together? If any one of them be right, which is it, and how shall I know it?" (Joseph Smith-History 1:10.)

Alter the great vision, badgered and persecuted, Joseph pondered: "Why should the powers of darkness combine against me?" "'Why the opposition and persecution that arose against me, almost in my infancy?" And again: "Why persecute me for telling the truth? I have actually seen a vision; and who am I that I can withstand God, or why does the world think to make me deny what I have actually seen?" (Joseph Smith-History 1:20, 25.) The Prophet Joseph Smith was a man of great depth of feeling; he knew much poignancy!

Questions are sometimes asked in order to prepare the way for immediate responses. Nephi asked how it was that Jesus "did fulfill all righteousness in being baptized by water?" (2 Nephi 31:6.) Nephi then instructed and declared that this was accomplished by Jesus' "[showing] unto the children of men that, according to the flesh he humbleth himself before the Father, and witnesseth unto the Father that he would be obedient unto him in keeping his commandments." Nephi quickly and trenchantly asked: "Can we follow Jesus save we shall be willing to keep the commandments of the Father?" (2 Nephi 31:7, 10.) Jesus fully humbled himself before the Father by experiencing many things "according to the flesh," and we must do likewise.

Our focus should, therefore, always be on our great example, Jesus: "For how knoweth a man the master whom he has not served, and who is a stranger unto him, and is far from the thoughts and intents of his heart?" (Mosiah 5:13.) What brings us closer to Jesus than pondering His marvelous atonement? Articulate Jacob asked, "Why not speak of the atonement of Christ, and attain to a perfect knowledge of him, as to attain to the knowledge of a resurrection and the world to come?" (Jacob 4:12.) Why, Jacob inquired in lamentation, do people reject the words of the prophets about Christ, "deny the good word of Christ, and the power of God, and the gift of the Holy Ghost, and quench the Holy Spirit, and make a mock of the great plan of redemption?" (Jacob 6:8.) Why, indeed?

Prophets often ask diagnostic questions in order to determine the status of people's spiritual knowledge. Paul, for in stance, determined through questions that some followers of John the Baptist needed to be instructed (see Acts 19:1-6; see also 18:25).

Other deep, diagnostic questions asked by prophets are represented by this instance: "And now behold, I ask you, my brethren of the church, have ye spiritually been born of God? Have ye received his image in your countenances? Have ye experienced this mighty change in your hearts?" (Alma 5:14.)

Questions evoke responses that provide instruction but also prepare the way for further instruction, as when Ammon asked the king, "Believest thou that there is a God?" Alter their colloquy, the king both declared and then further inquired, "I believe all these things which thou hast spoken. Art thou sent from God?" (Alma 18:24, 33.)

In questioning, even nostalgia can be very useful, hence, "I would ask, can ye feel so now?" (Alma 5:26.) Lapsed faith may be revived by probing the past, especially by reconnoitering the reservoir of happy memories.

It should not surprise us if some questions are repeated from dispensation to dispensation: "Behold, are ye stripped of pride?" "Behold, I say, is there one among you who is not stripped of envy?" (Alma 5:28, 29.) And in 1831 the Lord said, "Strip yourselves from jealousies. . . and humble yourselves before me, for ye are not sufficiently humble" (D&C 67:10).

The Lord asked this next question not only of Abraham but also of Jeremiah: "Behold I am the Lord, the God of all flesh: is there any thing too hard for me?" (Jeremiah 32:27; see also Genesis 18:14.) A question which is also an answer!

It is not surprising that the pleadings of the prophets are often similar. Alma "lifted up his voice to heaven and cried, saying: O, how long, O Lord, wilt thou suffer that thy servants shall dwell here below in the flesh, to behold such gross wickedness among the children of men?. . .O Lord God, how long wilt thou suffer that such wickedness and infidelity shall be among this people? O Lord, wilt thou give me strength, that I may bear with mine infirmities?" (Alma 31:26, 30.) These poignant pleadings are strikingly parallel to those pleadings of Joseph Smith emanating from Liberty Jail:

O God, where art thou? And where is the pavilion that covereth thy hiding place?

How long shall thy hand be stayed, and thine eye, yea thy pure eye, behold from the eternal heavens the wrongs of thy people and of thy servants, and thine ear be Penetrated with their cries?

Yea, O Lord, how long shall they suffer these wrongs and unlawful oppressions, before thine heart shall be softened toward them, and thy bowels be moved with compassion toward them? (D&C 121:1-3.)

Such introspective questions can reflect a readiness to learn, an inner meekness: "And they said one to another, Did not our heart burn within us, while he talked with us by the way, and while he opened to us the scriptures?" (Luke 24:32.) Being honest with ourselves is vital.

The repetitiveness and the routineness of life are emphasized a number of times in the scriptures. The expressions concerning eating, drinking, and giving in marriage convey this sameness and routineness.

Jesus declared "as it was in the days of Noah, so it shall be also at the coming of the Son of Man" (Joseph Smith-Matthew 1:41). People will be eating and drinking and giving in marriage, being overcome and consumed by the routineness and repetitiveness of daily life devoid of spiritual context. This is a terrible waste of one's mortal probation. There can be much more to life—much, much more!

Indeed, the pursuit of such routineness is not enough! Jesus pointedly asked, "Is not the life more than meat, and the body than raiment?" (3 Nephi 13:25.)

Before He asks, the Lord knows when we are puzzled and also unlikely to give good responses, so He teaches us if we have ears to hear: "Therefore, why is it that ye cannot under stand and know that he that receiveth the word by the Spirit of truth receiveth it as it is preached by the Spirit of truth?" (D&C 50:21.)

The same tutorial pattern appears in His asking, "Unto what shall I liken these kingdoms, that ye may understand?" (D&C 88:46.) We are then treated to an expansive, panoramic view of things. This should leave us breathless as to the universality of the Lord's work, for "any man who hath seen any or the least of these hath seen God moving in his majesty and power" (D&C 88:47).

Short questions are often introductions to longer and profound answers. A special example is this: "Behold, there are many called, but few are chosen. And why are they not chosen?" (D&C 121:34.) Lest this seem a "hard saying" (John 6:60), we are then treated to specific and sobering insights from the Lord about why only few are chosen (see D&C 121:34-46). This elaboration is given nowhere else in scripture! It is a significant part of the fulness of the Restoration and includes counsel on how human foibles can keep us from gaining access to the powers of heaven and how power and authority are to be exercised. In the New Testament, on the other hand, only Jesus' terse, seemingly deterministic statement is preserved, "Many are called, but few are chosen" (Matthew 22:14; see also 20:16).

Questions asked of the Lord involving vital, doctrinal instruction occur as early as Adam: "'Why is it that men must repent and be baptized in water?" The response to that question was followed by needed instruction and by marvelous assurance: 'And the Lord said unto Adam: Behold I have forgiven thee thy transgression in the Garden of Eden" (Moses 6:53).

The Lord once asked: "Am I a God at hand, . . . and not a God afar off?" (Jeremiah 23:23.)

Surely He is both, as observed by Enoch, who saw God's vast creations and His weeping, yet exclaimed, "Yet thou art there" (Moses 7:30). God, whose "curtains are stretched out," can bring to pass, as He has done, the removal of a mere mortal "iron curtain." Indeed, "All things must come to pass in their time" (see D&C 64:32). He needs our meekness, however, in order to part the curtains of our understanding.

If we understand the profound implications of our beliefs, real brotherhood is possible: "Have we not all one father? Hath not one God created us? Why do we deal treacherously every man against his brother?" (Malachi 2:10.) On this relationship, apostolic assurance is given us: "And [God] hath made of one blood all nations of men for to dwell on all the face of the earth, and hath determined the times before appointed, and the bounds of their habitation" (Acts 17:26).

And on the "dealing treacherously," Nephi wrote:

For none of these iniquities come of the Lord; for he doeth that which is good among the children of men; and he doeth nothing save it be plain unto the children of men; and he inviteth them all to come unto him and partake of his goodness; and he denieth none that come unto him, black and white, bond and free, male and female; and he remembereth the heathen; and all are alike unto God, both Jew and Gentile (2 Nephi 26:33).

As we hear the Lord's answers, they are not always easy to bear. For example, Jesus' discourse on the dangers of wealth produced anxiety and inquiry among His followers: "When his disciples heard it, they were exceedingly amazed, saying, Who then can be saved?" (Matthew 19:25.) Note the Savior's response as rendered by the Joseph Smith Translation: "But Jesus beheld their thoughts, and said unto them, With men this is impossible; but if they will forsake all things for my sake, with God whatsoever things I speak are possible" (JST, Matthew 19:26). We can succeed, if we will forsake the world. Otherwise the soul-stretching, mind-expanding demands of the gospel would be impossible to meet. To have one's soul "greatly enlarge[d] without hypocrisy" (D&C 121:42) is part of the journey of discipleship. Perhaps no question was more terse while eliciting more magnificent though brief responses than when God the Father said of His plan of salvation and of the need for a Savior, "Whom shall I send?" "Here am I, send me." (Abraham 3:27.) The rest is supernal history!

The more we understand the virtues and attributes of God, the more we see that the ways of the natural man and woman have no place in heaven: "Know ye not that the unrighteous shall not inherit the kingdom of God? Be not deceived: neither fornicators, nor idolaters, nor adulterers, nor effeminate, nor abusers of themselves with mankind. . . shall inherit the kingdom of God." (1 Corinthians 6:9-10.)

The natural man, however, does not like counsel from a man of Christ. Paul asked, "Am I therefore become your enemy, because I tell you the truth?" (Galatians 4:16.) In contrast, the children of Christ, who are in the process of growing up to a fulness of the stature of Christ, will surely be tutored: "If ye endure chastening, God dealeth with you as with sons; for what son is he whom the father chasteneth not?" (Hebrews 12:7.)

There are great, unanswered questions—at least, unanswered at the time: "And about the ninth hour Jesus cried with a loud voice, saying, Eli, Eli, lama sabachthani? that is to say, My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?" (Matthew 27:46.) On our small scale we too may go without immediate answers in our pleadings of distress.

If we regard our Father and Redeemer rightly and with gratitude, we will savor their questions and accept all their answers.
