Neal A. Maxwell, Men and Women of Christ ( 1991)

Chapter 10

"Glory Be to the Father"

More often than we do as men and women aspiring to become more like His firstborn, we might profitably pause to ponder all the Father has done for us. Among so many things are the following reminders that should spur our quest to become men and women of Christ:

Thus we see that Father's love is expressed in many profound and significant ways. No wonder He is described as "merciful and gracious" (D&C 76:5). No wonder the Apostle John told us God so loved the world that He gave us His Son to lead us to eternal life (John 3:16). The Book of Mormon declares that God loves the world and does nothing save it be "for the benefit of the world" (2 Nephi 26:24). Even when we come to truly love Him, the fact is that He loved us first! (1 John 4:19.)

How often, in our private prayers, do we thank Heavenly Father for any of the above-enumerated things? Or are we so busy petitioning Him for the new and pressing needs of the moment that we forget past blessings and His promised blessings of eternity? In recording the revelation he received on October 3, 1918, President Joseph F. Smith spoke of the "wonderful love made manifest by the Father and the Son" (D&C 138:3). "Oh, it is wonderful!"

We can all join an ancient prophet in his tender expression of gratitude to God as he approached death. This servant of God observed, "I am encircled about eternally in the arms of his love" (2 Nephi 1:15).

No wonder young Jesus noted that He must be about His Father's profound and rescuing business. Only modern revelation describes specifically and grandly what that unique loving and rescuing business is: "This is my work and my glory—to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man" (Moses 1:39).

Jesus has always gladly given all glory to our generous Father. God the Father and Jesus are far more generous toward the faithful than anything the latter could rightly ask of them, including their lifting the faithful up "at the last day" (3 Nephi 27:22). And "the tender mercies of the Lord are over all those whom he hath chosen, because of their faith" (1 Nephi 1:20).

In contrast, the adversary will not support his dutiful followers at the last day (see Alma 30:60).

Our Father delights to honor those who serve Him! (See D&C 76:5.) He even weeps over needless human suffering: "And it came to pass that the God of heaven looked upon the residue of the people, and he wept; and Enoch bore record of it, saying: How is it that the heavens weep, and shed forth their tears as the rain upon the mountains?" (Moses 7:28.)

God not only keeps His promises but in doing so rewards very generously. His windows of heaven are opened wide to pour out blessings in response to our tithe of a mere one-tenth! (See Malachi 3:10.)

Both premortally and after the astonishing atonement, Jesus said "Glory be to the Father" (see Moses 4:2; D&C 19:19). What a contrast to those of us unprofitable servants who, after doing a few good deeds, insist on keeping score!

We worry over whether or not our little deed is noticed. We notice the size of the letters on the mortal marquees over the tiny little theaters where our "own little plot is always being played."

We continue to be overly concerned with getting mortal credit and over-establishing our worth. As God's children we do have great value and genuine intrinsic, individual worth. Must that intrinsic worth ever be at the mercy of our moods or of extrinsic, ephemeral measuring rods?

In contrast, Jesus declared:

Behold, I am Jesus Christ, whom the prophets testified shall come into the world.

And behold, I am the light and the life of the world; and I have drunk out of that bitter cup which the Father hath given me, and have glorified the Father in taking upon me the sins of the world, in the which I have suffered the will of the Father in all things from the beginning. (3 Nephi 11:10-11.) How could we have any greater recognition anyway than that of being a spirit son or daughter of God? or of finally deserving to be known as a man or woman of Christ? How could we possibly ever be given more than "all that my Father hath"? There isn't any more!

No matter how much we do, we will never be able even to approach, let alone match, the goodness of God and all that He has done and will do for us. Therefore, of that portion which has been allotted to us in this life, why should we desire more? Especially in view of what lies ahead for the faithful. (See Alma 29:6.)

The revelations about our true identity tell us of our immense possibilities. These revelations may irritate some contemporaries, as happened earlier when Jesus disclosed His identity: "Therefore the Jews sought the more to kill him, because he not only had broken the sabbath, but said also that God was his Father, making himself equal with God" (John 5:18). Wrong as they were about some things, they nevertheless understood that a "son" is of the same essence as his father. So it is with our being God's spirit children.

If fully faithful, we will receive of His fulness, for He has told us: "I give unto you these sayings that you may understand and know how to worship, and know what you worship, that you may come unto the Father in my name, and in due time receive of his fulness" (D&C 93:19). This is one of the great but under-appreciated blessings of the restored gospel. It richly assures us of our intrinsic value and of our eternal and ultimate worth. Therefore we need not be entirely dependent upon human assessments and evaluations. In any case, if recognition arising from proximate circumstances based upon fleeting criteria constitutes the sole measure of our personal significance, recognition will be both mercurial and insufficient. The Lord's recognition, however, is enduring. Note that while a new king came along who knew not Joseph (Exodus 1:8), God knew and valued Joseph, as an individual, long before and long after any Pharaohs ever existed. Peers may not always pay heed to us, but the meek can abide this neglect and even their disdain. Colleagues may not always value what we say. But God actually listens to our prayers. He is perfect in both justice and mercy (see Mosiah 16:1; 27:31; Alma 12:15). He knows perfectly the very thoughts and the real intents of our hearts—he never misunderstands us.

The temporal causes which we champion may fail—after all we can do. But God's work of which we are part will finally triumph! He is remarkably able to do His own work, just as He has so directly stated (see 2 Nephi 27:20-21). Indeed, we are at the very center of His work. In the hassling competition of the work of the world we may lose out. But we always win when we lose ourselves in God's service.

In the worthy work of the world, mortals will have "joy in [their] works for a season" (3 Nephi 27:11). But everlasting and full joy comes only with God's gift of eternal life. Granted, when we are in the service of our fellowmen we are in the service of God (Mosiah 2:17). But the more we do of spiritual significance, the greater the significance of service.

Events may turn against us, but if we are turning ever more toward God, we are on course. This is the only turning that really matters. Though that turning may bring with it an attendant churning, better the spiritual churning of a broken heart than an unyielding, hard heart.

Friends may betray us, but Jesus never fails us. He even calls us his friends; the Father and Jesus are our best and only perfect friends (see John 15:14, 15; D&C 84:77; 93:45).

Illustrative of how God is a true Father who desires maximum, eternal happiness for His children, we are advised that on occasion God will chasten his people and will try our patience and faith (see Mosiah 23:21). Is not the question, "Why, O Lord?" one which goes to the heart of the further development of faith amid tutoring? Similarly, is not the question, "How long, O Lord?" one which goes to the very heart of developing patience amid tutoring? Thus we see how interactive all of these things are in the developmental dimensions of God's plan of salvation, which culminates in eternal life.

When we err, others may be unforgiving and ungenerous. But though our sins be as scarlet, God assures the repentant that these shall be as white as snow (see Isaiah 1:18). Moreover, God will not even mention certain portions of our past (Ezekiel 18:22). In that case, nor should we! It should be hand to the plow without looking back. Finally, He mercifully assures us that if we repent He actually will remember our sins no more! (D&C 58:42.)

God's remarkable redemptiveness and His stunning personal-ness occur amid His governance of the expanding galaxies. "Yet," as Enoch comfortingly exclaimed of God, "thou art there."

The Father has promised the faithful "all that [He] hath" (D&C 84:38). How bounteously we will then be "added upon"! (See Abraham 3:26.) Compare His "all" to a vied-for promotion in a company which will not even exist ten years from now. Or to an envied place in the hierarchy of an organizational chart which will be scrambled again in six months.

Occasionally we see those who do something bad justify it on the grounds that thereby they can thereafter do some good: "If I can just make this deal or gain this office, think of the position I will be in to do much good." This rationalizing might be called looking beyond Lucifer's shoulder—on to imagined possibilities. It is a very different thing from saying, "Get thee behind me!" (See Matthew 16:23.)

Sometimes we scarcely know what to petition God for (see Romans 8:26). At other times we do not realize the implications of what we ask for (see Matthew 20:22). The eye of faith sees things as they really are (see Jacob 4:13; see also Alma 5:15); yet at other times our eyes may actually be "holden," because we are not ready for divine disclosure (see Luke 24:16). At still other times the scales fall, giving us eyes to see (see 2 Nephi 30:6).

There are many sincere searchers after truth and wisdom, as represented in this expression by Will Durant: "So much of our lives is meaningless, . . . but we would believe all the while that there is something vital and significant in us. . . We want to seize the value and perspective of passing things, and so to pull ourselves up out of the maelstrom of daily circumstance. We want to know that the little things are little, and the big things big, before it is too late; we want to see things now as they will seem forever—'in the light of eternity.'" (The Story of Philosophy [Garden City, N. Y.: Garden City Publishing Co., 1943], p. 1.) Christian disciples understand that the illumination will come through revelation.

And what "seeing" there will be one day! "That which is of God is light; and he that receiveth light, and continueth in God, receiveth more light; and that light groweth brighter and brighter until the perfect day" (D&C 50:24).

Before God's throne we will bow in humble reverence! Whatever our spiritual progress may be in the future—even though we receive "all that the Father hath"—throughout eternity we will never cease praising Him in humble reverence and giving Him "glory forever and ever" for all that He has done for us. (See D&C 76:93.)

At the judgment we will not only have the Book of Mormon's prophesied "bright recollection" and "perfect remembrance" of our misdeeds (see Alma 5:18; 11:43). The joyous things will be preserved too—we shall know "even as we know now" (Alma 11:43; see also D&C 93:33). Among the "all things [that] shall be restored" (Alma 40:23) will be memory, including eventually the memory of premortal events and conditions. What a flood of feeling and fact will come to us when, at a time a loving God deems wise, this faculty is restored! Surely it will increase our gratefulness for God's long-suffering and for Jesus' atonement! Hence one of the great blessings of immortality and eternal life will be the joy of our being connected again with the memories of both the first and the second estates.

Oh, how great is our God! "Yea, and how is it that ye have forgotten that the Lord is able to do all things according to his will, for the children of men, if it so be that they exercise faith in him? Wherefore, let us be faithful to him." (1 Nephi 7:12.)

He is surely able to do his own work (see 2 Nephi 27:20-21). His purposes will all—indeed must—come to pass in their time (see D&C 64:32). And as his children we should be happy to be at the center of His loving purposes.

May we return to Him in full reconciliation as true sons and daughters, as men and women of Christ.

Glory be to the Father!

Footnotes
