Robert L. Millet, I Will Fear No Evil (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2002)

God and Human Tragedy

As I sit at my computer and write these words, it occurs to me that it has been only a short time since terrorists hijacked three commercial airliners and flew the planes (with their passengers) into the twin towers of the World Trade Center in New York City and the Pentagon in Washington, D.C. A fourth plane was kept from the hijackers' nefarious purposes only by the heroism of persons on board. Thousands of innocent victims died from these horrid acts. It is impossible to fathom the depth of human emotion, to comprehend the anguish and heartache as well as the suspicion, anxiety, and fear that have come as a result of these tragedies. In many ways, no matter where we live, our lives will never be the same again. Life is good, and, to be sure, there are moments and seasons in life that make it all worthwhile, that whisper peace and assurance to our souls, that affirm that "men are, that they might have joy" (2 Nephi 2:25). But there are times when our sense of wellness is shaken to the core, occasions when we bow our heads, weep, and cry out, as did the Prophet Joseph Smith, "O God, where art thou?" (D&C 121:1). Indeed, when we think of the nightmare of the Holocaust, as well as the devilish and unnecessary loss of life under countless totalitarian regimes, we find ourselves saying, "Wait a minute! This isn't the way things are supposed to be!"

One evangelical scholar, Cornelius Plantinga, has observed: "In the film Grand Canyon, an immigration attorney breaks out of a traffic jam and attempts to bypass it. His route takes him along streets that seem progressively darker and more deserted. Then the predictable . . . nightmare: his expensive car stalls on one of those alarming streets whose teenage guardians favor expensive guns and sneakers. The attorney does manage to phone for a tow truck, but before it arrives, five young street toughs surround his disabled car and threaten him with considerable bodily harm. Then, just in time, the tow truck shows up and its driver an earnest, genial man begins to hook up to the disabled car. The toughs protest: the truck driver is interrupting their meal. So the driver takes the leader of the group aside and attempts a five-sentence introduction to metaphysics: 'Man,' he says, 'the world ain't supposed to work like this. Maybe you don't know that, but this ain't the way it's supposed to be. I'm supposed to be able to do my job without askin' you if I can. And that dude is supposed to be able to wait with his car without you rippin' him off. Everything's supposed to be different than what it is here.' " 1

No, things aren't the way they ought to be. And they haven't been since Adam and Eve left the Garden of Eden. This is a fallen world, a telestial tenement, and we are brought face to face on a regular basis with the fact that for this temporal time and season not all well-laid plans will come to fruition. Times change. Youth fades. Things break down. Bodies grow old and decay. I look at the date and realize that only three months ago today I was rushed to the hospital after suffering a serious heart attack. I walk a little slower now, don't have the stamina I once had, and in general feel like the old tabernacle is gradually losing the battle against mortality.

Because there is pain, because there is sorrow, because there is tragedy, men and women ask: Where is God, especially when it hurts? In speaking to Brigham Young University students many years ago, Elder Spencer W. Kimball asked some tough questions about human suffering and tragedy, and at the same time provided a provocative and elevated perspective on God:

"Was it the Lord who directed the plane into the mountain to snuff out the lives of its occupants, or were there mechanical faults or human errors?

"Did our Father in heaven cause the collision of the cars that took six people into eternity, or was it the error of the driver who ignored safety rules?

"Did God take the life of the young mother or prompt the child to toddle into the canal or guide the other child into the path of the oncoming car?

"Did the Lord cause the man to suffer a heart attack? Was the death of the missionary untimely? Answer, if you can. I cannot, for though I know God has a major role in our lives, I do not know how much he causes to happen and how much he merely permits. . . . "Could the Lord have prevented these tragedies? The answer is, Yes. The Lord is omnipotent, with all power to control our lives, save us pain, prevent all accidents, drive all planes and cars, feed us, protect us, save us from labor, effort, sickness, even from death, if he will. But he will not. . . . "The basic gospel law is free agency and eternal development. To force us to be careful or righteous would be to nullify that fundamental law and make growth impossible." 2

Following the deaths of the apostles in the meridian of time, and the consequent loss of divine authority and plain and precious scriptural truths, men and women groped in darkness. Within four centuries after Christ's ascension, church councils were convened to settle the matter of the nature of God and the Godhead. In an effort to reconcile Christian theology with Greek philosophy, the god of Nicea and Chalcedon and Constantinople was created: a being without body and parts; a being who is timeless, immutable (unchangeable), and impassible (incapable of feeling or emotion). The god of the philosophers was the unknowable one, the untouchable one, the unreachable one. Further, over time and in a misguided effort to confess and acknowledge God's total sovereignty, theologians devised the notion of deity's complete control over all things, including men's and women's actions.

It is especially challenging for persons who view God solely as a dispenser of good gifts and happy times to fathom how and in what manner he is related, if at all, to earthly trauma. Having been brought up on a constant diet of "God is love" or "God is good," they inevitably equate such goodness with kindness. "By the goodness of God," C. S. Lewis pointed out, "we mean nowadays almost exclusively His lovingness; and in this we may be right. And by Love, in this context, most of us mean kindness, the desire to see others than the self happy; not happy in this way or in that, but just happy. What would really satisfy us would be a God who said of anything we happened to like doing, 'What does it matter so long as they are contented?' We want, in fact, not so much a Father in Heaven as a grandfather in heaven a senile benevolence who, as they say, 'liked to see young people enjoying themselves,' and whose plan for the universe was simply that it might be truly said at the end of each day, 'a good time was had by all.' " 3

Through the instrumentality of a modern prophet, light and truth and understanding concerning the true nature of God have come to us. The God we have come to know is an exalted Man, a Man of Holiness (Moses 6:57), a divine being who has all power and all knowledge and who possesses every godly attribute in perfection. At the same time, through the clarifying lenses provided by the revelations of the Restoration, the Latter-day Saints are made acquainted with a God who is in reality our Heavenly Father, the Father of our spirits; who "has a body of flesh and bones as tangible as man's" (D&C 130:22); who feels tender regard for all his children and is, like his Beloved Son, "touched with the feeling of our infirmities" (Hebrews 4:15); and who has granted to each of us moral agency, the capacity to choose what we will do with our lives. As Elder Kimball pointed out in the statement above, agency is paramount. In fact, as we know, agency was one of the central issues in the war in heaven (Moses 4:3), a war, by the way, that is still under way. We also know, in a very personal way, of the reality of evil and of the fact that Lucifer is bent upon our destruction and the overthrow of the Father's plan. He does everything in his power to pervert and corrupt the right way and to entice men and women to use their agency unwisely.

There are some things that are even more horrible to contemplate than the Holocaust, more unspeakable than millions of innocent people being put to death by crazed dictators, more frightening than terrorists hijacking planes and murdering thousands. Consider this thought: What if there were no agency? What if people did not have the right to choose? What if Lucifer's amendatory proposals in the grand councils of heaven had been implemented?

We rejoice to know that agency is an eternal reality, one of the greatest of all the gifts of a benevolent and generous God. But, of course, that gift comes at a price. The power to choose automatically brings with it the possibility of improper, unwise, immoral, and evil choices and thus abuse and human tragedy.

One philosopher wrote: "A God who gives humans such free will necessarily brings about the possibility, and puts outside his own control whether or not . . . evil occurs. It is not logically possible that is, it would be self-contradictory to suppose that God could give us such free will and yet ensure that we always use it in the right way. . . . A world in which agents can benefit each other but not do each other harm is one where they have only very limited responsibility for each other. If my responsibility for you is limited to whether or not to give you a camcorder, but I cannot cause you pain, stunt your growth, or limit your education, then I do not have a great deal of responsibility for you. . . . A good God, like a good father, will delegate responsibility. In order to allow creatures a share in creation, he will allow them the choice of hurting and maiming, of frustrating the divine plan."

Now note these perceptive insights: "I am fortunate if the natural possibility of my suffering if you choose to hurt me is the vehicle which makes your choice really matter. My vulnerability, my openness to suffering (which necessarily involves my actually suffering if you make the wrong choice), means that you are not just like a pilot in a simulator, where it does not matter if mistakes are made. That our choices matter tremendously, that we can make great differences to things for good or ill, is one of the greatest gifts a creator can give us. And if my suffering is the means by which he can give you that choice, I too am in this respect fortunate." 4

Where is God when it hurts? He is in his heavens. He is aware. He knows. In ways that we cannot even comprehend, he knows. And he blesses and lifts and liberates and lightens the burdens of his children whenever he can. But he cannot remove us from the toils and tragedies and contradictions of life whether they come from agency or simply from the challenges of this existence without robbing us of mortal experience. These things come with the turf. They are part of the test. So much depends upon how we choose to think about what most consider to be the unfairness and the senseless nature of temporal trauma. So much depends upon what we understand about God our Father, about his plan of salvation, and about how vital it is for us to move ahead, even when our burdens or the burdens of others seem unbearable.

While a measure of joy and happiness and a sense of overcoming can be ours in this life, the fulness of joy is reserved for the next estate, when spirit and body are reunited in the resurrection (D&C 93:33). "Wherefore, fear not even unto death," the Redeemer declared, "for in this world your joy is not full, but in me your joy is full" (D&C 101:36). Or, as President Boyd K. Packer explained, "There are three parts to the plan. You are in the second or the middle part, the one in which you will be tested by temptation, by trials, perhaps by tragedy. Understand that, and you will be better able to make sense of life and to resist the disease of doubt and despair and depression. . . . "If you expect to find only ease and peace and bliss during Act II, you surely will be frustrated. You will understand little of what is going on and why it is permitted to be as [it is].

"Remember this! The line 'And they all lived happily ever after' is never written into the second act. That line belongs in the third act when the mysteries are solved and everything is put right." 5

As Elder Neal A. Maxwell taught, "When we tear ourselves free from the entanglements of the world, are we promised a religion of repose or an Eden of ease? No! We are promised tears and trials and toil! But we are also promised final triumph, the mere contemplation of which tingles one's soul." 6

We shouted for joy in that premortal day (Job 38:7) because we knew that there were lasting lessons and everlasting principles to be learned on earth, things we could neither grasp nor experience in our first estate. We shouted for joy because we knew that there were relationships to be developed, feelings to be felt, tests to be passed. And we shouted for joy knowing full well the struggle through which we would be called upon to pass because we knew that it would be worth it.

Notes
