Robert L. Millet, I Will Fear No Evil (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2002)

Vigilance without Fear

It is extremely difficult to pass through a crisis, learn the appropriate lessons, be adequately forewarned, and move on with life without at the same time becoming oversensitive and hyperalert to possible future recurrences. Because my wife and I have had some experience with wandering children, I can say without hesitation that siblings younger than the wanderer are in for a rough time! Why? Because Mom and Dad have been through the perilous times once and have no desire to see such tragedies reenacted in the lives of their younger children. The temptation to the parents is to be unusually (and often unnecessarily) suspicious, leery, much more strict and regimented, and prone to react quickly to the slightest aberration from the family standard.

Men or women who have been "burned" in dating or courtship may be prone to "hunker down" and refuse to allow themselves to meet new people or even approximate close and endearing relationships in the future. Those who have gone through a tempestuous marriage characterized by constant disharmony will be much less open to the sharing of their true feelings and much more inclined to "hold back" a bit, sensing that they must never again wear their feelings on their sleeve. And so it goes through most of life's experiences: we want to learn from the pain and avoid it at all costs in the future.

But life is meant to be lived. We cannot allow ourselves to be stifled and stilted by events of the past, no matter how traumatic or life-changing they were. I was assigned many years ago to work with two men who had been quarreling for a decade. After meeting with both of them, I learned that Persons A and B had at one time been best friends. They had grown up together, double-dated, married young women who were also friends, and lived not far from one another for the first several years of their married lives. One day Person A confided something to Person B. It was not a big thing, just a private matter that Person A asked B to keep to himself. In a moment of weakness some months later, Person B mentioned the confidential matter in a rather public setting, the word got back to A, and the caustic accusations began. "I will never trust you again with anything," he said to his friend. "Nor will I ever forgive you for what you have done."

Person A was true to his word. Despite my pleadings for a reconciliation and the additional efforts of a score of priesthood leaders and friends over many, many years, Person A refused to let the matter drop and forgive. To my knowledge, he has maintained bitterness bordering on hatred for about thirty years now. I have watched with much interest and deep sorrow as this incident almost silly, given how relatively unimportant the matter was has cankered the soul of Person A, driven him deeper into his own hostilities and away from people, and eaten away at his spirituality and overall zest for life. And in some ways, even more tragically, it is as though Person B is being held hostage by Person A, unable to receive forgiveness, to move on, to find peace. He too has been beaten down by one foolish man's refusal to let go and bounce back.

Life is too short for us to be held hostage by our own past, the deeds of others we know and love (even cruel and unkind ones), or even the evil inflicted by insidious strangers bent on our destruction. One family I know experienced a break-in and robbery in their home while they were away one weekend. The mother indicated that she and the children felt somehow defiled, that their privacy and sacred space had been violated. The family began to plan ahead to forestall any and all efforts to disturb their peace in the future. They added to their security system a large number of locks, several alarms, and dogs in the house and in the yard to announce intruders. In addition, the father of the family began to build quite an arsenal of weapons. Family members gradually began to leave home less and less often and, when they did, they left two or more members at the house to stand guard. Truly, this family had allowed an unfortunate event, a painful one to be sure, to transform them from a happy, easygoing brood to a little army possessed of a siege mentality.

As I mentioned earlier, the United States as a nation has recently been bludgeoned and jolted by unfeeling persons who viciously hijacked passenger planes and killed thousands of innocent people. While appropriate security measures, requiring some degree of inconvenience on the part of the average citizen, can and should be taken to lessen the risk of future terrorist attacks of this sort, life must go on. For Americans or any other people in the free world to allow themselves to be frightened into the shadows is to concede a victory to the perpetrators of this heinous deed. Rather, we will go about our business and have no hesitation about air travel. That is, while we will be vigilant on our guard, prepared we will refuse to live in fear. Nor will we be controlled by fear. "The fear of man bringeth a snare: but whoso putteth his trust in the Lord shall be safe" (Proverbs 29:25).

The wisest among us also refuse to allow fear to set our agenda. One of the leaders of the Church once related to a group of us that not long after he had been called as a General Authority someone planted a bomb at the door of the Salt Lake Temple. The bomb had exploded and knocked the large, heavy door off its hinges. He commented that the episode was chilling to him and created an anxiety and discomfort, a fear, that lasted all day. To his utter surprise, he noticed that all through the day, in the many meetings he attended with other General Authorities, no mention was made of this scary incident. Finally, at the end of the day, he asked one of the senior Brethren about the temple door, only to have his colleague remark, "Yes, we need to get that fixed, don't we." Then he added this important principle, one that ought to guide our walk and talk as we move into troublesome days ahead: "We do not take counsel from our fears."

Truly, as we sing in the hymn,

I will not doubt, I will not fear; God's love and strength are always near. His promised gift helps me to find An inner strength and peace of mind. I give the Father willingly My trust, my prayers, humility. His Spirit guides; his love assures That fear departs when faith endures.1

President Gordon B. Hinckley has asked the question: "Who among us can say that he or she has not felt fear? . . . We suffer from the fear of ridicule, the fear of failure, the fear of loneliness, the fear of ignorance. Some fear the present, some the future. . . . Let us recognize that fear comes not of God, but rather that this gnawing, destructive element comes from the adversary of truth and righteousness. Fear is the antithesis of faith. It is corrosive in its effects, even deadly.

"'For God hath not given us the spirit of fear; but of power, and of love, and of a sound mind.' (2 Timothy 1:7.)"These principles are the great antidotes to the fears that rob us of our strength and sometimes knock us down to defeat. They give us power."What power? The power of the gospel, the power of truth, the power of faith, the power of the priesthood."2

Although it is well to be in a vigilant position militarily or socially or economically, perhaps the greatest antidote to fear is closeness to the Lord, an eagerness on our part to cultivate his Spirit and seek to obtain his power and strength. We have been instructed that "if ye are prepared ye shall not fear" (D&C 38:30). Perfect love, the pure love of Christ, casts out fear (1 John 4:18; Moroni 8:16). As members of the Lord's Church, having the gift of the Holy Ghost, we are entitled to a rich outpouring of his peace, an endowment that will dispel fear. "If this generation harden not their hearts," the Savior declared in a modern revelation, "I will establish my church among them. . . . Therefore, whosoever belongeth to my church need not fear, for such shall inherit the kingdom of heaven" (D&C 10:53, 55). Again, note the promise to his Saints: "Wherefore, be of good cheer, and do not fear, for I the Lord am with you, and will stand by you" (D&C 68:6).

Notes
