Robert L. Millet, I Will Fear No Evil (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2002)

Ambiguity and Uncertainty

There's a very real sense in which we as Latter-day Saints and recipients of a myriad of restored truths are spoiled! We have the answers to so many questions, the solutions to so many of the world's vexing issues, the only meaningful suggestion for peace in a troubled world, peace here and hereafter. In fact, we have so many answers to so many religious questions that some of us expect to have them all. And it's downright unsettling when we happen upon some dilemma or face some tragedy for which no answer or rational explanation is forthcoming, something which is at best unclear or at worst unrevealed.

It is the nature of mankind to seek for closure, to strive to fill in the blanks. That is as it should be. Our souls reach out for answers. We are eternal creatures living in a mortal world, spiritual beings undergoing a temporal experience. The veil of forgetfulness purposely and purposefully denies us access to many things we once knew, many parts of a rather intricate and complex puzzle. Even with all that has been delivered by prophets and apostles, by wise men and women, and by the spirit of inspiration, there are and will be questions. Difficult questions. Startling developments. Nagging issues that are troublesome and at times seemingly unanswerable.

It is important to note that there is no evil in having questions, no harm in wondering and asking and inquiring. No person, Latter-day Saint or otherwise, ought to feel guilty because he or she has questions. Such is perfectly normal, a part of the plan. If we already possessed the solutions to all the traumas and the formulas for all the paradoxes, there would be little purpose and certainly little fulfillment to be had in this second estate. Success and happiness in life depend not on whether we have questions but rather with how we deal with them. Whatever the nature of our queries, there are both productive and counterproductive, both fruitful and unfruitful means of engaging them.

Some years ago my family and I moved from a part of the country we had come to love dearly. I was asked to assume a new assignment in the Church Educational System that required a relocation. We had been in our new home for only a few weeks when I received a telephone call late one Sunday evening. The woman on the other end of the line was deeply distraught. "Brother Millet," she said, "this is Sister Johnson."

"Yes, Sister Johnson," I responded. "How are you and the family?" I had known the Johnson family quite well; they lived in the area we had just left. Brother Johnson had been a member of the bishopric in their ward (Sister Johnson had served in the presidencies of both the Primary and Relief Society) while I had served as a member of the stake presidency in that area. I had been in their home several times, had enjoyed dinners and social gatherings with them, had known of their dedicated Church service, and believed them to be one of the most settled and secure Latter-day Saint families anywhere. They had joined the Church after having been found and taught by the missionaries some ten years earlier. They were themselves extremely missionary-minded and had been instrumental in leading several families to baptism. But there was obvious pain in Sister Johnson's voice. I tried to be positive and asked: "What can I do for you?"

"I desperately need your help," she said. "My husband is about to leave the Church."

Her statement nearly took my breath. "Leave the Church?" I asked. "What do you mean?"

She went on to explain that her husband's brother, a man not of our faith who had opposed their baptism, had for several months been sending rather bitter anti-Mormon propaganda through the mail. She mentioned that at first her husband had ignored the stuff, but that after a few weeks he began perusing it out of sheer curiosity. "I began to notice a gradual change in Bill," she stated. She pointed out that he became argumentative and uncooperative at Church, touchy and ill at ease at home, and just plain unsettled in his demeanor. "He has a lot of questions, Brother Millet," she added, "and I'm afraid if he doesn't get them answered pretty soon we'll lose him."

"How can I help?" I inquired.

"He wants to talk with you," Sister Johnson came back.

"Good," I said. "Put him on the line."

"Oh no," she said, "he wants to meet with you in person."

I expressed to her that such a meeting would be perfectly fine with me, but that we were now some ten or twelve hours' driving distance from one another. I suggested that if this was the only way to deal with his concerns, if his concerns could not be addressed by someone in their area, then we should set a time when we might get together.

"He's already on his way," she then observed. "He left a couple of hours ago. Would you please meet with him? He'll be at the institute by 9:00 a.m."

I was a bit startled but quickly assured Sister Johnson that I would be more than happy to meet with him and do what I could.

Brother Johnson wasn't the only one who didn't sleep that night. I tossed and turned through the night, arose several times, and retired to the living room to pray for guidance. The morning came faster than I had wished, and my stomach churned as I contemplated what the meeting might entail. Sister Johnson was quite accurate in her prediction: her husband arrived a little after nine o'clock. She was also quite accurate in her description of her husband's condition. He had a fallen countenance, a dark look in his eyes, and in general a rather gloomy appearance; this simply was not the man I had known before. He had lost the Spirit and was in many ways like a broken man, like a person who had lost his innocence,who indeed had lost his way. We knelt and prayed together, and I pleaded with the Lord to dispel the spirit of gloom and doubt and endow us with the spirit of light and understanding. The answer to that prayer came eventually, but only after a long and difficult struggle.

As is so often the case, Brother Johnson had been confronted with scores of questions on authority, on the Church's claim to being Christian, on temple rites, on doctrinal teachings of specific Church leaders, on changes in scripture or Church practice, and so forth and so on. An endless list. I took the time to respond to every issue, to suggest an answer if such was possible. In some cases the answer was simply a call for faith, an invitation to pray or repray about whether Joseph Smith was a prophet of God, whether his successors have worn the same mantle of authority, and whether the Church is divinely led today. I sensed, however, that there was something deeper, something beneath the surface that was being reflected in his questions, something that was festering and eating away at his soul like a cancer. It took me almost eight hours to discover what that something was.

When Brother and Sister Johnson were first taught the gospel and introduced to the Book of Mormon, one of the missionaries no doubt well-meaning but shortsighted had said something like this: "Now, Brother and Sister Johnson, the Book of Mormon is true. It came from God to Joseph Smith. And you can know for yourselves that it is true by praying about it. But, the fact is, there are so many archaeological evidences of its truthfulness, these days it almost isn't necessary to pray about it!" The statement sounded convincing enough. Brother Johnson bought into that line of reasoning and shortsighted on his own part never took occasion to pray with real intent about the Book of Mormon. When anti-Mormon materials suggested that there were not as many current external evidences of the Nephite or Jaredite civilizations as he had been told previously, his whole world collapsed. If the Book of Mormon wasn't true, he reasoned, then Joseph Smith was not a prophet. If Joseph Smith was not a prophet . . . And so on. One fatal step led to another. And now he was ready to throw it all away, unfortunately because his testimony was not substantive, his doctrinal foundation weak and shifting. And he had been unwilling to exercise sufficient faith and patience to resee and refocus on the things that really count, in this case the message or content of the Book of Mormon.

It was almost a relief to finally get down to the core issue. I explained to him that we were now up against the wall of faith and that the only issue to be decided was whether or not he was willing to pay the price to know the truth. I asked some hard questions, such as: Did you ever know that this work is true? What was your witness based on? What has this doubting and this vexation of the soul done to your wife and children? Does the bitter spirit you have felt during the last few months come from God? And then I asked: Are you willing to throw it all away, to jettison all that is good and ennobling because your foundation was deficient? He paused, reflected again with me on the painful and poignant strugglings he had undergone, but then added that he wanted more than anything to feel once more what he had felt ten years earlier. I stressed to him the need to stay with simple and solid doctrinal matters, particularly in regard to the Book of Mormon and the Restoration, to focus on the things of greatest worth, to follow the same course of study and pondering and prayer that he had followed during his initial investigation of the Church. I challenged him never to yield to the temptation to quit the Church when he encountered things he didn't understand, especially when there were so many things he did understand and know. It was a sweet experience to watch the light of faith and trust come back into his countenance and into his life.

This experience highlights the tragic reality that too often people are prone to "jump ship," to forsake family and friends and faith to give it all up because there is an unanswered question, an unresolved dilemma, or a new development in life that defies explanation. Let me briefly share a different experience. Several years ago I became acquainted with a lovely young family who joined the Church a mother, father, and two children. From all appearances they were a perfect conversion: people who loved the Church, eager to jump in with both feet, and anxious to share their newfound way of life with others. Sister Brown was quickly absorbed into the Primary, while Brother Brown became fast friends with members of the elders quorum. After they had been in the Church for well over a year, Brother Brown came to see me at my office one day. He expressed his love for the Church as well as the thrill he felt at seeing his family deeply rooted in Mormonism. But he then shared with me something that I never would have supposed he did not really have a witness of Joseph Smith's prophetic calling. He said, in essence: "Bob, I love the gospel with all my heart. I know that this is the true Church. There's no question in my mind about it. This is what I want for my family, now and always. But I have a problem, one that won't seem to go away. I just don't know that Joseph Smith was a prophet."

He then expressed how silly such a thing must sound to me, that is, to accept and embrace the revelation and at the same time be unable to accept and acknowledge the revelator. He said, "I've prayed and prayed and prayed for a testimony of Joseph Smith, but I still can't say that I know he was called of God. I sincerely believe that he was a great and good man and that in the purest sense he was inspired of God. But I just don't know for sure that he was a prophet. What do I do?" This was a bit unusual to me. From all I could discern, there was no duplicity, no cynicism, no skepticism, only simple and pure uncertainty; he wanted so badly to know, but he didn't know. We worked together on this problem for years. We read books on Joseph Smith; we fasted together; we prayed together. In all that time, Brother Brown remained true and faithful. He labored in many of the auxiliaries of the Church and for a time served as an elders quorum president. He and his family were active and involved in every way that could be expected of them. Our families became quite close, and we often spent time talking about life and its challenges, about the central place of the gospel in our lives, and about where we would be if we were not members of the Church.

In time we moved from the area. It was several years later that I received a telephone call from Brother Brown. "Bob," he said excitedly, "I have something to tell you. I have a testimony of Joseph Smith. These feelings have been growing within me for several months now, but I can finally stand and say that I know. I know!" I wept with him as we talked about the peace of mind he had gained, as we discussed this most recent phase of his lengthy but steady conversion. It had taken almost a decade for him to come to know, but in the interim he had done all that was expected of him.

I have a witness of how much the Lord loves Brother Brown and all the other Brother Browns who have the spiritual stamina and moral courage to hang on, to hold to the rod, even when they are not absolutely certain as to the destination of the path they traverse or what they will do in a brand-new life situation. Surely this is what the Savior meant when he counseled us: "Search diligently, pray always, and be believing, and all things shall work together for your good, if ye walk uprightly and remember the covenant wherewith ye have covenanted one with another" (D&C 90:24).

Another example of a counterproductive approach to obtaining answers is going to the wrong people for help. A man and his wife that I knew quite well joined the Church in the southern part of the United States. After a year's involvement with the Church, they traveled to Washington, D.C., to receive the blessings of the temple. On returning home, the father had several unanswered questions about the temple, so he contacted his former Protestant minister and arranged for a meeting. The minister, of course, was more than willing to oblige him and especially eager to give answers to his queries regarding Mormon temples. As one might suppose, the family left the Church within a matter of weeks and returned to their former religion. Simply stated, one would not go to Caiaphas or Pilate to learn about Jesus. He would go to Peter, James, or John, those who knew the Master intimately. One does not go to the enemies of Joseph Smith or the critics of the present Church if he or she sincerely wants to gain understanding concerning the faith. Wisdom would suggest that one does not take his doubts to a known doubter and expect to receive peace of mind.

Each of us is under obligation to search and ponder the issues ourselves, to do our best to learn by study and by faith the answers to our concerns (D&C 9:7-9; 88:118). Every member of this Church has a direct channel to our Heavenly Father; there is no one between us and God. Every person who has been baptized and confirmed has a right to the companionship and guidance of the Holy Ghost, the Comforter, even that Spirit of Truth which knows all things (D&C 42:17; Moses 6:61). In addition, members of a given ward can readily take their concerns to their priesthood leaders their branch president or bishop. If the bishop does not know the answer to the question, he can inquire of the stake president. If the stake president is unable to address the concern and feels it advisable to do so, he may inquire of the General Authorities of the Church. As indicated earlier, people ought to feel free to ask their questions. If an answer is to be had, it can be obtained through proper channels. There is a temptation, when we are troubled by a particular matter, to spend inordinate amounts of time researching it. Some things simply have not been revealed, and thus to devote ourselves endlessly to the discovery of what in essence is the undiscoverable (at least for now) is counterproductive. It's almost a waste of time, especially when our efforts could so much more profitably be expended in studying and reinforcing the things that have been given by God.

We reduce the realm of the unknown not by wandering in it but rather by delighting in and expanding our knowledge of that which God has already revealed. It is a soul-satisfying experience to be reading Topic A and then to have our minds caught away to consider Topic B. Indeed, serious, consistent, prayerful consideration and reflection upon the institutional revelations (the standard works and the words of the living oracles) result in individual revelations, including where the Lord senses it is appropriate and we are ready to receive them the answers to our more difficult questions. Those answers may come as a specific response to a specific concern, or they may come in the form of a comforting and peaceful assurance that all is well, that God is in his heaven, that the work in which we are engaged is true, that specifics will be made known in the Lord's due time. Either way, answers do come. They really do, but only as we go to the right source.

Some people jump to the false and really rather silly conclusion that because they do not understand, then no one else does either. That's quite a presumptuous conclusion, but it is, nevertheless, a surprisingly common one. Humility would demand a different stance. Meekness would force us to acknowledge that there just might be someone either brighter or more experienced than ourselves, or maybe even someone who has successfully struggled with this issue before. Common sense would suggest that the odds are against absolute originality in regard to our specific concern. And even if it is possible that we have indeed unearthed something which no other mortal has ever encountered, still there are good and wise people in our midst who have been blessed with the gifts of the Spirit with discernment, with revelation, with wisdom and judgment to assist us in putting all things into proper perspective.

A related tendency with some is to parade their doubts, to suppose that by making a public announcement of all things that trouble them they shall somehow either feel better about their difficulties or identify and join hands with others who similarly struggle. Of course, as we have suggested already, one is not expected to suffer alone. There is help available, within fairly easy reach. Precious little good comes, however, from "hanging out our dirty wash," from making public proclamations about one's inner anxieties, little good to the individual and little good to groups of people. Such things merely feed doubt and perpetuate it. "Why are a few members," asked Elder Neal A. Maxwell, "who somewhat resemble the ancient Athenians, so eager to hear some new doubt or criticism? (see Acts 17:21). Just as some weak members slip across a state line to gamble, a few go out of their way to have their doubts titillated. Instead of nourishing their faith, they are gambling "offshore' with their fragile faith. To the question "Will ye also go away?' these few would reply, "Oh, no, we merely want a weekend pass in order to go to a casino for critics or a clubhouse for cloakholders.' Such easily diverted members are not disciples but fair-weather followers."Instead," Elder Maxwell concluded, "true disciples are rightly described as steadfast and immovable, pressing forward with "a perfect brightness of hope' (2 Nephi 31:20; see also D&C 49:23)."1

With some questions we may simply be able to ask ourselves: "Does this really matter? Is this issue important enough to worry myself about? Is it worth the effort?" We have only so much time and energy in this life; we would do well to ignore, where possible, the unimportant, to avoid getting caught up, as someone has suggested, in the thick of thin things! As a professor of religion at Brigham Young University, I have found it fascinating (and sometimes a bit discouraging) to find what some students grapple with. This one just has to know the exact location of Kolob. That one won't rest until he has calculated the precise dimensions of the celestial city seen by John the Revelator. Others wrestle with the present resting place of the Ark of the Covenant or Joseph Smith's seer stone. "There is so much to learn about the great eternal verities which shape our destiny," Elder Bruce R. McConkie has written, "that it seems a shame to turn our attention everlastingly to the minutiae and insignificant things. So often questions like this are asked: "I know it is not essential to my salvation, but I would really like to know how many angels can dance on the head of a pin and if it makes any difference whether the pin is made of brass or bronze?' There is such a thing as getting so tied up with little fly specks on the great canvas which depicts the whole plan of salvation that we lose sight of what the life and the light and the glory of eternal reward are all about. (See, e.g., Matt. 23:23-25.) There is such a thing as virtually useless knowledge, the acquisition of which won't make one iota of difference to the destiny of the kingdom or the salvation of its subjects."2

In teaching some of my religion classes, I have occasionally said that it is as important to know what we do not know as it is to know what we know. Further, to quarrel and dispute over the unknown and the unrevealed is fruitless and absolutely unnecessary. In that spirit, it is fundamentally necessary for us occasionally to say, "I don't know!" Part of our spiritual maturity is reflected in our ability to deal with ambiguity, to handle uncertainty. And yet our focus need not be upon the unknown; rather, we can emphasize what we do know. This is the pattern found in scripture, the pattern whereby a prophet says, in essence, "I don't know this, but let me tell you what I do know." An angel asked Nephi: "Knowest thou the condescension of God?" Now note the young prophet's response: "I know that he loveth his children; nevertheless, I do not know the meaning of all things" (1 Nephi 11:16-17; compare Alma 7:8; 40:8-9).

There are many things we will need to wait on, many questions we will encounter whose answers will definitely not be forthcoming right away. Some things we need to be willing to "put on a shelf." We continue our searching, our prayer, our discussions, but we wait patiently upon the Lord. I, like many others, do not understand for the present all the things that took place in the history of our Church or all the doctrines preached by leaders of the Church. But my confidence and my trust in Joseph Smith and his successors is implicit. We simply do not have the whole story yet. We must be patient, avoiding the temptation to attribute improper motivation or to jump prematurely to conclusions; we need to give the leaders of the Church the benefit of the doubt. The Lord will vindicate the words and works of his anointed servants in time. Of this I have no doubt. In the meantime, we must receive their words, as the revelation declares, "in all patience and faith" (D&C 21:5).

I have no hesitation in acknowledging that I have placed many things on a shelf over the last thirty years. A number of those items have come down from the shelf as information and inspiration have brought light and understanding where darkness and uncertainty had been. Some matters will probably stay on the shelf until that glorious millennial day when the God of heaven makes known those things "which have passed, and hidden things which no man knew, things of the earth, by which it was made, and the purpose and the end thereof things most precious, things that are above, and things that are beneath, things that are in the earth, and upon the earth, and in heaven" (D&C 101:32-34).

I readily admit that I don't have the answers to all of life's tough questions, questions that are shouted regularly by the dissident as well as the disillusioned: what this doctrine means, why that particular event in our history took place, why this person died so needlessly or that one must endure such terrible suffering. But some things I do know, and I know them through the quiet whisperings of the Holy Ghost: that there is a God and that he is my Father; that there is purpose to life, a reason why we are here and a reason why we experience the things we do; that we can be lifted and cradled by Him who descended below all things and thus understands our plight fully; and that in the end if we will submit to God, surrender our will to him, and trust in his plan and his timetable, we will come to know, in the midst of our earthly challenges, the peace that passes all understanding (Philippians 4:7). If we are able to say, with Job, "Though [God] slay me, yet will I trust in him" (Job 13:15), the shroud of doubt and spiritual darkness will be lifted and removed by the winds of faith and trust in our Redeemer. We then begin to see things as they really are. We can be at peace.

Notes
