Robert L. Millet, I Will Fear No Evil (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2002)

Lasting Lessons,Tender Tutorials

At one time or another, every one of us will face adversity, whether it be in the form of financial reversals, personal struggles, the loss of a loved one, or some type of profound disappointment. Adversity will come to us, one and all, whether we are prepared for it or not. Too often in tough times we yield ourselves to stress and distress, to despondency and discouragement, much more than our forebears would have done. Certainly life is more complex, the demands on our time are more intense, and the temptations of the devil are more sophisticated than they were in past ages.

At the same time, it seems to me that there is a mindset, characteristic of our day, that opens us to despair. That mindset is one in which we assume, given all the pleasures and luxuries of our day and age, that all should be well with us, that we should be perpetually happy. Many of us have bought into and imbibed the jargon and the philosophy of our pop psychology world. The fact is, life can be tough. We are not guaranteed a stress-free existence, nor did the Lord promise us a mortal life void of challenge and difficulty.

As we noted earlier, we are now living in a fallen world, one in which things break down, decay, atrophy, and die. We are living in a mortal existence. Now, lest you misunderstand my point, there is much in the world that is glorious and beautiful and uplifting and inspiring; many of the relationships we establish, for example, are elevating and enriching they bring the deepest of joys into our lives. But we receive sorrow alongside our joys. Both elements of the equation come with the turf, with a life on earth. And we knew this before we came.

C. S. Lewis once observed that God "has paid us the intolerable compliment of loving us, in the deepest, most tragic, most inexorable sense. . . . We are," he continued, "not metaphorically but in very truth, a Divine work of art, something that God is making, and therefore something with which He will not be satisfied until it has a certain character." Thus it is perfectly "natural for us to wish that God had designed for us a less glorious and less arduous destiny; but then we are wishing not for more love but for less."1 "For whom the Lord loveth he chasteneth, and scourgeth every son whom he receiveth. . . . Now no chastening for the present seemeth to be joyous, but grievous: nevertheless afterward it yieldeth the peaceable fruit of righteousness unto them which are exercised [trained, disciplined] thereby" (Hebrews 12:6, 11). James, the brother of Jesus, therefore instructed us to "count it all joy when ye fall into many afflictions; knowing this, that the trying of your faith worketh patience. But let patience have its perfect work, that ye may be perfect and entire, wanting nothing" (JST James 1:2-4).

In short, there are great lessons to be learned from life's struggles, lessons that can perhaps be acquired in no other way. Many of our afflictions we bring upon ourselves through our own impatience, shortsightedness, or sins. I suppose there are even lessons to be learned from our sins not the least of which is the motivation to avoid in the future the pain associated with our misdeeds but these are lessons that I am persuaded the Lord can bring into our lives without our sinning. A man called as a bishop, for example, need not be troubled about the fact that he has lived a faithful life and thus may not be able to feel what the transgressor feels. The Great Physician, he who descended below all things during the awful hours of atonement (D&C 88:6; 122:8), is able, through his Holy Spirit, to reveal to his ordained servants what they need to know and feel in order to lead the wandering sheep back into the fold.

There are, however, lessons that come to us from God through challenges and distresses and setbacks and failures. There is a purifying work of pain, a divine work that can transform the soul of the distressed one, if he or she approaches the difficulty with the proper attitude. It is not uncommon for members of the Church who have lost a loved one, or who now must face the prospects of a terminal disease, or whose financial fortunes have been dramatically reversed, to ask: "Why? Why would God do this to me? Why is this happening?" These are, of course, "natural" reactions to trauma, especially when each us would be perfectly content to remain perfectly content! But that's not why we are here.

On more than one occasion I have suggested to the sufferers, as kindly and lovingly as I could, that "Why is this happening?" is not the proper question. Why is it happening? Because we are mortal, because things like this happen in a mortal world. No one of us is required by God to enjoy suffering or to anticipate with delight the next trial. I have an associate who said to me once: "You know, Bob, I learn so much from my trials that I find myself praying that the Lord will send more trials my way." I smiled, but I thought to myself: "No way! You wouldn't catch me praying for trials. They come without asking for them."

On the other hand, it makes little sense for us to come to earth to be proven and then to ask why we are being proven. The Father is the Husbandman, the Vinedresser. The Savior is the Vine, and we are the branches. The Vinedresser chooses the manner in which he will purge the branches. Why? "Every branch that beareth fruit," the Master stated, "he [the Father] purgeth it, that it may bring forth more fruit" (John 15:2).

Elder Richard G. Scott pointed out that "when you face adversity, you can be led to ask many questions. Some serve a useful purpose; others do not. To ask, Why does this have to happen to me? Why do I have to suffer this now? What have I done to cause this? will lead you into blind alleys. . . . Rather ask, What am I to do? What am I to learn from this experience? What am I to change? Whom am I to help? How can I remember my many blessings in times of trial?"2

In describing life within a prison camp, Victor Frankl has written that "we who lived in concentration camps can remember the men who walked through the huts comforting others, giving away their last piece of bread. They may have been few in number, but they offer sufficient proof that everything can be taken from a man but one thing: the last of . . . human freedoms to choose one's attitude in any given set of circumstances, [and] to choose one's own way [of life]."3

As difficult as it is for me to acknowledge this, we must occasionally be willing to be "broken" if we really expect to gain that broken heart and contrite spirit about which the scriptures speak (Psalms 51:17; 3 Nephi 9:20; D&C 59:8). Inasmuch as our will is the only thing that we can, in the long run, really consecrate to God, the Lord needs to know of our willingness to be broken by him. That is, to what degree are we willing to submit, to surrender, to yield our hearts unto him? "What happens in the breaking of a horse?" someone has asked. "Contrary to what many people believe, the horse's spirit isn't broken. A well-broken horse remains strong, eager, quick-witted, and aware, and he loves to gallop when given free rein. Rather, it is the horse's independence that is broken. The breaking of a horse results in the horse giving instant obedience to its rider.

"When a child of God is broken, God does not destroy his or her spirit. We don't lose our zest for living when we come to Christ. We don't lose the force of our personality. Rather, we lose our independence. Our will is brought into submission to the will of the Father so that we can give instant obedience to the one whom we call Savior and Lord. . . ."We can choose to respond to brokenness with anger, bitterness, and hate. We can rail against our circumstances. We can strike out against those whom we believe have caused us pain. Those options are available to us because we have free will."The way to blessing, however, lies in turning to God to heal us and make us whole. We decide whether we will yield to him and trust him."4

Indeed, if we approach them properly, our trials can teach and sanctify us, can assist us to know "the fellowship of [Christ's] suffering" (Philippians 3:10). Francis Webster, one of those who suffered unspeakable pain as a member of the Martin Handcart Company, said: "Everyone of us came through with the absolute knowledge that God lives for we became acquainted with him in our extremities."5

At a very difficult time for my wife, Shauna, and me when we watched helplessly as loved ones chose painful and unproductive paths we found ourselves, early in the process of dealing with the pain, at a crossroads. We sensed, at that early juncture, that our attitude toward what we were experiencing was everything. To be honest, both of us went through a period of weeks and months in which our days were filled with self-doubt, with personal recrimination, with loads of questions about what we had done wrong over the years. But as we prayed with intensity, read scriptures with new and searching eyes, and spent time regularly in the holy temple, there began to distill upon us the quiet but powerful realization that only we could determine how we would deal with our dilemma. Would we allow our problems to strangle our marriage and family? Would we permit these difficulties to drive us into seclusion? Or would we yield to doubt and cynicism, given that we had tried so hard through the years to do what we were asked?

I will be forever grateful that the two of us sensed that we must face this together and that the one thing we could not afford to have happen was for the trial to drive the two of us apart. Further, after a time of being wrung out emotionally and spiritually, we both sensed that the Lord was our only hope for peace, our only means of extricating ourselves from dysfunctional living. It was then that our prayers and our yearnings began to change. It was then that we found ourselves shorn of self-concern and naked in our ineptitude; it was then that we acknowledged our nothingness and drew upon the strength and lifting power of our Divine Redeemer. Oh, we were still concerned, and we kept trying. But we were "trying in a new way, a less worried way."6

We should not be unnerved by trials and challenges and even a bad day once in a while. And there are certainly times when a third party, be it a priesthood leader, parent, dear friend, or even a professional counselor, can help us put things in place or in proper perspective. It may even be necessary in some instances for an individual to use medication prescribed by a competent physician. But we must never, ever, minimize the impact the Master can have in our lives, the calming and reassuring and healing balm that he can be to us, no matter the depth of our despair or the seriousness of our situation. "Whatever Jesus lays his hands upon lives," Elder Howard W. Hunter testified. "If Jesus lays his hands upon a marriage, it lives. If he is allowed to lay his hands on the family, it lives."7

The touch of the Master's hand is life and light and love. It calms. It soothes. It sanctifies. It empowers. It transcends anything earthly. Those who have been healed by that sacred and sensitive touch are they who can joyously proclaim, like Andrew, Simon Peter's brother, "We have found the Messias" (John 1:41).

I do not wish in any way to minimize some of the tremendous challenges that many of our people face. These are real and sobering. I am very much aware that there are many today who have been subjected to much of pain and distress in their lives, to abuse, to neglect, to the agonies of wanting more than anything to live a normal life and to feel normal feelings, but who seem unable to do so. I would say, first of all, that each one of us, whoever we are, wrestles with something. Perhaps it's things like weight or height or complexion or baldness or I.Q. Perhaps it's problems or issues that pass in time. Perhaps it's the torture of watching helplessly as loved ones choose unwisely and thereby close doors of opportunity for themselves and foreclose future privileges. And then there are the terrible traumas in our life, those occasions when someone we love does despite to our tender trust and deals a blow that strikes at the center of all we hold dear and all we value about ourselves.

I know that the day is coming when all the wrongs, the awful wrongs of this life, will be righted, when the God of justice will attend to all evil. Those things that are beyond our power to control will be corrected, either here or hereafter. Many of us may come to enjoy the lifting, liberating powers of the Atonement in this life, and all our losses will be made up before we pass from this sphere of existence. Perhaps some of us will wrestle all our days with our traumas and our trials, for He who orchestrates the events of our lives will surely fix the time of our release. I have a conviction that when a person passes through the veil of death, all those impediments and challenges and crosses that were beyond his or her power to control abuse, neglect, immoral environment, weighty traditions, and so forth will be torn away like a film, and perfect peace will prevail in our hearts.

In some cases our Lord and Master seems to ask of us the impossible to forgive those who have dreadfully hurt us. As Bruce and Marie Hafen have observed, "That picture somehow has a familiar look we've seen all this before. Of course, because this picture depicts the sacrifice of Jesus Christ: he took upon himself undeserved and unbearable burdens, heaped upon him by people who often said, and often believed, that they loved him. And he assumed that load not for any need of his, but only to help them.

"So to forgive not just for abuse victims, but for each of us is to be a Christ figure, a transitional point in the war between good and evil, stopping the current of evil by absorbing it in every pore, thereby protecting the innocent next generation and helping to enable the repentance and healing of those whose failures sent the jolts into our own systems."8

And so we hold on, we press on, we move ahead, even though the road is not necessarily straight and the path is not necessarily clear. Lessons we are to learn through our suffering may or may not be obvious. The one lesson, perhaps overarching all the rest, is patience. Elder Orson F. Whitney taught: "No pain that we suffer, no trial that we experience is wasted. It ministers to our education, to the development of such qualities as patience, faith, fortitude and humility. All that we suffer and all that we endure, especially when we endure it patiently, builds up our characters, purifies our hearts, expands our souls, and makes us more tender and charitable, more worthy to be called the children of God."9

At the time Shauna and I were going through some of our deepest sorrows and distresses, we could not have sensed what lessons for life were being chiseled into our souls. It all seemed during that season of stress so overwhelming, so awful, so terribly unfair. And as is true with most of us, it's tough to learn lessons while you're in the midst of the refiner's fire. Now while I would not wish to go through that experience again, at the same time I would not trade the lessons we learned for anything in this world or the next. They were timeless lessons, eternal and tender tutorials that have drawn us closer to the Good Shepherd and expanded our consciousness and empathy for his precious sheep. We learned some things about God during those years of trial, but we also learned some things about ourselves. Fortunately or unfortunately, the only way I can know to what extent I will serve God at all hazards is to have my mettle tested. In asking Abraham to offer his son Isaac, for example, Abraham needed to learn something about Abraham.

In some ways, then, facing our trials courageously and resolutely prepares us for fellowship with those who have passed the tests of mortality. Now, to be sure, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints does not subscribe to a doctrine of asceticism, nor do we teach that we should seek after either persecution or pain. But persecution and pain are the lot of the people of God in all ages, and each of us, saint and sinner alike, becomes acquainted with the Suffering Servant through our own suffering. We have been taught, by those who know best, that "all these things shall give thee experience, and shall be for thy good. The Son of Man hath descended below them all. Art thou greater than he?" (D&C 122:7-8).

No, we are not greater than he, nor should we suppose that fellowship with him who was well acquainted with grief will come through a life of ease. As the apostle Peter counseled us: "Beloved, think it not strange concerning the fiery trial which is to try you, as though some strange thing happened unto you: but rejoice, inasmuch as ye are partakers of Christ's sufferings; that, when his glory shall be revealed, ye may be glad also with exceeding joy" (1 Peter 4:12-13). As tough as it is, over time and through seasons of experience we come to glory in our trials, for only through times of weakness and distress do we eventually emerge into a day of strength and power (2 Corinthians 12:9-10).

Notes
