Robert L. Millet, I Will Fear No Evil (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2002)

Opposition to the Church

As we move closer and closer to the end of time, meaning the end of earth's temporal existence, the forces of evil will be combined against the forces of good, particularly the Church of the Lamb of God. A proclamation issued by the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles in April 1845 includes these words: "As this work progresses in its onward course, and becomes more and more an object of political and religious interest and excitement, no king, ruler, or subject, no community or individual, will stand neutral. All will at length be influenced by one spirit or the other; and will take sides either for or against the kingdom of God."1

Thus we should not be surprised or startled when individuals or whole organizations take issue with or condemn outright the teachings or practices of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. We have the assurance that there will never again be an apostasy of the Lord's Church, that the kingdom of God is here to stay and will grow and expand to include hundreds of millions of people throughout the earth. Indeed, as Moroni predicted, "Those who are not built upon the Rock will seek to overthrow this church; but it will increase the more opposed."2

"We are not without critics," President Gordon B. Hinckley observed, "some of whom are mean and vicious. We have always had them, and I suppose we will have them all through the future. But we shall go forward, returning good for evil, being helpful and kind and generous."3

Thus, how we respond to criticism or how we choose to answer hard questions about our faith and way of life are important. This is especially the case as Church membership grows, as temples spread throughout the earth, and as our influence begins to be witnessed and felt more and more.

Most people around us like the way we live and even like the way we talk. But they're just plain uncomfortable with the doctrine that underlies our behavior. In point of fact, however, our conduct and our way of life cannot be separated from our doctrine, for what we believe empowers and directs what we do. A number of years ago an article appeared in Christianity Today entitled "Why Your Neighbor Joined the Mormon Church." Five reasons were given:

After a brief discussion of each item on the list, the author of the article concluded: "In a day when many are hesitant to claim that God has said anything definitive, the Mormons stand out in contrast, and many people are ready to listen to what the Mormons think the voice of God says. It is tragic that their message is false, but it is nonetheless a lesson to us that people are many times ready to hear a voice of authority."4

The Savior taught of the importance of judging things prophets, for example by their fruits, by the product of their ministry and teachings (Matthew 7:15-20). He also explained that "every plant, which my heavenly Father hath not planted, shall be rooted up" (Matthew 15:13). Evil trees cannot bring forth good fruit. Works of men eventually come to naught, but that which is of God cannot be overthrown (Acts 5:38-39).

In encountering those who pose questions to us either sincere or curious investigators on the one hand or critics of the Church on the other there are certain simple but worthwhile observations to consider. First, all of us can have sufficient knowledge and testimony of the gospel to sustain and defend the faith; no formal schooling or training is necessary, although we are always in a better position to provide a reason for the hope within us (1 Peter 3:15) when we have become more than distant acquaintances of the doctrines of the gospel. Second, while we want to be helpful where we can, we are not obligated to provide answers to everyone's questions. In fact, some questions are best not answered (Alma 11:21-22). The Lord has not yet answered all of my questions, and I rather suspect he hasn't cleared up all of yours either. Third, as Latter-day Saints, we already know more about God and Christ and the plan of salvation than anyone who might seek to deter us from a faithful course. We need to be confident and assured in the knowledge that is ours.

Let me also share three suggestions learned through both sad and sweet experience on how we might effectively deal with difficult questions posed by those not of our faith. First, stay in control of yourself. There is nothing more frustrating than knowing the truth, loving the truth, sincerely desiring to share the truth, and yet being unable to communicate our deepest feelings to another who sees things differently. Argument or disputation over sacred things causes us to forfeit the Spirit of God and thus the confirming power of our message (3 Nephi 11:28-30). We teach and we testify. Contention is unbecoming of one called to publish peace and thus bless our brothers and sisters. In the words of Elder Marvin J. Ashton, "We have no time for contention. We only have time to be about our Father's business."5

In 1896 President Joseph F. Smith wrote to one of his missionary sons: "Kindness will beget friendship and favor, but anger or passion will drive away sympathy. To win one's respect and confidence, approach them mildly, kindly. No friendship was ever gained by an attack upon principle or upon man, but by calm reason and the lowly Spirit of Truth. If you have built for a man a better house than his own, and he is willing to accept yours and forsake his, then, and not till then, should you proceed to tear down the old structure. Rotten though it may be, it will require some time for it to lose all its charms and fond memories of its former occupant. Therefore let him, not you, proceed to tear it away. Kindness and courtesy are the primal elements of gentility."6

I have been a student of the Book of Mormon for many years, and I have come to value its pages, its principles, and its precepts more than silver or gold. But, like you, I continue to discover new truths and new applications with new readings and new experiences in life. For example, I have read the first chapter of Alma many, many times. But in recent years a particular reading of the text brought to light a lesson, a stern warning. In speaking of what took place in about 90 b.c., Mormon explains: "It came to pass that whosoever did not belong to the church of God began to persecute those that did belong to the church of God, and had taken upon them the name of Christ. Yea, they did persecute them, and afflict them with all manner of words." He notes that "there was a strict law among the people of the church, that there should not any man, belonging to the church, arise and persecute those that did not belong to the church, and that there should be no persecution among themselves.

"Nevertheless," Mormon adds, "there were many among them" meaning the church "who began to be proud, and began to contend warmly with their adversaries, even unto blows; yea, they would smite one another with their fists." (Parenthetically, I would confess that I've been involved in some pretty heated discussions on religious topics, but I have never been in a fist fight!) Mormon points out that these unfortunate instances were the cause of "much trial with the church." Why? Consider the next verse: "For the hearts of many were hardened, and their names were blotted out, that they were remembered no more among the people of God. And also many withdrew themselves from among them" (Alma 1:19-24). How tragic! Here we have members of the Church of Jesus Christ whose contention for the faith cost them their faith and their membership.

Second, stay in order. The Savior taught that gospel prerequisites should be observed when teaching sacred things (Matthew 7:6-7).7

A person, for example, who knows very little about our doctrine will probably not understand or appreciate our teachings concerning temples, sealing powers, eternal life, or the deification of man. The Prophet Joseph Smith explained that "if we start right, it is easy to go right all the time; but if we start wrong, we may go wrong, and it [will] be a hard matter to get right."8

It is always wise to lay a proper foundation for what is to be said; the truth can then flow more freely.

Let me illustrate. After I had been on a mission for about fifteen months, I was assigned to work in a beautiful section of Connecticut. My companion, a nice fellow to be sure, had one particular problem that affected the work somewhat his mind was never with us. He was always off in another world, or so it seemed. We came to the door of a small but lovely home. I can still remember what a beautiful day it was, in the early summer of the year. It was Elder Jackson's turn to be the spokesman. A woman who appeared to be about thirty-five years old opened her door and unlatched the screen door. She said: "Yes. Is there something I can do for you?"

My companion answered: "We're missionaries for The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. We have a message about Christ that we would like to share with you."

She looked us over very carefully. Then she responded: "I don't think so. I have my own faith."

My companion, who probably wasn't paying attention to what she said, went silent. After waiting uncomfortably for at least ten or fifteen seconds, I blurted out: "And what church do you attend?"

She came right back: "I didn't say I attended a church; I said that I had my own faith."

Somewhat surprised, I said: "Could you tell us about your faith?"

She said: "I don't think I want to. You would make fun of me."

I assured her that we would not make fun of her. "What is your faith?" I asked.

"Well," she timidly declared, "I believe the physical body is the temple of God and that people ought to take better care of their bodies. For example, I think it's wrong for people to smoke or drink." I commented that we felt her thinking was right on the mark. She continued: "Well, there's more. I don't drink coffee or tea." Then she asked: "What do the Mormons believe?"

It was difficult for me not to speak out, but I felt I ought to allow Elder Jackson to engage what was obviously a great teaching moment. He stood erect, and I could almost see the wheels in his mental machinery turning. He answered: "Well, we believe in baptism for the dead."

The woman carefully pulled the screen door shut and latched it. Before closing the main door she said, with a pained look on her face, "That sounds sick."

I had some idea of what she was thinking and of how bizarre these Latter-day Saints appeared to be. Mostly I was stunned, shocked. Before we left the porch, I turned to Elder Jackson and asked in utter disbelief: "What are you doing?"

He seemed offended and said: "We do believe in baptism for the dead, don't we?"

I said, "Yes, we do, Elder Jackson. Why didn't you tell her about polygamy?"

His response was even more stunning: "I thought about doing that next, but she closed the door."

"Elder," I said, "this lady lives the Word of Wisdom."

"I thought that was odd," he added, as we walked to the next door.

This woman had essentially come to the door with her cup and said, "I thirst." We had answered, "We can fix that," and then proceeded to drag out the fire hose and drown her in the living waters. It isn't that this woman was not bright enough to understand the concept of salvation for the dead. The problem was that we had not laid a proper doctrinal foundation, and our message therefore seemed to be spoken against reason. There is indeed a system of gospel prerequisites.

Third, stay in context. We love the Bible and cherish its messages. But the Bible is not the source of our doctrine or authority, nor is much to be gained through efforts to "prove" the truthfulness of the restored gospel from the Bible. Ours is an independent revelation. We know what we know about the premortal existence, priesthood, celestial marriage, baptism for the dead, the postmortal spirit world, degrees of glory, and so forth, because of what God has made known through latter-day prophets, not because we are able to identify a few biblical allusions to these matters.

Some of our greatest difficulties in handling questions about our faith come when we try to establish specific doctrines of the Restoration from the Bible alone. We have an obligation a sacred obligation to rely upon the Book of Mormon, the Doctrine and Covenants, the Pearl of Great Price, the Joseph Smith Translation of the Bible, and especially the teachings of latter-day apostles and prophets, in establishing our doctrine. There is consummate peace and spiritual power to be derived from being loyal and true to those things the Almighty has communicated to us in our dispensation (D&C 5:10; 31:3-4; 43:15-16; 49:1-4; 84:54-61).

In September 1832 the Lord warned of a condemnation, a scourge, and a judgment that would rest upon the whole Church until we took seriously the Book of Mormon and the revelations of the Restoration (D&C 84:54-61). In short, there is a loyalty that should and must exist among us, a loyalty to those things the Lord has given to us. We are commanded to "declare glad tidings." And what are those tidings? Are we to go into the world and reteach the Sermon on the Mount, the Bread of Life sermon, or any of those remarkable doctrines contained in the New Testament? As we have said before, we cherish the Bible and seek to safeguard its truths, but we are called upon, in the words of the Lord, to "declare the things which have been revealed to my servant, Joseph Smith, Jun." (D&C 31:3-4).

While we seek to make friends and build bridges of understanding where possible, we do not court favor, nor do we compromise one whit on what we believe. Some doctrines, like the doctrine of "the only true and living church" (D&C 1:30), by their very nature, arouse antagonism from those of other faiths. Would it not be wise, some have asked, to avoid or at least downplay such divisive points? Perhaps, some say, we should consider focusing on matters we have in common and put aside, for the time being, the distinctive teachings of the Restoration. Elder Boyd K. Packer declared: "If we thought only in terms of diplomacy or popularity, surely we should change our course."But we must hold tightly to it even though some turn away. . . ."It is not an easy thing for us to defend the position that bothers so many others."Brethren and sisters, never be ashamed of the gospel of Jesus Christ. Never apologize for the sacred doctrines of the gospel."Never feel inadequate and unsettled because you cannot explain them to the satisfaction of all who might inquire of you."Do not be ill at ease or uncomfortable because you can give little more than your conviction. . . ."If we can stand without shame, without hesitancy, without embarrassment, without reservation to bear witness that the gospel has been restored, that there are prophets and Apostles upon the earth, that the truth is available for all mankind, the Lord's Spirit will be with us. And that assurance can be affirmed to others."9

President Gordon B. Hinckley declared: "If we will go forward, never losing sight of our goal, speaking ill of no one, living the great principles we know to be true, this cause will roll on in majesty and power to fill the earth. Doors now closed to the preaching of the gospel will be opened. The Almighty, if necessary, may have to shake the nations to humble them and cause them to listen to the servants of the living God. Whatever is needed will come to pass."10

This work is true, and because it is true it will triumph. The destiny of the restored kingdom is set, and we need not fear for the success of the Church. The repeated plea in scripture is "Fear not." The promise of Deity is encouraging and strengthening to our faith: "Verily, thus saith the Lord unto you there is no weapon that is formed against you shall prosper; and if any man lift his voice against you he shall be confounded in mine own due time. Wherefore, keep my commandments; they are true and faithful. Even so. Amen" (D&C 71:9-11; compare 136:17). God will bring to pass his purposes; of that we can rest assured.

Notes
