Robert L. Millet, I Will Fear No Evil (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2002)

False Christs and False Prophets

In his Olivet discourse, the Savior warned his disciples of false Christs and false prophets (Matthew 24:24; Joseph Smith-Matthew 1:22). With the exception of a few deluded individuals who claim messianic authority, false Christs are generally false systems of salvation, errant paths to happiness and peace here and eternal reward hereafter. False prophets are those who seek to deceive, "who use the name of the Lord, and use it in vain, having not authority" (D&C 63:62). False prophets are "teachers and preachers who profess to speak for the Lord when, in fact, they have received no such appointment. . . . They are teachers of religion who do not receive revelation and have not gained from the Holy Ghost the true testimony of Jesus." They "are false teachers; they teach false doctrine; they neither know nor teach the doctrines of salvation."1

While few of us in the restored Church are led astray to such extent that we acknowledge one as having divine authority when he does not, too often we are captivated and captured by those claiming some new insight, some novel interpretation of prophecy, some easier way to God and unusual spiritual experiences. We need not defect to full-scale apostasy to dilute our discipleship; we need only give an ear or lend our undivided attention to a cause, a crusade, or a movement that is not ordained of God and not in harmony with the teachings of the Church and its constituted authorities. Alma counseled us to "trust no one to be your teacher nor your minister, except he be a man of God, walking in his ways and keeping his commandments" (Mosiah 23:14).

In the first few centuries following the death of Christ there grew up a movement that came to be known as Gnosticism. The word gnosis connoted for them knowledge, not a general kind of knowledge, but rather a special, saving knowledge. The Gnostics were a group who claimed to be possessors of the esoteric teachings of Jesus, the supposedly sacred and secret messages reserved only for those who sought to rise above the mundane and liberate themselves from the fetters of ignorance and a confining physical world. They decried and defied, for the most part, what they believed to be a stifling and restrictive priesthood hierarchy of the orthodox church. Salvation was an individual experience that came through spiritual illumination of the mysteries of godliness.

In the times of restitution, we have not been without our own little Gnostic groups. There was Hiram Page, who sought to reveal things about Zion (D&C 28); Mrs. Hubble, who claimed to be receiving divine direction for the Saints (D&C 43); some who spoke of secret commissions and ordinations under the hands of Joseph Smith; and others today who make much of special callings or unusual insights. We have watched with much interest and pain as a surprising number of the Lord's people are lured away by voices that beckon for their attention. Safety and security in the midst of a babble of voices are to be found in following the Brethren, in giving heed to the counsel and direction we receive from our leaders at the general conferences of the Church and in the official organs and publications of the Church. When we are loyal to this principle, we would never seek to run ahead of our file leaders, to suggest that the Saints should do this or that when in fact those responsible for guiding the destiny of the Church and kingdom have not so spoken.2

The Lord does not ask us to magnify other people's callings.

Few people would go astray, would find themselves in apostasy or in the center of controversy, if they simply sought for and followed the counsel of their Church leaders. People are not necessarily called to positions of responsibility because they are the most qualified, the most talented, or the best informed. Our challenge is to sustain that is, give our full loyalty and support to people who are often less than perfect, even people that we might feel to be less capable than ourselves. "You can put it down in your little black book," Elder Boyd K. Packer taught, "that if you will not be loyal in the small things, you will not be loyal in the large things. . . ."A man who says he will sustain the President of the Church or the General Authorities, but cannot sustain his own bishop, is deceiving himself. The man who will not sustain the bishop of his ward and the president of his stake will not sustain the President of the Church."3

There are ways of knowing the truth, of discerning the veracity and fruitfulness of a doctrine or a point of view. The Prophet Joseph Smith pointed out that nothing is a greater injury to the children of men than to be under the influence of a false spirit when we suppose we have the Spirit of God.4

If someone comes to us claiming a special appointment, special knowledge that is not available to most members, special training and abilities that entitle him or her to interpret scripture, clarify doctrine, or chart a course beyond what has been given by the authorized servants of God, we might ask the following: Is the person claiming a divine communication or insight acting within the bounds of his or her respective assignment? The Lord's house is a house of order, not of confusion (D&C 132:8). Chaos would ensue rather quickly if every person were permitted to receive revelations or provide divine direction for every other person in the Church, irrespective of stewardship. The Prophet taught, for example, that "it is contrary to the economy of God" for people to receive revelation for those higher in authority than themselves.5

He also explained that it is "the privilege of any officer in this Church to obtain revelations, so far as [it] relates to his particular calling and duty in the Church."6 There is order. There are proper channels. Is the recipient of the communication worthy to receive the same? Though we may not always be in a position to judge another's worthiness, we are generally pretty good judges of our own. The revelations indicate that the works of God are brought to pass through those who are clean, who have been purified from the sins of the world (3 Nephi 8:1; D&C 50:28). God will generally not work through polluted channels. In fact, President Harold B. Lee offered the following sobering remarks: "We get our answers from the source of the power we list to obey. If we're following the ways of the devil, we'll get answers from the devil. If we're keeping the commandments of God, we'll get our answers from God."7 Is the communication in harmony with the teachings of the standard works and those of the living oracles? When people claim to have received word that they should join a polygamous cult or participate in a demonic practice or be disloyal or disobedient to the government, one wonders how they can justify their position. When others indicate that they have been directed by the Lord to lie or cheat or steal or be immoral, one wonders how such actions can square with the teachings of the Church. Often individuals claim that their case is an exception to the rule. We would do well as a people to stay within the rules and avoid the exceptions, especially when such exceptions stand in violation of the law and order of the kingdom of God. Those still convinced that what they are commanded to do is of God would do well to counsel with their priesthood leaders and then follow that counsel emphatically. Does the communication edify or instruct? Is it consistent with the dignity that should attend something that comes from the Almighty? If a supposed communication from heaven dictates that someone act foolish or undignified or yield themselves completely to erratic behavior or emotional display, then we ought to question the veracity of the communication. The Prophet Joseph Smith explained that in the early days of the Church "many ridiculous things were entered into, calculated [by Satan] to bring disgrace upon the Church of God, to cause the Spirit of God to be withdrawn, and to uproot and destroy those glorious principles which had been developed for the salvation of the human family." He stated an important principle when he said: "There is nothing unnatural in the Spirit of God."8 Does the communication build our faith and commitment to the kingdom of God and strengthen our loyalty to its constituted authorities? There is a litmus test that can be applied, a vital criterion that must be met if a supposed revelation is from God. We ask such questions as the following: Does this communication strengthen my faith in Joseph Smith and the Restoration? Do I feel more motivated to serve faithfully in the Church and kingdom? Does this manifestation build my confidence in the Lord's anointed servants today and in the destiny of the Church? God does not and will not work against himself; he will not confuse his people by having them believe or do things that would in any way weaken their hold on the iron rod.

The Lord set forth a pattern for the Saints to observe, a guide in determining whom we should follow and to whose words we should give heed: "I say unto you, that it shall not be given to any one to go forth to preach my gospel, or to build up my church, except he be ordained by some one who has authority, and it is known to the church that he has authority and has been regularly ordained by the heads of the church" (D&C 42:11). After having cited this passage, Elder Boyd K. Packer lifted a warning voice: "There are some among us now who have not been regularly ordained by the heads of the Church and who tell of impending political and economic chaos, the end of the world something of the "sky is falling, chicken licken' of the fables. They are misleading members to gather to colonies or cults.

"Those deceivers say that the Brethren do not know what is going on in the world or that the Brethren approve of their teaching but do not wish to speak of it over the pulpit. Neither is true. The Brethren, by virtue of traveling constantly everywhere on earth, certainly know what is going on and by virtue of prophetic insight are able to read the signs of the times.

"Do not be deceived by them those deceivers. If there is to be any gathering, it will be announced by those who have been regularly ordained and who are known to the Church to have authority.

"Come away from any others. Follow your leaders, who have been duly ordained and have been publicly sustained, and you will not be led astray."9

Truly, "False prophets always arise to oppose the true prophets and they will prophesy so very near the truth that they will deceive almost the very chosen ones."10

No true believer wants to be deceived, to be led astray. No disciple of Christ wants to waste his or her time and energy and zeal on a secondary cause or a misguided effort. All of us desire to stay true to the faith, "true to the truth for which martyrs have perished,"11 true to the end. But each of us knows that Satan's tactics and his teachings are becoming ever more sophisticated and seductive. Wherein is safety? How can we discern the lies of the father of lies?

A fascinating pattern for discernment is found in the first chapter of the book of Moses. This remarkable chapter records an experience of Moses the Lawgiver that is found nowhere else in scripture, an inspiring account of Moses' face to face encounter with God and his vision of the earth and all of its inhabitants, past, present, and future. Also found here is an account of Moses' encounter with Satan and the latter's strategy to confuse and confound Moses. For one thing, it is worth noting that Satan appeared after Moses had seen God, after "he was left unto himself" and in the weakness of his mortality had fallen "unto the earth. And it came to pass that it was for the space of many hours before Moses did again receive his natural strength like unto man" (Moses 1:9-10). In short, the arch-deceiver came onto the scene, as he so often does with us, when the prophet was at his weakest.

As seasoned and versatile as the devil is, however, Moses had an advantage: he had stood in the very presence of God, was nourished and enlivened by his Spirit, and came to know who he (Moses) was and his place in the plan of God. That is, Moses had gained an elevated perspective and also had felt the power of God and entered the realm of divine experience. Thus, when he was approached by another who demanded his worship, Moses replied: "Who art thou? For behold, I am a son of God, in the similitude of his Only Begotten; and where is thy glory, that I should worship thee?" (Moses 1:12-13).

In short, the more experience a person has with God and with the Spirit of God, the more readily he or she is able to discern and dismiss false Christs and false prophets. The Holy Ghost is thus the key to our discernment, the vital key to our capacity to distinguish false spirits false persons, doctrines, and ideas from that which is ordained and sent forth by God. Our hope for survival in the midst of competing and, in some cases, compelling voices will be realized to the extent that we seek the Spirit, follow the Brethren, and stay in the mainstream of the Church. Therein is safety.

Notes
