Robert L. Millet, I Will Fear No Evil (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2002)

Wars and Rumors of Wars

The Prophet Joseph Smith learned that with the advent of what we know as the War between the States, "war will be poured out upon all nations, beginning at this place [South Carolina]." The Lord then spoke of the expanding influence of war, about slaves rising up against their masters, about coalitions during major world wars, and about bloodshed, famine, and plague, "until the consumption decreed hath made a full end of all nations." The prophecy on war ends with this solid counsel: "Wherefore, stand ye in holy places, and be not moved, until the day of the Lord come; for behold, it cometh quickly, saith the Lord. Amen" (D&C 87:2-8).

War, it seems, is forever with us. Indeed, war historians acknowledge that since the 1860s there has not been a time when war of some sort was not underway on this earth. That war comes upon us because of human selfishness is clear from scripture. "From whence come wars and fightings among you?" James asked. "Come they not hence, even of your lusts that war in your members? Ye lust, and have not: ye kill, and desire to have, and cannot obtain: ye fight and war, yet ye have not, because ye ask not. Ye ask, and receive not, because ye ask amiss [wickedly, wrongly], that ye may consume it upon your lusts." James went on to say that "the Spirit that dwelleth in us lusteth to envy. But [God] giveth more grace. Wherefore he saith, God resisteth the proud, but giveth grace unto the humble" (James 4:1-3, 5-6). The spread of organized conflict in the form of war is thus an indication of fallen man's having yielded to his own carnal nature.

Because it is the case, as the revelations indicate, that war will be with us until the King of kings comes to earth to settle all disputes and bring peace, we would be well-advised to learn how to deal with the issue of war most productively and positively. Using the Book of Mormon as our guide, let us consider the following suggestions:

It was in that spirit, in fact, that the righteous Nephite military leaders led their people into war. First of all, they entered war to protect their families and their civil and religious liberties, feeling that this was an obligation they owed to God, as well as their people. Theirs was never an offensive war they understood that offensive war would not entitle them to the blessings of heaven (Alma 43:9-10, 44-47; 48:14-15; 3 Nephi 3:20-21; compare D&C 98:23-36).

In speaking of America, Moroni observed: "Behold, this is a choice land, and whatsoever nation shall possess it shall be free from bondage, and from captivity, and from all other nations under heaven, if they will but serve the God of the land, who is Jesus Christ" (Ether 2:12). This is why, no matter how much we might make our influence for good felt in society, the most fundamental and enduring difference we can make in the world will come through teaching the principles of the restored gospel. Having paid high praise to Captain Moroni, Mormon added this important detail, a powerful statement about what good people can and should do during times of war: "Now behold, Helaman and his brethren were no less serviceable unto the people than was Moroni; for they did preach the word of God, and they did baptize unto repentance all men whosoever would hearken unto their words" (Alma 48:19). Indeed, as Alma noted, the preaching of the word has "a great tendency to lead the people to do that which [is] just." In fact, it has a more powerful impact "than the sword, or anything else" (Alma 31:5).

As Elder Bruce R. McConkie testified: "I maintain that the most beneficial and productive thing which Latter-day Saints can do to strengthen every good and proper cause is to live and teach the principles of the everlasting gospel."There may be those who have special gifts and needs to serve in other fields, but as far as I am concerned, with the knowledge and testimony that I have, there is nothing I can do for the time and season of this mortal probation, that is more important than to use all my strength, energy and ability in spreading and perfecting the cause of truth and righteousness, both in the Church and among our Father's other children."2

Remarkably good things can and do take place during times of crisis. It was during the period of wars that Alma was taken from the midst of the people, presumably translated and taken from the earth without tasting death (Alma 45:8-19). Oddly enough, Mormon writes of a time during the days of Nephite wars when, because of the steadiness of the members of the Church, "they did prosper exceedingly, and they became exceedingly rich; yea, and they did multiply and wax strong in the land. And thus we see how merciful and just are all the dealings of the Lord, to the fulfilling of all his words unto the children of men. . . . Behold, there never was a happier time among the people of Nephi, since the days of Nephi, than in the days of Moroni" (Alma 50:18-19, 23).

Indeed, the Nephite record provides a profound lesson about how one responds to his or her circumstances. Note this language about the end of the wars: "And thus ended the thirty and first year of the reign of the judges over the people of Nephi; and thus they had had wars, and bloodsheds, and famine, and affliction, for the space of many years. And there had been murders, and contentions, and dissensions, and all manner of iniquity among the people of Nephi; nevertheless for the righteous' sake, yea, because of the prayers of the righteous, they were spared. But behold, because of the exceedingly great length of the war between the Nephites and the Lamanites many had become hardened, . . . and many were softened because of their afflictions, insomuch that they did humble themselves before God, even in the depth of humility" (Alma 62:39-41). How they reacted to pain, to distress, to heartache, to strife in society was a personal choice.

A bit of perspective on the future may be helpful here. While we know that wars and bloodshed and gross wickedness will characterize much of the planet until the initiation of the millennial reign, we also know that consummate righteousness and peace will be found among the Saints of the Most High. That is, while the mother of abominations spreads her nefarious influence throughout the four corners of the earth, the Church of the Lamb will spread a righteous influence, albeit on a smaller scale. "And it came to pass that I, Nephi, beheld the power of the Lamb of God, that it descended upon the saints of the church of the Lamb, and upon the covenant people of the Lord, who were scattered upon all the face of the earth; and they were armed with righteousness and with the power of God in great glory" (1 Nephi 14:11-14).

While tears and tests and trials lie ahead, there is so very much to look forward to: the spread of the restored gospel to all the world, temples dotting the earth, Latter-day Saints providing a leavening influence in the arts, sciences, education, and the entertainment industry. There is so much for us to have faith in, not the least of which is the future of the United States of America. "Men may fail in this country," President Harold B. Lee affirmed to Ricks College students in 1973, "earthquakes may come, seas may heave beyond their bounds, there may be great drought, disaster, and hardship, but this nation, founded on principles laid down by men whom God raised up, will never fail. This is the cradle of humanity, where life on this earth began in the Garden of Eden. This is the place of the new Jerusalem. . . . I have faith in America; you and I must have faith in America, if we understand the teachings of the gospel of Jesus Christ. . . ."I plead with you not to preach pessimism. Preach that this is the greatest country in all the world. This is the favored land. This is the land of our forefathers. It is the nation that will stand despite whatever trials or crises it may yet have to pass through."3

While we must, on the one hand, be fully aware of the evils of our time, ever vigilant to the creeping corruption and raging relativism of the day, we must not allow ourselves to become prey to that cynicism that is an enemy to spirituality. It was just after the uncovering of the scandal of Watergate that Elder Bruce R. McConkie lifted his voice to the members of the Church. "There is an eternal law," he said, "ordained by God himself before the foundations of the world, that every man shall reap as he sows. If we think evil thoughts, our tongues will utter unclean sayings. If we speak words of wickedness, we shall end up doing the works of wickedness. If our minds are centered on the carnality and evil of the world, then worldliness and unrighteousness will seem to us to be the normal way of life. If we ponder things related to sex immorality in our minds, we will soon think everybody is immoral and unclean and it will break down the barrier between us and the world. . . ."On the other hand, if we are pondering in our hearts the things of righteousness, we shall become righteous."4

A passage of scripture that has special appeal to me is from the writings of the apostle Paul: "Whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever things are of good report; if there be any virtue, and if there be any praise, think on these things" (Philippians 4:8; emphasis added). Paul states that we are to think on that is, focus upon things that are true, honest, just, pure, lovely, of good report, virtuous, and praiseworthy. While we are not to be naïve in regard to evil or foolish in regard to unholy influences about us, we are not to fixate upon them or conclude that all is lost. There is too much good to be seen and acknowledged, too much good to be enjoyed and appreciated, too much good to be accomplished by those bent on the salvation of souls. We have no time for despair, no time for feeling sorry for ourselves; we only have time to be about our Father's business. There's a world out there waiting to be saved.

Notes
