Robert L. Millet, I Will Fear No Evil (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2002)

Taking No Thought or Planning Ahead?

During the early 1970s there was much anxiety among the people in the United States, both within and without the Church, concerning the economy and the state of the nation. The Vietnam War had taken not only many thousands of lives but also a major emotional toll on the American people. In addition, we had just passed through the trauma of Watergate, and confidence in government and governmental officials was at an all-time low. Many self-proclaimed prophets of doom published books, delivered lectures, and frequented talk shows to discuss the decline and fall of the American economy.

Unfortunately, members of the Church were not immune to the effects of such sensationalism. I remember encountering many Latter-day Saints who spoke often of the demise of the United States, an imminent overthrow of America by the communists, the collapse of the economy, and the impending Second Coming. College students dropped out of school. Many young couples decided to let their insurance premiums lapse. Others chose not to buy a home. Why such reactions? Because, they said, the end is near, the coming crisis is upon us. Why waste money or effort when it's all going to be over any day now? It was a pretty scary time.

Well, as you may have noticed, the nation didn't dissolve, the economy didn't collapse, and the Millennium did not begin. The leaders of the Church have assured us that while we are certainly closer to the end of time than ever before, there is much to do, much to experience, and much to accomplish before the Lord Jesus comes to dwell on this earth. There is a need to live on, to live providently, to live productively, to live with an eye to the future. We must plan ahead. The wisest among us set money aside for savings and advanced schooling or training, have a year's supply of food, position ourselves to be able to serve missions in the years ahead, and develop a strategy for retirement and our advanced years.

Those who lived in a bygone day said it like this: "I know the Lord will come before too very long, but I still plant cherry trees." That is, we have been counseled to live in the present, to appreciate and enjoy all that is virtuous, lovely, and of good report in our day. We have been advised to live today as though the future is well ahead of us to set reasonable goals for ourselves, to purchase and build homes, to buy insurance, and, in general, to do some long-range planning.

I believe the key is for us to strike a balance. Though those who do not think about the future at all seldom arrive there in a state of preparation, though there is much to recommend about time management and goal-setting programs (in terms of making maximum use of our time and resources), there is another side to the story. While we should look to the future, plan for the future, and anticipate living in the future, we must not become obsessed with the future. We are called upon to live now. The Savior, in his Sermon on the Mount, instructed us to "take no thought for your life, what ye shall eat, or what ye shall drink; nor yet for your body, what ye shall put on. Is not the life more than meat, and the body than raiment?" He added: "Take therefore no thought for the morrow: for the morrow shall take thought for the things of itself" (Matthew 6:25, 34). In studying this passage, let's keep a few things in mind. First of all, these words were delivered primarily to the Twelve, to those who would go into the world without purse or scrip as full-time ministers of the gospel. Second, "take no thought" doesn't really mean "don't think about" but rather "don't be overly anxious about" or "don't fret and worry about." The Lord's counsel to his disciples is to avoid being fixated on or riveted to the future.

The Lutheran theologian Dietrich Bonhoeffer commented on the Master's words as follows: "Be not anxious! Earthly possessions dazzle our eyes and delude us into thinking that they can provide security and freedom from anxiety. Yet all the time they are the very source of all anxiety. If our hearts are set on them, our reward is an anxiety whose burden is intolerable. Anxiety creates its own treasures and they in turn beget further care. When we seek for security in possessions, we are trying to drive out care with care, and the net result is the precise opposite of our anticipations. The fetters which bind us to our possessions prove to be cares themselves.

"The way to misuse our possessions is to use them as an insurance against the morrow. Anxiety is always directed to the morrow, whereas goods are in the strictest sense meant to be used only for to-day. By trying to ensure for the next day we are only creating uncertainty today. . . . The only way to win assurance is by leaving to-morrow entirely in the hands of God and by receiving from him all we need for to-day."1

Let's not misunderstand Bonhoeffer. It isn't that we shouldn't plan ahead or save or even put things in store. It is that the Lord does not want us to become so enamored with our future holdings that they in fact hold us hostage; in short, we must not be possessed by our possessions, either here and now or thirty years from now. Thus, the man or woman who, like Scrooge McDuck, spends every waking moment focused on making money, acquiring more and more property, and building an inexhaustible supply of toys for the future all to the exclusion of the weightier matters of life is in reality mining fool's gold. Such a one will learn the harsh realities concerning "slippery riches" (Helaman 13:31) one day to his own cost and loss. "For where your treasure is, there will your heart be also" (Matthew 6:21).

I have also witnessed a related phenomenon that is really quite sad. Sometimes persons who are overly tied to their goals or regimented in their plan do not allow themselves to be open to appropriate interruption. They tend to view people and people's problems or questions as distractions or hindrances, as objects which move them off course. In the same way, those who have planned all their life for A, are doing everything in their power to pursue A, and become obsessed with that great end are occasionally oblivious or insensitive to small promptings, slight impressions from on high to respond to a newly opened door.

On a number of occasions I have been asked by young students to describe the path that brought me to my present profession. I have usually stated that my path has been anything but a simple and straight one. After I had finished a master's degree, I was accepted into a doctoral program. I was loving my course work, was stimulated by my role as a graduate instructor, and fully expected to be working as a clinical psychologist in three or four years. I reflected occasionally upon the future but never really worried about much beyond the next week's reading or writing assignments. I had heard fellow clinical psychology students refer occasionally to an organization called LDS Social Services, but I really knew nothing about it. One day I was sitting at a desk reading when the thought weighed upon me that I should contact LDS Social Services and find out about their various programs. And so on the basis of an ever so slight urging from on high, I called and made an appointment.

I drove to Salt Lake City a few days later and visited the agency. My intention was to speak for a moment with a worker and then perhaps get some literature describing their work. But I soon learned that the people there thought I was there for another reason. I was introduced to a very kindly gentleman who introduced himself to me and asked me to be seated in his office. We chatted informally for about thirty minutes about Brigham Young University, the behavioral sciences, and the answers to age-old questions that come to us through the restored gospel. There was an unusual spirit in the room, a peaceful feeling, a sense that what was being said needed to be said. The man then told me all about LDS Social Services and surprised me with the question: "Now, Brother Millet, which of those programs would you be most interested in working in?"

I thought to myself: "Bless his heart. He thinks I'm here for a job. I just came to get a brochure! But I don't want to hurt his feelings. I'll go along with this for a while." And so I answered his question and explained which of their programs appealed to me the most.

He nodded and said, "That's what I thought."

His next question truly startled me. "Brother Millet, would you be willing to go anywhere in the country to work?"

Again, I thought, "My goodness, he is really pursuing this matter. I'll go one more step before I pop the balloon."

I answered, "Yes, I suppose I would."

He then asked, "How does Idaho Falls sound to you?"

I found myself saying, "Sounds good."

He paused for a moment, and I sat silently wondering where this was really going. Then he said, "Brother Millet, that stack of papers on my desk is a pile of applications from people who would like very much to work for LDS Social Services. But I'm offering you a job right now if you'll take it."

It's hard to verbalize what I then felt. There was the strange irony of the moment, the odd and almost humorous realization that the man behind that desk and I had entered the interview with two different intentions. But there was also a feeling that I knew very well, one I had come to know over the years the feeling that we were being moved along by an unseen power, the quiet nudge of the Spirit, to enter a new door that was now opening. Without hesitation I responded: "I'll take it."

I spent the next forty-five minutes on the way home trying to organize my thoughts and prepare a nice way to say to my sweetheart: "Okay, pack up the tent. We're moving on." In addition, I needed to find a way to become disengaged from my schooling and assignments at the university as gracefully as I could. As difficult as the latter challenge was for me (including bruising some feelings here and there of those to whom I had made commitments), I knew what needed to be done. My conversation with Shauna was, in fact, a very moving experience. I walked into the apartment, she inquired how my day had gone, and I asked her to sit and visit with me for a moment. I said: "Brace yourself. I have something to tell you." I then rehearsed the episode in Salt Lake City and, thankfully, felt the same Spirit come into the room that I had enjoyed an hour earlier.

Shauna responded, with tears in her eyes, "We're supposed to do this, aren't we?" I nodded.

Similar things have happened in regard to major professional decisions again and again during our thirty-plus years of marriage. Don't get me wrong: I don't think we are a flaky couple, tossed to and fro by every whim and thought that make their way into our minds. We have tried to live a sane and balanced life, to be prayerful, diligent, and dependable. We have prayed earnestly for divine direction in all phases of our lives, and we feel we have been attentive and receptive when God has spoken. I would not, however, be speaking the truth if I were to suggest to you that I have always known exactly what course my professional life would take. I have not. But we have loved our lives. Our brief time with LDS Social Services was life changing, and some of the friendships we developed and lessons we learned in Idaho will be with us all our days. And then another door opened, and we entered. A few years later another one opened, and, once again, we walked through.

We live in difficult times, and there are days now (and there will surely be more challenging ones in the future) when we may be tempted to close up the shop of everyday life and look with despair upon the future. We must not yield to such temptations. To turn an expression of the Prophet Joseph to a different context, "There is much which lieth in futurity, pertaining to the saints" (D&C 123:15). And so we look ahead, plan for the future, and begin now putting things in their proper order. We are neither ignorant nor naïve about the tests and trials ahead, but we will not yield ourselves to the spirit of cynicism. And so we look to the future, but we are not captivated or ensnared with anxiety regarding the future. We set goals but are open to a change in plans, knowing full well that He who notices the fall of the sparrow is conscious of and will lead his chosen people along the pathways of life.

Note
