Robert L. Millet, I Will Fear No Evil (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2002)

Standing in Holy Places

The Savior soberly spoke of an "overflowing scourge" and a "desolating sickness" that will grip the land in the last days. The Lord then added a prophetic insight that is simple but comforting: "But my disciples shall stand in holy places, and shall not be moved" (D&C 45:31-32). There is safety in holiness, security in standing in holy places. The children sing it: "Keep the commandments; keep the commandments! In this there is safety; in this there is peace."1

And what are the holy places in which we are to stand? They are the temples, the church houses, the homes of the Latter-day Saints. We are to become, first of all, a temple-centered people, a body of believers who are covenant conscious and focused on the things of eternity. Bearing in our souls "the testimony of the covenant" (D&C 109:38), we strive to make the temple, as President Howard W. Hunter counseled us, the great symbol of our Church membership.2

In that same spirit, we devote ourselves to faithful attendance and enthusiastic participation in the programs of the Church. This is the Lord's Church, and he is at the head of it. Through the principles, ordinances, teachings, and organized sacrifice provided by the Church, we purify our hearts, come to love and cherish one another, and mature in our relationship to God. We need the Church and feel undying gratitude for its restoration in these last days.

We go to church and to the temple to enter into sacred covenants, and we come home to keep those covenants and to live and practice the precepts we have been taught. The home is the most sacred of all institutions in the kingdom of God, for it houses the family the most important unit in time and in eternity. We learn to be reverent and attentive to spiritual things in the temple and the church, but we apply these timeless lessons in the home. President David O. McKay thus taught that "a home in which unity, mutual helpfulness, and love abide is just a bit of heaven on earth."3

While the temple, the church house, and the home are and should be holy places, there is another holy place that in some ways is even more important to us. I speak of where we are, spiritually speaking, at any given time. For surely it is not where we are living or what ward we are attending that matters most; is it how we are living. And to the degree that we are living the gospel, doing our very best to keep our covenants, the Spirit of the Lord will be with us; where that Spirit is, there is peace and liberty and security. Therein is a holy place. "For I am able to make you holy," the Savior said, "and your sins are forgiven you" (D&C 60:7). That peace and safety can come to us in Paramus, New Jersey, or Portland, Oregon. It can come to us in Saganaw, Michigan, as well as in Salt Lake City, Utah. The peaceful assurance that the Lord is in our midst (D&C 38:7) and is guarding his flock can come to the smallest branch of the Church, as well as the largest Latter-day Saint stronghold.

There is a myth that continues to sweep the Church to the effect that one day all of the Saints will gather physically to Independence, Missouri, or to Salt Lake City. One problem with this thought is that it violates the principle set forth by Isaiah the prophet, who spoke of expanding the tent of Zion by driving more and more tent pegs (stakes) into the ground (Isaiah 54:2; compare 33:20). Growth and expansion in the kingdom do not occur as everyone comes into the center of the tent, as it were, but rather as more and more stakes are grounded, and the walls of the tent thereby expand to take in more and more people. "For Zion must increase in beauty, and in holiness; her borders must be enlarged; her stakes must be strengthened; yea, verily I say unto you, Zion must arise and put on her beautiful garments" (D&C 82:14).4

"There will be here and there a Stake [of Zion] for the gathering of the Saints," Joseph Smith taught. "Some may have cried peace, but the Saints and the world will have little peace from henceforth. Let this not hinder us from going to the Stakes. . . . There your children shall be blessed, and you in the midst of friends . . . may be blessed."5

Elder Harold B. Lee spoke during World War II of the need to stand in holy places. "I know now that the place of safety in this world is not in any given place; it doesn't make so much difference where we live; but the all-important thing is how we live, and I have found that the security can come to Israel only when they keep the commandments, when they live so that they can enjoy the companionship, the direction, the comfort, and the guidance of the Holy Spirit of the Lord, when they are willing to listen to these men whom God has set here to preside as His mouthpieces, and when we obey the counsels of the Church."6

Our hope is in Christ. Our hope is not and cannot rest solely on mortal men and women, no matter how good or noble they may be. Hope is more than wishing, more than yearning for some eventuality or some possession. Gospel hope is a solid and sure conviction. Hope is expectation. Anticipation. Assurance. The Saints of the Most High those who have come out of the world, put off the natural man, and put on Christ these are they who are entitled to "a more excellent hope" (Ether 12:32). Hope flows from faith, faith in the Lord Jesus Christ. When we have faith in him, we believe in him who he is and what he has done. Further, we believe he can do what he says he can do make us clean and whole; make us pure before God the Father; make us happy, productive, and contributing members of his grand kingdom. Mormon taught: "And again, my beloved brethren [and sisters], I would speak unto you concerning hope. How is it that ye can attain unto faith, save ye shall [then] have hope? And what is it that ye shall hope for? Behold I say unto you that ye shall have hope through the atonement of Christ and the power of his resurrection, to be raised unto life eternal, and this because of your faith in him according to the promise" (Moroni 7:40-41; emphasis added; compare Ether 12:4).

And what is our indication that we are on course? How do we know we are standing in holy places? "Hereby know we that we dwell in him, and he in us, because he hath given us of his Spirit" (1 John 4:13). The presence of God's Spirit is the attestation, the divine assurance that we are headed in the right direction. It is God's seal, his anointing, his unction (1 John 2:20) to us that our lives are in order.

I can still recall very vividly the fear and awful anxiety that my wife, Shauna, and I felt when we decided to purchase our first home. We had no money in savings, and though I had a steady job it did not bring a hefty income. Yet we knew we had to get started some time if we ever hoped to become homeowners. We determined to start slowly. A dear friend of ours, a fellow seminary teacher, located a place for us in his neighborhood. Another seminary teacher friend offered to loan us the down payment. (Thank goodness for friends!) It was at this time that Shauna and I became acquainted with the concept of "earnest money." We made a goodwill payment to the owner of the home, a small amount to be sure, but an amount that was sufficient to evidence our seriousness about purchasing the place. That amount was called the earnest money. It was a token payment, a gesture of our desire to acquire a home, a promise of our intent.

God works with us in similar ways. How can he communicate to us that we are following a proper course? As we indicated above, he can send his Spirit. The Holy Ghost thus represents God's "earnest money" on us, his down payment, his goodwill gesture and assurance to us that he is serious about saving us, and that one day he will own us and claim us fully as his. Indeed, the same Spirit that eventually seals us up unto eternal life places a seal of approval upon our lives here and now (2 Corinthians 1:21-22; 5:5; Ephesians 1:13-14). Though the fulness of the blessings of eternal life are not available until the world to come, the peace and rest and hope that are harbingers of those unspeakable blessings can and should be ours in this world.

We cannot overcome the world if we are worldly. We cannot overcome the world if our trust is in the arm of flesh (2 Nephi 4:34). And we cannot overcome the world if we live in a constant state of spiritual insecurity. Satan, the arch-deceiver, is versatile and observant. As surely as the day follows the night, he will strike at our sense of insecurity before God if we do not acquire that hope or assurance that comes by and through His Holy Spirit. We overcome the world through Christ through being changed by Christ, captained by Christ, and consumed in Christ.7 During the Last Supper, Jesus declared to his disciples: "These things I have spoken unto you, that in me ye might have peace. In the world ye shall have tribulation: but be of good cheer; I have overcome the world" (John 16:33).

To what extent, then, are we prepared to meet God? How ready are we to enter into heavenly places and to sit among glorified beings? Few of us would dare rush forward and volunteer to sign the list of names of the sanctified. But the revelations of God and the teachings of his servants affirm that if we are faithful in the Church, worthy of participation in the holy temple, and enjoying the fruits and benefits of the Holy Spirit to that degree we are prepared to meet God.

"Where is there safety in the world today?" President Harold B. Lee asked. "Safety can't be won by tanks and guns and the airplanes and atomic bombs. There is only one place of safety and that is within the realm of the power of Almighty God that he gives to those who keep his commandments and listen to his voice, as he speaks through the channels that he has ordained for that purpose."8

We do not need to be possessed of an unholy or intemperate zeal in order to be saved; we need to be constant and dependable. God is the other party with us in the gospel covenant. He is the controlling partner. He lets us know, through the influence of the Holy Ghost, that the gospel covenant is still intact and the supernal promises are sure. The Savior invites us to learn the timeless and comforting lesson that "he who doeth the works of righteousness shall receive his reward, even peace in this world, and eternal life in the world to come" (D&C 59:23). Peace. Hope. Assurance. Security. These things come to us by virtue of the atoning blood of Jesus Christ and as a natural result of our wholehearted efforts to stand in holy places.

Notes
