Robert L. Millet, I Will Fear No Evil (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2002)

Rooted, Grounded, Established

A number of years ago a particular book was sweeping the country and eliciting special interest among Latter-day Saints. Though it was written by a Latter-day Saint, it was released by a national publishing house, and thus its popularity and its sales swelled. Within about a year after its release, it was not uncommon to hear the book discussed in priesthood and Relief Society meetings, sacrament meetings, and youth firesides. I even heard of a stake president recommending, in the main session of stake conference, that members of the stake acquire the book and study it carefully.

While I'm a real sucker for new books, for some reason I was a bit slow about buying a copy of this book and even slower about reading it. I remember finally sitting down and beginning my reading and study in earnest. I was not very far into the work before I began to be troubled with what I found. Though the story line was fascinating and the details made for interesting consideration, the doctrinal messages, shallow and disguised as they were for those of other faiths, were off target; I began, in fact, to make notes of the problematic parts of the book. I took my rather unofficial review and filed it away.

Early one Saturday morning a few weeks later, I received a phone call from one of the General Authorities of the Church. After I recovered a bit from the call itself and after we had spent a few moments in light chatter, the Church leader asked, "Bob, have you read the book by _______?" I indicated that I had read the book. He asked me what I thought of it.

"Well, it's a fascinating story. I can see why people around the country, including Latter-day Saints, are quite taken by the book. It's intriguing."

"Any other impressions?" he asked.

I was hesitant to say anything too negative and so I added the quip: "I just wish my books sold like this book!"

"Anything further?" he persisted.

I finally responded, "There are some things about the book that make me very nervous."

"Well, I hope so," he followed up. "What are they?" I then began to recite what I considered to be the doctrinal flaws of the book, expressing with each item where I felt the book was at odds with principles of truth that have been set forth in the standard works or revealed through modern apostles and prophets. The words that followed are indelibly impressed upon my soul. He said: "It never ceases to amaze me how gullible the Latter-day Saints can be when it comes to printed material like this. Our lack of doctrinal depth and gospel understanding in general makes many of us an easy prey to every passing craze."

We need to be solid, void of sensationalism, and rooted in restored truth if we are to face squarely the challenges of our day and engage with courage and conviction the demands of discipleship in a future day. That is to say, our own gospel scholarship needs to be steady and solid, focused on the principles and doctrines that matter most, and true to the teachings we have received in this dispensation. President Joseph Fielding Smith pointed out that "it makes no difference what is written or what anyone has said, if what has been said is in conflict with what the Lord has revealed, we can set it aside. My words, and the teachings of any other member of the Church, high or low, if they do not square with the revelations, we need not accept them. Let us have this matter clear. We have accepted the four standard works as the measuring yardsticks, or balances, by which we measure every man's doctrine."1

My colleagues and I receive phone calls, letters, and e-mails quite regularly from members of the Church throughout the world asking different gospel questions. Many of these are quite easy to handle, such as when the person simply needs a reference or source for something. Some of the letters I do not handle at all, inasmuch as they seem to describe the kinds of problems that ought to be dealt with by ecclesiastical authorities; these are forwarded to Church leaders. And then there is another category of questions: those that pertain to what I have come to call extraneous matters, tangential issues, areas of focus that are either so narrow or so abstract that it really doesn't matter. And I generally don't know the answer to their question anyway.

During the time that I served as dean of Religious Education at Brigham Young University, we often had inquiries from members of the Church about doctrine, Church history, or other religious areas. One week one of my associate deans and I had spent what seemed to be every available moment, Monday through Friday, dealing with unusual and strange requests, everything from anti-Mormon attacks to Latter-day Saints being proselytized to apostate cults. By Friday afternoon at five o'clock I was absolutely exhausted. I was emotionally spent and mentally drained and commented to my associate dean that over the weekend I might investigate the possibility of starting a new career as a bricklayer or cattle rancher!

At 5:15 p.m. the phone rang. A woman on the other end of the line asked: "Brother Millet, do you have a moment for a doctrinal question?" I sighed and said yes. She continued, "I've been studying the book of Revelation this year and have come upon some things that are confusing to me. For some time now I have been in the thirteenth chapter and have been trying to understand the details concerning the horns on the beast. Do you have any recommendations?"

It really was a bad time to ask me that kind of question, for no sooner had she ended the query than I fired back, "Yes, I have a suggestion. Do you have something to write with?"

"I do," she said. "Go ahead."

I then said something that shouldn't have been said. "I recommend," I began with some gusto, "that you burn the book of Revelation and read the Book of Mormon!"

There was, as you might suppose, a long pause. Then the sister responded: "What was that again?" I repeated the instruction exactly and with identical zeal. She reacted timidly: "Oh, Brother Millet, you don't mean that, do you? Don't you like the book of Revelation?"

I then said: "Sister _______, I'm sorry. It's been a long and hard week. I shouldn't have said what I did. I love the Apocalypse, and I believe it contains some of the greatest encouragement and counsel we could receive in the last days, especially as we confine ourselves to the grand, overarching messages and not trip over the symbolic detail that has not been explained by prophet leaders." I then added the following, somewhat cautiously: "One more thing. It seems to me that such a study could really prove a major spiritual distraction to you."

Again, a long pause, and then she spoke, this time with deep emotion. "Thank you, Brother Millet. I'm afraid you're right. I need to get back on course."

There is so much of beauty and depth and certainty and applicability within the covers of the standard works and the sermons of living prophets and apostles. Why would we even concern ourselves with flimsy matters, with tangential reading, when the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven are so readily available? Elder Bruce R. McConkie explained that "we are obligated to understand the basic doctrines which lead to eternal life; beyond this, how much we know about the mysteries depends upon the degree of our spiritual enlightenment. It is unwise to swim too far in water over our heads. (Mosiah 4:27; D&C 10:4.) My experience is that people who get themselves ensnared in fruitless contention over the meanings of deep and hidden passages of scripture are usually those who do not have a sound and basic understanding of the simple and basic truths of salvation."2

We are, to a large extent, a product of what we consume, whether that be in food or reading material. Thus, what we think about, how we perceive events in our own day, and to what degree we comprehend the scenes leading up to the second coming of the Son of Man will depend a great deal upon what we imbibe through serious study. There is a crying need for Latter-day Saints to be solid and secure in the faith, not just equipped with testimony and conviction but also fortified with a reason for the hope within them (1 Peter 3:15), with gospel understanding that is as satisfying to the mind as it is soothing to the heart. The apostle Paul counseled the Saints in his day: "As ye have therefore received Christ Jesus the Lord, so walk ye in him: rooted and built up in him, and stablished in the faith, as ye have been taught, abounding therein with thanksgiving" (Colossians 2:6-7). Our task, like that delivered to the former-day Saints, is to "continue in the faith grounded and settled, and be not moved away from the hope of the gospel" (Colossians 1:23). Spiritual stability comes from focusing on the fundamental verities of salvation and striving to align our hearts and minds with the word and will of God. Such a course leads to peace, to joy, to rest to a settled conviction of the truth.

Notes
