Robert L. Millet, I Will Fear No Evil (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2002)

Watchmen on the Tower

It is not uncommon to begin to teach the restored gospel to those not of our faith, to pray with and bear testimony to them, to respond to their questions, to even have them come to Church and meet the Saints, and then to have the investigator say something like this: "Look, elders (or sisters), I really appreciate all you are trying to do for me. I enjoy very much being with you and having you in my home. I have appreciated the chance to get to know some of the members in your local congregation and have been touched by the love in their families and their genuine commitment to their faith and way of life. The programs in your church for women, children, youth, and the care of the poor have fascinated and inspired me. I have been stimulated by many of the teachings of your church, especially the ones dealing with life before birth and life after death. The last few weeks have been very meaningful to me, and I have learned a great deal. But, to be completely honest with you, I just can't buy this stuff about Joseph Smith and visions and angels and gold plates. It's just a bit far-fetched. But I do like the other facets of your faith."

Such a statement is often baffling to the missionaries and downright perplexing to the members. This person, clearly touched by and impressed with the clean-cut, polite, and spiritually minded missionaries, as well as the deeply sincere Latter-day Saints in the local ward, is ready to accept one phase of Mormonism but reject the other. Specifically, he is prepared to accept the product of the revelation but unable or unwilling to accept the revelator. To put this another way, people are often eager to acknowledge the fruits of Mormonism clean living, strong families, abiding faith in God without similarly acknowledging the validity of the roots of Mormonism. If we could simply construct a religion which had our authority, doctrines, and practices, without at the same time linking ourselves to the First Vision or angelic ministrations, then surely more people would rush forward to be baptized.

But we cannot. Foundational doctrines and practices are built upon foundational events, namely, the appearance of God the Father and his Son Jesus Christ in the Sacred Grove in the spring of 1820, as well as a whole host of heavenly messengers, "all declaring their dispensation, their rights, their keys, their honors, their majesty and glory, and the power of their priesthood; giving line upon line, precept upon precept; here a little, and there a little; giving us consolation by holding forth that which is to come, confirming our hope!" (D&C 128:21). The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is "built upon the foundation of the apostles and prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the chief corner stone" (Ephesians 2:20). It is built upon the rock, the same rock upon which Jesus built his Church in the meridian of time (Matthew 16:13-19), the glorious rock of revelation.1

I have spent a good deal of time in the last decade interacting with men and women of other faiths. In some cases, I have developed deep and lasting friendships with these folks. I am reminded of one gathering with a group made up of five Latter-day Saints and five Christians of another persuasion. We spent almost two days discussing the Latter-day Saint concept of Christ and the Atonement. We (the LDS contingent) responded to a myriad of questions, dispelled a multitude of myths about Mormonism, and read a few scriptures from the writings of Paul, but we spent a surprising amount of time reading and reflecting on the testimony of Book of Mormon prophets concerning the mercy and grace of the Savior.

The leader of the other group sat back in his chair and said, "This is impressive. I thought I understood all about you and your faith. I'm willing to put aside our differences on the Trinity, because few of us who accept it understand it. And for now I'm willing to set aside some of your beliefs and teachings about the nature of God. Do you know what we're left with, as far as major differences between us?"

I answered for the group: "What's that?"

He shot right back: "The First Vision and priesthood authority."

The five Latter-day Saints in the group looked at each other and smiled, and I said: "You're starting to understand us."

All that we teach and all that we believe is absolutely dependent upon our acceptance of the fact that there was a falling away, a lengthy season when divine authority and saving doctrines were lost from the earth; that God has called and empowered a modern prophet, Joseph Smith, to initiate what the scriptures call the "restitution of all things" (Acts 3:21); that the keys of power have continued in rightful succession from Joseph Smith to the senior apostles of God on earth, down to the present day; and that this Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is in very deed the kingdom of God on earth and is preparing a people for the second coming of the Son of Man.

We sustain fifteen men as prophets, seers, and revelators. Their primary assignment is to serve as "special witnesses of the name of Christ in all the world" (D&C 107:23). They are prophets, inasmuch as "the testimony of Jesus is the spirit of prophecy" (Revelation 19:10). Further, as revelators they are charged by God to make known or reveal the will of God to the Church and to the world. They speak, as did their Master, as men having authority from God, and not as the learned of the day (JST Matthew 7:37). Finally, these chosen servants are called as seers, persons commissioned to see things afar off (D&C 101:54), things "not visible to the natural eye" (Moses 6:36). Ammon explained to Limhi that "a seer is a revelator and a prophet also; and a gift which is greater can no man have, except he should possess the power of God, which no man can; yet a man may have great power given him from God. But a seer can know of things which are past, and also of things which are to come, and by them shall . . . secret things be made manifest, and hidden things shall come to light" (Mosiah 8:16-17).

To Ezekiel, the prophetic contemporary of Lehi, Jehovah said: "So thou, O son of man, I have set thee a watchman unto the house of Israel; therefore thou shalt hear the word at my mouth, and warn them from me. When I say unto the wicked, O wicked man, thou shalt surely die; if thou dost not speak to warn the wicked from his way, that wicked man shall die in his iniquity; but his blood will I require at thine hand. Nevertheless, if thou warn the wicked of his way to turn from it; if he do not turn from his way, he shall die in his iniquity; but thou hast delivered thy soul" (Ezekiel 33:7-9).

Prophets are covenant spokesmen, mouthpieces for God, watchmen on the tower. They are granted the prophetic perspective to see things as they really are and as they really will be. They speak boldly in defense of virtue and powerfully in identifying and condemning evil. They fearlessly warn of social trends and doctrinal drifts among the people of the covenant. "Prophets have a way of jarring the carnal mind," declared President Spencer W. Kimball. "Too often the holy prophets are wrongly perceived as harsh and anxious to make a record in order to say, "I told you so.' Those prophets I have known are the most loving of men. It is because of their love and integrity that they cannot modify the Lord's message merely to make people feel comfortable. They are too kind to be so cruel. I am grateful that prophets do not crave popularity."2

It is especially during the times of stress and distress, during the times of crisis and trauma, that the Saints of the Most High would do well to direct their attention to the words of living prophets. Their seeric vision grants them an elevated perspective, a capacity to see beyond the here and now and to plan and prepare today with "an eye of faith" toward tomorrow. Though each of us who enjoys the gift of the Holy Ghost should and must seek for the power to recognize and discern the signs of the times for what they are, the wisest among us will always and forevermore have an eye toward the First Presidency and Quorum of the Twelve Apostles and an ear attuned to their words.

In a revelation given in November 1831 to a group of men who would be called to the first Quorum of the Twelve Apostles in our dispensation, the Lord said: "Unto you it shall be given to know the signs of the times, and the signs of the coming of the Son of Man" (D&C 68:8-11; emphasis added).

How could the Brethren have known except by revelation how vital the Church welfare program was and how far-reaching its influence would be when they first established it in the 1930s? Who could have predicted the war against the home and family that would come upon us like a whirlwind when the Brethren called upon the Saints to hold a weekly family home evening in the 1960s? Could any of us have suspected what a godsend the new editions of the scriptures would prove to be in terms of arming the Saints against false educational and cultural ideas or enhancing gospel scholarship? Do we, even now, recognize the power of pure doctrine set forth in the Proclamation on the Family, a power that will do much to secure the home and preserve the family unit in even more troublesome times ahead? In a time gripped by relativism, a season that is gradually losing its hold on the doctrine of the divine Sonship, can we fully appreciate how the bold pronouncement of the prophets and seers, "The Living Christ," will yet impact a world that is desperately in need of a Savior?

We have the scriptures, the standard works, and God be praised for that. There are timeless lessons, eternal doctrines, and marvelous inspiration to be found within their covers. We can profitably study them over and over again, year in and year out, and still find new insights and new application with every reading. But the written word of God, as priceless a treasure as it is, is not what truly distinguishes the Latter-day Saints from those of other faiths. We have the living prophets, the living oracles in our midst, and their words we are to "receive as if from [the Lord's] own mouth, in all patience and faith" (D&C 21:5). The Lord of Light has given this stern warning to us: "And all they who receive the oracles of God [both the revelations and the revelators], let them beware how they hold [receive] them lest they are accounted as a light thing, and are brought under condemnation thereby, and stumble and fall when the storms descend, and the winds blow, and the rains descend, and beat upon their house" (D&C 90:5).The Lord's living Church is indeed alive and well, for it is led by living apostles and prophets. It is to be governed by revelation current, modern, daily revelation and not by written documents alone. All of God's purposes for his children cannot be codified. Nothing is more fixed, set, and established than the fact that among the people of God the canon of scripture is open, flexible, and expanding, and also that the ongoing will of heaven will come through those charged to direct the destiny of this Church. The mark of distinction for The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is the flow of "revelation adapted to the circumstances in which the children of the kingdom are placed."3

Thus, the timeless counsel is to simply "follow the Brethren." Elder Boyd K. Packer told a story once of Karl G. Maeser, the man called to serve as the first president of Brigham Young University. Elder Packer explained that "on one occasion [Brother Maeser] was leading a party of young missionaries across the Alps. As they slowly ascended the steep slope, he looked back and saw a row of sticks thrust into the glacial snow to mark the one safe path across the otherwise treacherous mountains.

"Something about those sticks impressed him, and halting the company of missionaries he gestured toward them and said, "Brethren, there stands the priesthood. They are just common sticks like the rest of us some of them may even seem to be a little crooked, but the position they hold makes them what they are. If we step aside from the path they mark, we are lost.'"4

It seems to me that there are basically two avenues by which we come to enjoy the blessings of the Lord in our lives. The first is through personal righteousness and obedience to the commandments of God. The second is through loyalty to the Lord's anointed servants, for, as Jesus taught, "He that receiveth a prophet in the name of a prophet shall receive a prophet's reward" (Matthew 10:41). And that's good enough for me.

Notes
