Robert L. Millet, I Will Fear No Evil (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2002)

Faith in a Day of Unbelief

I have been thinking about faith a great deal lately. My thoughts have returned to an address delivered by President Harold B. Lee at a student fireside in Logan, Utah, in 1971. "Fifty years ago or more," he said, "when I was a missionary, our greatest responsibility was to defend the great truth that the Prophet Joseph Smith was divinely called and inspired and that the Book of Mormon was indeed the word of God. But even at that time there were the unmistakable evidences that there was coming into the religious world actually a question about the Bible and about the divine calling of the Master himself. Now, [many] years later, our greatest responsibility and anxiety is to defend the divine mission of our Lord and Master, Jesus Christ, for all about us, even among those who claim to be professors of the Christian faith, are those not willing to stand squarely in defense of the great truth that our Lord and Master, Jesus Christ, was indeed the Son of God."1

Clearly, there are few things as desperately needed in our day than faith faith in the unseen, or as one astute observer of Christianity has noted, "Faith that bridges the chasm between what our minds can know and what our souls aspire after."2

Faith is not whimpering acquiescence, not timid and spineless hope for happiness, for pie-in-the-sky in the great-by-and-by. Faith is active. Faith is powerful. Faith is based on evidence, internal evidence, the kind of evidence that men and women acquire who search and pray and open themselves to the Infinite, who refuse to yield to cynicism or arrogance.

There is a sense in which faith requires us to act in the face of (what the world would consider to be) the absurd. Abraham was asked to put to death his beloved and long-awaited son, Isaac, the one hope Abraham had of fulfilling the promise that his posterity would be as numberless as the sands upon the seashore or the stars in the heavens. Jehovah had spoken. Abraham had entered the realm of divine experience, knew the voice of the Lord, and knew what he had encountered was real. Therefore, when the awful assignment came to offer up Isaac in sacrifice, he obeyed, even though, rationally speaking, there was no way the promises could thereafter be realized. But the Father of the Faithful had implicit trust in his God, "accounting that God was able to raise [Isaac] up, even from the dead" (Hebrews 11:19). Abraham knew God, and he knew his purposes; the finite mind yielded to the Infinite, knowing fully that "whatever God requires is right, no matter what it is, although we may not see the reason thereof till long after the events transpire."3

His leap of faith was prerequisite to his ascent to glory.

I am shocked and often surprised by the ways some of us often use the word faith. I hear a missionary in Vienna say: "Come on, Elder (or Sister), where's your faith? Why, if we had the faith we could baptize this whole city!" I watch with some sorrow as well-meaning but insensitive souls explain to a grieving mother and father that if the family had sufficient faith, their fifteen-year-old daughter, who has struggled with multiple sclerosis for five years, would not be forced to suffer longer. Faith is not the power of positive thinking. Faith is not the personal resolve that enables us to will some difficult situation into existence. Faith is not always the capacity to turn tragedy into celebration. Faith is a principle of power, of God's power. We do not generate faith on our own, for "it is the gift of God" (Ephesians 2:8). We do not act ourselves into faith, for faith comes to us by the Spirit (Moroni 10:1), given by God to suit his purposes and bless his children.

People act in faith when they act according to the will of God. To say that another way, I can have sufficient faith to move Mount Timpanogos to the middle of Utah Lake only when I know that the Lord wants it moved! I can have faith or power to touch the hearts of men and women with my testimony of the truth only when they are prepared and readied for the word. Even the Master could not perform miracles in the midst of a people steeped in spiritual indifference. "A prophet is not without honour," Jesus said in speaking of his own reception in Nazareth, "save in his own country, and in his own house. And he did not many mighty works there because of their unbelief" (Matthew 13:57-58; emphasis added). Similarly, the prophet-leader Mormon loved his people and poured out his soul in prayer in their behalf; "nevertheless, it was without faith, because of the hardness of their hearts" (Mormon 3:12). Someone watching from the sidelines, unaware of what faith really is, might have cried out: "Come on, Mormon, where's your faith?"

Again, acting by faith is acting according to the will of the Lord. I remember very well one warm June evening in Louisiana, only a few months after I had returned from a mission, sitting with my mom and dad watching television. The phone rang, and my father was quickly summoned to the hospital to give a priesthood blessing to someone. A sixteen-year-old boy, a friend of my younger sister, had suddenly collapsed on the softball field and had been rushed to the hospital. My dad was told that the boy had been diagnosed with a strange, degenerative nerve disease and that if something didn't happen soon he would die. We rushed to the hospital, took the elevator to the fifth floor, and hurried through the doors that opened to the waiting room. We were greeted by the sorrowing of friends and loved ones; the young man had died. We did our best to console the mourners and then made our way home.

As we walked in the back door, my sister asked, "How is he?" I answered that her friend had passed away. She came right back with: "Well, why didn't you raise him from the dead?" Being the seasoned and experienced returned missionary that I was, having most of the answers to life's hard questions, I stuttered for a second and then turned to my father: "Yeah, why didn't we raise him from the dead?"

Dad's answer was kind but firm. It was also very instruc-tive: "Because the Spirit of the Lord didn't prompt us to do so," he said. I have to admit that at that moment a piece of cynicism made its way into my conscious thoughts, and I said to myself: "That's a bit of a cop-out, isn't it?" In the years that followed, however, I came to know something about my dad's faith: he had been with his father when in fact the Spirit had prompted, and the dead had been raised to life again. He knew when to move and when not to move. He had faith.

In late 1838 Wilford Woodruff was traveling to Zion to assume his new assignment in the Quorum of the Twelve. On the journey his wife, Phoebe, was overcome with a high fever and lay upon the point of death. While Sister Woodruff was prepared to face death with courage, her husband was not eager to let her go. At a certain point, however, Sister Woodruff seems to have breathed her last and passed away, and the sisters who had gathered at the home began to weep. "The spirit and power of God began to rest upon me," Elder Woodruff said, "until, for the first time during her sickness, faith filled my soul, although she lay before me as one dead." He anointed his wife with oil and in the name of Jesus Christ rebuked the power of death and commanded her to live. "Her spirit returned to her body, and from that hour she was made whole; and we all felt to praise the name of God, and to trust in Him and to keep His commandments." Sister Woodruff later explained that after her spirit left her body she was given the choice to either move on in her eternal journey or to return to mortality. She chose to return. "At the moment that decision was made," her husband said, "the power of faith rested upon me, and when I administered unto her, her spirit entered her tabernacle."4

Joseph Smith taught that working by faith is working by the power of mental exertion rather than physical force.5 I am persuaded that the mental exertion of which he spoke is not merely a cognitive exercise, but rather a demanding, strenuous effort, a spiritual search to know the will of God and then to accept and abide by that will. "Working by faith is not the mere speaking of a few well-chosen words," Elder Bruce R. McConkie has written. "Anyone with the power of speech could have commanded the rotting corpse of Lazarus to come forth, but only one whose power was greater than death could bring life again to the brother of Mary and Martha. Nor is working by faith merely a mental desire, however strong, that some eventuality should occur. . . . Faith cannot be exercised contrary to the order of heaven or contrary to the will and purposes of him whose power it is. Men work by faith when they are in tune with the Spirit and when what they seek to do by mental exertion and by the spoken word is the mind and will of the Lord."6

The Lord asks us to move forward on the path of life on the basis of what has been made known through prophets. We cannot always see the end from the beginning. We cannot always act in the face of the observable or the demonstrable. In many cases, believing must precede seeing. Indeed, the revelations affirm that as we search diligently, pray always, and be believing, all things will work together for our good (D&C 90:24). We are further counseled to doubt not because we see not, for we receive no witness until after the trial of our faith (Ether 12:6). This is the nature of the leap of faith, a leap from the safe and the secure to the anticipated and the hoped for (Alma 32:21). The disciples of Christ are not called upon to proceed wholly in the dark, to leap from the precipice without evidence of deliverance. Rather, we are asked to rely upon the unseen, to trust in the quiet but persistent whisperings of the Spirit, to lean upon the prophetic promises. In the words of Elder Harold B. Lee, we must "learn to walk to the edge of the light, and perhaps a few steps into the darkness, and [we] will find that the light will appear and move ahead of [us]."7

Faith has its own type of discipline. Some things that are obvious to the faithful sound like the gibberish of alien tongues to the faithless. The discipline of faith, the concentrated and consecrated effort to become single to God, has its own reward, a reward that includes the expansion of the mind. Such persons come to be filled with light and are able in time to comprehend "all things" (D&C 88:67).

It is worth considering the words of a revelation given in Kirtland, Ohio. Having encouraged the Saints to call a solemn assembly, the Lord continued: "And as all have not faith, seek ye diligently and teach one another words of wisdom; . . . seek learning, even by study and also by faith" (D&C 88:118). We note that the counsel to seek learning out of the best books is prefaced by the negative clause, "And as all have not faith . . ." One wonders whether the Master did not intend something such as the following: Since all do not have sufficient faith that is, since they have not "matured in their religious convictions" enough to learn by any other means8 then they must seek learning by study, the use of the rational processes alone. In other words, if all did have the requisite faith, then what?

Perhaps learning by studying from the best books would then be greatly enhanced by revelation. Honest truth seekers would learn things in this way that they could not know otherwise. Could this be what Joseph Smith meant when he taught that "the best way to obtain truth and wisdom is not to ask it from books, but to go to God in prayer, and obtain teaching"9

It is surely in this same context that another of the Prophet's famous yet little-understood statements finds meaning: "Could you gaze into heaven five minutes," he declared, "you would know more than you would by reading all that ever was written on the subject" of life after death.10

"I believe in study," President Marion G. Romney stated. "I believe that men learn much through study. As a matter of fact, it has been my observation that they learn little concerning things as they are, as they were, or as they are to come without study. I also believe, however, and know, that learning by study is greatly accelerated by faith."11

And so as we move into the twenty-first century and as we are called upon to face difficult challenges we move forward in faith. Faith in Jesus Christ is trust in Jesus Christ. It is reliance. It is confidence. We have faith in him in that we believe he is who the prophets say he is. We have faith in him in that we believe he has done for humankind what no other mortal could ever do he "hath abolished death, and hath brought life and immortality to light through the gospel" (2 Timothy 1:10). We have faith in him in that we feel to trust in his promises and his purposes. We have faith in him, even as Joseph the Seer had faith. At a very difficult time, the Prophet wrote to Emma: "God is my friend. In him I shall find comfort. I have given my life into his hands. I am prepared to go at his call. I desire to be with Christ. I count not my life dear to me, only to do his will."12 And we have faith that Christ will come again to earth, will remove wickedness, right all of the terrible wrongs of this existence, and wipe away all tears.

Jesus, lover of my soul, Let me to thy bosom fly, While the nearer waters roll, While the tempest still is high. Hide me, O my Savior, hide, Till the storm of life is past. Safe into the haven guide; Oh, receive my soul at last. Other refuge have I none; Hangs my helpless soul on thee. Leave, oh, leave me not alone; Still support and comfort me. All my trust on thee is stayed; All my help from thee I bring. Cover my defenseless head With the shadow of thy wing.13

Notes
