Robert L. Millet, I Will Fear No Evil (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2002)

Oil in Our Lamps

Elder Harold B. Lee related a story that teaches a timeless lesson. "The story opens," he said, "with a young woman on the train, alone with her thoughts, on her way to visit her dying father. For the hundredth time she opened her purse, took out the telegram that read simply, "Father critically ill. Come at once. Mother,' and all through the journey the daughter prayed that the Lord would keep him alive until she could arrive and see him again; then somewhat guiltily she had to say to herself, "Well, over the years we have taken father more or less [as] just a matter of course.' He was a necessity; he provided our food and our clothes and our shelter, but somehow now to realize that he was in imminent danger of slipping away, being taken by death, caused a longing that she could be close to him again, that she could roll back the years and see him again as she had seen him in her childhood days. Father was in a coma, still alive when she arrived, but a few hours later he slipped quietly away. She was assigned by the family to the task of going through his personal papers and taking care of what the family called the "unfinished business.'

"She went carefully to her task to make sure that there was nothing that he wished to have done that would be left undone. As she searched in an inside pocket of his coat, she came upon a crumpled bit of paper which showed the effects of having been removed and read, and folded and unfolded many times. This crumpled piece of paper was a message from a young girl whom her father had befriended, and this letter was a letter of appreciation to this great, noble father. Although this other little girl was not his daughter, he had seemingly clung to the message which this letter conveyed as something of a satisfaction that he hadn't received from his own. The little girl had poured out her heart in gratitude that he had come at a crisis in her life, and she openly expressed her love for his thoughtfulness and kindness to her and his consideration. The daughter laid down the paper and wept because she realized that his own daughter had failed to give her father what this other girl had given and the thing for which he had longed so much. "Unfinished business' but unfortunately the kind of business that she was not permitted to finish. How she wished that she could have rolled back the clock and had a chance to live over some of the years, to have made the life of her father more happy and more joyous than she had done."1

Because the past no longer belongs to us, we can do little about it except to repent and learn from our mistakes. Because the future is also out of our reach, we can do little about it except to "improve our time" (Alma 34:33) in this life and make necessary preparations for tomorrow. Today is precious. As we sing in the hymn,

Time flies on wings of lightning; We cannot call it back. It comes, then passes forward Along its onward track. And if we are not mindful, The chance will fade away, For life is quick in passing. 'Tis as a single day.2

In ancient Israel a wedding ceremony could be quite an event. The groom would arrive at the bride's house, and the processional would then continue to the groom's house. When the wedding took place at night, lamps or torches were employed. The torches were generally on a long pole and had oil-drenched rags at the end. Clay lamps may also have been used, but they would not have been as useful as the torches. Interestingly, the main characters in the parable of the ten virgins in Matthew 25 are designated as ten virgins (or bridesmaids, ladies in waiting), meaning presumably ten people who have kept themselves from the taints of the world. They are divided into two groups not righteous and wicked, but rather wise (or provident) and unwise (or foolish).

All of the virgins started out right, for the account indicates that they "took their lamps and went forth to meet the bridegroom." But the unwise are found unprepared in regard to what it takes to keep the light of God burning in their lives. They are careless; they do not exercise enough foresight to prepare for what lies ahead. The level of oil (often symbolic of the Holy Spirit) within their lamps could thus represent the degree to which they had cultivated the influence of the Holy Spirit to navigate life's shoals and to empower them in meeting life's challenges. When the crucial moment has arrived, the time of preparation is over.

When the cry was sounded concerning the coming of the bridegroom, everyone scurried about. And, sadly, the unwise virgins were not able to sustain light in their lives because they had not prepared properly. One is tempted to read this parable and ask: "Why don't the wise virgins simply share with the foolish ones? Why not extend yourself a little bit?" Surely, we reason, if people could learn to share what they have then everyone would be prepared for the coming of the bridegroom, that is, a time of judgment. Sadly, Jesus points out that there are some things that one cannot loan to a neighbor on the spur of the moment. Can we loan what we learn and what we develop over the years as we lift and strengthen and love others? Can we share the product of developing meaningful relationships?

I gained a whole new appreciation for this parable a number of years ago. While I was serving as a priesthood leader, a husband and wife came in to see me. They were both distressed about the state of their marriage and family; things seemed to be coming apart in their lives. "How can I help?" I asked.

"We need more spirituality in our home," the wife answered.

I asked a few questions. "How often do you pray as a family?"

They answered that their hectic schedules precluded any kind of family prayer.

"Have you been able to hold family home evening?"

"Bill and I bowl on Monday nights" was the response.

"Do you read the scriptures as a family or as individuals?"

The answer from the husband: "Reading hurts my eyes."

"Well, then, how can I help you?"

Again the reply: "We want the Spirit in our lives."

It was as though they were saying to me, "Brother Millet, could you reach down into your heart and lend us five years of daily prayer, ten years of regular scripture study, and fifteen years of family spiritual activities?" I couldn't do it. I realized dramatically that there are some things that we simply cannot share. President Spencer W. Kimball pointed out that "the foolish [virgins] asked the others to share their oil, but spiritual preparedness cannot be shared in an instant. . . . This was not selfishness or unkindness. The kind of oil that is needed to illuminate the way and light up the darkness is not shareable. . . . In our lives the oil of preparedness is accumulated drop by drop in righteous living."3

Individuals who choose to ignore parental teachings or societal standards; persons young and old who refuse to bridle their passions and thereby act immaturely and irresponsibly; fathers and mothers who make little effort to teach their children right from wrong; people of all walks of life who turn a deaf ear to the inner sense of morality and decency within them and who in general show little reverence for life these all find their lamps devoid of oil in the time of crisis.

Just as many of the small lamps in the Middle East require a careful and methodical effort to fill them, so in our own lives we need to build our reservoirs of faith and spiritual depth gradually, drop by tiny drop. Every noble deed, every prayer, every period of sincere fasting, every lesson we teach and testimony we bear, every moment of quiet reflection on things of eternity add to the reservoir. Some people try to defy the law of the harvest (Galatians 6:7-8), to reap where they have not sown, to enjoy the fruits of labors that were never performed or were performed shabbily. Or, as in this parable, some of us seek desperately, at the time of crisis, to compensate for long-term neglect through sudden bursts of effort. Jesus is teaching that the way to peace and preparation is not through spiritual marathons at the last hour, but rather through consistent and steady personal progress throughout our lives.

The time of the coming of the Bridegroom, like the day of our own death, is not known precisely. Death is something all of us would avoid, if we could, but we cannot. It is inevitable. When we face it, if we are unprepared to meet God, it will be a day of remorse and personal agony, for "the torment of disappointment in the mind of man is as exquisite as a lake burning with fire and brimstone."4

"The great misery of departed spirits in the world of spirits, where they go after death, is to know that they come short of the glory that others enjoy and that they might have enjoyed themselves, and they are their own accusers."5

Many years ago I was called to serve as bishop of our home ward. It was a terribly busy time for me and my young family. I was serving as the director of the institute of religion and had supervisory responsibility for seminary in five different stakes. Added to this was the fact that I had started a doctoral degree in a discipline where I had little or no background; I don't think I had ever taken an undergraduate course in the field, and so a good deal of remedial work was necessary. Days were long, and nights were extremely short. I remember, for example, counseling as a bishop with a struggling married couple until about two o'clock in the morning, then sitting down at my desk in the bishop's office, pulling my notes together, and beginning a major paper that was due in six hours. This happened more than once.

It seemed as if we would never see the light at the end of the tunnel. I can't count the number of times during those challenging years that I said to my wife, Shauna, "This is crazy! Why am I doing this? I don't need this. I'm going to drop out of this doctoral program." She would quietly, lovingly, but firmly respond, "No, sweetheart, you're not going to quit. We've come too far to quit, and, besides, you'll need this degree in years to come."

A young family moved into our ward, and the executive secretary scheduled an appointment for the bishopric to meet with them. After we had chatted cordially for a few minutes and discovered where they were from, where they had lived before, and so forth, we asked about their employment. "Oh," the husband said, "I'm here working on a Ph.D." Then he added this rather interesting comment: "Bishop, I don't know if you know anything about this degree program I've been admitted to, but it's very intense, one that will require all of my time and energies to complete." The program, by the way, was the same one I was working in. I asked him to tell me more about it.

He provided much detail and then said, "And so, Bishop, it seems to me that it would be wise for me to be allowed to work at my education full-time without the distraction or drain of a Church calling. Maybe by the time I'm finishing up we can find something that would fit my talent and background, something that would require a minimal amount of effort." The three members of the bishopric each suggested that perhaps he could find the time for some small assignment even before then, but he indicated that he didn't feel comfortable even taking a home teaching responsibility. We complied with his wishes. I watched with much interest and sorrow over the next few years: despite the efforts of many to involve the man in ward functions, he maintained but a distant connection to the Church. I don't know how he and his wife are doing now, many years later, but I worry that things still may not be quite right for them spiritually.

When the Lord Jesus comes in his glory, then "shall the parable be fulfilled which I spake concerning the ten virgins. For they that are wise and have received the truth, and have taken the Holy Spirit for their guide, and have not been deceived verily I say unto you, they shall not be hewn down and cast into the fire, but shall abide the day" (D&C 45:56-57). "Wherefore, be faithful, praying always, having your lamps trimmed and burning, and oil with you, that you may be ready at the coming of the Bridegroom" (D&C 33:17).

The gradual acquisition of oil in our lamps of faith prepares us to read the signs of the times, a task that is difficult and requires significant judgment and discernment. Those who have searched the scriptures and pondered the words of the prophets from days gone by, those who give diligent heed to the words of eternal life as those words come forth from current apostles and prophets, and those whose faith in the Savior entails a genuine loyalty to seers and revelators who now lead and will yet lead the restored Church these are they who will be enabled to read the signs of the times and be prepared for that which is to be.

In one sense, to read the signs of the times is to perceive the unfolding of God's divine drama in these last days. It is to understand that this is the day long awaited by the prophets of old and by the messengers of heaven, when God would pour out knowledge and power from on high "by the unspeakable gift of the Holy Ghost," knowledge "that has not been revealed since the world was until now" (D&C 121:26). On the other hand, to read the signs of the times in our day is to read the signs of wear and tear in the faces of those who have chosen to love and give devoted service to either questionable or diabolical causes. Error and wickedness take their terrible tolls upon the hearts and countenances of those who choose divergent paths; the wheels of waywardness grind away slowly but inexorably to desensitize the character and thereby rob a person of peace of mind. To read the signs of the times is, in part, to recognize that Alma spoke a profound truth when he counseled a wayward son that "wickedness never was happiness" (Alma 41:10).

To read the signs of the times in our day is to make a decision in favor of the society of Zion and the Church of the Lamb of God (1 Nephi 14:10) this in contrast to a decision to enter or perpetuate Babylon. Each city, Zion and Babylon, makes definite demands of its citizens, and as the time approaches the millennial day each of these communities will insist upon the total devotion and consecration of its citizenry. To read the signs of the times is to recognize that in the future fewer and fewer Latter-day Saints will be "lukewarm" (Revelation 3:16); that the myopic and misguided of the religious world will grow in cynicism and confusion; that the ungodly will, as time goes by, sink ever deeper into a despair known only to those who revel in iniquity; that wickedness will widen and malevolence multiply until the citizens of Babylon seal themselves to him who is the father of all lies.

To read the signs of the times is also to know that "Zion must arise and put on her beautiful garments" (D&C 82:14); that the Church of the Lamb will continue to require the tithes, offerings, and donations of its members until that day when theirs is a full and consecrated life; and that through yielding their hearts unto God and thereby giving all to the Lord through his Church, the Saints of the Most High will establish a heaven on earth and receive the glorious assurance of exaltation in the highest heaven.

Notes
