Robert L. Millet, I Will Fear No Evil (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2002)

When Will the End Come?

I remember very well a particular night in my past. I was in the fourth grade, was sitting in the living room one warm evening with my parents, and was pretending to be engrossed in the television program Mom and Dad were viewing. My mind, however, was not on that program. Instead, my thoughts were on something else the second coming of Christ. I know that sounds a little strange for a fourth grader, but then, I've always been a little strange. As I recall, I had heard a powerful sermon in Church about the Second Coming, and it had really gotten my attention. In fact, it scared me to death! Added to that was the fact that I had dreamed about that future event just a few nights before and been horrified in my dream because of visions of flies and maggots and death and bodies coming out of graves and the burning of the earth. For someone like me with so very little understanding, it seemed like a pretty bizarre and frightening thing.

For some reason, I was obsessed with the idea that because no one really knew the exact time of the Lord's coming in glory, it was going to happen at any time, any minute now. I wasn't ready. I wanted to live longer, to grow up, to go on a mission, to get married and have a family, to get something done before everything came crashing down. As I think back on those moments in the living room, I can still recall how tense I was, how fast my heart was beating. And then, without warning, a car horn sounded across the street. But it wasn't a car horn to me; it was a trumpet, an angel's trumpet. It was here. I jumped up from the sofa and cried out: "It's time. He's here!"

My startled dad responded: "Who's here?"

"Jesus," I said.

He and Mom managed to calm me down and explain a few things, including the fact that I would probably be able to go to the movies the next Saturday. All was well. It would be a while before we would welcome our Savior to earth.

In some ways my experience as a fourth grader is not too unlike what many grownups feel today. For them, the coming of Jesus Christ to earth is something they fear, something they don't really know much about, something they would just as soon put off indefinitely. In a modern revelation, the Master explained that "if ye are prepared ye shall not fear" (D&C 38:30). As we have discussed before, such preparation has much to do with cultivating the Spirit, keeping our covenants, creating a loving environment in the home, and bringing up our children and grandchildren in light and truth. In addition, we prepare ourselves for what lies ahead by studying the holy word and listening attentively to those charged to guide the destiny of the Lord's kingdom. In short, the more we know, the better off we are, and the less anxiety and worry we experience. In that spirit, let's review a few of the fundamental matters associated with the second coming of the Lord.

Jesus came to earth as a mortal being in the meridian of time. He taught the gospel, bestowed divine authority, organized the Church, and suffered and died as an infinite atoning sacrifice for the sins of the world. He stated that he would come again, would return not as the meek and lowly Nazarene but as the Lord of Sabaoth, the Lord of Hosts, the Lord of Armies. His second coming is thus spoken of as his coming "in glory," meaning, in his true identity as the God of all creation, the Redeemer and Judge. His second coming is described as both great and dreadful great for those who have been true and faithful and therefore look forward to his coming, and dreadful to those who have done despite to the spirit of grace and who therefore hope against hope that he will never return. The Second Coming in glory is in fact "the end of the world," meaning the end of worldliness, the destruction of the wicked (Joseph Smith-Matthew 1:4, 31).1

At this coming the wicked will be destroyed, the righteous quickened and caught up to meet him, and the earth transformed from a fallen telestial orb to a terrestrial, paradisiacal sphere. We will live and move about among new heavens anda new earth. The Second Coming will initiate the millennial reign.

The scriptures speak of the Master returning as "a thief in the night" (1 Thessalonians 5:2; 2 Peter 3:10). It is true that no mortal man has known, does now know, or will yet know the precise day of the Lord's second advent. This is true for prophets and apostles as well as the rank and file of society and the Church. The Lord did not reveal even to Joseph Smith the precise day and time of his coming (D&C 130:14-17). Elder M. Russell Ballard has observed: "I am called as one of the apostles to be a special witness of Christ in these exciting, trying times, and I do not know when He is going to come again. As far as I know, none of my brethren in the Council of the Twelve or even in the First Presidency knows. And I would humbly suggest to you . . . that if we do not know, then nobody knows, no matter how compelling their arguments or how reasonable their calculations. . . ."I believe when the Lord says "no man' knows, it really means that no man knows. You should be extremely wary of anyone who claims to be an exception to divine decree."2

On the other hand, the Saints are promised that if they are in tune with the Spirit, they can know the season. The apostle Paul chose the descriptive analogy of a pregnant woman about to deliver. She may not know the exact hour or day when the birth is to take place, but one thing she knows for sure: it will be soon. It must be soon! The impressions and feelings and signs within her own body so testify.In that day, surely the Saints of the Most High, the members of the body of Christ, will be pleading for the Lord to deliver the travailing earth, to bring an end to corruption and degradation, to introduce an era of peace and righteousness. And those who give heed to the words of scripture, and especially to the living oracles, will stand as "the children of light, and the children of the day," those who "are not of the night, nor of darkness" (1 Thessalonians 5:5). In a modern revelation the Savior declared: "And again, verily I say unto you, the coming of the Lord draweth nigh, and it overtaketh the world as a thief in the night therefore, gird up your loins, that you may be the children of light, and that day shall not overtake you as a thief" (D&C 106:4-5; emphasis added).

As we noted in an earlier chapter, the Lord spoke to those brethren who would eventually be called to the first Quorum of the Twelve Apostles in this dispensation: "And unto you it shall be given to know the signs of the times, and the signs of the coming of the Son of Man" (D&C 68:11). As we move closer to the end of time, we would do well to live in such a manner that we can discern the signs of the times; we would be wise also to keep our eyes fixed and our ears riveted on those called to direct the destiny of this Church. The Prophet Joseph Smith pointed out that a particular man who claimed prophetic powers "has not seen the sign of the Son of Man as foretold by Jesus. Neither has any man, nor will any man, till after the sun shall have been darkened and the moon bathed in blood. For the Lord hath not shown me any such sign, and as the prophet saith, so it must be: "Surely the Lord God will do nothing, but he revealeth his secret unto his servants the prophets.'"3

In November 1831 the early elders of the Church were given their authorization to preach the gospel: "Go ye into all the world, preach the gospel to every creature, acting in the authority which I have given you, baptizing in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost" (D&C 68:8). Also: "For, verily, the sound must go forth from this place into all the world, and unto the uttermost parts of the earth the gospel must be preached unto every creature, with signs following them that believe" (D&C 58:64). It is true that every person must have the opportunity to hear the gospel, either here or hereafter. In fact, John the Revelator saw that before the Second Coming there would be kings and priests in every nation, kindred, tongue, and people (Revelation 5:9-10). This means that a nucleus of faithful Latter-day Saints will have been established in every land so that the blessings of the House of the Lord are available to them.4 But not all people will have the privilege of hearing the gospel as mortals, and not all will have that privilege before the Second Coming. The great day of gathering the day when millions upon millions will come into the true fold of God is millennial (1 Nephi 22:25-26; 3 Nephi 21:23-28).5

There may be some wisdom in speaking of the Second Comings of the Lord Jesus Christ, three of which are preliminary appearances or comings to select groups, and one of which is to the whole world. The Lord will make a preliminary appearance to his temple in Independence, Jackson County, Missouri. This seems to be a private appearance to those holding the keys of power in the earthly kingdom. President Charles W. Penrose observed that the Savior "will come to the Temple prepared for him, and his faithful people will behold his face, hear his voice, and gaze upon his glory. From his own lips they will receive further instructions for the development and beautifying of Zion and for the extension and sure stability of his kingdom."6

The Lord will make an appearance at Adam-ondi-Ahman, "the place where Adam shall come to visit his people, or the Ancient of Days shall sit" (D&C 116). For one thing, this grand council will be a large sacrament meeting, a time when the Son of Man will partake of the fruit of the vine once more with his earthly friends. And who will be in attendance? The revelations specify Moroni, Elias, John the Baptist, Elijah, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Joseph, Adam, Peter, James, John, "and also," the Savior clarifies, "all those whom my Father hath given me out of the world" (D&C 27:5-14), multitudes of faithful Saints from the beginning of time to the end. This will be a private appearance in the sense that it will be unknown to the world. It will be a leadership meeting, a time of accounting, an accounting for priesthood stewardships. The Prophet Joseph Smith explained that Adam, the Ancient of Days, "will call his children together and hold a council with them to prepare them for the coming of the Son of Man. He (Adam) is the father of the human family, and presides over the spirits of all men, and all that have had the keys must stand before him in this grand council. . . . The Son of Man stands before him, and there is given him [Christ] glory and dominion. Adam delivers up his stewardship to Christ, that which was delivered to him as holding the keys of the universe, but retains his standing as head of the human family."7

President Joseph Fielding Smith explained: "This gathering of the children of Adam, where the thousands, and the tens of thousands are assembled in the judgment, will be one of the greatest events this troubled earth has ever seen. At this conference, or council, all who have held keys of dispensations will render a report of their stewardship. . . . We do not know how long a time this will be in session, or how many sessions will be held at this grand council. It is sufficient to know that it is a gathering of the Priesthood of God from the beginning of this earth down to the present, in which reports will be made and all who have been given dispensations (talents) will declare their keys and ministry and make report of their stewardship. . . . This will precede the great day of destruction of the wicked and will be the preparation for the Millennial Reign."8

The Savior will appear to the Jews on the Mount of Olives. It will be at the time of the Battle of Armageddon, at a time when the Jews will find themselves with their backs against the wall. During this period two prophets will stand before the wicked in the streets of Jerusalem and call the people to repentance. These men, presumably members of the Council of the Twelve Apostles or the First Presidency holding the sealing powers "are to be raised up to the Jewish nation in the last days, at the time of the restoration" and will "prophesy to the Jews after they are gathered and have built the city of Jerusalem in the land of their fathers" (D&C 77:15; see also Revelation 11:4-6).9 They will be put to death by their enemies, their bodies will lie in the streets for three and a half days, and they will then be resurrected before the assembled multitude (Revelation 11:7-12).

At about this time, the Savior will come to the rescue of the Jews (Zechariah 14:2-4). Then shall come to pass the conversion of a nation in a day, the acceptance of the Redeemer by the Jews. "And then shall the Jews look upon me and say: What are these wounds in thine hands and in thy feet? Then shall they know that I am the Lord; for I will say unto them: These wounds are the wounds with which I was wounded in the house of my friends. I am he who was lifted up. I am Jesus that was crucified. I am the Son of God. And then shall they weep because of their iniquities; then shall they lament because they persecuted their king" (D&C 45:51-53; see also Zechariah 12:10; 13:6).

Finally, and we would assume not far removed in time from his appearance on the Mount of Olives, is Christ's coming in glory. All will know. "Be not deceived," the Master warned in a modern revelation, "but continue in steadfastness, looking forth for the heavens to be shaken, and the earth to tremble and to reel to and fro as a drunken man, and for the valleys to be exalted, and for the mountains to be made low, and for the rough places to become smooth" (D&C 49:23; see also 133:19-22).

The righteous dead from ages past, those who qualify for the first resurrection specifically those who died true in the faith since the time the first resurrection was initiated in the meridian of time will come with the Savior when he returns in glory (JST 1 Thessalonians 4:13-17). Those who are of at least a terrestrial level of righteousness will continue to live as mortals after the Lord returns. During the millennial years that follow, the inhabitants of the earth will live to "the age of man" in the words of Isaiah, the age of one hundred (Isaiah 65:20) and will then pass through death and be changed instantly, "in the twinkling of an eye," from mortality to resurrected immortality (D&C 63:49-51; see also JST Isaiah 65:20). President Joseph Fielding Smith pointed out that "the inhabitants of the earth will have a sort of translation. They will be transferred to a condition of the terrestrial order, and so they will have power over disease and they will have power to live until they get a certain age and then they will die."10

Malachi prophesied that "the day cometh, that shall burn as an oven; and all the proud, yea, and all that do wickedly, shall be stubble: and the day that cometh shall burn them up, saith the Lord of hosts, that it shall leave them neither root nor branch" (Malachi 4:1; compare 2 Nephi 26:4; D&C 29:9; 64:24; 133:64; Joseph Smith-History 1:37). The second coming of Christ in glory is a day wherein "every corruptible thing, both of man, or of the beasts of the field, or of the fowls of the heavens, or of the fish of the sea, that dwells upon all the face of the earth, shall be consumed; and also that of element shall melt with fervent heat; and all things shall become new, that my knowledge and glory may dwell upon all the earth" (D&C 101:24-25; compare 133:41; 2 Peter 3:10). Joseph Fielding Smith wrote, speaking ironically: "Somebody said, "Brother Smith, do you mean to say that it is going to be literal fire?' I said, "Oh, no, it will not be literal fire any more than it was literal water that covered the earth in the flood.'"11

The revelations teach that the Savior will appear in red apparel. Red is symbolic of victory victory over the devil, death, hell, and endless torment. It is the symbol of salvation, of being placed beyond the power of all one's enemies.12

Christ's red apparel will also symbolize both aspects of his ministry to fallen humanity his mercy and his justice. Because he has trodden the winepress alone, "even the winepress of the fierceness of the wrath of Almighty God" (D&C 76:107; 88:106), he has descended below all things and mercifully taken upon him the burden of our sins. In addition, he comes in "dyed garments" as the God of justice, even he who has trampled the wicked beneath his feet (D&C 133:48-51).

The second coming in glory of Jesus Christ ushers in the Millennium. The Millennium does not begin when Christ comes to his temple in Missouri, when he appears at Adam-ondi-Ahman, or when he stands on the Mount of Olives in Jerusalem. The Millennium will not come because men and women on earth have become noble and good, because Christian charity will have spread across the globe and goodwill is the order of the day. The Millennium will not come because technological advances and medical miracles will have extended human life or because peace treaties among warring nations will have soothed injured feelings and eased political tensions for a time. The Millennium will be brought in by power, by the power of Him who is the King of kings and Lord of lords. Satan will be bound by that power, and the glory of the Millennium will be maintained by the righteousness of those who are permitted to live on the earth (1 Nephi 22:15, 26).

The early elders of the Church were instructed, "Wherefore, be of good cheer, and do not fear, for I the Lord am with you, and will stand by you; and ye shall bear record of me, even Jesus Christ, that I am the Son of the living God, that I was, that I am, and that I am to come" (D&C 68:6). This scripture says something about how we should feel about the Second Coming and about how we should approach life between now and then. As we mentioned earlier, our duty as Latter-day Saints is to so live that we enjoy the companionship, comfort, and direction of the Holy Ghost, that is, we are to live in such a manner as to fill our lamps with oil. We do not need to be truer than true, to do some marvelous and unusual thing to prepare for our Lord's return.

Those who will be caught up to meet him in the clouds of heaven, who qualify to live with him on earth during the glorious Millennium, and who then inherit exaltation in the celestial kingdom these are they who have been true to their temple covenants, live quiet and peaceful lives, and have weaned themselves from the ways of the world. There is no mystery here, no strange or unusual requirement placed upon the Saints of the Most High; we simply need to endure faithfully to the end of our days (D&C 14:7; 50:5). There is no need to be afraid of the Second Coming, or even to fear what lies ahead. We can have hope. We can and should have rejoicing. In harmony with the soul-cry of John the Revelator, we exclaim: "Even so, come, Lord Jesus" (Revelation 22:20).

When I was a fourth grader, I was frightened when I contemplated the second coming of Christ, mostly because I didn't understand a lot of things. My views have changed as I have grown older and, I hope, a little wiser. I no longer cringe at the thought of the Second Coming. When I see and encounter the corruption and perversion that sweep our planet, when I find it harder and harder for me or my family to watch television or go to a movie without defiling ourselves, and when I ponder upon what it will be like to be taught and led and loved in person by the King of kings, I rejoice in and pray for his speedy return to earth.

Notes
