Robert L. Millet, I Will Fear No Evil (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2002)

The Victory Is Assured

Several years ago my wife and I were struggling with how best to build faith in all of our children and how to entice wandering souls back into Church activity. A caring colleague, sensing the weight of my burdens, happened into my office one day and simply asked this question: "Do you think our Heavenly Parents wander throughout the heavens in morose agony over their straying children?" Startled a bit by the question, I thought for a moment and said: "No, I don't think so. I know they feel pain, but I honestly can't picture them living in eternal misery." Then my friend responded: "Ask yourself why they do not do so and it will make a difference in your life." I didn't get much work done the rest of the day because I spent many hours pondering the question. When I arrived home that evening, I asked Shauna to sit down and reflect on the same question. She answered as I did, and then the two of us set about a prayerful quest for the next several days to understand how it is that our Eternal Father and Mother deal with their pain.

In time it began to dawn on us that the Lord knows the end from the beginning, and that, as Joseph the Prophet declared, all things past, present, and future are and were with Him "one eternal "now.'"1

Perspective. PERSPECTIVE. That was the answer. God deals with pain through and by virtue of his infinite and perfect perspective. He not only knows what we have done and what we are doing, but he also knows what we will do in the future. If in fact, as the prophets have taught, many who are heirs to the blessings of the covenant made with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob will either in time or eternity be reconciled to and reunited with the covenant family, then all we need to do for the time being is to seek through fasting and prayer for at least a portion of our God's perspective his omni-loving patience, his long-suffering, his ever-open arms, and a glimpse of the big picture. Such a perspective will not only serve us well here, in the midst of our sufferings, but it will also empower our souls and fashion us into the image of our Master, who is the personification and embodiment of charity, or pure love (Moroni 7:45-48).

Knowing something about the future, the end, can help us immeasurably in dealing responsibly and productively with the present. The reason we need not succumb to cynicism or depression or despair about how awful things are now is that one day, before too very long, things will change. God is in charge. Satan may possess a huge following, and he may have great power, but God will win the battle between goodand evil. As the apostle Paul declared, "Thanks be to God, [who] giveth us the victory through our Lord Jesus Christ" (1 Corinthians 15:57).

The Book of Revelation, the Apocalypse, is all about the assured victory of God and his people over the forces of evil. Even if we are uncertain as to the meanings of many of the unusual symbols in the Apocalypse, we can grasp and appreciate the overarching messages of this book of holy scripture. Some of these include:

"Imagine that you are attending a football game," Elder Boyd K. Packer has said. "The teams seem evenly matched. One team has been trained to follow the rules; the other, to do just the opposite. They are committed to cheat and disobey every rule of sportsmanlike conduct.

"While the game ends in a tie, it is determined that it must continue until one side wins decisively.

"Soon the field is a quagmire.

"Players on both sides are being ground into the mud. The cheating of the opposing team turns to brutality.

"Players are carried off the field. Some have been injured critically; others, it is whispered, fatally. It ceases to be a game and becomes a battle.

"You become very frustrated and upset. "Why let this go on? Neither team can win. It must be stopped.'

"Imagine that you confront the sponsor of the game and demand that he stop this useless, futile battle. You say it is senseless and without purpose. Has he no regard at all for the players?

"He calmly replies that he will not call the game. You are mistaken. There is a great purpose in it. You have not understood.

"He tells you that this is not a spectator sport it is for the participants. It is for their sake that he permits the game to continue. Great benefit may come to them because of the challenges they face.

"He points to players sitting on the bench, suited up, eager to enter the game. "When each one of them has been in, when each has met the day for which he has prepared so long and trained so hard, then, and only then, will I call the game.'

"Until then, it may not matter which team seems to be ahead. The present score is really not crucial. There are games within games, you know. Whatever is happening to the team, each player will have his day.

"Those players on the team that keep the rules will not be eternally disadvantaged by the appearance that their team somehow always seems to be losing.

"In the field of destiny, no team or player will be eternally disadvantaged because they keep the rules. They may be cornered or misused, even defeated for a time. But individual players on that team, regardless of what appears on the scoreboard, may already be victorious.

"Each player will have a test sufficient to his needs; how each responds is the test.

"When the game is finally over, you and they will see purpose in it all, may even express gratitude for having been on the field during the darkest part of the contest."

Then, in providing a bit of interpretation for this remarkable parable, Elder Packer added: "I do not think the Lord is quite so hopeless about what's going on in the world as we are. He could put a stop to all of it any moment. But He will not! Not until every player has a chance to meet the test for which we were preparing before the world was, before we came into mortality."4

It is true that perilous times lie ahead, that Gadianton bands will yet wreak havoc on this planet, that murder and immorality and deceit will extend their evil tentacles, that it will seem to us as though every man were at war with his neighbor. But there will be safety in the stakes of Zion, safety within the gospel net, safety and security to be found through standing in holy places.While the prophetic promise is that the Lord will preserve his people (Moses 7:61), this does not necessarily mean that the righteous will always be spared the pain of loss, the agony of misrepresentation and betrayal, or even the sober reality of mortal death. The Prophet Joseph Smith explained that "it is a false idea that the Saints will escape all the judgments, whilst the wicked suffer; for all flesh is subject to suffer, and "the righteous shall hardly escape;' still many of the Saints will escape, for the just shall live by faith; yet many of the righteous shall fall a prey to disease, to pestilence, etc., by reason of the weakness of the flesh, and yet be saved in the Kingdom of God."5

Elder Bruce R. McConkie thus taught: "We do not say that all of the Saints will be spared and saved from the coming day of desolation. But we do say there is no promise of safety and no promise of security except for those who love the Lord and who are seeking to do all that he commands."6

What I am trying to say is this: Because we know that God will win, we need not fret about the future. Because we know that the great and abominable church will crumble, we need not be discouraged as organized evil spreads its mischief. Because we know that this Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints will indeed be found in every nation and kingdom under heaven, we need not worry about this slanderous remark or that misrepresentation of our faith and way of life. The Lord lives. This is his work, and he will bring it to consummation. He will not be defeated. Nephi prophesied: "For the time soon cometh that the fulness of the wrath of God shall be poured out upon all the children of men; for he will not suffer that the wicked shall destroy the righteous. Wherefore, he will preserve the righteous by his power, even if it so be that the fulness of his wrath must come, and the righteous be preserved, even unto the destruction of their enemies by fire," meaning, the fire of the glory of Christ at the time of his second coming. "Wherefore," Nephi stated, "the righteous need not fear; for thus saith the prophet, they shall be saved, even if it so be as by fire" (1 Nephi 22:16-17).

Brigham Young University professor Todd A. Britsch told a delightful story that illustrates the power and peace that come of knowing that the victory is assured. "A few years ago," he said, "before the time that all BYU games were televised live, I landed at the Salt Lake airport just as a BYU "away' game was concluding. I rushed around the terminal until I finally found someone who could assure me that we had won, although by a very close score. That evening, after returning to Provo, I went downstairs to watch the replay of the game on KBYU. My demeanor was amazingly serene. When we fumbled or had a pass intercepted, I hardly reacted. My wife could even let our children get around me. Usually I feel obligated to help my brethren in striped shirts by pointing out their errors in judgment. Because my seats are on row 25, such correction often requires a rather high decibel level. This loudness has carried over to watching football on television. But on that day I remained absolutely calm, even when I had the benefit of instant replay to verify my claim that their defensive back clearly arrived early and that the ground had obviously caused our running back to lose the ball. I was a veritable model of football decorum, never becoming unduly upset or ill behaved.

"The cause of my improved behavior was obvious: I already knew the outcome of the game BYU would win. It is amazing how that knowledge changes things: cornerbacks can get beat, running backs can fumble, linebackers can miss tackles, offensive guards can blow blocking assignments, and other things can go wrong. But when we know the final score, such things can be endured and sometimes even ignored.

"We also know the final score for the history of this world and for the life of the righteous. The Lord and his people will triumph. It is true that the sorrows of this world and the strength of Satan's forces will win a number of the skirmishes.. . . Satan and his followers, as well as the natural circumstances of mortal life, will inflict many bruises and win many battles. But God, who knows the end from the beginning, has promised that those who serve him will receive the fullness of his blessings. When we realize that righteous living puts us on the winning side, we can learn to trust him during trying times."7

The Savior and his anointed servants have invited you and me to live and act today as the victors with quiet confidence, with assurance, and with an optimism born not of arrogance but of trust in and reliance upon Him who has all power. We can face the traumas of the present because we know something about what lies ahead. We proceed confidently in the war against evil because of our confidence in the Captain of our souls.

Notes
