Robert L. Millet, I Will Fear No Evil (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2002)

Beauty for Ashes

Some seven hundred years before the birth of Jesus of Nazareth, Isaiah uttered prophetic words that would find their fulfillment largely in the mortal ministry of the Anointed One: "The Spirit of the Lord God is upon me; because the Lord hath anointed me to preach good tidings unto the meek; he hath sent me to bind up the brokenhearted, to proclaim liberty to the captives, and the opening of the prison to them that are bound; to proclaim the acceptable year of the Lord, . . . to comfort all that mourn." Now note the poignant passage that follows: "To appoint unto them that mourn in Zion, to give unto them beauty for ashes, the oil of joy for mourning, the garment of praise for the spirit of heaviness" (Isaiah 61:1-3; emphasis added; compare Luke 4:18-19).

Jesus Christ came to bring beauty for ashes to replace distress with comfort, worry with peace, turmoil with rest. The Good Shepherd came to earth on a "search and rescue mission" to identify and gather in those who have strayed, to welcome the wanderer back home, to adorn the tattered son or daughter of God with a robe and a ring, to kill the fatted calf in celebration. Our Precious Savior condescended left his throne divine to come down and be with his people, the sheep of his fold. He came to right all the terrible wrongs of this life, to fix the unfixable, to repair the irreparable. He came to heal us by his tender touch, to still the storms of our startled hearts. Again, he came to replace ashes with beauty.

Because things do not always turn out as we had expected, because today was not the day we bargained for, "every one of us," Elder Jeffrey R. Holland has pointed out, "has times when we need to know things will get better. The Book of Mormon speaks of this as "hope for a better world' (Ether 12:4). For emotional health and spiritual stamina, everyone needs to be able to look forward to some respite, to do something pleasant and renewing and hopeful, whether that blessing be near at hand or still some distance ahead. . . ."My declaration is that this is precisely what the gospel of Jesus Christ offers us, especially in times of need. There is help. There is happiness. There really is light at the end of the tunnel. It is the Light of the World. . . . I say: Hold on. Keep trying. God loves you. Things will improve. Christ comes to you in his "more excellent ministry' with a future of "better promises.'"1

Each one of us needs to know needs the conviction, deep down in our souls that our Master is not an absentee Landlord, not a distant Deity. He is "touched with the feeling of our infirmities" (Hebrews 4:15), knows from firsthand experience all about our pains, our afflictions, our temptations (Alma 7:11-12), and thereby understands "the weakness of man and how to succor them who are tempted" (D&C 62:1). He has not, as the deists believed centuries ago, wound up the world clock and left it to run on its own. Rather, he is intimately involved in saving and succoring literally, running to help those who call upon him and learn to trust in his mighty arm. Indeed, our God's infinity does not preclude either his immediacy or his intimacy. As Enoch the seer learned, when we need God, when we reach out to him, he is there, his bosom is there; he is just and merciful and kind forever (Moses 7:30).

Many in the free world were tempted at the time of the great tragedy on 11 September 2001 to cry out: Where is God? Where was he when we needed him? Could he not have prevented this heinous deed? As we discussed in chapter 2, our God, though an exalted Man of Holiness, is also all-powerful, has all knowledge, and is, by the power of his Spirit, everywhere present. He could, if he chose to do so, prevent every tragedy and block every trauma. But he will not do so, for such would thwart the great plan of happiness by impinging upon the moral agency of both the wicked and the righteous.

One person has responded to questions about God's presence and involvement in our world as follows: "I know where my God was the morning of September 11, 2001. He was very busy. First of all, he was trying to discourage anyone from taking this flight. Those four flights together [could have] held over 1000 passengers, [but] there were only 266 aboard. He was on four commercial flights giving terrified passengers the ability to stay calm. Not one of the family members who was called by a loved one on one of the hijacked planes said that passengers were screaming in the background. On one of the flights he was giving strength to passengers to try to overtake the hijackers. He was busy trying to create obstacles for employees at the World Trade Center [so they wouldn't be at work]. After all, only around 20,000 were at the towers when the first jet hit. Since the buildings hold over 50,000 workers, this was a miracle in itself. How many of the people who were employed at the World Trade Center told the media that they were late for work or they had traffic delays? He [God] was holding up two 110-story buildings so that [four-fifths] of the workers could get out."2

Returning to Isaiah's prophecy with which we began this chapter, we are reminded that the Lord promises to give "the oil of joy for mourning, the garment of praise for the spirit of heaviness" (Isaiah 61:3). As we open ourselves to his redeeming and enabling power, Jesus pours oil on the troubled waters of our lives, and clothes us in the quiet assurance of his sanctifying praise. When we have learned to lean on the Lord and rely on his goodness and his approval, then what the world thinks of us comes to matter precious little. When the fickle plaudits of the worldly wise no longer entice us, then we are buoyed up by the sweet peace that signals divine approval. "I receive not honour from men" (John 5:41), Jesus declared. And so it is with those who confess him as Lord and Master. We cry out: "Hear, O Lord, and have mercy upon me: Lord, be thou my helper. Thou hast turned for me my mourning into dancing: thou hast put off my sackcloth, and girded me with gladness" (Psalm 30:10-11).

During my darkest hours during times of extreme stress and distress or days of worry and deep anxiety comfort and perspective have come through singing or reflecting upon the words of sacred music. For example:

Be still, my soul: The Lord is on thy side; With patience bear thy cross of grief or pain. Leave to thy God to order and provide; In ev'ry change he faithful will remain. Be still, my soul: Thy best, thy heav'nly Friend Thru thorny ways leads to a joyful end.

Be still, my soul: Thy God doth undertake To guide the future as he has the past. Thy hope, thy confidence let nothing shake; All now mysterious shall be bright at last. Be still, my soul: The waves and winds still know His voice who ruled them while he dwelt below.

Be still, my soul: The hour is hast'ning on When we shall be forever with the Lord, When disappointment, grief, and fear are gone, Sorrow forgot, love's purest joys restored. Be still, my soul: When change and tears are past, All safe and blessed we shall meet at last.3

As I have sought to point out more than once in this work, we need not be free from turmoil or sorrow in order to be at rest in today's world. Like Nephi, we need not know the meaning of all things to know that the Savior loves us (1 Nephi 11:17) and that he can strengthen us to bear heavy burdens with relative ease. Let us be reminded that "whatever Jesus lays his hands upon lives. If Jesus lays his hands upon a marriage, it lives. If he is allowed to lay his hands on the family, it lives."4

The Lord is not slack in keeping his promises to his chosen people: he will give "beauty for ashes, the oil of joy for mourning, the garment of praise for the spirit of heaviness." He will welcome his faithful Saints into "the rest of the Lord" (Moroni 7:3), not only in the sense of granting them eternal life in the world to come, but also in bestowing upon them the peace which is the harbinger of eternal life (D&C 59:23), the peace in this life that passes all understanding (Philippians 4:7). God may not always remove us from the burdensome and toilsome circumstances in which we find ourselves, but he will empower us to deal responsibly with and even change the circumstances.

The rest of the Lord is "a settled conviction of the truth in the minds of men." "To my mind," President Joseph F. Smith observed, entering into the rest of the Lord "means entering into the knowledge and love of God, having faith in his purpose and in his plan." This is a condition the world as a whole cannot comprehend, for it is "rest from doubt, from fear, from apprehension of danger, rest from the religious turmoil of the world."5 Mormon thus spoke of "the peaceable followers of Christ [who] have obtained a sufficient hope by which ye can enter into the rest of the Lord, from this time henceforth until ye shall rest with him in heaven" (Moroni 7:3).

In speaking of the horror and tragedy of the events of 11 September 2001, President Gordon B. Hinckley stated: "Our hearts are deeply touched. . . . This has been a tragic, solemn and dark day. We have been reminded that evil is still rampant in the world. Its insidious and dastardly hand has struck again in a most reprehensible manner." Now note the calming reassurance from a prophet of God: "But dark as is this hour, there is shining through the heavy overcast of fear and anger the solemn and wonderful image of the Son of God, the Savior of the world, the Prince of Peace, the exemplar of universal love, and it is to Him that we look in these circumstances. It was He who gave His life that all might enjoy eternal life. May the peace of Christ rest upon us and give us comfort and reassurance."6

Life is good. I love life. Like you, I have experienced pain and fear and frustration and anguish of soul. Like you, I have had those dark moments when I have asked, Why? Why am I being asked to pass through this miserable and unsettling situation, especially when we have tried so hard to do what's right? And so I know something about the sufferings and struggles that accompany life in this second estate. But there are so many wonderful blessings to be gained and lasting lessons to be learned through passing through the refiner's fire, particularly at this exciting time in earth's history. There is so much to look forward to.

"And one of the elders answered, saying unto me, What are these [people who] are arrayed in white robes? and whence came they? And I said unto him, Sir, thou knowest. And he said to me, These are they which came out of great tribulation, and have washed their robes, and made them white in the blood of the Lamb. Therefore are they before the throne of God, and serve him day and night in his temple: and he that sitteth on the throne shall dwell among them. They shall hunger no more, neither thirst any more; neither shall the sun light on them, nor any heat. For the Lamb which is in the midst of the throne shall feed them, and shall lead them unto living fountains of waters: and God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes" (Revelation 7:13-17).

I echo the counsel of the prophets of God, ancient and modern, that we need not fear, we need not surrender to despair or doom or gloom. God is in his heavens. He knows us, one and all, and he knows of our pains and our possibilities. Jesus Christ our Deliverer lives, is directing his Church and kingdom through living prophets and apostles, and offers to bear our burdens and liberate our souls from the galling yoke of sin and the fetters of a fading world. I rejoice in the privilege it is to be a part of the dispensation of the fulness of times, to be a participant in the winding-up scenes. And I look forward, more than I can say, to the return in glory of our Lord and Savior and to life with him and the faithful Saints of all ages.

Notes
