# “Art Brings a Different Feeling”

On February 2, 2018, Church members organized a photographic exhibition and awards night in the gallery of the National Historical Museum in Tirana. The photographic exhibition, titled “Modern Iconography,” celebrated the ways in which people experienced worship and inspiration in order to build bridges across diverse passions and perspectives in Albanian society.

“The purpose of the exhibition was to explore the different ways people admire,” said Blerina Agalliu, the Church’s director of public affairs in Albania, who opened the exhibition.

“We tried to make it broad, so that individuals who were not of our faith would feel welcome to be a part [of it],” said Aubrie Mema, the exhibition’s curator. “The exhibition is an attempt to bring different backgrounds together, to celebrate the common crossroads of different forms of worship. Through the photos we hope to build bridges between religion and atheism, different passions and perspectives.”

In conjunction with the photography, the Church awarded a “Family Values” prize to the Different Weekend Foundation, which reached out to the poorest members of society and organized volunteers in the community to build homes for them. “The work of this organization in the service of Albanian families shows that there is a better way to break the cycle of poverty and suffering,” said Blerina. “We support the efforts and goals of this organization and commend it for its commitment, kindness, and dedication.” The photographic exhibition included a wall covered with documentary-style photographs of the work of the Foundation.

Prior to the exhibition, Blerina, Aubrie, and other local Latter-day Saints hosted a dinner for the winning photographers and representatives of the foundation. “We all came together and had a wonderful meal together with these individuals to celebrate their talents and the things they had accomplished,” said Aubrie.

Nearly 300 people attended the opening night of the exhibition in Tirana. After a month in Tirana, the exhibition moved to Durrës and Pogradec. “What I was most surprised about is [that] with very little advertisement, we had a lot of interest,” said Aubrie. “Everyone came together and we were a community, regardless of the religion.”

The Saints in Albania held a similar exhibition and community award ceremony in the prior year, but it featured artwork instead of photography. Artists from the Church and from the greater community applied for the show, titled “Colors of My Family.” More than 75 pieces, created by nearly 45 artists, were accepted.

Both shows were attended not only by passersby and members of the local community but also government officials, members of parliament, and other prominent members of society.

“It was a very nice experience for me,” said Blerina, “because we highlighted the talents of the participants and gave them the opportunity to present their work with pleasure.”

“Art has a way of bringing together and expressing things that we cannot express in other ways,” Aubrie said. “All the other ways, like singing, are valid. But art brings a different feeling, and it brings out a different community.”
