# “Where Are They Whom I Shall Baptize?”

In 1851 and 1868 respectively, missionaries from the missions in France and Switzerland made fruitless attempts to preach in Belgium. In late 1868, Octave Ursenbach, a Swiss missionary, traveled to Antwerp and Liège, where he distributed many tracts but found no success. After just two months, Ursenbach sent a series of petitions to his mission president asking to return to Switzerland, because, he reasoned, “he could accomplish no good in Belgium.” Ursenbach’s petitions were soon granted, and no efforts were made to send additional missionaries for two decades.

In September 1888, Mischa Markow, a zealous young missionary who had been told to preach the gospel wherever he could find listeners, had traveled from his home in Constantinople to London, England, preaching along the way. Penniless and intent on boarding a ship to return home, Markow received a spiritual prompting to board a different ship. After boarding, he learned that he was now en route to Antwerp. When he arrived in the unfamiliar city, he prayed for guidance. “Where are they whom I shall baptize?” he asked.

Resting on a park bench, Markow was soon approached by Karl Beckhaus. “I see you are a stranger,” Beckhaus said. “Where are you from?”

Learning that Markow was Serbian, Beckhaus asked if he was also Catholic. “I am an elder of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints,” Markow boldly declared. As the sun set, Markow began to unfold the restored gospel to Beckhaus, who invited Markow to his home to preach to his family.

That night, Henrietta Esselmann, Beckhaus’s wife, dreamt about a man bringing her Christ’s gospel. When she saw Markow approaching the home the next afternoon, she recognized him. “I have seen this gentleman in a vision,” she told her daughter. “I believe that he is a servant of God.” Henrietta and her children readily accepted the gospel and asked to be baptized. However, Beckhaus was strongly opposed and tried to stir opposition among local government and religious leaders. Despite her husband’s opposition, Esselmann persisted. “My children and I … believe,” she told Markow. “If you don’t baptize me and my children … [our] sins [are] on your head.”

On October 17, 1888, Esselmann and her 16-year-old son, Frederick Pieper, were baptized. Beckhaus, who had a change of heart, and the rest of their children were baptized over the next two weeks. Esselmann immediately began writing letters to her family and friends sharing the news of her conversion and bearing witness of the restored gospel. Markow sent letters to the mission in Switzerland, announcing his success and reporting that nearly 80 people were interested. Three additional missionaries were soon sent.

Despite Markow’s optimism, the Church grew slowly in Belgium. Traveling missionaries from the Swiss-German, Netherlands, and French Missions occasionally visited cities, preaching and baptizing, but quickly left. By 1891, 34 members had been baptized in Belgium and a small branch had been established in Antwerp, with Frederick Pieper as president. The following year, branches were established in Brussels and Liège.
