# Learn Wisdom

In late October 2012, Hurricane Sandy caused widespread destruction from the Caribbean to Canada. First making landfall in Kingston, Jamaica, the storm raged through Jamaica, Cuba, and the Bahamas before turning sharply to the northwest. On October 29, the storm hit the east coast of North America, cutting a path of destruction from Florida to Canada in 24 US states and the Canadian provinces of Ontario and Quebec. When the storm finally dissipated, it had killed more than 230 people and caused more than US$70 billion dollars in property damage in eight countries.

In early January 2013, 140 young adults from stakes in Ontario and Quebec traveled to New York City to assist with relief efforts. Over the course of one weekend, they provided 2,940 hours of service and completed 111 cleanup projects. “When I was first asked about going,” Kirstie Shepherd of the Hamilton Ontario Stake recalled, “I could feel the Spirit prompting me to be on that bus.” Unsure if she could get the time off work, Kirstie packed a bag, said a prayer that her boss would be understanding, and asked for the time off. “He agreed without any hesitation,” Kirstie said.

In New York, Kirstie and other volunteers helped families remove the water-damaged interiors of their homes. At one home, Kirstie worked alongside Janine, a homeowner whose home was destroyed by flooding. “At the end of the day, we were left standing in the shell of her house,” Kirstie said. “No words could be said. The Spirit was so strong. … Janine was speechless.” As they left, Janine whispered, “Thank you,” as she hugged each volunteer. “Here was a woman,” Kirstie said, “a complete stranger to me only five hours before, whom I now loved with all my heart and soul.”

Throughout the weekend, Kirstie and the other volunteers had many similar experiences. “In Mosiah 2:17, it says, ‘And behold, I tell you these things that ye may learn wisdom,’” Kirstie explained, quoting the Book of Mormon’s most famous passage on service. “This weekend I learned wisdom. … It was the greatest weekend of my life.”
