# Strength, Knowledge, and Understanding

Kayla Kaimarama grew up in Arorangi, Rarotonga, the second child of five siblings. Her parents and older sibling never completed high school. “It is common for people to work instead of getting an education so they can support their family,” she said.

While serving a mission in Independence, Missouri, Kayla was inspired by Latter-day Saints who were alumni of Brigham Young University–Hawaii. “The opportunity to study in a school where the student body share the same values as I do is rare to find,” she explained. “People talked about the diversity of cultures there.”

Her parents encouraged Kayla to go to university. However, upon returning from her mission, Kayla learned that her father had been diagnosed with cancer. She had applied to BYU–Hawaii but deferred and got a job as a human resources assistant. “Someone had to take care of my mother and my siblings. I thought it was my responsibility as the second-oldest child,” said Kayla.

Over time, and with the family’s fasting and prayers, her father was able to get the treatments he needed and recovered.

Kayla then took the leap and became the first person in her family to attend university. At BYU–Hawaii, she studied political science, as well as coursework in hospitality and tourism, Pacific Islands studies, human resources, and criminal justice. She relied on God for help in her quest for learning.

“Every time I pray, I ask for strength, knowledge, and understanding to retain the things I have learnt,” she said.

At BYU–Hawaii, Kayla developed a stronger sense of cultural identity. “I have so much pride in my culture now than ever before,” she said. “I did not realize much about myself and my culture until I moved far away from home.”

Another blessing of going to school at BYU–Hawaii is that there was a temple only five minutes away. “In the Cook Islands, my family and I sacrificed and saved all we could in order to travel to the temple at least once a year,” she said.

Kayla encouraged her younger sister to set her sights on a university education. “Sometimes, we are uncomfortable with trying new things,” she said. “The opportunities are here; we just take it. You might hear stories from people saying studying is hard, but it will be worth it in the end.”

Having taken that first great leap of faith, Kayla gained confidence in herself and faith in God. “When I put the Lord first in all I do, He provides a way for me to accomplish all that I need to do.”

Kayla graduated from BYU–Hawaii in 2020 with triple majors in political science, cultural anthropology, and Pacific Islands studies, her sights set on returning to her beloved islands and contributing to local society.
