# Perpetual Education Fund

Carla Marina Nova Valdez first learned about the Perpetual Education Fund (PEF) through her seminary teacher. She hoped to pursue a career in public relations, but the expenses were prohibitive. PEF provided her with a financial path to pursue this degree. To begin the process, she worked through her bishop. Carla chose to attend the Catholic University in Santo Domingo, near the temple, and to major in public relations.

Carla found helpful support in the PEF workshop called “Planning for Success,” which walked her through all the steps she would need to complete to obtain the loan and the information she would need to give to her school. This workshop training also included steps for setting up a bank account and establishing repayment objectives.

When she learned her application had been approved, Carla said both she and her family members were very happy. “Truly, everyone was grateful to the Church for the opportunity,” she said, “to continue studying and continue moving forward.”

Carla’s mother went to the bank with her to assist with the process. As the PEF funded 75–80% of Carla’s educational expenses, her mother also helped with the balance of the funds. From her employment, Carla’s intentions were to eventually repay her mom for the monetary help she received from her. Several of Carla’s friends from her branch had also been approved for PEF funds. Carla believes that without the PEF, she would have been forced to pursue a career she would not enjoy, “studying … without desire or motivation, studying just to study.”

Working as a volunteer at the Church institute building approximately 3 hours a day, or 15 hours per week, was Carla’s way of saying thanks and giving back to others. When asked in 2011 what advice she had for people who might be interested in receiving help via the PEF, Carla said, “To young people like me, well, work hard, because truly our leaders have given us the opportunity through the fund to develop and have a better future. Value the fund, because it’s truly a great sacrifice.”
