# A Translator and His Trainer

Like many who grew up in the Soviet Era, Genadijus Motiejūnas was raised an atheist. After the fall of the Soviet Union, he looked to religion for added harmony in his life and family. Genadijus joined a local Baptist church, became very active, and began translating for his new church. He was warned against the “Mormons” and promised he would not read the Book of Mormon.

Genadijus eventually stopped attending his Baptist church, and a short time later, two Latter-day Saint missionaries, Cristal Hammaker and Heather Baer, knocked at his door. Refusing the Book of Mormon, he turned the sisters away. His wife, Alfreda, however, expressed interest in the message of the missionaries, and Genadijus called them back. He realized he was no longer obliged to refuse the Book of Mormon and accepted a copy in Russian. After reading, Genadijus was baptized in April 1996. Two months later, Genadijus baptized Alfreda.

A few years later, Church leaders decided to translate the Book of Mormon into Lithuanian. LeGrand Black from the Church’s translation department traveled to Lithuania to recruit a translator. Black felt a strong bond of cooperation and trust would be necessary to complete the intellectually and spiritually intense process. “I prayed all the way across the ocean that the Lord would prepare a way for me to develop this bond,” he recalled.

When Black met Genadijus and Alfreda, he asked them to relate their conversion story. They produced a large photo album with pictures of their angels, Sisters Hammaker and Baer. “I know these sisters,” he told Genadijus and Alfreda. Black had taught both of the sisters in seminary and institute courses. “You are the teacher of my angels?” Genadijus replied. “Then you may be my teacher.”

Genadijus Motiejūnas became the lead translator of the Book of Mormon as well as the Doctrine and Covenants and the Pearl of Great Price. Genadijus later traveled to Salt Lake City and helped to translate the temple ceremonies.
