# Places of Refuge

On November 28, 1991, Tropical Storm Zelda hit the Marshall Islands, causing severe damage on Ebeye, Kwajalein, Ujae, and Lae. On Ujae, nearly all of the trees were uprooted, and half of the island was wiped clean of all structures. On Ebeye, 3,000 people were left homeless. On Majuro, power lines fell down, roofs blew off houses, and several ships in the lagoon were grounded.

In the wake of the storm, the local newspaper publicized Latter-day Saint meetinghouses as places of refuge. “Were you one of the 175 people who took refuge in one of the three Mormon churches on Majuro during last week’s tropical storm?” read the article, titled “Mormons Provide Refuge.” The article noted that many people lived in homes that were “single-wall shacks with lightly fastened tin for roofs” and that for families with infants or young children for whom exposure could be life-threatening, the option of sheltering in a substantial concrete structure would be welcome. The article quoted a Latter-day Saint missionary, Elder Bill Partridge: “We make it a point to keep the churches open during times of emergency such as this.” The article concluded with the point that people should spread the word “that in time of emergency, the churches will be open, and don’t be afraid to ask, you’ll be very welcome!”

The word did get around, just in time. About one month later, Typhoon Axel passed 25 miles south of Majuro, causing major damage on the island. On the night of the storm, 600 people took shelter in the meetinghouse. The following day, a tidal wave struck the island, destroying the homes of many, including 14 Church members. In the three months following the storm, 15 families whose homes had been destroyed lived in the Long Island and Delap Meetinghouses while they began to rebuild. The main brunt of the storm was felt on Jaluit, where Church humanitarian services donated 1,000 pounds of clothing and 20 tents for people on the island who suffered losses.

Following Typhoon Axel, a severe drought, which lasted for four months, occurred on Majuro. Normally, the island received 35 inches of rain annually but during that period, only one inch fell, causing a severe water shortage, especially on Uliga and Rita. Local leaders opened the Delap Meetinghouse, which had a well and a water pump. Community members with wheelbarrows, bottles, and other containers sometimes lined up to pump water until after midnight. A catchment basin at the Laura Meetinghouse also became a valuable community resource.

Amid the great Pacific storms and uncertain weather, Latter-day Saints in the Marshall Islands have strengthened each other and offered refuge and vital resources to others.
