# Youth in Panama Continue a Legacy of Sacrifice and Service

Panamanian youth have journeyed great distances to participate in building the gospel in their country. In 1966, 36 Panamanian youth traveled to Costa Rica to attend a regional youth conference held at the Sarapiqui Ranch. On their border journey, they had to drive through mountain passes enveloped in thick fog. The lack of visibility made it hard for the driver to see.

Instead of turning back, the youth walked ahead on the road, guiding the vehicle forward. They eventually arrived at the conference, where they participated in recreational and spiritual activities with more than 150 other Central American youth. The conference helped prepare them to become missionaries and leaders in their Church communities.

A half century later, young Panamanians continued this legacy of faith, leaving their homes and coming together to prepare for the dedication of the Panama City Temple in 2008. Raquel Velásquez Cárdenas was one of the leaders who worked with young Church members planning the cultural celebration that would take place as part of the dedication celebration.

She said that 850 youth participated in practices held in the San Isidro Chapel. “In one of the practices we had, some youth that came from the San Blas Islands had traveled two days by boat to arrive in time to come to the city and practice,” she said. They sailed through high waves and arduous conditions to ensure the upcoming temple dedication presentation was ready.

After one group of 16 young people arrived at the rehearsal, their leader told Raquel that because of the length and danger of the journey, they might not be able to return for the actual dedication. Raquel recognized that they might miss out on a unique chance to visit the temple. She and their leader drove them from the rehearsal chapel into Panama City to see the temple.

In February 2019, Panamanian youth came together from across Panama to Chiriquí to participate in a For the Strength of Youth Conference. “I know that Jesus Christ answers my prayers and knows exactly what we need,” Alejandra Polo said. “I know by my example, I can teach another family about the gospel, about the joy that I have.”

“Despite life being hard,” Abish González said, thinking about her friends and family back home, “I hope that with the things I have learned, with the things my leaders taught me, with my experiences, they can learn and not have to go through the same things.” Like generations of young Panamanian Saints before them, Abish and Alejandra were ready to serve and lead by example.
