# “The Book of Mormon Seemed to Be Speaking”

In early 1940, Otto L. Hunsaker accepted a position with the US Army, constructing barracks, roads, and runways in the Panama Canal Zone. Six months later, his wife, Cressa, and their five children followed him to Panama.

The family was thrilled with their new home, but they soon grew hungry for Church fellowship and decided they would return to the United States if they could not locate a branch. Otto wrote to the First Presidency about their situation. In May 1941, Elder Antoine R. Ivins of the First Council of the Seventy traveled to Panama to organize the Canal Zone Branch, with Otto as president. Ten members were present. In the following years, the branch continued to grow, but missionary efforts were limited to the Canal Zone because of legal restrictions.

On March 6, 1953, a special Church meeting was held at the air force base for workers in the Canal Zone who were Guna (an Indigenous people of Panama and Colombia living among the 49 inhabitable islands off the north coast of the Isthmus of Panama). Many lived in the San Blas Islands (now known as the Guna Yala).

Forty individuals were present at the meeting, including Juan Coleman, the son of one of the head chiefs of the San Blas Islands. Juan was especially interested in the Book of Mormon and was given a copy to take back to the islands. He was excited to share it with others. He was especially intrigued by the book’s claim to be an account of God’s relationship with peoples in the Americas. Since that first meeting, the group gathered weekly, and several attended Sunday services and Mutual Improvement Association activities on Tuesdays.

Juan’s father-in-law, Chief Iguanitipipi of Aligandi Island, attended one such Sunday service and said that he had enjoyed studying the Book of Mormon with Juan. Chief Iguanitipipi pointed out ways in which his traditional beliefs intersected with the missionaries’ message, including the belief in a pre-existence, creation, a flood, and heavenly visitors, as depicted in San Blas artwork.

Chief Iguanitipipi invited the missionaries to visit his island home to speak with members of his tribe. During that visit on May 21, 1953, Ceferino Coleman, another chief, rose and spoke. He counseled everyone present to read the Book of Mormon, for, he said, he had learned of its truthfulness and it “coincided with the legends and teachings he had received from his father and forefathers.”

Juan and his wife, Irene Andreve, were baptized on February 11, 1954, in the swimming pool of the local YMCA, with Church President David O. McKay presiding. Juan and Irene were both pioneers among the San Blas people. Irene became their first female chief. She and Juan led many to the waters of baptism, including several members of their extended family. “This was a blessing from Heavenly Father,” Irene said.
