# “Jesus Really Cared for Everybody”

Although groups of expatriate Latter-day Saints in Singapore gathered for worship in the early 1960s, it was not until 1968 that four missionaries of the Southern Far East Mission began proselytizing efforts in the country. On May 4, 1968, Alice Tan Kee Eng was the first local Singaporean to be baptized. The Church gained recognition from the government on October 12, 1968, and the Singapore Branch was organized the following day.

Around the same time, Queenie Chew Peng Kim and Eddie Chew Cheng Kiat invited missionaries into their home. Queenie had attended an Anglican school and was intrigued by the Church’s teachings about baptisms for the dead. “So many people have died before having learned about Christ,” she said. “I felt they should also have the chance to learn about Christ. It shows that Jesus really cared for everybody.” Queenie’s husband Eddie “wasn’t keen” about the Church but attended discussions and Church services with her.

Queenie and Eddie spent several months learning from the missionaries. “We had a problem with tithing because we’d just bought a new car,” Queenie remembered. “Elder Mouritsen asked us to sell the car so we could pay tithing. We were quite cross with Elder Mouritsen.” Queenie and Eddie stopped attending church. But once they paid off the car, they eventually resumed missionary discussions. Queenie and Eddie were baptized November 10, 1968, at the Pasir Ris Beach. After their baptism, Eddie began to read the scriptures avidly, especially the Doctrine and Covenants.

Early in 1970 a string of negative attacks on the Church in newspapers led the government to restrict foreign missionary visas from around thirty to only three. For the next decade, similar restrictions remained in place and local members took the lead. Eddie became the first local branch president, and Queenie served as first counselor to the first local Relief Society president, Sheila Hsia Tsang Shiu Ngo 夏曾绍娥. In 1971 the Singapore District was created, and in 1973 Eddie became the first local district president.
