# “All Along the Lord Supported Me”

In 1970, Srilaksana Suntarahut was invited to join the committee overseeing the translation of the Book of Mormon into Thai. As a girl, she had lived with Thailand’s queen and received an excellent education in both English and Thai. She became indispensable to the oversight team and soon served as the principal translator.

One night, as Srilaksana lay on the floor resting after translating, an evil power entered the room, immobilized her, and flipped her onto her stomach. An immense weight was placed on her lower back. She screamed in pain and, unable to get up, had to lie on the floor until help arrived in the morning. The resulting back pain seriously interfered with the translation process until Srilaksana received a blessing from Bruce R. McConkie of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles. In a few days, she had enough relief that she could return to translating the Book of Mormon. However, she suffered with back pain the rest of her life.

The next year, Srilaksana experienced life-threatening complications from an operation. The doctor, not knowing what to do for her, sent her home. The pain was so terrible that she could not sleep, close her eyes, or even speak. She thought she might soon die. Then, she recounted, “The door of my bedroom opened, and three tall men in white robes entered my room and came and stood by my bed. Their heads were also covered in white. They laid their hands on my head. One of them called me by name and said in English, ‘We, the elders of Israel …’ as they began to pronounce a blessing.” Srilaksana felt as if she were “shocked with electricity” and “overcome with happiness.” When she awoke, she found she could speak again. Three days later, she resumed translating the Book of Mormon.

One difficulty in translating the Book of Mormon was the lack of Thai words for Christian concepts. The word “priesthood” was particularly challenging. Despite a year of fasting and praying, Srilaksana could not find a way to represent that concept in Thai. One night she prayed again, “Oh, help me. Help me to solve this word.” Then, she recounted, “I looked at the ceiling in my room, and I saw a hand, writing Thai letters.” She knew immediately that this was the word for priesthood.” Srilaksana discovered the word was not in any Thai dictionary.

In 2000, Gordon B. Hinckley, President of the Church, noted that Satan had tried many times to prevent the publication of the Thai Book of Mormon, including provoking Srilaksana’s physical struggles. Srilaksana also testified, “It was as if someone I couldn’t see was trying to pull me away. I had hard problems with family and health every inch of the way. All along the Lord supported me and I knew He was standing by my side and watching over me.”
