# “Being a Missionary, One Experiences Tremendous Spiritual Growth”

In July 1958, Chiu Siou-ping 邱秀平 graduated from the prestigious nursing school attached to Taiwan University and began an internship at Taiwan University Hospital. This internship was supposed to continue until July of 1959. However, in January 1959, missionary Sister Betty Johnson arrived from Hong Kong. She needed a companion. Chiu was eager to serve, but what about her hard-won nursing internship? Chiu wrote a report to the head of the nursing school, sincerely explaining her desire to serve a mission and requesting a leave from her internship. The nursing school had never granted this sort of leave before. Surprisingly, however, the head of the nursing school decided to approve the leave.

In a sacrament meeting on the evening of January 18, 1959, Chiu’s mission call was announced to the Taipei Branch. “The branch president laid hands on her head and set her apart from ordinary people,” recalled another branch member. “At that moment, the Spirit filled the room, and the Church members felt as if they had been totally cleaned and emptied out, elevated to a spiritual plane. God’s temple had been cleansed, and only the loftiest of sentiments were stirring.”

Chiu and Johnson rented a small apartment in Taipei but spent little time in it. On Sunday evening they boarded a train in Taipei, traveling all night and arriving at their destination the next morning. Throughout the week they would go from city to city, holding Relief Society, returning to Taipei each Saturday. Local branch Relief Society activities included handicraft-making and a musical group called the Singing Mothers that often performed in Church meetings. Because of the small numbers in these fledgling branches, the local sisters worked very hard but rejoiced in their shared secular and spiritual learning.

In the midst of her labors, Chiu reflected, “Preaching the gospel is not easy work, and missionary life is extremely austere, but being a missionary, one experiences tremendous spiritual growth, and develops better understanding of the Lord, the gospel, and our Church.”
