# We Need to Have Faith in Ourselves

Born in Papua New Guinea, Maria Kupun Mael had always dreamed of getting a university degree, but she did not know how this would be possible. “I did not know how I would make my dream come true because of my family’s financial situation,” she said.

In 2004, she joined the Church. Two years later, she served a full-time mission in Vanuatu. After returning home to Papua New Guinea, a member of the Church, Luke Robert Mael, whom she had met in Vanuatu, proposed marriage. Maria decided to marry him and moved to Vanuatu in August 2008.

As Maria and Luke were raising their young family, they experienced financial difficulties. She started weaving bilums (Papua New Guinea–style bags) to sell in order to support her family. She still dreamed of earning a degree. “I always prayed about it and knew that one day it would come true,” she said.

In 2012, Maria learned about the Church’s Perpetual Education Fund and enrolled at the University of the South Pacific, Emalus Campus, in 2013.

Maria took four courses per semester, which was “not that easy.” While in school, she gave birth to her third child. To save money, instead of taking the bus to campus, she walked an hour each way.

Several friends and relatives criticized Maria’s decision, telling her she needed to stay home and take care of her family. These criticisms hurt Maria, and she turned to the Lord in prayer for comfort.

“My husband was very supportive in my studies[;] despite the negatives, he said to never give up. He took care of the kids while I went to school to attend classes and to submit my assignments,” said Maria.

In 2015, Super Cyclone Pam hit Vanuatu and destroyed Maria’s house. “All my tax books and course books were destroyed,” Maria said.

Undeterred, she borrowed those books from the library. Her home lacked internet access, so she used the internet at school.

Maria graduated on November 30, 2018, five years after beginning her studies, with a bachelor’s degree in commerce, double majoring in management and public administration and sociology. Local Latter-day Saints recognize her as one of the first Latter-day Saint women in Vanuatu to graduate from university.

“I make sure my children get the best education and get qualified,” she said. “It is challenging at times as I have five children now and I have greater commitment. But I strive every day to make sure they are happy.” She also accepted a calling as a self-reliance facilitator in her ward.

Maria enrolled again in the University of the South Pacific to obtain a master’s degree in business administration (MBA), graduating in December 2021. She gained employment in the Ministry of Infrastructure and Public Utilities. “I love my job and I am faithful in my career,” she said. “I have always wanted to be a good employee and a good example to the people I serve [every day] by applying the gospel principles and living as a Latter-day Saint.”
