# Planting Zion in Great Britain

In the early 20th century, many British Saints worked to establish a more permanent Church presence in their local areas. One member, Julia Foster, immigrated to Utah with her family in the late 19th century, only to return to Hull, England, a short time later. For several years, Foster and her husband diligently saved their money in hopes that they would be able to move again to Utah. When her husband passed away, Foster donated £600 (the equivalent of three years of wages for the average Briton at the time)—all they had saved—to fund the construction of a meetinghouse for the Hull Branch.

At the start of World War II, Church leaders evacuated foreign missionaries from Europe. Andre Anastasiou, a Russian immigrant, was called to lead the British Mission in their absence. As the war progressed, Saints faced new challenges, and Anastasiou adapted Church programs to the wartime conditions. Latter-day Saint leaders were not considered professional ministers and were denied exemptions from military service. As a result, many branches were left without their leaders. Those left at home also had their lives disrupted by German bombing campaigns. At one point, for example, the family of the Liverpool Branch president prayed for the preservation of their home and the branch records while waiting for a bomb that had landed outside to be defused.

Hundreds of British sisters accepted calls as part-time missionaries and preached in the evenings. “We realise that most of them are on war work, having very little time to spare for themselves,” Anastasiou wrote. “And yet these faithful Saints, young and old, have been the salvation of some of the Branches.” In 1943, Edith Russell, a gifted writer, was called as the first female editor of the Millennial Star. Under her direction, the publication helped keep Saints connected to the Church through the closing year of the war.

As leaderless branches began to falter, Anastasiou petitioned the government for military exemptions, which would allow a few priesthood holders to stay and minister to branches in need. “All of the eligible men of our church … who have been called up for military service, have answered the call, … for they are loyal subjects of His Majesty the King,” Anastasiou told an official. “Do you not think that the King of Kings needs a few men to carry on His work?” The exemptions were granted. Thanks to these few leaders and the work of the part-time sister missionaries, not only were the prewar branches maintained, but new branches were created.

The diligence of Britain’s Saints was soon rewarded. Just eight years after the war ended, the Millennial Star announced, “A Temple is to be built in Britain!” In September 1958, members from across the country traveled to attend the six dedicatory sessions for the London England Temple.
