1. Smith, “Castle Garden,” 49.

2. Andrew Jenson, “Church Emigration,” Contributor 14 (1892): 135.

3. “Map of the State of New York Showing Its Water and Rail Road Lines,” January 1855, Library of Congress Railroad Maps, http://memory.loc.gov/ammem/gmdhtml/rrhtml/rrhome.html (accessed May 1, 2006).

4. The Chicago, Rock Island & Pacific Railway System and Representative Employees (Chicago: Biographical Pub. Co., 1900), 81–83.

5. “Great Conflagration, Mississippi Bridge Burned!! Steamboat Sunk!!!” and “Further Particulars of the Burning of the Mississippi Bridge,” Moline Workman, May 7, 1856, and May 14, 1856.

6. Jay Shultz, “Hurd v. Rock Island Railroad Company, a Turning Point in Abraham Lincoln’s Legal Career,” Illinois History 36 (February 1998): 36, http://www.lib.niu.edu/ipo/1998/ihy980236.html.

7. E. Coy & Co.’s Twin Cities Directory and Business Mirror, for the Year 1860 (Davenport, Iowa: Luse, Lane, and Co. 1859), 23.

8. Gerald Mansheim, “Iowa City and Its Environs, by J. H. Millar, 1854,” in Iowa City An Illustrated History (Norfolk, VA: Donning Co., 1989), 65.

Driving Notes

1. “Sandusky, Ohio, 1864,” city map, Follett House Museum, Sandusky, Ohio.

2. “City of Toledo, County of Lucas, Ohio, 1857,” map, Toledo Public Library, Toledo, Ohio.

3. Maxine Trotter (Curator and Vice President, Wyanet Historical Society), interview and tour with the author, July 20, 2005.

1f:Ta7f8,

New York City’s harbor, 1855, showing Castle Garden and the New Jersey shoreline.

Sunday, June 15

The day was spent in arranging our things, and many of the Saints attended the meeting in the City. We were visited by many of our brethren and sisters and much good feeling was manifested towards us.

New York City was the largest city in the United States, and the Saints landed late in the day on a Saturday. Many of them did not speak the language, and only some of the returning missionaries had ever been to the city. After two days of rest and processing, they would travel on to the west. First, they would take a train to cross New York. Then, they would travel by steamboat across Lake Erie. Finally, they would finish their trip to Iowa City, Iowa, by riding on three different railroads.

The immigration officials appear not to have processed immigrants on Sundays. The Saints had arrived at sundown on a Saturday and were thus fortunate to have a free Sunday, which allowed them to attend the local church meeting and to get things somewhat settled before their processing. At the church service the Saints could have met Levi Savage, age 36. He was returning from a mission to Siam, now known as Thailand. He wrote that “most of the congregation were the Saints that arrived last night on the ship Thornton.”

Monday, June 16

President John Taylor visited us and gave us much good instruction and counsel in relation to our future proceedings. Prest. Willie engaged in making preparations for leaving for the Camp while the Saints were engaged in seeing to their luggage. Several gentlemen and editors of papers visited us, and generally manifested friendly feelings. Several paragraphs were put in the papers commendatory of the passengers of their general cleanly appearance. Sister Annie Atkins a P.E.F. passenger remained at New York with the approval of Prest. John Taylor.

John Taylor was the member of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles who had responsibility for the Church in New York City. He helped to get the Mormon immigrants through the city, and he was in charge of public relations for the Church. As mentioned, the newspapers had reporters out and about trying to come up with news about the immigrants. Those comments were favorable, just as the comments of the captain had been favorable.

It is not known exactly how many of the approximately 761 original emigrants continued on toward Iowa City, Iowa. There were usually three types of Church emigrants on ships like the Thornton. They have been called “through passengers,” “Perpetual Emigrating Fund passengers (P.E.F.),” and “ordinary passengers.” “Through passengers” had sufficient means to pay their own way through to the Salt Lake Valley. “P.E.F. passengers” were loaned the means to come to the valley by the Church’s Perpetual Emigrating Fund. “Ordinary passengers” had only enough means to get to the United States and were usually planning to earn some money before traveling to the valley.1 Levi Savage reported on June 18 that he was in the company of “about 500 Saints.” When they left Iowa City, it is believed that there were still around 500 people with the Willie Company.2

Tuesday, June 17

This morning the Saints very busy going on board the barge with their luggage. About 10 a.m. the steamboat took us to the New York and Erie R.R. depot where we remained till 7 p.m., each passengers luggage was weighed, 50 lbs. being the weight for each adult. The steam boat took us to pier Mount where we arrived at 11 p.m. when we took the Rail for Dunkirk, a distance of 460 miles. Prest. Willie and Atwood returned to New York to attend to unsettled business, Elder Savage taking charge of the Saints.

The company journal described two movements during the day, but Peder Madsen’s record gave more details. The Saints initially took a barge across the Hudson River sailing to the New York and Erie Railroad depot. Their luggage was then weighed and transferred to a steamboat. Nine hours later they sailed up the Hudson River to “pier Mount.” An 1855 railroad map indicated that the New York and Erie Railroad had terminals at both Jersey City, New Jersey, and Piermont, New York.3 The Jersey City terminal was directly across the Hudson River from Castle Garden, but it was not the rail line’s main terminal. The main terminal was the Piermont terminal, which was about 25 miles up the Hudson River, just barely inside the state of New York. Apparently, they could not catch the train at Jersey City, so they traveled by steamboat to Piermont. Piermont got its name from a mile-long earthen pier that jutted out into the Hudson River near some hills, which to New Yorkers looked like mountains.

The “Elder Savage” who took charge was Levi Savage. President Willie asked him to take charge of the company, which he did. He stayed with the group until Sandusky, Ohio. He then visited relatives as he worked his way to Iowa City, Iowa, where he rejoined the handcart pioneers on July 10. He kept an almost-daily journal throughout this period of time.

Driving Directions

Tuesday, June 17

Nothing remains of the original New York and Erie Railroad terminal across the Hudson River from where the Castle Garden Emigrant Receiving Station used to be. It was probably located in what is now Liberty State Park, Jersey City, New Jersey. A Central Railroad of New Jersey (CRRNJ) historic railroad terminal has been preserved where the Saints may well have landed. To visit this terminal, drive to Liberty State Park in Jersey City and follow the “Historic Railroad Terminal” signs to the shore. The building is currently used to sell tickets to the Ellis Island buildings and to the Statue of Liberty.

There are remnants of the earthen pier at Piermont, New York. There are no remnants of the 1850 railroad tracks or terminal because they were removed when the army took over the pier and constructed its own facilities. There are some remnants of the army’s dock works just offshore. To visit the pier, drive north on Palisades Parkway from the George Washington Bridge area. From Palisades Parkway take Exit 4 and travel north on US Highway 9W through Palisades to the sign for the Tallman Mountain State Park. Turn right at the sign for the Tallman Mountain State Park and proceed north past the entrance to the State Park and continue down a winding road to a stop sign. Turn right at the stop sign and travel northeast on Ferdon Avenue to a traffic light at the intersection with Paradise Avenue. Turn right onto Paradise Avenue and travel east on it until the sign stating “To Pier.” Then turn right onto Ferry Road and travel for only about a tenth of a mile to the parking area. Vehicles are not permitted on the pier road without a special permit from the police. However, it is a very easy, pleasant, mile-long walk on the asphalt roadway to the end of the pier. The GPS end point of the pier is N 41 02.585’ W 073 53.786’. (Note: There are some condominiums constructed on the west end of the pier. Walk past them to get to the remainder of the old pier.)

Map of New York water and railroad lines, 1855.

Map of New York water and railroad lines, 1855.

Wednesday, June 18

Saints travelled all day and night and though much crowded together felt well in spirit as well as in body. The country through which we passed dotted with towns and new settlements, and which was pleasing from the contrast with the monotony of the sea. Had to procure provisions as we could get it by the way.

Peder Madsen described the railroad cars quite favorably in his June 17 entry. They were better constructed than the English and the Danish cars that he had seen in Europe. There were bench seats for two people in rows on each side of the car with a two-foot aisle down the middle of the car. Each car could accommodate 86 people. There was a stove in the middle of the car and a toilet at the end. There was no food service on the train, so meals or food had to be bought at the train’s stops along the way.

Although the company journal mentioned their passing through towns and settlements, there was no mention in any journal of anyone noting the significance of the area through which they were traveling. The Saints followed the Delaware River as it formed the New York and Pennsylvania border. Shortly thereafter, they crossed the Susquehanna River near Harmony, Pennsylvania, which is the area where Joseph Smith, the founder of the Church, was baptized, received the priesthood, and translated most of the Book of Mormon.

Driving Directions

Wednesday, June 18

To approximate the course of the railroad across New York, from Piermont return to US Highway 9W and travel north to I-87 and I-287. (Note: About a quarter of a mile past the traffic light in Piermont is the turn that leads to the winding road that passes the Tallman State Park entrance. If this turn is missed, US Highway 9W is very hard to find going north.) Travel west on I-87 and I-287, until they split at Exit 15. (Note: Do not take State Road 17 at Exit 15A.) Stay on I-87 traveling north on the New York State Thruway, a toll road, to Exit 16. Take Exit 16 and travel west on State Road 17. (Note: State Road 17 will turn into I-86.) Stay on State Road 17 to Exit 121W. Take Exit 121W and travel west on I-84 to Exit 1 at the New York state line. Take Exit 1 and go west on US Highway 6 into Port Jervis. Follow US Highway 6 as it winds around until State Road 97 breaks off, which is at a traffic light. Travel State Road 97 as it follows the winding course of the Delaware River to Hancock, New York. After traveling through Hancock, State Road 97 joins State Road 17. Take State Road 17 west to Exit 79. The railroad tracks generally followed the Susquehanna River as it went south. In order to follow that route and also see the Church’s Aaronic Priesthood Restoration site monument near Oakland, Pennsylvania, take Exit 79 and drive south on State Road 79 into Pennsylvania, where the road changes to State Road 92 leading to Oakland, Pennsylvania. (Note: In order to avoid this portion of the trail simply remain on State Road 17 and drive west to Binghamton.) State Road 92 changes to State Road 171 near Oakland. Stay on the north side of the Susquehanna River; the Priesthood Restoration monument is 1.7 miles west of the bridge that spans the river and leads to Oakland. The GPS point of the Priesthood Restoration monument is N 41 57.068’ W 075 38.323’. Continue traveling west on State Road 171 to I-81. Drive north on I-81 back into New York until it intersects State Road 17. Follow State Road 17 west through Binghamton, Elmira, Corning, and on to Salamanca. At Salamanca take Exit 20 and travel north on State Road 353 through Little Valley, Cattaraugus, Wesley, and on to Dayton. (Note: A portion of the railroad line still exists between Cattaraugus and Dayton.) In Dayton turn right onto US Highway 62 and travel north to Gowanda. In Gowanda turn left onto State Road 39 and travel west toward Forestville and Dunkirk. About five miles past Forestville, State Road 39 ends. Turn left onto US Highway 20 and drive southwest for about two miles until the highway intersects State Road 60. Turn right and travel north on State Road 60 into Dunkirk, New York.

Thursday, June 19

This day we arrived at Dunkirk at 12 noon feeling generally well though tired with the irksome journey by Rail. At 2 p.m. Prests. Willie & Atwood arrived by express train having left New York at 5 p.m. the preceding evening. The Saints generally were glad to welcome them. Procured all the provisions we could get in the town. At 6 p.m. we embarked on board the Jersey City, a screw steam boat, bound for Toleda, distant 280 miles, and though much crowded good spirit and feeling prevailed. The sea was quite calm as we were on lake Erie. We were enabled to form some contrast with the Lakes and the Mighty Ocean. Nothing of any importance occurred.

The Saints traveled 460 miles in about 36 hours from Piermont to the shores of Lake Erie. Their luggage was transferred to the docks, as they proceeded west.

Driving Directions

Thursday, June 19

In Dunkirk, New York, there are no remnants of the 1856 dock or railway terminal. There was, however, a monument that had been erected at the end of the old New York and Erie rail line. The monument was located just south of the present-day CSX railway underpass, at the intersection of Main Street, which is State Road 60, Third Street and Cliffstar Court (Note: Cliffstar Court was formerly called Railway Avenue and then Franklin Street.) Where these three roads come together, just south of the underpass, is a triangular piece of grass where the original rail line terminated. It can be found at GPS point N 42 29.115’ W 075 19.700’. The original rail line came into town where Railway Avenue was located.

Friday, June 20

This morning though very much crowded the Saints felt well, the steerage was devoted for the sisters, and brethren accommodated themselves the best way possible on deck. The sea still outward calm and beautiful though the weather was warm. Touched at Cleveland and while there procured provisions for the passengers. Also put in for Sandusky in the evening where Elder Savage left us, after remaining a few hours, we proceeding on our passage to Toledo. The night was calm and all that could be desired, no motion being discernable.

The Jersey City was not a paddle-powered steamboat, instead it was powered by a “screw,” or propeller. The conditions described in the company journal are typical of 1850s steamboat travel. The boats were packed as full as possible with people, luggage, and freight. The female passengers were generally accommodated in the enclosed portions of the vessel, referred to here as the “steerage,” which indicated that it was the lowest class of passage in the enclosed portion of the ship. Meanwhile, the male passengers stayed day and night on the deck, regardless of the weather. The men in the Willie Company were probably comfortable because the weather was warm and the lake was calm. Peder Madsen recorded that provisions of “bread and butter” were issued. They stopped in Cleveland, Ohio, and then in Sandusky, Ohio, as the boat skirted around the edge of Lake Erie.

Driving Directions

Friday, June 20

There is no remnant of the 1856 Cleveland docks. In Cleveland, passenger traffic appears to have been handled near the end of East 9th Street. Likewise, in Sandusky there is no remnant of the 1856 docks. However, from an 1854 Sandusky City map it appears that passenger traffic was handled near the foot of Jackson Street, which was next to Columbus Street, the main street in the city. Freight was handled several blocks west and east, away from the passenger dock.1 The end of the main Cleveland dock is currently found at GPS N 41 30.661’ W 081 41.794’. The end of the present Jackson Street pier in Sandusky is at GPS N 41 27.548’ W 082 42.884’.

Saturday, June 21

This morning about 9 a.m. we arrived at Toledo and disembarked at the Railroad station, where we remained till the evening, taking the rail again for Chicago. The Railroad authorities at Toledo manifested a very unkind spirit towards us, putting us to all the inconvenience in their power. Procured all the provisions we could get at Toledo. The Saints feel well.

The first mention of poor treatment in the United States came when the Saints were transferring to the Northern Indiana Railroad at Toledo, Ohio, and the authorities treated them unkindly. Peder Madsen reported that they departed riding on rail cars similar to those in New York.

Driving Directions

Saturday, June 21

Once again there are no remnants of the 1856 docks or rail terminal in Toledo. However, it is clear from an 1857 Toledo City map that shipboard passengers arrived at the combined railroad terminal and dock. It was located at the north end of an area called the Middle Ground, so named because it was between the Maumee River and Swan Creek.2 The Middle Ground is currently occupied by the Owens-Corning Fiberglass headquarters in downtown Toledo. To walk to the site where the Saints landed, find the intersection of North Summit and Monroe Street. Walk east across the bridge over Swan Creek. Find the outdoor gazebo area by the buildings. Walk north through the gazebo and follow the gravel pathway to the end of the peninsula. The GPS location is N 41 38.860’ W 083 32.030’.

Sunday, June 22

At 5 p.m. we arrived at Chicago where we were very roughly treated by the Railroad conductor, he insisting on our landing in the street, which we were obliged to do, and after much trouble in finding the Railroad Superintendent we prevailed with him to allow us the use of an empty warehouse for the night, the weather to all appearance indicating a thunderstorm. For the above we feel to recognize the hand of the Almighty in softening the hearts of men in our behalf, and we feel to tender the gratitude of our hearts.

In Chicago, Illinois, they were again poorly treated by a railroad official. Peder Madsen wrote that “The people in this city are not good. They tried to disturb us.” Persecution was not new to most of these converts to the Church. For many, the goal of gathering to Zion in the western United States served two purposes: first, it allowed them to obey a commandment of God’s prophet, and second, it allowed them to escape religious-based persecution.

The railroad terminals in Chicago and further west were not what people envision today. The depots were wooden structures, built for utility and not for beauty. The station of the Chicago & Rock Island Railroad in Chicago was said to be the nicest in its system. The station first constructed by the company in the autumn of 1853 was “an old whitewashed barn.” It was upgraded in 1855 and was described in 1900 as follows: “The first Chicago depot built by the company in 1855, was near the site of its present station. It was constructed of unplaned boards, had a frontage of about 200 feet, and was whitewashed yearly. It was burned two or three years after completion.”4

Driving Directions

Sunday, June 22

The railroad line between Toledo, Ohio, and Chicago, Illinois, basically proceeded along the following course out of Toledo and into the LaSalle Street Station in downtown Chicago. From the corner of North Summit and Monroe in downtown Toledo, drive southwest on North Summit for less than a mile until it becomes State Road 2 at the intersection of Clayton and North Summit. Continue west on State Road 2 until it intersects the Ohio Turnpike, which is a toll road, at the Toledo Airport. Travel west on the Ohio Turnpike, which is the combined I-80 and I-90, until Exit 25. Take Exit 25 and travel generally south on State Road 66 to Archbold, Ohio. In Archbold, begin following State Road 2 as it meanders generally west and south to Bryan. Drive south out of Bryan on State Road 2 until it intersects US Highway 6. Turn right and travel west onto US Highway 6 and follow it into Indiana. In Indiana, keep driving west for over 40 miles on US Highway 6. In Ligonier, US Highway 6 joins US Highway 33. About six miles past Ligonier, US Highways 6 and 33 separate. Turn right and travel north on US Highway 33 through Goshen and toward Elkhart. Just into Elkhart US Highway 33 ends and US Highway 20 begins. Take US Highway 20 and travel west and north until it intersects the Indiana Toll Road, which combines I-80 and I-90. Travel west on the toll road until Exit 21, which is where I-80 and I-90 split. Stay on I-90, which remains a toll road, and drive west into Illinois. I-90 curves north just before it enters Illinois. Follow I-90 as it joins I-94. Take the combined I-90 and I-94 north until they intersect I-290 near downtown Chicago. Take I-290 at Exit 51H east onto Congress Parkway to Dearborn Street. From Congress Parkway turn left and drive north on Dearborn Street one block to Van Buren Street. Turn left onto Van Buren Street and drive west to LaSalle Street. The terminal was on the left, in the block just west of LaSalle Street and south of Van Buren Street. There are still trains running from the LaSalle Street station. The GPS location is N 41 52.625’ W 087 37.930’.

Monday, June 23

In consequence of not a sufficient number of cars being on hand our company was obliged to be divided, and most of the English Saints left at 3 p.m. by express train for Rock Island: the remainder leaving at 11 p.m. On our arrival at Pond Creek we ascertained that the Railroad bridge had broken down a few hours previous, many carriages smashed, no lives lost but many injured, in which train some brethren from the Valley including President Lorenzo Snow, all of whom escaped injury, and they kindly welcomed all the Saints who saw them. The night was spent at Pond Creek sleeping in the cars.

After spending about 24 hours in a Chicago warehouse, the Saints split into two groups to travel to Rock Island, Illinois, on the Chicago & Rock Island Railroad. Their route went southwest from Chicago to Joliet, Illinois; then along the Illinois River to its junction with the Bureau River; and finally on to the west to Rock Island, Illinois. Both of the trains stopped for the night at Pond Creek, which was only a few miles west of the Bureau River junction. This allowed the two groups to reunite.

Today nothing exists of the Pond Creek stop. It was south of Wyanet, Illinois, on Pond Creek. There was not much of a station at Pond Creek. It was just a food and water stop on the Illinois prairie where trains stopped and waited before going on to Rock Island. On June 24, Peder Madsen reported the conditions as follows: “There was a shop and a place where cakes and bread were baked and food prepared. Milk was obtained from the farmers nearby.”

The cause of their stop appears to be attributed to the railroad bridge across the Mississippi River being “broken down.” The facts stated in this entry appear to be more rumor than fact. The Moline Workman, a local Moline, Illinois, newspaper, reported on May 7 and May 14 some of the facts regarding the trouble with the Mississippi Bridge. This was the first railroad bridge across the Mississippi River. It ran from Rock Island, Illinois, across the river to Davenport, Iowa. It was 1,582 feet long and made from iron and wood. Shortly after the bridge was completed, the Effie Afton, a side wheel riverboat, had passed through the draw portion of the bridge and reportedly the wind and river current swept her back into the pier on the eastern side of the draw. The boat caught fire, causing the bridge’s pier to catch fire. Both burned and the span fell into the water. The boat was a total loss, but no one was hurt on the boat or the bridge.5 As a minor footnote in history, Abraham Lincoln was later hired to defend the railroad from a lawsuit brought by the steamboat’s owner. Lincoln won the case.6

Contrary to the rumors, unless there was some later unreported bridge disaster, this noteworthy wreck on the Mississippi River had occurred about six weeks before they got to Pond Creek. In addition, no rail cars were damaged.

Finally, the journal stated there were “many injured” and that “brethren from the valley including President Lorenzo Snow” were on the train that was involved in the incident. There is, however, no evidence that Lorenzo Snow, a member of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles, was in Illinois or Iowa at the time. However, his younger brother and fellow Quorum member, Erastus Snow, was in Iowa City from June 18 through June 23 on his way to St. Louis, Missouri.

Driving Directions

Monday, June 23

To follow the general path of their train from Chicago to Pond Creek, return to Congress Parkway. Turn right and travel west on Congress Parkway for a short distance until it intersects I-90 and I-94. Take I-90 and I-94 south, in the direction of Indiana, until I-90 and I-94 intersect I-55. Take I-55 and travel southwest until it intersects I-80 at Exit 250. Take Exit 250 and travel west on I-80 until Exit 56. Take Exit 56 and drive south on State Road 26 until it intersects US Highway 34, in Princeton, Illinois. Follow “West” US Highway 34 through Princeton and then drive west on US Highway 34 through Wyanet. Ignore the railroad tracks in the middle of Wyanet; they belong to a different rail line. On Wyanet’s western edge take County Road 8 south toward Bradford. Drive south for only 0.9 mile, driving over a railroad overpass and an old railroad bridge. Just barely past the railroad bridge, turn sharply to the left at the end of the guardrail and onto a small gravel road that parallels the asphalt road. Drive north on the small gravel road to the bottom of the hill, almost under the old railroad bridge, and cross the railroad tracks. The Pond Creek depot was immediately east of where the gravel road crosses the railroad tracks. The depot was on the north side of the tracks. The creek was on the south side of the tracks. The major canal that currently dominates this site did not exist in 1856.3 The GPS location of the depot was N 41 21.199’ W 089 35.223’. (Note: Wyanet was in competition with Pond Creek for importance in the 1800s. Wyanet was the stop for the Chicago, Burlington, and Quincy Railroad. Wyanet won out, and the community of Pond Creek gradually faded out of existence.)

Illinois railroad map, 1855.

Tuesday, June 24

This morning the remainder of the Company joined us, and remained there till 5 p.m. doing the best we could though unable to procure provisions. Left for Rock Island and arrived at 11 p.m. and slept in the cars all night. While at Pond Creek the child of died of general debility and was buried the same day in the presence of Prests. Willie and Ahmanson.

Death:

Stine Rasmussen, age 22 months

The company journal left a blank space where the names of the child who died and its parents would normally appear. Peder Madsen told us the child’s name, Stine Rasmussen, and her age, 22 months. Only her father’s name was given, Hans Rasmussen. She was probably Danish because John Ahmanson, the leader of the Danish Saints, was present at the burial.

Driving Directions

Tuesday, June 24

To travel along the general path that the Saints traveled to get to the Rock Island Depot, return to US Highway 34 and travel west to State Road 40. Turn right onto State Road 40 north to I-80. Take I-80 and travel west toward Rock Island. At about milepost 10 the Interstate divides: leave I-80 and travel west on I-74 and I-280. At about milepost 5 the Interstate divides again. Follow I-74 north into Moline, when it divides from I-280. Take Exit 2, called “7th Avenue.” At the bottom of the off ramp turn right and follow the street as it winds around to River Drive. River Drive is the street one block north of Fourth Avenue. Turn left onto River Drive and travel west into Rock Island until there is a sharp left-hand curve followed immediately by railroad tracks. Cross the tracks and turn right immediately onto Fifth Avenue. Follow Fifth Avenue west until it intersects 31st Street. On the right, or the north side of the street, is a restored brick train station currently housing a restaurant called “Abbey Station.” In front of the station is a large stone monument picturing the depots that used to be at that location and across the river in Davenport. They are both depicted as wooden, plank built buildings. The monument is located at GPS N 41 30.476’ W 090 33.335’.

Wednesday, June 25

Depiction of the Rock Island, Illinois, train depot.

This morning through the kindness of the Superintendent, he procured us a large warehouse to remain in while there and in consequence of the Railroad bridge being destroyed, we had to cross the Mississippi in a steam ferry boat, which engrossed our time in shifting our luggage throughout the day. Quite a rowdy spirit was manifested by many, desiring access to the building, and in the evening, we had to keep a strong guard, as we received a report through some friends that a mob intended to attack us in the night and gain access to our young women. The Lord overruled all for our good, for which we feel to be grateful and to express our thankfulness to Him. Obtained all the provisions we could get.

This was the third stop where there was trouble accompanying the Saints. Peder Madsen confirmed the company journal’s report of trouble. He reported that the police came and dispersed the mob. Persecution on the frontier was beginning to find them every time they stopped.

Driving Directions

Wednesday, June 25

The original railroad bridge is long gone. The location of the docks where they would have met the steam ferryboat is not known. The existing bridge across the Mississippi River is known as the “Government Bridge” and is hundreds of feet down river from the original bridge’s location. All that is left of the original bridge are two monuments. The monuments are in Rock Island, Illinois, and Davenport, Iowa, near where the bridge originally was located. To see the two bridge-pier monuments and to cross the river on the Government Bridge, return to Fifth Avenue and travel east. Turn left on Seventh Avenue and take State Road 92 east to the traffic signal at 44th Street. Then turn left, drive two blocks north, and cross the railroad tracks. The road curves sharply to the right and becomes River Drive again. Travel east on River Drive until there is a sign for the “Rock Island Arsenal” just after 15th Street. Drive into the arsenal. It is a United States Army post and personal identification is needed to get on the post. (Note: The purpose of the visit is to see the bridge-pier monument.) Follow Rodman Avenue almost all the way across the island to Davenport Drive. (Do not turn at the Davenport House sign.) Turn right onto Davenport Drive. The monument is about 0.3 mile up the riverbank on the right. It is at GPS N 41 31.225’ W 090 33.536’. The other monument is directly across the river. To reach it, return to Rodman Avenue and turn right. Travel west to the bridge and drive north across the bridge to Davenport. In Iowa turn right onto Third Street, which soon becomes River Drive and is also US Highway 67. Travel east on River Drive for one block to where Fourth Street intersects River Drive. The monument is on the north side of River Drive. It is at GPS N 41 31.425’ W 090 33.817’.

Thursday, June 26

Depiction of the Davenport, Iowa, train depot.

This morning at 7 a.m. we left and crossed the Mississippi by the steam ferry boat, and at 9 a.m. we left by rail for Iowa City, arrived at 1:30 p.m. and camped on the green, but in consequence of a thunderstorm approaching, we obtained possession of a large Engine shed and remained there during the night, it raining in torrents all night. Many of the brethren from the Camp visited and cordially welcomed us, and on their return took a large number of the sisters to the Camp with them.

The 1860 address of the train depot in Davenport, Iowa, was “East side of LeClaire, opposite Fifth.”7 The monument across the river in Rock Island has a depiction of a wooden plank building, which could show how the Mississippi and Missouri Railroad’s depot in Davenport looked in 1856. This area is currently a gravel pit.

The 1856 train depot in Iowa City was located on the southern edge of the city.8 It was in the area of the present switching yards and an old, no-longer used train depot.

With their arrival in Iowa City, the immigrants had traveled about 460 miles crossing New York, roughly 280 miles crossing Lake Erie, and about 465 miles crossing Ohio, Illinois, and a part of Iowa. All totaled they had traveled approximately 1,200 miles in less than two weeks. They had suffered the loss of only one child. General good health prevailed and the easy part of their trek was finished.

Driving Directions

Thursday, June 26

To drive to the Davenport Depot’s former location at Fifth and LeClaire Streets, drive west on Fourth Street to Iowa Street. Turn right onto Iowa Street and drive north to Federal Street. Turn right onto Federal Street and drive one block east to the intersection with LeClaire Street. Fifth Street and LeClaire Street would have intersected in the gravel pit just south of this location. The intersection of Federal Street and LeClaire Street is at GPS N 41 31.515’ W 090 34.090’. To follow the general path of the railroad to Iowa City requires a drive through some of the older areas in Davenport. Return to Iowa Street, turn left onto Iowa Street, and drive south for one block to Fifth Street. Turn right and drive west onto Fifth Street and follow the railroad tracks west to Taylor Street. Turn right and then drive north on Taylor Street, which becomes Clay Street and then Washington Street, and weave through the city to Lombard Street, which runs east and west. Turn left and drive west on Lombard Street until it becomes Hickory Grove Road. Drive northwest until Hickory Grove Road becomes US Highway 6. Travel west on US Highway 6 until it intersects I-280. Cross the interstate and continue driving west on County Road F 58. Just west of Wilton, County Road F 58 intersects US Highway 6 again. Turn left and go south about two miles. Then turn right and drive west, continuing on US Highway 6 into Iowa City, Iowa.

To reach the area of the Iowa City depot, follow US Highway 6 west until it intersects Gilbert Street. Turn right onto Gilbert Street and drive north to Prentiss Street, which is opposite Bowery Street. Turn left onto Prentiss Street and drive west to Dubuque Street. Turn left onto Dubuque Street and drive south to Wright Street. Turn right onto Wright Street. On the south side of the street between Dubuque Street and Clinton Street is an old, no-longer used train station. The depot in 1856 would have been south and east of this station, i.e., in the current switching yards, which extend to Oak Grove Park, five blocks east and three blocks south at the corner of Dodge Street and Page Street. The present, unused station is at GPS N 41 39.199’ W 091 32.031’, while Oak Grove Park is at GPS N 41 39.128’ W 091 31.668’.

12:["$","$L1c",null,{"book":{"id":61,"title":"The Willie Handcart Company","subtitle":null,"image_id":"website-files-bucket/books/book_cover_images/WillieHandcart.png","excerpt":null,"book_series_id":null,"series_ordering":0,"ebook_link_kindle":null,"ebook_link_deseret":null,"ebook_link_nook":null,"free_book":0,"pdf_id":"website-files-bucket/books/book_pdf/WillieBook.pdf","footnotes":null,"public":1,"slug":"the-willie-handcart-company","wp_id":null,"product_link":"product/the-willie-handcart-company","author_id":null},"chapter":{"id":570,"title":"Chapter 2: New York City, New York, to Iowa City, Iowa","subtitle":null,"online_book_id":61,"excerpt":null,"content":"$1d","intro_text":"

“I have been a stranger in a strange land.\" Exodus 2:22

","page_number":35,"previous_chapter":"chapter-1-liverpool-england-to-new-york-city-new-york","next_chapter":"chapter-3-iowa-city-iowa-to-florence-nebraska-territory","pdf_id":"website-files-bucket/books/chapter_pdf/BYUS-BK-WHC-02-New-York-City-New-York-to-Iowa-City-Iowa.pdf","footnotes":"$1e","slug":"chapter-2-new-york-city-new-york-to-iowa-city-iowa","public":1,"wp_id":null,"test":"569","podcast_file_id":null,"section_heading":null,"chapter_author":null},"topics":[],"scriptures":[],"authors":[],"processedContent":{"html":"$1f","headings":[{"id":"heading-0","textContent":"Sunday, June 15","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-1","textContent":"Monday, June 16","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-2","textContent":"Tuesday, June 17","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-3","textContent":"Tuesday, June 17","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-4","textContent":"Wednesday, June 18","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-5","textContent":"Wednesday, June 18","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-6","textContent":"Thursday, June 19","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-7","textContent":"Thursday, June 19","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-8","textContent":"Friday, June 20","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-9","textContent":"Friday, June 20","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-10","textContent":"Saturday, June 21","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-11","textContent":"Saturday, June 21","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-12","textContent":"Sunday, June 22","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-13","textContent":"Sunday, June 22","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-14","textContent":"Monday, June 23","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-15","textContent":"Monday, June 23","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-16","textContent":"Tuesday, June 24","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-17","textContent":"Tuesday, June 24","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-18","textContent":"Wednesday, June 25","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-19","textContent":"Wednesday, June 25","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-20","textContent":"Thursday, June 26","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-21","textContent":"Thursday, June 26","tagName":"H2"}]}}]