The night of their arrival in Iowa City, the Saints found shelter from the torrential rain in an engine shed. They would not stay in Iowa City, where the rail line ended, for long. The Willie Handcart Company was outfitted three miles to the west in present-day Coralville, Iowa, which was then known as Clark’s Mill. At about noon the next day, when the roads had dried enough to proceed, they walked roughly three miles to their campground. Throughout Iowa they had to suffer with the weather and the settlers. The rain, heat, and humidity were unrelenting. They also found that they were a spectacle and would draw people out to gawk and in some cases to mock as the handcart-pulling Mormons went along.

Friday, June 27

This morning it still continued to rain, about noon it cleared up, and the roads drying very fast, so much so that before night all the passengers were removed to the Camp, with most of their luggage, Prest. Willie remained there till all had left and at 9 p.m. arrived at the Camp and received a cordial welcome from Prest. Spencer and brethren generally.

When the Willie Company arrived at Clark’s Mill, Peder Madsen wrote that there were 900 people at the camp. President Daniel Spencer, age 62, was in charge of outfitting the arriving handcart companies. He and his crew had already successfully sent off two handcart companies; the third would leave just a day after the Willie Company’s arrival. These first three companies were the Edmund Ellsworth Company with 274 people that had left the staging area on June 9, 1856; the Daniel D. McArthur Company with 297 people that had left two days later on June 11, 1856; and the Edward Bunker Company of 320 Welsh Saints that would leave on June 28, 1856.

President Spencer was not ready to outfit the approximately 500 people in the Willie Company. The Saints immediately began preparing for their journey. However, the most immediately pressing need for them was not handcarts, but tents. These new arrivals needed a tent for every 20 people, which meant that they needed 25 tents. Peder Madsen’s entry on June 2 makes it clear that they had worked on the tents while crossing the ocean. In addition, for 500 people they needed to build 100 handcarts.

Peder Madsen described their daily ration of food. In the other records, the rations they received over the next few days varied little from his account on June 27, except that on other days salt was included and soda and soap were excluded. Each person was allowed the following:

1 pound wheat flour,

2½ ounces pork,

2 ounces sugar,

2 ounces dried apples,

¼ pound coffee,

½ ounce tea,

soda, and

soap.

[caption] Replica of Single Pole Tent at Mormon Handcart Visitors' Center, Martin's Cove, Wyoming.[/caption]

Driving Directions

[caption][/caption]

Friday, June 27

There is a Mormon Handcart Park in Coralville, Iowa, which is in the area where the Saints had their campground and worked to outfit themselves for their 1856 trek. To reach the park from the train station, return to US Highway 6 and drive west into Coralville, Iowa. At the intersection of First Avenue and Second Street (US Highway 6), turn left onto First Avenue and drive south for about a mile until First Avenue intersects Hawkeye Park Road. Turn right onto Hawkeye Park Road. Then turn right at the first opportunity and drive north into the park. There are several things to read and an asphalt walking trail in the park. It is at GPS N 41 39.994’ W 091 34.480’.

Saturday, June 28

The Saints all cheerful and happy and under the circumstances doing the best they can without tents. Prest. Willie received instructions from Prest. D. Spencer to continue in charge of the Company for the time being. The Sisters busy engaged in making tents under the direction of Elders William Ledingham. Elder Atwood with many of the brethren went to Iowa City accompanied with many teams to get up the luggage before night, quite a considerable quantity of it was brought to the Camp. General good feeling prevailing amongst the Saints and all appear to desire to hearken to the counsel of those over them. Everybody in the Camp appeared to be busy making hand carts, yokes, &c., for the trip across the plains. This evening commenced to rain very heavy, the Saints bore it with fortitude, perfectly resigned to the will of Heaven. Union and love seem to prevail with all.

Without tents for shelter, the Saints were at the mercy of the Iowa weather. There were no sheds or warehouses to borrow. Consequently, without tents, they simply got wet when it rained. The Saints made circular tents, which sheltered 20 people. The hand-sewn tents were made of canvas with a single pole in the middle. The occupants would sleep with their feet toward the middle pole. Peder Madsen reported the sewing. He also stated that some tents were set up, but apparently there were not very many finished tents. Finally, he recorded the arrival of John Van Cott, the 42-year-old returning president of the Church’s Scandinavian mission. He arrived with about 400 cattle for the various handcart companies.

Sunday, June 29

This morning is a lovely morning and most of the Saints rejoicing although they got wet through in their beds. We attended meeting in the Camp in the morning. Prests. Willie & Elder John A. Hunt addressed the meeting and in the afternoon Elder Dan Jones preached. There were a good many strangers present, a good spirit prevailing.

Although the Saints were soaked in the night, this did not dampen their desire to hear the word of God preached to them. Peder Madsen wrote that there were morning and afternoon gatherings.

Monday, June 30

A fine day but extremely warm. Saints very busy making tents. Prest. Willie was engaged settling up his accounts and endeavoring to get the Saints under cover. This day Jens C. Jensen, native of Denmark died in the camp, aged two years.

Death:

Jens Christian Jensen, age 2

Peder Madsen wrote that they learned they could take only 17 pounds of goods per person on the handcarts. On the earlier portions of this journey, they had been allowed to bring 50 pounds of luggage. He listed several alternatives to dispose of the extra items. First, the items could be shipped to the Salt Lake Valley. Next, some people sold their extra goods in the city. Finally, he said that he had given his extra goods to the Saints in St. Louis, who were unable to come to the valley that season. Not surprisingly, some of the people were grumbling and complaining, and he reported that three of their leaders talked to them about obedience to God’s laws and God’s servants.

Tuesday, July 1

This morning the Company of the Thornton Ship signed receipts of passage from New York to Iowa City. A child died today.

We are getting ready for the plains and are getting 17 lbs. of luggage ready to cross the plains with as it is not possible to take more. We still continue busy making tents and all doing what they can to further our movement.

Death:

an unnamed child

Unfortunately, the company journal and Peder Madsen’s journal provide no other information about the death of the unnamed child.

The “receipts of passage” that the Saints signed would have related to their status as PEF emigrants. They were obligated to repay the Church for the cost of their passage. The unfinished tents continued to get more attention in the journals than the unfinished handcarts. It would be another week before the tents would all be finished.

Wednesday, July 2

This morning it is pouring with rain accompanied by thunder and lightning. Sister Mary Lewis, wife of Joseph Lewis was delivered of a son at 3 a.m. of the Bristol Branch in the midst of thunder and lightning. The tents not being done we had a good soaking. It is very hot today.

Birth:

a son to Mary and Joseph Lewis

There does not appear to be any couple named Mary and Joseph Lewis listed as traveling with the Willie Company or with any of the other groups that left later in 1856. Consequently, this son’s name is not known.

Thursday, July 3

We had plenty of rain again last night with thunder & lightning. The tents are not done although Prest. Willie is unceasing in his exertions to keep the sisters to their work. Nothing of importance, but all have plenty to do guarding, making tents, etc.

Peder Madsen wrote that “our beloved Brother VanCott” left to go get more cattle. He hoped to see the Saints again in Council Bluffs, Iowa.

Friday, July 4

This day being the day of Celebration for the Independence of the United States we suspended generally from work and held a meeting with the American Flag flying when many of the Brethren spoke and Elder Ferguson delivered an oration. Many strangers were present and appeared much pleased, and all passed off well.

Peder Madsen noted the abundance of resources and freedom that Americans had, along with the day’s celebration, which involved “shooting practice and assemblies.” He described the weather as beautiful.

Saturday, July 5

This morning Lars Julius Larsen was born, the son of Peter and Ann K. Larsen. Also died this morning. Sarah Ann, daughter of Sister Ann Cooper in the Camp late of the Cambridgeshire Conference, England. It is very warm today.

Birth:

Lars Julius Larsen to Ann K. and Peter Larsen

Death:

Sarah Ann Cooper, age 2

Apparently, the people were having trouble disposing of their surplus property at fair prices. Peder Madsen wrote that some of the brethren went to the city with handcarts carrying bedding and other items that did not sell well. He wrote that earlier in the trip he had paid eight dollars to cover the cost of 105 pounds of overweight goods and that he had trouble getting reimbursed for the money that he had earlier expended. He also referred to Sister Larsen, the mother of the newborn child, as “Sister Hageman.”

Although not mentioned in the Willie Company record, another returning missionary, William Woodward, age 23, was assigned by Elder James Ferguson on July 5 to work with the Willie Company and to be under President Willie’s charge. He had arrived with an earlier group from England. He had been assisting traveling Saints at Iowa City since June 2. A consistent journal keeper, his personal journal would help record the company’s history through October 1, when he would begin keeping the official company journal.

Sunday, July 6

It is very hot, the tents are not yet finished. We attended meeting this day, held two meetings in the Camp today & many strangers were present. A good feeling prevails among the Saints, and very little discontent manifest.

Some of the Danish Saints did not intend to travel to the Salt Lake Valley by handcart. Peder Madsen recorded that Hannah Anderson asked John Ahmanson to ask both Lars Madsen and Hans Rasmussen to loan her enough money to continue on with the handcarts. The two men did loan her the money. These men, along with their families, traveled with the Hodgetts Wagon Company.

Monday, July 7

This morning, Mary Ledingham died, daughter of William & Catherine Ledingham, late of Leith, Scotland, aged 22 months.

Death:

Mary Ledingham, age 22 months

Some of the men continued to be preoccupied with their surplus goods. Peder Madsen related that they had loaded three handcarts with bedding and clothing, which they had sold in the city for $71. Some of the men got together and purchased a yoke of oxen for $115, to go with a wagon that they had not yet purchased, so that they could haul their surplus things.

Tuesday, July 8

The tents are now finished, and all are pretty comfortably provided for. Most of the company are now engaged washing clothes, while others are making the hand-carts, fitting up wagons, &c.

Throughout the records of Peder Madsen and the company journal there are conflicts as to the specific dates of various events. For example, Peder Madsen recorded that a group of 800 arrived on July 8, while the company journal recorded their arrival on July 9. The other two major journals were not helpful in resolving this conflict because William Woodward had no entry for either day and Levi Savage arrived on July 10 to find about “1,500 Saints.”

Wednesday, July 9

A company of Saints arrived that came in the Horizon from Liverpool numbering some 800 souls came up this evening in the midst of a terrible storm, and we as well as the other Companies accommodated them the best in our power. A sister of the Company died this morning.

Death:

an unnamed woman

The 800 Saints who would make up the Martin Handcart Company arrived “in the midst of a terrible storm.” The two groups crowded into the newly available tents, trying to keep dry. Peder Madsen wrote that the Willie Company members were ordered to pack up so they could get going. He was glad to get going on their journey, which he described as the way to gain the experiences they would need for eternity. Without any explanation in the records, one unnamed woman died that morning.

Thursday, July 10

Selecting the cattle this morning for our Camp; also mules, waggons, &c. All are pretty well with plenty to do preparing to move. Weather very warm.

Each tent of 20 people would be allotted four handcarts. Peder Madsen explained that one would be “covered,” if needed to carry little children. The covered handcarts looked like miniature covered wagons.

Friday, July 11

Saints generally busy and feel well about their departure, and are making all exertion possible to get ready. Nothing of importance occurred this day, the health and spirits of the company good.

Peder Madsen described the handcarts as follows: “The handcarts that were delivered to us are well constructed and light. They have very strong wooden wheels, four feet high. The rim around them is made up of two steam bent fellies fastened with iron tires. They have wooden axles that hold two beams eight feet long with five matching cross beams. The carts are four feet wide and weigh 60 pounds. They provide about sixteen square feet for five people’s belongings that weigh about 85 pounds.”

A felly is the name of the rim on a wagon wheel. From Peder Madsen’s description, it is clear they used steam to curve the wood for the wheel and then they placed an iron rim around the fellies and spokes. Wagon wheels made of wood worked well, if the weather stayed moist. As the weather became drier, the wood contracted and the wheels became loose inside of the iron rims.

Saturday, July 12

Sister Bailey who was out of her mind was baptized by President Willie. All are busy getting their 17 lbs. weighed up this morning. A brother fell down in a fit but after being administered to soon recovered. We have about finished weighing up this luggage this day. Quite a number complaining of diarrhea. There was a meeting held this evening when President Willie was appointed to preside over the 4th Division of the P.E.F. Hand-Cart Company. Elders Atwood, Savage, Woodward & Chislett were appointed to preside over hundreds of the said Company. And much good counsel was given by President Spencer.

John Ahmanson was not mentioned in the company journal, but William Woodward listed him as captain of the “5th Hundred.” The term “5th Hundred” referred to the Danish Saints. The five captains were all former missionaries, heading to Zion. John Chislett and John Ahmanson were former missionaries who had not yet been to the Salt Lake Valley. Levi Savage had arrived at the camp only two days earlier on July 10. He had spent the time from June 20, when he left the company at Sandusky, Ohio, until July 10 visiting his relatives as he worked his way west.

The company journal reported the baptism of Sister Bailey on July 12 and Sister Ingra on July 13. It is not clear if these were convert baptisms or rebaptisms for health purposes. More than likely they were for health reasons because Sister Bailey was described as being “out of her mind.” The early Saints would in some cases, as a sign of their faith, be rebaptized to cure spiritual or physical sickness.1

Sunday, July 13

A child died last night between 8 & 9 p.m., the daughter of Hannah Louiza Richins on the camping ground. Sister Ingra was baptized this morning. We had two meetings in the Camp today where some good doctrine was preached. Elder Willie also called a meeting of the Captains of Hundreds & proposed that Elders Ledingham and Griffiths be appointed Captain of the Guard & Commissary. The vote was carried unanimously & after some good instruction from President Willie we were dismissed.

Death:

Hannah Louiza Richins, age 1

Although the company journal stated that Hannah Louiza Richins’ daughter died, that was incorrect. The child that died was named Hannah Louiza Richins. Charlotte Richins was Hannah’s mother and she would give birth to a son, Franklin Richins, just two days later on July 15.

Both Levi Savage and Peder Madsen recorded that the Saints partook of the sacrament at their Sunday services. Levi Savage went on to state that a good spirit prevailed, with only one “drunken man” making a little disturbance.

Monday, July 14

The Captains of Hundreds and all hands are busy carrying out the instructions of Prest. Willie given last night, namely of weighing all luggage to be paid for the valley & takeing an Inventory of all surplus property with valuation of same—All are in first rate spirits and more for the hand carts than the waggons.

One faithful Danish couple was Peder Mortensen, age 48, and his wife, Lena Mortensen, age 46, who were converted to the gospel in 1855. Due to a desire to gather to Zion and rejection by their community, they sold everything they owned in anticipation of their journey. They had land and animals. Together with their 8 children, ages 5 through 27, they traveled to Copenhagen, Denmark, to stay at the mission home until they could emigrate to Utah. The Mortensens’ oldest son, Morten, was asked by the mission president to stay in Denmark and serve as a missionary. Morten, along with the rest of the Mortensen family, was concerned, but agreed. The mission president promised the Mortensens that every one of them would reach Zion in safety because of Morten’s willingness to stay and serve, along with the family’s willingness to do without his much-needed help. Peder was physically disabled. He and his wife had planned to buy a wagon so that he could ride in it to the Salt Lake Valley. However, after hearing the counsel of their Church leaders, they shared their money with other members of the company so that sufficient handcarts and supplies could be bought in Iowa City. Peder’s disability kept him from walking. He rode in a supply wagon until about September 6, when the loads were adjusted due to a buffalo stampede. He had to be carried in a handcart from that point, until the company was rescued. Morten came to Utah after his three-year mission in 1858, two years after the rest of his family had all safely arrived in Zion.2

Tuesday, July 15

We finished weighing the luggage today. Sister Eliza Hurren was delivered of a daughter about 6 a.m. yesterday; also Franklin Richins was born this day to John and Charlotte Richins of the Cheltenham Conference, & Richard Godfrey of Worcester Conference was joined in matrimony to Ann Herbert of the same Branch by Bishop Tyler.

We started out a short distance this day and encamped for the night, all in first rate spirits.

Births:

Selena Hurren to Eliza R. and James Hurren

Franklin Richins to Charlotte and John Richins

Marriage: Richard Godfrey to Ann Herbert

Andrew Jenson, in his article on “The Belated Emigration of 1856,” wrote that the emigrants who left Liverpool on May 4 had been reduced to “about five hundred souls, five mules, twelve yoke of cattle, one hundred and twenty hand carts, twenty five tents and five wagons,” when they left the Iowa City area.3 William Woodward recorded that “with each Hundred persons were 5 tents, 5 covered Handcarts & 15 Hand-carts not covered.” In his journal he also recorded the names and ages of each of the 97 people assigned to his hundred. He further provided a breakdown of which tent each of his hundred was assigned for the trek.

Peder Madsen likewise recorded the breakdown of the Danish division. There were 93 people in 5 tents; there were 17 people in the first tent with no families. There were 12 women and 1 child, to go along with only 4 men, in that first tent group and 19 people, including 4 families each, in the other 4 tents. Overall there were not very many Danish men. The 5 Danish tents had 4, 5, 5, 6, and 4 men respectively, meaning that to pull the 20 Danish handcarts there were only 4 that would be pulled by more than one man. Although the numbers for the other handcart divisions are not all available, the William Woodward division had only a slightly better ratio of men to handcarts than the Danish division.

Wednesday, July 16

This morning all seemed in first rate health & spirits. We moved out 3 miles this day. The oxen did not arrive for 2 or 3 hours after the hand carts so that Prest. Willie with 9 or 10 men & 2 yoke of oxen went back and helped them up.

Peder Madsen clarified that each of the five wagons was pulled by four oxen. The purposes of the wagons were to transport food, tents, and sick people. Levi Savage reported that they did not get started until 4 p.m. Emma Jane James, age 16, stated, “It was great fun pulling empty carts and imitating the teamsters with a merry gee and haw. The carts soon pulled away from the heavy wagons and then there was a wait. We had plenty of time to see the country and run here and there for this and that which caught our eye in this strange country.”4

Driving Directions

Wednesday, July 16

The first half of the trail across Iowa generally follows the path of US Highway 6 from Coralville, Iowa, to Adel, Iowa, with a few exceptions, such as in the Des Moines area. This first half of the trail allowed the Saints to travel on existing state roads that kept them mainly on ridge-tops, yet near rivers and creeks on the rolling hills of Iowa.

[caption] Handcart Statue at the Mormon Trail Center in Florence (Omaha), Nebraska.[/caption]

Thursday, July 17

This morning is a lovely morning. President Spencer and Elder Ferguson came up this morning & took back with them a list of the names &c. President Willie called a meeting & gave the Saints some good counsel and encouragement. Elders Atwood and Savage also addressed us & gave us some good advice & and a good spirit prevailed in our midst, after which we were dismissed by prayer.

Peder Madsen wrote that three Native Americans visited their camp and demonstrated their skill in shooting with a bow. He further reported that the Saints had 23 tents and 92 handcarts. On July 16 he reported that 19 to 20 people slept in each tent. Consequently, there would have been between 437 and 460 people with the Willie Company. However, without further explanation on July 18 he wrote that there were 500 people with the company.

Friday, July 18

4:35 a.m.–7:25 p.m.

All are well and in first rate spirits. The bugle blew about 4 a.m. for us to get up & we got breakfast, luggage, &c., ready for starting by 11 o’clock. We proceeded on to Clear Creek, a distance of 6 miles where we arrived at 5 p.m. over broken bridges bad road unbroken oxen, &c. When we arrived we were covered with dust, all in first rate spirits. There is plenty of wood & water here.

Starting on July 18 and continuing on July 19, 21, and 22, the 4 a.m. wake-up bugle was mentioned. Without electricity, flashlights, or even oil lamps, there was little reason to be up much before sunrise or after sunset. For modern-day people, living in a world where getting up before 6 a.m. is considered early, the 4 a.m. wake-up time seems unimaginable. However, for these Saints it was the middle of the summer with plenty of light. The sky begins to be light about 30 minutes before sunrise and remains somewhat light for 30 minutes after sunset. There were no official time zones or even official times along the trail the Willie Company traveled throughout Iowa and on to the Salt Lake Valley. Train schedules would eventually be the catalyst for setting up uniform local times. Daylight savings time had not yet been devised. From this point on in this narrative, sunrise and sunset will be given for each day of their journey, with noon serving as the dividing point for that day’s total daylight.5

Peder Madsen wrote that the provisions for the day were issued at 8 o’clock. The provisions were “flour for one day, sugar, pork, rice, soap, salt, and dried apples.” Five of the accompanying wagons held the provisions and the tents. Although on July 16 he had recorded that each wagon was pulled by four oxen, he now wrote that each wagon was pulled by six oxen. There was also a wagon used to carry the sick, which was pulled by four mules.

The road was described in the company journal as a “bad road.” It did not appear that there was a real road. Trails in the 1850s were usually just a single track. Peder Madsen stated, “One drives where best he can.” Levi Savage stated, “Our teams were very awkward and the teamsters more awkward than the oxen.”

Saturday, July 19

4:36 a.m.–7:24 p.m.

This morning it is very cold. The bugle blew about 4 a.m. & after getting our breakfast we started at 9:30 a.m. for Brushrow Creek 12 miles where we arrived at 7 p.m. much fatigued. We stopped about 3 miles from here to water the cattle. It is a beautiful road & good traveling.

Getting a group of this size going was difficult and the Saints had a late start. They had a long day, stopping only about one half hour before sunset. After Clear Creek they traveled on to Brushrow Creek. The names of some of the creeks may not have been too well established. For example, there does not appear to have been a Brushrow Creek, but there was a Buffalo Creek, which they had already passed.

Life on the trail was not without its unnecessary discouragements. On July 20 Levi Savage reported that on the prior evening, July 19, a man had threatened President Willie, telling him that he would be bringing up to 50 men to tear down their tents. Persecution by the locals had started again.

Sunday, July 20

4:37 a.m.–7:23 p.m.

We did not move out this day but rested ourselves and had two meetings. Prest. Willie, Elders Chislett & Savage addressed us. Yesterday Sister Adelaide A. Baker left us & this morning came and took her luggage & two of her children away with her. She came from the Portsmouth Branch, Southampton Conference; also Ann & Sabina Bird of the Eaton Bray Branch of the Bedfordshire Conference & Harriet Smith of the Bristol Branch, South Conference left us this day. All seemed in good spirits & when the evening meeting was over we were dismissed by prayer & went to our tents.

Levi Savage stated that they held one meeting during their day of rest. He wrote that many of the local people came and visited. They were told of the Saints’ faith, belief, and determination, which was the pattern they would follow across Iowa.

Although they had been underway for less than a week, some members of the company chose to leave. On July 19 and 20, a mother with her two children, along with three other women, left the handcart company. It should not be assumed that people who left the company or decided to stay in Iowa all apostatized. In 1856 the emigrant McKay and Evans families from Scotland and Wales both stayed in Iowa rather than travel on to the Salt Lake Valley. David O. McKay, the ninth President of the Church, was a direct descendant of these two families.6 Although not mentioned in the official records, two days out of Iowa City, 16-year-old Joseph Lorenzo Oakey disappeared along the trail. His family later learned that he had stopped at a farmhouse and obtained work.7

Monday, July 21

4:38 a.m.–7:22 p.m.

This morning the bugle blew at 4 a.m. for the Saints to get up which they did & then got breakfast, greased our carts, took up our tents, packed out luggage & were ready to start at 7:30 a.m., with only one sick person in the waggon, all cheerful & in good spirits and proceeded to Hutton Creek 7 miles where we arrived at 12 noon. The Saints on arriving were surprized to find they had come so far and a good spirit prevailed throughout. There are a few sick in our midst. This night we were a little disturbed by some persons cursing & swearing about the Mormons, but plenty of guards & firearms were called out & after an hour or two swearing they left us.

The handcart axles needed grease to run smoothly. The Saints had very little grease. In some instances, they used their bacon fat for grease.

“Hutton Creek” does not exist today. However, Hilton Creek does exist and it is safe to assume that they camped on Hilton Creek.

The harassment and the threats of the local residents came often. Peder Madsen reported that President Willie “called upon the brethren to arm themselves for battle.”

Tuesday, July 22

4:39 a.m.–7:21 p.m.

This morning is a beautiful morning. The bugle blew at 4 a.m., and after getting our breakfast, &c., we had prayer & were ready for the journey at 7:50 a.m. We proceeded on our journey about 4 miles where we halted & refreshed ourselves & proceeded on to Bear Creek 10 miles. Our journey was very hilly & the heat very great & nearly all were beat out when they arrived at 2 p.m. There is plenty of wood & water here. Prest. Willie was busy attending upon the sick, the remaining part of the day. We were then dismissed by prayer by Elder Willie & went to our beds.

The overall plan called for the company to travel about 15 miles every day. The Saints struggled with the heat and the intense physical labor of pulling handcarts. The country they were passing through was hilly. It also had plenty of wood, water, and grass.

Wednesday, July 23

4:40 a.m.–7:21 p.m.

Charles Peat and family with Martha & four children from Worcester, England, left us this morning. This morning it is very hot indeed without a breath of air & after prayer by Prest. Willie we were ready to start again at 7:30 a.m. we proceeded on our journey about 5 miles when we halted & those who had provisions refreshed themselves. We then went on about 5 miles further & halted two hours. The sun was excessively hot. We then continued our journey as far as Brush Creek, 13 miles, where we arrived at 7 p.m. with a great many sick & tired out. Prest. Willie & Elder Griffiths were engaged till quite dark administering to the sick. Sister Mary Williams from the Worcester Branch of the Worcestershire Conference died on the way, supposed from eating green plums, together with the excessive heat. There is plenty of wood & water here.

Death:

Mary Williams, age 50

William Woodward reported Sister Williams’s death by stating, “A woman was sun-struck about noon, & died towards evening.” Probably out of caution for the Saints’ condition in the hot, humid, Iowa summer weather, the company only went two miles on the next day.

The Willie Company had run headlong into the heat-related dangers of Iowa. Because the human body uses sweat as a means to cool down, too much humidity in the air seriously impairs the body’s ability to cool down on hot days. As the temperature approaches 90º F with as little as 70 percent humidity, the atmosphere can simulate 105º temperatures, which makes it difficult for the human body to cool down. Sunstroke and heatstroke become real factors to address because the humidity in Iowa often approaches 90 percent. Mary Williams may well have eaten some green plums, but William Woodward’s diagnosis of her cause of death was probably right.

Thursday, July 24

4:40 a.m.–7:20 p.m.

This morning after prayers we left at 7:30 a.m. and proceeded on our journey 2 miles & encamped on Big Bear Creek, where we remained during the day. This afternoon we buried Sister Williams in the town burying ground and procured timber & made her a decent coffin. Prest. Willie & several of the brethren attended the funeral. In the evening we held a meeting & after prayer Prest. Willie with Elders Atwood & Woodward addressed the meeting and gave such counsel as was needed pressing upon the Saints the necessity of being one in all things.

Every journal mentioned either the meeting or the problems that were occurring. Levi Savage complained about reduced rations. He wrote that they received 10 ounces of flour per day and 10 ounces of pork for 28 days. They also received unspecified rations of tea, coffee, sugar, rice, and dried apples. He said, “It is not enough.” Peder Madsen reported wickedness among the English, including milking strangers’ cows and killing their pigs. William Woodward noted that the meeting was held and that a family had left to live with the Gentiles. President Willie’s job was not easy. The “town burying ground” was probably in Brooklyn, Iowa.

Friday, July 25

4:41 a.m.–7:19 p.m.

This morning at 7 a.m. we left the Camp and traveled as far as Muddy Creek, 13 miles. We stopped twice by the way to rest. The weather being very warm just before we encamped we were overtaken by the Sheriff with a warrant to search the waggons, &c. under the idea that women were detained contrary to their wish with ropes. After showing their authority, they had permission to examine any part of the Company & were fully satisfied that the report was without foundation & left us. We were disturbed last night by about 30 men with supposed bad pretensions & called over their names but finding us on guard left without committing any depredations.

The heat from the sun was now accompanied by hassles from the locals. During the day, the Poweshiek County sheriff stopped the company with a search warrant. William Woodward reported that the sheriff claimed, “We had some persons tied down in our wagons.” Levi Savage reported that a man in Brooklyn, Iowa, had been their accuser. The sheriff searched, realized his folly, and left.

Saturday, July 26

4:42 a.m.–7:17 p.m.

There is a nice air this morning. We had prayers & were in readiness for our journey at 8 a.m. when it commenced raining very fast & made the carts run very heavy. It continued to rain till about 10 a.m. when it ceased and the roads soon began to dry up. We arrived at Sugar Creek 11 miles at 1 o’clock and encamped for the night. Wood & water being pretty handy.

As the Saints prepared to start they were met by a two-hour rainstorm, which soaked them and then bogged down their handcarts. It seemed like every day brought a new set of challenges.

Sunday, July 27

4:43 a.m.–7:16 p.m.

This morning we had prayers, packed our tents, luggage, &c., and were on our journey by 7:50 a.m. We traveled as far as Skunk Creek, 6 miles, where we encamped for the day being Sunday to attend to washing, prayers, preaching, &c. The Camp is getting strong & the sick are a mending very fast. There is a good supply of wood & water here. We had a meeting this afternoon, Elder Savage presided & he & Elder Woodward addressed us. The weather is quite pleasant & very congenial to our feelings.

It was Sunday, so the Saints traveled only half of the day. Levi Savage mentioned that he preached in the afternoon, but his comment on the continued persecution dominated his entry. He wrote as follows: “A goodly number of the citizens came to view our camp and hear preaching. A few ruffians also came. One of them picked up a hatchet and put it in his pocket. This caused some angry words. During the day and evening they made great threats of disturbing us, but they did not put their threats into execution. We were prepared to defend ourselves.”

Monday, July 28

4:44 a.m.–7:16 p.m.

This morning the air was very pleasant. After we had packed our luggage, had prayers &c., we were on our journey. we proceeded on for 9 or 10 miles when we halted for an hour or two & pursued our journey to Cherry Creek, 14 miles. Here we encamped for the night. On our way we passed through Newton, where it was rumored we should meet with some difficulty, but we got our Company together & passed through very quietly. The Saints were all pretty tired & arrived at Cherry Creek about 6 o’clock. Wood & water pretty handy, all going along well although their journey throughout was very rough & hilly and tired them all out.

Seleam Haren, daughter of James & Eliza Haren, aged 14 days died about 11 a.m. this day with the rash in the mouth. Sister Haren’s child was buried this day with Elder Savage & others in attendance.

Death:

Selena Hurren, age 14 days

They passed through Newton, Iowa, expecting more trouble, but it did not materialize. The people just came out to gawk. They tried to camp outside of towns, so as to avoid the local people’s harassment. Sadly, James and Eliza Hurren’s two-week-old baby girl died.

Driving Directions

Monday, July 28

In Newton, US Highway 6 runs through town and combines with I-80. Follow US Highway 6 and then drive west on the combined US Highway 6 and I-80 to the Mitchellville exit, which is Exit 149.

Tuesday, July 29

4:45 a.m.–7:15 p.m.

This morning we were up, had prayers, breakfast, &c., and were on our journey by 7:15 a.m. This morning there is a small breath of air & beautiful traveling. We proceeded as far as Castle Green 8 miles where we halted two hours, then pursued our journey as far as Skunk Creek where we arrived at 4 p.m. We had some very heavy hills to ascend & made 12 miles this day. There is plenty of wood & water here. On our journey Brother Henry Boden of the Worcester Branch of the Worcestershire Conference left us.

William Woodward identified the deserter as Henry Newman, who left the company “to live with the Gentiles.” On a more positive note, Peder Madsen wrote that the Danish division was ordered to take the lead. He described the bridges as being dilapidated and in need of repair. As usual he then went on to describe how well things were, despite the day’s hardships.

Driving Directions

Tuesday, July 29

Take the Mitchellville exit, Exit 149, and drive south along the western edge of town to the stop sign by the Women’s Correctional Facility. Turn left at the stop sign and drive east to Central Avenue. Turn right at Central Avenue and drive south out of town. When the road divides, take the roadway that continues straight south toward Runnells, Iowa, for about three and a quarter miles to University Avenue. Turn right onto University Avenue and drive west toward Des Moines. In Des Moines turn left and drive south on Hubbell Avenue, which is just past 22nd Street. Hubbell Avenue soon joins Grand Avenue. Drive west on Grand Avenue.

Wednesday, July 30

4:47 a.m.–7:14 p.m.

We arose had breakfast, prayers, &c., and were on our journey by 7 o’clock, the air beautiful. We proceeded on our journey about 8 or 10 miles when we halted for about 2 hours, and were on our journey again at 2 o’clock intending to go about 4 miles to the next creek, but the Danes having the lead went some distance by the Camping ground through some misunderstanding, & after consulting a while, it was thought better to proceed to the next creek, rather than turn back. And being misinformed about the distance we pursued our journey as far as Fort Des Moines without coming to a convenient camping ground. We arrived about 7:30 p.m. all very tired. Wood & water is plentiful here. We stopped just outside the Town and had many visitors from the Town to see us & kept themselves very quiet. We traveled 21 miles this day.

Language was clearly a barrier. On the rotation, the Danish Saints continued in the lead and did not stop where the English leaders had planned. It did, however, lead to one of the biggest travel days in Iowa. Unfortunately, it also made them arrive at their campground just after sunset. There was almost no moonlight because it was the night before the night of the new moon. Consequently, they would have been setting up their tents and starting fires after dark.

In 1856, Des Moines, Iowa, did not exist as a city. It was created by combining Fort Des Moines with East Fort Des Moines, in January 1857. The handcart company stopped just outside of East Fort Des Moines, a little west of the present State Capitol Building, on the eastern edge of town.8

Thursday, July 31

4:48 a.m.–7:13 p.m.

This morning we were all up, had prayers, breakfast, &c., and were on our journey by 6:30 a.m. We crossed on the Flat-Boat-Bridge & passed about a mile through the Town where we stopped till 2 o’clock to give the cattle water & grass. We pursued our journey again about 4 miles where we encamped for the night. Wood & water pretty plentiful here. (Walnut Creek). Mr. Charles Good, a respectable gentleman from the City who seemed very favorable to the Gospel from no impure motive brought a present of 15 pairs of children’s boots & being given with a free spirit we received them. The Saints all seem in pretty good spirits this day although they were very much fatigued last night by the long day’s journey.

One of the truly Christian acts of kindness in Iowa was Charles Good’s gift of shoes. His unselfish act of charity was offset by William Woodward’s report that “some noisy men from Fort Des Moines came to interrupt our camp, but were foiled by the Guard.” Levi Savage further reported that “a large number of ruffians came determined to disturb our camp.”

The company journal stated that the Saints crossed the Des Moines River on a “Flat-Boat-Bridge.” William Woodward called it a “floating bridge.” In 1855 a pontoon bridge that was used for only two years was built where the Grand Avenue Bridge is today. It enabled the Willie Company to cross in 1856 without any trouble.9

Driving Directions

Thursday, July 31

To approximate the path that the Willie Company would have followed through Des Moines, continue driving west on Grand Avenue across the Des Moines River. This was where the pontoon bridge would have been located. Turn right immediately after the Grand Avenue Bridge onto Second Avenue. Drive north on Second Avenue to I-235. Turn left onto I-235 and travel west to Exit 123, where I-235 intersects I-35 and I-80. Take Exit 123B and travel north on I-35 and I-80 to Exit 125. Take Exit 125 onto US Highway 6 and travel west again on US Highway 6 toward Adel, Iowa.

Friday, August 1

4:49 a.m.–7:12 p.m.

This morning the air is very refreshing. We travelled about 10 miles & halted for about 2 hours for refreshment & pursued our journey again as far as Timber Point where we encamped for the night. The weather was very hot indeed the latter part of the journey which made it very bad travelling. The Saints all seem pretty well, the inhabitants round were very civil & obliging. Wood & water are plentiful here. We came 14 miles this day.

William Woodward and Levi Savage both reported that part of the company went past the planned campground. Instead of the whole group catching up to them, as they did on July 30, a mule team was sent after them.

Saturday, August 2

4:50 a.m.–7:11 p.m.

This morning there is a beautiful air. We started about 7:50 a.m., after the general duties had been attended to. We passed through O Del. Before entering the town we had to ford a river about knee deep. A great many of the towns people came to see us & got trying to get the sisters away, but they took no notice of them & we passed through very quietly. We also forded another river & mud hole this day on our journey, & arrived at Middle Coone Creek about 5 or 6 o’clock. Wood & water plentiful here, & a good spirit prevails in our midst. We travelled 17 miles this day.

They crossed the North Raccoon Creek according to William Woodward and traveled through Adel, Iowa, which is misspelled as “O Del.” The company stopped at Middle Raccoon Creek for the night, which is where Wiscotta, Iowa, is today. Raccoon is called “Coone” in the journal.

Along the way some of the local citizens tried to persuade Emily Hill, age 20, and her sister, Julia Hill, age 23, to abandon the trek. They were handed anonymous letters and warnings from sympathizing outsiders that set forth the hardships of their journey and offered inducements to stay behind. The sisters resisted. (Note: Emily Hill later wrote the words to the Mormon hymn, “As Sisters in Zion.”)10

Driving Directions

Saturday, August 2

In Adel, Iowa, US Highway 6 turns south and joins I-80. The Willie Company would have traveled west out of Adel toward Wiscotta, Iowa. From Adel, follow County Road F 60, which in Adel is Green Street, driving west toward Redfield. Redfield is about a mile north of Wiscotta.

Sunday, August 3

4:49 a.m.–7:10 p.m.

This morning is a beautiful morning & we were on our journey by 6:45 a.m., & arrived at the South Coone Creek at 10:15 a.m. where we encamped for the day being Sunday to attend to washing, &c. Wood & water are pretty plentiful here. We travelled 10 miles this morning & rested ourselves the remainder of the day.

The last few days the company had traveled at least 15 miles per day. It was Sunday, and to give them some rest they only walked until midday. The people had settled into the routine and were handling things fairly well.

Driving Directions

Sunday, August 3

From this point there are two routes that can be followed. The first route goes directly to Anita, Iowa, while the second route goes to Anita by way of Dalmanutha. The second route more closely approximates the Willie Company’s route. To take the first route, from Redfield simply drive south to I-80. Then drive west on I-80 for 30 miles to Exit 70. Take Exit 70 and drive south to Anita on State Road 148. The second route to Anita is a little more complicated, but it is not hard. (Note: Almost all of the roads used in the second route are asphalt. The gravel portions will be indicated. The gravel roads are well maintained and can be traveled in wet weather.) To take the second route, while approaching Redfield from the east turn right at the Y intersection and drive into Redfield. This street runs west and then north, eventually becoming First Street. At the stop sign in town turn left onto Thomas Street and drive west. Thomas Street becomes Bridge Street and then County Road F 59 as it heads west out of town. Follow County Road F 59 west as it winds to County Road P 28. At County Road P 28 turn right and travel north toward Panora, Iowa. Follow County Road P 28 as it winds north and west to County Road F 51. At County Road F 51 turn left and travel west toward Monteith, Iowa. Continue driving west through Monteith to State Road 25. At State Road 25 turn left and travel south for about 4.6 miles to County Road F 63. At County Road F 63 turn right and drive west for three miles to Koala Avenue. At Koala Avenue turn right and drive north on the gravel road for about 1.7 miles to Lost (or Lock) Trail. Turn left and drive about a quarter of a mile west to the Dalmanutha Cemetery, which is at the top of the hill and very easy to see. It is located at GPS N 41 35.205’ W 094 33.354’. From this point return to County Road F 63. Turn right onto County Road F 63 and drive west until it intersects Frontier Road, which is also County Road N 54. Turn left and drive south on County Road N 54 to the stop sign outside of Adair, Iowa. Turn right at the stop sign onto White Pole Road and drive into Adair, Iowa. Drive south through Adair to I-80 and take I-80 traveling west to Exit 70. Take Exit 70 and then drive south on State Road 148 to Anita.

[caption] Dalmanutha, Iowa, cemetery[/caption]

Monday, August 4

4:52 a.m.–7:08 p.m.

We started out about 7 o’clock, a beautiful morning and a nice air. We halted as usual 2 hours for refreshment & then continued our journey to Bear Grove Creek 17 miles where we arrived about 2 p.m. We stopped at a spring being no houses on our journey for refreshments. Wood is very scarce here. The Saints generally in pretty good spirits.

The trail led them to Bear Grove Creek. It was described by Peder Madsen as being “very hilly and only sparsely settled.” Little has changed in 150 years. The Saints were following the “Newton” stagecoach trail. They stopped within about a mile of the newly planned town of Dalmanutha, Iowa. On August 5 they would pass Dalmanutha and travel about 3 miles west to the spine of Iowa, which is the point in Iowa where the rivers no longer flow east toward the Mississippi River; they begin to flow west toward the Missouri River. (Note: There appears to be some confusion about the company’s path through Guthrie County, Iowa. This confusion comes from the fact that there was a Bear Grove Creek Station and a Bear Grove Creek Post Office. The station was near Dalmanutha, while the post office was about six miles northwest of Dalmanutha.)11

Tuesday, August 5

4:54 a.m.–7:07 p.m.

We started about 6:30 a.m. & travelled 8-½ miles to a spring where we rested for an hour & then went on to Turkey Creek 18½ miles & arrived about 3 p.m. Wood rather scarce here but a beautiful spring of water. In the evening Elders Willie & Atwood reproved the Saints for being so dilatory & told them if they did not repent they would not have the blessings of the Lord & would not get through this season.

On the topic of being dilatory, Elizabeth Xavier Tait, age 24, told a story that may well have happened in this area. She reported that she was tired one day when the company stopped for dinner. (Note: Dinner was the midday meal. Supper was the evening meal.) She and another lady companion went a little distance from the group and fell asleep. When it was time to go, they could not be found. The young women awoke later and to their horror could not find the company. They anxiously followed the tracks. When it became dark, their fear kept them going. They finally came to a stream of water and their shouts led to their rescue by the company that was camped nearby.12

William Woodward reported that they camped at “Morrison’s” on Turkey Creek. “Morrison’s” or “Morrison’s Grove” was the forerunner to the town of Anita, Iowa.

Wednesday, August 6

4:55 a.m.–7:06 p.m.

This morning the rain came down in torrents till about 7 a.m. & we started about 9 a.m. after the tents had dried. We halted for two hours at a creek and then pursued our journey to Jordan Creek 14 miles where we halted for the night very much fatigued, the journey being very hilly—water pretty plentiful but no wood within a mile and a half. We arrived in Camp about 6 p.m.

Birth:

a child to Ane K. and Peter Jacobsen

Peder Madsen recorded that “Sister Jacobsen gave birth.” No mention of a birth is found in the other records. There was a married “Sister Jacobsen” in the company. She was Ane K. Jacobsen, age 32, who was married to Peter Jacobsen, age 24 or 29. They had a child, Jens Peter Jacobsen, age 3.13 This birth was most likely a stillbirth. The Jacobsens were apparently troubled because on August 12 they were rebaptized for “health reasons.”

Peder Madsen also reported that for several nights it had been cold and had rained during the night, which made the roads slick. As a consequence of the weather, he had counted 12 other Saints that had colds and two additional children that were very sick.

The reference to “Jordan Creek” is certainly an error. Jordan Creek is actually 10 miles west of Indian Town, which town they did not reach until the seventh. The river they camped at was seven miles from Indian Town according to both Levi Savage and William Woodward.

Driving Directions

Wednesday, August 6

Near Anita, State Road 148 intersects State Road 83. Drive southwest toward Atlantic, Iowa, on State Road 83. Three miles before Atlantic, State Road 83 joins US Highway 6. Follow US Highway 6 west and then south out of Atlantic toward Lewis, Iowa. After about 6.5 miles there is a sign for Lewis. Follow the sign by turning left and driving south into Lewis.

Thursday, August 7

4:56 a.m.–7:05 p.m.

We started out about 6:30 a.m. A beautiful morning & splendid roads. We passed through Indian Town on our way, about 11:30 & halted for refreshments 2 hours and pursued our journey again as far as Walnut Creek 16 miles where we arrived at 4 oc wood & water very plentiful here. We had splendid roads this day & travelled some part of the journey at the rate of nearly 4 miles an hour. The Saints all in good spirits. Bro. Smith of the Wiltshire Conference went into a store to purchase some things & left his purse in the shop with 6 sovereigns in it.

Indian Town, on Indian Creek, was a small settlement about one mile west of Lewis, Iowa. From Lewis until Council Bluffs, Iowa, and Florence, Nebraska Territory, the Willie Company followed the 1846 Mormon Trail as it wound across Iowa from Nauvoo. Lewis was a major junction of the trails that crossed Iowa in 1856.

The most noteworthy event in Indian Town was the misplacement and then theft of Isaac Smith’s money purse. Not only was it mentioned in the company journal, but Levi Savage and William Woodward also referred to it. William Woodward was one of four people who were sent back to get a search warrant in an effort to try to recover the money. The sovereign is a British gold coin, designated as a British pound. Peder Madsen wrote on May 21 that the ocean passage cost two pounds. In his June 19 entry, he reported that a pound was worth slightly less than five American dollars. No money was ever recovered.

Driving Directions

Thursday, August 7

Note: There are two markers in the Lewis area that are related to the Mormon trail in general. The first marker is in the Lewis Town Park. This marker was formerly in Indian Town, but was later moved to the park in Lewis. The Lewis Town Park is on Main Street between Market Street and Webster Street. To find the marker drive south in Lewis until the road intersects Main Street. Turn right on Main Street and drive west to the park. The second marker is on Minnesota Street, which is two blocks north of Main Street. To find the marker, drive north and turn left onto Minnesota Street, which is the road out of town. Drive west until the road changes to gravel. The marker is in the small park on the north side of the road, about one quarter of a mile west of where the road becomes a gravel road. Indian Town was still further west on the gravel road.

From the Lewis area, the trail goes west across the rolling hills into Council Bluffs, following the path the Mormons took in 1846 as they left Nauvoo and went to Council Bluffs. To follow its general path, drive west from Lewis on the gravel road to State Road 48, which is also 550th Street. Turn left and drive south on State Road 48 to Griswold. In Griswold turn right and drive west on State Road 92 to Council Bluffs. An alternative route to Council Bluffs follows the Willie Company’s trail more closely. This route includes a 13-mile stretch of gravel road. To take this route, follow State Road 92 west, as just described. As it nears Carson look for US Highway 59. US Highway 59 intersects State Road 92 just east of Carson. At the sign for US Highway 59 turn right and follow the short exit road north and west. At the intersection with US Highway 59 turn left and travel south about three miles to County Road G 66. Turn right on County Road G 66 and travel west through Macedonia. Continue west about four miles to a stop sign. Turn left at the stop sign and travel south for one-half mile to again find County Road G 66. Turn right and follow County Road G 66, a well-maintained gravel road, as it winds its way west toward Council Bluffs.

Friday, August 8

4:56 a.m.–7:04 p.m.

This morning there is a nice air, we started out at 7:30 a.m., travelled 8 or 9 miles & crossed the East Nishna Botany River and took dinner on its banks & pursued our journey as far as West Nishna Botany Creek 15 miles where we halted for the night, wood & water pretty plentiful. Bro. Woodward went back with witnesses and got a search warrant for Bro. Smith’s purse, but did not succeed in finding it. We arrived in camp about 3 oc.

The August 6 “Jordan Creek” error was carried forward through the river crossings of the eighth. The “East Nishna Botany River” that they crossed would certainly have been Jordan Creek. The nearly treeless, rolling hills of western Iowa apparently all looked the same. On August 6 the company journal reported that there was no wood within a mile and a half of their camp. It is a wonder that there were not more errors regarding names of rivers and creeks.

Saturday, August 9

4:58 a.m.–7:01 p.m.

This morning we arose, had prayers, &c., and were on our journey at 6:30 a.m. & travelled to Silver Creek where we halted for refreshments about 2 hours & pursued our journey to Keg Creek 16 miles where we arrived about 3 oc. wood & water pretty plentiful here. In the evening Elders Willie & Atwood addressed the meeting & we had a first rate time of it with much of the Spirit of the Lord in our midst. On our way to this creek Bro. Gurnly of the Wiltshire Conference left us with his daughter.

The company journal reported that “Bro. Gurnly” and his daughter abandoned the journey, but Levi Savage’s record reported a more complete account of the incident. He wrote that, “Here Brother Garner, his daughter and son left us. His wife remained and traveled with us.” Levi Savage further recorded that on August 10 Brother Garner and his two children returned. Brother Garner “desired to go on with us,” and “he was sorry and would ask forgiveness for he had been wrong and would do better for the future.” It can easily be assumed that Sister Garner’s choice to remain with the company had an impact on his decision to return and repent. Levi Savage, who appeared to be the captain over the Garner’s hundred, consented to take him along.

Sunday, August 10

5:01 a.m.–7:00 p.m.

The Saints are all busy washing this morning. We left Keg Creek about 4 p.m. this day & travelled to Mosquito Creek 9 miles where we arrived at 7:20 p.m., a good spirit generally prevailing in our midst. Wood & water plentiful.

On Sundays they occasionally did their wash and eased away from their normal travel schedule. They waited until 4 p.m. to start walking nine miles to Mosquito Creek, which was just outside of Council Bluffs, Iowa. The company actually stopped 20 minutes after sunset, but the phase of the moon was such that they would have had at least some moonlight while they set up camp. None of the other records gives a reason for this late, Sunday afternoon trek.

Levi Savage struggled throughout his record with the correct spellings and names of physical features they encountered. As one typical example, he called Keg Creek, “Cass Creek,” and he called Mosquito Creek, “Musket Creek.” However, he was by no means the only diarist that misnamed or misspelled landmarks. The names of these two creeks today remain Keg and Mosquito.

Driving Directions

Sunday, August 10

In the Council Bluffs, Iowa, area the alternative route needs to reach State Road 92. From County Road G 66, continue driving west. A stop sign marks the intersection with County Road L 35. Turn right onto County Road L 35 and drive northwest toward Council Bluffs. When County Road L 35 intersects State Road 92, turn left onto State Road 92 and travel west to I-29. Take I-29 and travel north. To follow the Saints’ path through Council Bluffs, take the exit to State Road 192 and drive north on State Road 192 as it winds through Council Bluffs and rejoins I-29. To avoid Council Bluffs, simply stay on I-29. Either way, continue driving north on I-29 until it intersects I-680 a few miles north of Council Bluffs. Drive west on I-680 across the Missouri River toward Omaha, Nebraska, and take Exit 13. At Exit 13 turn left and travel south on 30th Street. (Note: The area around Council Bluffs has plenty of Mormon Trail related markers and monuments. None of them directly relate to the Willie Company or to the other handcart companies until Florence. However, they are nonetheless interesting.)

Monday, August 11

5:01 a.m.–6:59 p.m.

This day we started at 7:15 a.m. with a beautiful air & good roads in our favor. We passed through Bluffs City & 2 or 3 small towns on our way and proceeded to a Creek 10 miles where we intended to halt but finding no water we proceeded on to the Missouri River 16 miles where we took the ferry & crossed over to the Camp of Florence arriving about 4 oc & encamped for the night, all very tired. Bro. McGaw came & assisted us in crossing the river & Bro. Kimball welcomed us on our arrival.

Levi Savage gave a much more interesting account of the trip through “Bluffs City,” or Council Bluffs, and of Brother McGaw’s assistance. As had happened throughout Iowa, some of the local residents came out to gawk and to “make sport” of the handcart Saints. James McGaw, age 32, the Church’s agent and presiding authority in Florence, Nebraska Territory, apparently did not appreciate this verbal abuse. He defended the handcart system and the Saints against these “gentiles and apostates.” Levi Savage recorded that McGaw, “consequently, got into a fist fight with them. He whipped one or two of them, but received no material injury to himself except getting his hair well pulled.”

Peder Madsen recorded that there were 520 cows and heifers, along with 123 calves grazing near the river. They had been purchased by John Van Cott for the Saints to take west.

Five children were born in Iowa. This included two that were born on July 15, which was the day before they left with the handcarts to start walking across Iowa. The only baby to be born as they walked was the unnamed Jacobsen baby, who was born on August 6, and who may have been stillborn.

The Saints had trekked about 300 miles and had come to the edge of the wilderness. Six deaths were recorded while they were enduring the weather in the Iowa City area, in some instances without tents, while only two deaths were recorded as they walked. One of these two deaths was the baby born on July 14 (recorded on July 15), the day before they began walking.

1e:Tbc5,

1. James B. Allen and Glen M. Leonard, The Story of the Latter-day Saints, 2d ed. (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1992), 430–31.

2. “Mortensen Family History,” typescript copy, 1–8, Church Archives.

3. Jenson, “Church Emigration,” 135.

4. Loleta Dixon, “Biography of William James,” 5, Daughters of Utah Pioneers Library.

5. “Complete Sun and Moon Data for One Day,” U.S. Naval Observatory, Astronomical Applications Department, http://aa.usno.navy.mil/data/docs/RS_OneDay.html (accessed June 20, 2006).

6. Leonard Arrington, Susan Arrington Madsen, and Emily Madsen Jones, Mothers of the Prophets, rev. ed. (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 2001), 147–48.

7. “The Handcart Pioneers,” in Treasures of Pioneer History, comp. Kate B. Carter, 6 vols. (Salt Lake City: Daughters of the Utah Pioneers, 1952–57), 5:257.

8. Ilda M. Hammer, The Book of Des Moines (Des Moines, IA: Board of Education, 1947), 62–63.

9. Hammer, Book of Des Moines, 73.

10. Augusta Joyce Crocheron, “Emily H. Woodmansee,” in Representative Women of Deseret (Salt Lake City: J. C. Graham, 1884), 86; “As Sisters in Zion,” in Hymns of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1985), no. 309.

11. Steven F. Faux, “The Significance and Location of the Iowa Mormon Handcart Trail: Faint Footsteps of 1856–57 Retraced” (paper presented to University of Iowa–Iowa City commemoration, Mormon Handcart Trek Sesquicentennial, June 9, 2006).

12. Faleen Truman, “Sketch of the Life of Elizabeth Xavier Tait,” 3–4, Daughters of Utah Pioneers Library.

13. Riverton Wyoming Stake, comp., Remember: The Willie and Martin Handcart Companies and Their Rescuers—Past and Present (Salt Lake City: Publishers Press, 1997), E-4. Throughout this volume, the ages and family relationships that are not supplied through one of the four primary sources or through another referenced source all come from Remember.

1f:T1277c,

The night of their arrival in Iowa City, the Saints found shelter from the torrential rain in an engine shed. They would not stay in Iowa City, where the rail line ended, for long. The Willie Handcart Company was outfitted three miles to the west in present-day Coralville, Iowa, which was then known as Clark’s Mill. At about noon the next day, when the roads had dried enough to proceed, they walked roughly three miles to their campground. Throughout Iowa they had to suffer with the weather and the settlers. The rain, heat, and humidity were unrelenting. They also found that they were a spectacle and would draw people out to gawk and in some cases to mock as the handcart-pulling Mormons went along.

Friday, June 27

This morning it still continued to rain, about noon it cleared up, and the roads drying very fast, so much so that before night all the passengers were removed to the Camp, with most of their luggage, Prest. Willie remained there till all had left and at 9 p.m. arrived at the Camp and received a cordial welcome from Prest. Spencer and brethren generally.

When the Willie Company arrived at Clark’s Mill, Peder Madsen wrote that there were 900 people at the camp. President Daniel Spencer, age 62, was in charge of outfitting the arriving handcart companies. He and his crew had already successfully sent off two handcart companies; the third would leave just a day after the Willie Company’s arrival. These first three companies were the Edmund Ellsworth Company with 274 people that had left the staging area on June 9, 1856; the Daniel D. McArthur Company with 297 people that had left two days later on June 11, 1856; and the Edward Bunker Company of 320 Welsh Saints that would leave on June 28, 1856.

President Spencer was not ready to outfit the approximately 500 people in the Willie Company. The Saints immediately began preparing for their journey. However, the most immediately pressing need for them was not handcarts, but tents. These new arrivals needed a tent for every 20 people, which meant that they needed 25 tents. Peder Madsen’s entry on June 2 makes it clear that they had worked on the tents while crossing the ocean. In addition, for 500 people they needed to build 100 handcarts.

Peder Madsen described their daily ration of food. In the other records, the rations they received over the next few days varied little from his account on June 27, except that on other days salt was included and soda and soap were excluded. Each person was allowed the following:

1 pound wheat flour,

2½ ounces pork,

2 ounces sugar,

2 ounces dried apples,

¼ pound coffee,

½ ounce tea,

soda, and

soap.

Replica of Single Pole Tent at Mormon Handcart Visitors' Center, Martin's Cove, Wyoming.

Driving Directions

Friday, June 27

There is a Mormon Handcart Park in Coralville, Iowa, which is in the area where the Saints had their campground and worked to outfit themselves for their 1856 trek. To reach the park from the train station, return to US Highway 6 and drive west into Coralville, Iowa. At the intersection of First Avenue and Second Street (US Highway 6), turn left onto First Avenue and drive south for about a mile until First Avenue intersects Hawkeye Park Road. Turn right onto Hawkeye Park Road. Then turn right at the first opportunity and drive north into the park. There are several things to read and an asphalt walking trail in the park. It is at GPS N 41 39.994’ W 091 34.480’.

Saturday, June 28

The Saints all cheerful and happy and under the circumstances doing the best they can without tents. Prest. Willie received instructions from Prest. D. Spencer to continue in charge of the Company for the time being. The Sisters busy engaged in making tents under the direction of Elders William Ledingham. Elder Atwood with many of the brethren went to Iowa City accompanied with many teams to get up the luggage before night, quite a considerable quantity of it was brought to the Camp. General good feeling prevailing amongst the Saints and all appear to desire to hearken to the counsel of those over them. Everybody in the Camp appeared to be busy making hand carts, yokes, &c., for the trip across the plains. This evening commenced to rain very heavy, the Saints bore it with fortitude, perfectly resigned to the will of Heaven. Union and love seem to prevail with all.

Without tents for shelter, the Saints were at the mercy of the Iowa weather. There were no sheds or warehouses to borrow. Consequently, without tents, they simply got wet when it rained. The Saints made circular tents, which sheltered 20 people. The hand-sewn tents were made of canvas with a single pole in the middle. The occupants would sleep with their feet toward the middle pole. Peder Madsen reported the sewing. He also stated that some tents were set up, but apparently there were not very many finished tents. Finally, he recorded the arrival of John Van Cott, the 42-year-old returning president of the Church’s Scandinavian mission. He arrived with about 400 cattle for the various handcart companies.

Sunday, June 29

This morning is a lovely morning and most of the Saints rejoicing although they got wet through in their beds. We attended meeting in the Camp in the morning. Prests. Willie & Elder John A. Hunt addressed the meeting and in the afternoon Elder Dan Jones preached. There were a good many strangers present, a good spirit prevailing.

Although the Saints were soaked in the night, this did not dampen their desire to hear the word of God preached to them. Peder Madsen wrote that there were morning and afternoon gatherings.

Monday, June 30

A fine day but extremely warm. Saints very busy making tents. Prest. Willie was engaged settling up his accounts and endeavoring to get the Saints under cover. This day Jens C. Jensen, native of Denmark died in the camp, aged two years.

Death:

Jens Christian Jensen, age 2

Peder Madsen wrote that they learned they could take only 17 pounds of goods per person on the handcarts. On the earlier portions of this journey, they had been allowed to bring 50 pounds of luggage. He listed several alternatives to dispose of the extra items. First, the items could be shipped to the Salt Lake Valley. Next, some people sold their extra goods in the city. Finally, he said that he had given his extra goods to the Saints in St. Louis, who were unable to come to the valley that season. Not surprisingly, some of the people were grumbling and complaining, and he reported that three of their leaders talked to them about obedience to God’s laws and God’s servants.

Tuesday, July 1

This morning the Company of the Thornton Ship signed receipts of passage from New York to Iowa City. A child died today.

We are getting ready for the plains and are getting 17 lbs. of luggage ready to cross the plains with as it is not possible to take more. We still continue busy making tents and all doing what they can to further our movement.

Death:

an unnamed child

Unfortunately, the company journal and Peder Madsen’s journal provide no other information about the death of the unnamed child.

The “receipts of passage” that the Saints signed would have related to their status as PEF emigrants. They were obligated to repay the Church for the cost of their passage. The unfinished tents continued to get more attention in the journals than the unfinished handcarts. It would be another week before the tents would all be finished.

Wednesday, July 2

This morning it is pouring with rain accompanied by thunder and lightning. Sister Mary Lewis, wife of Joseph Lewis was delivered of a son at 3 a.m. of the Bristol Branch in the midst of thunder and lightning. The tents not being done we had a good soaking. It is very hot today.

Birth:

a son to Mary and Joseph Lewis

There does not appear to be any couple named Mary and Joseph Lewis listed as traveling with the Willie Company or with any of the other groups that left later in 1856. Consequently, this son’s name is not known.

Thursday, July 3

We had plenty of rain again last night with thunder & lightning. The tents are not done although Prest. Willie is unceasing in his exertions to keep the sisters to their work. Nothing of importance, but all have plenty to do guarding, making tents, etc.

Peder Madsen wrote that “our beloved Brother VanCott” left to go get more cattle. He hoped to see the Saints again in Council Bluffs, Iowa.

Friday, July 4

This day being the day of Celebration for the Independence of the United States we suspended generally from work and held a meeting with the American Flag flying when many of the Brethren spoke and Elder Ferguson delivered an oration. Many strangers were present and appeared much pleased, and all passed off well.

Peder Madsen noted the abundance of resources and freedom that Americans had, along with the day’s celebration, which involved “shooting practice and assemblies.” He described the weather as beautiful.

Saturday, July 5

This morning Lars Julius Larsen was born, the son of Peter and Ann K. Larsen. Also died this morning. Sarah Ann, daughter of Sister Ann Cooper in the Camp late of the Cambridgeshire Conference, England. It is very warm today.

Birth:

Lars Julius Larsen to Ann K. and Peter Larsen

Death:

Sarah Ann Cooper, age 2

Apparently, the people were having trouble disposing of their surplus property at fair prices. Peder Madsen wrote that some of the brethren went to the city with handcarts carrying bedding and other items that did not sell well. He wrote that earlier in the trip he had paid eight dollars to cover the cost of 105 pounds of overweight goods and that he had trouble getting reimbursed for the money that he had earlier expended. He also referred to Sister Larsen, the mother of the newborn child, as “Sister Hageman.”

Although not mentioned in the Willie Company record, another returning missionary, William Woodward, age 23, was assigned by Elder James Ferguson on July 5 to work with the Willie Company and to be under President Willie’s charge. He had arrived with an earlier group from England. He had been assisting traveling Saints at Iowa City since June 2. A consistent journal keeper, his personal journal would help record the company’s history through October 1, when he would begin keeping the official company journal.

Sunday, July 6

It is very hot, the tents are not yet finished. We attended meeting this day, held two meetings in the Camp today & many strangers were present. A good feeling prevails among the Saints, and very little discontent manifest.

Some of the Danish Saints did not intend to travel to the Salt Lake Valley by handcart. Peder Madsen recorded that Hannah Anderson asked John Ahmanson to ask both Lars Madsen and Hans Rasmussen to loan her enough money to continue on with the handcarts. The two men did loan her the money. These men, along with their families, traveled with the Hodgetts Wagon Company.

Monday, July 7

This morning, Mary Ledingham died, daughter of William & Catherine Ledingham, late of Leith, Scotland, aged 22 months.

Death:

Mary Ledingham, age 22 months

Some of the men continued to be preoccupied with their surplus goods. Peder Madsen related that they had loaded three handcarts with bedding and clothing, which they had sold in the city for $71. Some of the men got together and purchased a yoke of oxen for $115, to go with a wagon that they had not yet purchased, so that they could haul their surplus things.

Tuesday, July 8

The tents are now finished, and all are pretty comfortably provided for. Most of the company are now engaged washing clothes, while others are making the hand-carts, fitting up wagons, &c.

Throughout the records of Peder Madsen and the company journal there are conflicts as to the specific dates of various events. For example, Peder Madsen recorded that a group of 800 arrived on July 8, while the company journal recorded their arrival on July 9. The other two major journals were not helpful in resolving this conflict because William Woodward had no entry for either day and Levi Savage arrived on July 10 to find about “1,500 Saints.”

Wednesday, July 9

A company of Saints arrived that came in the Horizon from Liverpool numbering some 800 souls came up this evening in the midst of a terrible storm, and we as well as the other Companies accommodated them the best in our power. A sister of the Company died this morning.

Death:

an unnamed woman

The 800 Saints who would make up the Martin Handcart Company arrived “in the midst of a terrible storm.” The two groups crowded into the newly available tents, trying to keep dry. Peder Madsen wrote that the Willie Company members were ordered to pack up so they could get going. He was glad to get going on their journey, which he described as the way to gain the experiences they would need for eternity. Without any explanation in the records, one unnamed woman died that morning.

Thursday, July 10

Selecting the cattle this morning for our Camp; also mules, waggons, &c. All are pretty well with plenty to do preparing to move. Weather very warm.

Each tent of 20 people would be allotted four handcarts. Peder Madsen explained that one would be “covered,” if needed to carry little children. The covered handcarts looked like miniature covered wagons.

Friday, July 11

Saints generally busy and feel well about their departure, and are making all exertion possible to get ready. Nothing of importance occurred this day, the health and spirits of the company good.

Peder Madsen described the handcarts as follows: “The handcarts that were delivered to us are well constructed and light. They have very strong wooden wheels, four feet high. The rim around them is made up of two steam bent fellies fastened with iron tires. They have wooden axles that hold two beams eight feet long with five matching cross beams. The carts are four feet wide and weigh 60 pounds. They provide about sixteen square feet for five people’s belongings that weigh about 85 pounds.”

A felly is the name of the rim on a wagon wheel. From Peder Madsen’s description, it is clear they used steam to curve the wood for the wheel and then they placed an iron rim around the fellies and spokes. Wagon wheels made of wood worked well, if the weather stayed moist. As the weather became drier, the wood contracted and the wheels became loose inside of the iron rims.

Saturday, July 12

Sister Bailey who was out of her mind was baptized by President Willie. All are busy getting their 17 lbs. weighed up this morning. A brother fell down in a fit but after being administered to soon recovered. We have about finished weighing up this luggage this day. Quite a number complaining of diarrhea. There was a meeting held this evening when President Willie was appointed to preside over the 4th Division of the P.E.F. Hand-Cart Company. Elders Atwood, Savage, Woodward & Chislett were appointed to preside over hundreds of the said Company. And much good counsel was given by President Spencer.

John Ahmanson was not mentioned in the company journal, but William Woodward listed him as captain of the “5th Hundred.” The term “5th Hundred” referred to the Danish Saints. The five captains were all former missionaries, heading to Zion. John Chislett and John Ahmanson were former missionaries who had not yet been to the Salt Lake Valley. Levi Savage had arrived at the camp only two days earlier on July 10. He had spent the time from June 20, when he left the company at Sandusky, Ohio, until July 10 visiting his relatives as he worked his way west.

The company journal reported the baptism of Sister Bailey on July 12 and Sister Ingra on July 13. It is not clear if these were convert baptisms or rebaptisms for health purposes. More than likely they were for health reasons because Sister Bailey was described as being “out of her mind.” The early Saints would in some cases, as a sign of their faith, be rebaptized to cure spiritual or physical sickness.1

Sunday, July 13

A child died last night between 8 & 9 p.m., the daughter of Hannah Louiza Richins on the camping ground. Sister Ingra was baptized this morning. We had two meetings in the Camp today where some good doctrine was preached. Elder Willie also called a meeting of the Captains of Hundreds & proposed that Elders Ledingham and Griffiths be appointed Captain of the Guard & Commissary. The vote was carried unanimously & after some good instruction from President Willie we were dismissed.

Death:

Hannah Louiza Richins, age 1

Although the company journal stated that Hannah Louiza Richins’ daughter died, that was incorrect. The child that died was named Hannah Louiza Richins. Charlotte Richins was Hannah’s mother and she would give birth to a son, Franklin Richins, just two days later on July 15.

Both Levi Savage and Peder Madsen recorded that the Saints partook of the sacrament at their Sunday services. Levi Savage went on to state that a good spirit prevailed, with only one “drunken man” making a little disturbance.

Monday, July 14

The Captains of Hundreds and all hands are busy carrying out the instructions of Prest. Willie given last night, namely of weighing all luggage to be paid for the valley & takeing an Inventory of all surplus property with valuation of same—All are in first rate spirits and more for the hand carts than the waggons.

One faithful Danish couple was Peder Mortensen, age 48, and his wife, Lena Mortensen, age 46, who were converted to the gospel in 1855. Due to a desire to gather to Zion and rejection by their community, they sold everything they owned in anticipation of their journey. They had land and animals. Together with their 8 children, ages 5 through 27, they traveled to Copenhagen, Denmark, to stay at the mission home until they could emigrate to Utah. The Mortensens’ oldest son, Morten, was asked by the mission president to stay in Denmark and serve as a missionary. Morten, along with the rest of the Mortensen family, was concerned, but agreed. The mission president promised the Mortensens that every one of them would reach Zion in safety because of Morten’s willingness to stay and serve, along with the family’s willingness to do without his much-needed help. Peder was physically disabled. He and his wife had planned to buy a wagon so that he could ride in it to the Salt Lake Valley. However, after hearing the counsel of their Church leaders, they shared their money with other members of the company so that sufficient handcarts and supplies could be bought in Iowa City. Peder’s disability kept him from walking. He rode in a supply wagon until about September 6, when the loads were adjusted due to a buffalo stampede. He had to be carried in a handcart from that point, until the company was rescued. Morten came to Utah after his three-year mission in 1858, two years after the rest of his family had all safely arrived in Zion.2

Tuesday, July 15

We finished weighing the luggage today. Sister Eliza Hurren was delivered of a daughter about 6 a.m. yesterday; also Franklin Richins was born this day to John and Charlotte Richins of the Cheltenham Conference, & Richard Godfrey of Worcester Conference was joined in matrimony to Ann Herbert of the same Branch by Bishop Tyler.

We started out a short distance this day and encamped for the night, all in first rate spirits.

Births:

Selena Hurren to Eliza R. and James Hurren

Franklin Richins to Charlotte and John Richins

Marriage: Richard Godfrey to Ann Herbert

Andrew Jenson, in his article on “The Belated Emigration of 1856,” wrote that the emigrants who left Liverpool on May 4 had been reduced to “about five hundred souls, five mules, twelve yoke of cattle, one hundred and twenty hand carts, twenty five tents and five wagons,” when they left the Iowa City area.3 William Woodward recorded that “with each Hundred persons were 5 tents, 5 covered Handcarts & 15 Hand-carts not covered.” In his journal he also recorded the names and ages of each of the 97 people assigned to his hundred. He further provided a breakdown of which tent each of his hundred was assigned for the trek.

Peder Madsen likewise recorded the breakdown of the Danish division. There were 93 people in 5 tents; there were 17 people in the first tent with no families. There were 12 women and 1 child, to go along with only 4 men, in that first tent group and 19 people, including 4 families each, in the other 4 tents. Overall there were not very many Danish men. The 5 Danish tents had 4, 5, 5, 6, and 4 men respectively, meaning that to pull the 20 Danish handcarts there were only 4 that would be pulled by more than one man. Although the numbers for the other handcart divisions are not all available, the William Woodward division had only a slightly better ratio of men to handcarts than the Danish division.

Wednesday, July 16

This morning all seemed in first rate health & spirits. We moved out 3 miles this day. The oxen did not arrive for 2 or 3 hours after the hand carts so that Prest. Willie with 9 or 10 men & 2 yoke of oxen went back and helped them up.

Peder Madsen clarified that each of the five wagons was pulled by four oxen. The purposes of the wagons were to transport food, tents, and sick people. Levi Savage reported that they did not get started until 4 p.m. Emma Jane James, age 16, stated, “It was great fun pulling empty carts and imitating the teamsters with a merry gee and haw. The carts soon pulled away from the heavy wagons and then there was a wait. We had plenty of time to see the country and run here and there for this and that which caught our eye in this strange country.”4

Driving Directions

Wednesday, July 16

The first half of the trail across Iowa generally follows the path of US Highway 6 from Coralville, Iowa, to Adel, Iowa, with a few exceptions, such as in the Des Moines area. This first half of the trail allowed the Saints to travel on existing state roads that kept them mainly on ridge-tops, yet near rivers and creeks on the rolling hills of Iowa.

Handcart Statue at the Mormon Trail Center in Florence (Omaha), Nebraska.

Thursday, July 17

This morning is a lovely morning. President Spencer and Elder Ferguson came up this morning & took back with them a list of the names &c. President Willie called a meeting & gave the Saints some good counsel and encouragement. Elders Atwood and Savage also addressed us & gave us some good advice & and a good spirit prevailed in our midst, after which we were dismissed by prayer.

Peder Madsen wrote that three Native Americans visited their camp and demonstrated their skill in shooting with a bow. He further reported that the Saints had 23 tents and 92 handcarts. On July 16 he reported that 19 to 20 people slept in each tent. Consequently, there would have been between 437 and 460 people with the Willie Company. However, without further explanation on July 18 he wrote that there were 500 people with the company.

Friday, July 18

4:35 a.m.–7:25 p.m.

All are well and in first rate spirits. The bugle blew about 4 a.m. for us to get up & we got breakfast, luggage, &c., ready for starting by 11 o’clock. We proceeded on to Clear Creek, a distance of 6 miles where we arrived at 5 p.m. over broken bridges bad road unbroken oxen, &c. When we arrived we were covered with dust, all in first rate spirits. There is plenty of wood & water here.

Starting on July 18 and continuing on July 19, 21, and 22, the 4 a.m. wake-up bugle was mentioned. Without electricity, flashlights, or even oil lamps, there was little reason to be up much before sunrise or after sunset. For modern-day people, living in a world where getting up before 6 a.m. is considered early, the 4 a.m. wake-up time seems unimaginable. However, for these Saints it was the middle of the summer with plenty of light. The sky begins to be light about 30 minutes before sunrise and remains somewhat light for 30 minutes after sunset. There were no official time zones or even official times along the trail the Willie Company traveled throughout Iowa and on to the Salt Lake Valley. Train schedules would eventually be the catalyst for setting up uniform local times. Daylight savings time had not yet been devised. From this point on in this narrative, sunrise and sunset will be given for each day of their journey, with noon serving as the dividing point for that day’s total daylight.5

Peder Madsen wrote that the provisions for the day were issued at 8 o’clock. The provisions were “flour for one day, sugar, pork, rice, soap, salt, and dried apples.” Five of the accompanying wagons held the provisions and the tents. Although on July 16 he had recorded that each wagon was pulled by four oxen, he now wrote that each wagon was pulled by six oxen. There was also a wagon used to carry the sick, which was pulled by four mules.

The road was described in the company journal as a “bad road.” It did not appear that there was a real road. Trails in the 1850s were usually just a single track. Peder Madsen stated, “One drives where best he can.” Levi Savage stated, “Our teams were very awkward and the teamsters more awkward than the oxen.”

Saturday, July 19

4:36 a.m.–7:24 p.m.

This morning it is very cold. The bugle blew about 4 a.m. & after getting our breakfast we started at 9:30 a.m. for Brushrow Creek 12 miles where we arrived at 7 p.m. much fatigued. We stopped about 3 miles from here to water the cattle. It is a beautiful road & good traveling.

Getting a group of this size going was difficult and the Saints had a late start. They had a long day, stopping only about one half hour before sunset. After Clear Creek they traveled on to Brushrow Creek. The names of some of the creeks may not have been too well established. For example, there does not appear to have been a Brushrow Creek, but there was a Buffalo Creek, which they had already passed.

Life on the trail was not without its unnecessary discouragements. On July 20 Levi Savage reported that on the prior evening, July 19, a man had threatened President Willie, telling him that he would be bringing up to 50 men to tear down their tents. Persecution by the locals had started again.

Sunday, July 20

4:37 a.m.–7:23 p.m.

We did not move out this day but rested ourselves and had two meetings. Prest. Willie, Elders Chislett & Savage addressed us. Yesterday Sister Adelaide A. Baker left us & this morning came and took her luggage & two of her children away with her. She came from the Portsmouth Branch, Southampton Conference; also Ann & Sabina Bird of the Eaton Bray Branch of the Bedfordshire Conference & Harriet Smith of the Bristol Branch, South Conference left us this day. All seemed in good spirits & when the evening meeting was over we were dismissed by prayer & went to our tents.

Levi Savage stated that they held one meeting during their day of rest. He wrote that many of the local people came and visited. They were told of the Saints’ faith, belief, and determination, which was the pattern they would follow across Iowa.

Although they had been underway for less than a week, some members of the company chose to leave. On July 19 and 20, a mother with her two children, along with three other women, left the handcart company. It should not be assumed that people who left the company or decided to stay in Iowa all apostatized. In 1856 the emigrant McKay and Evans families from Scotland and Wales both stayed in Iowa rather than travel on to the Salt Lake Valley. David O. McKay, the ninth President of the Church, was a direct descendant of these two families.6 Although not mentioned in the official records, two days out of Iowa City, 16-year-old Joseph Lorenzo Oakey disappeared along the trail. His family later learned that he had stopped at a farmhouse and obtained work.7

Monday, July 21

4:38 a.m.–7:22 p.m.

This morning the bugle blew at 4 a.m. for the Saints to get up which they did & then got breakfast, greased our carts, took up our tents, packed out luggage & were ready to start at 7:30 a.m., with only one sick person in the waggon, all cheerful & in good spirits and proceeded to Hutton Creek 7 miles where we arrived at 12 noon. The Saints on arriving were surprized to find they had come so far and a good spirit prevailed throughout. There are a few sick in our midst. This night we were a little disturbed by some persons cursing & swearing about the Mormons, but plenty of guards & firearms were called out & after an hour or two swearing they left us.

The handcart axles needed grease to run smoothly. The Saints had very little grease. In some instances, they used their bacon fat for grease.

“Hutton Creek” does not exist today. However, Hilton Creek does exist and it is safe to assume that they camped on Hilton Creek.

The harassment and the threats of the local residents came often. Peder Madsen reported that President Willie “called upon the brethren to arm themselves for battle.”

Tuesday, July 22

4:39 a.m.–7:21 p.m.

This morning is a beautiful morning. The bugle blew at 4 a.m., and after getting our breakfast, &c., we had prayer & were ready for the journey at 7:50 a.m. We proceeded on our journey about 4 miles where we halted & refreshed ourselves & proceeded on to Bear Creek 10 miles. Our journey was very hilly & the heat very great & nearly all were beat out when they arrived at 2 p.m. There is plenty of wood & water here. Prest. Willie was busy attending upon the sick, the remaining part of the day. We were then dismissed by prayer by Elder Willie & went to our beds.

The overall plan called for the company to travel about 15 miles every day. The Saints struggled with the heat and the intense physical labor of pulling handcarts. The country they were passing through was hilly. It also had plenty of wood, water, and grass.

Wednesday, July 23

4:40 a.m.–7:21 p.m.

Charles Peat and family with Martha & four children from Worcester, England, left us this morning. This morning it is very hot indeed without a breath of air & after prayer by Prest. Willie we were ready to start again at 7:30 a.m. we proceeded on our journey about 5 miles when we halted & those who had provisions refreshed themselves. We then went on about 5 miles further & halted two hours. The sun was excessively hot. We then continued our journey as far as Brush Creek, 13 miles, where we arrived at 7 p.m. with a great many sick & tired out. Prest. Willie & Elder Griffiths were engaged till quite dark administering to the sick. Sister Mary Williams from the Worcester Branch of the Worcestershire Conference died on the way, supposed from eating green plums, together with the excessive heat. There is plenty of wood & water here.

Death:

Mary Williams, age 50

William Woodward reported Sister Williams’s death by stating, “A woman was sun-struck about noon, & died towards evening.” Probably out of caution for the Saints’ condition in the hot, humid, Iowa summer weather, the company only went two miles on the next day.

The Willie Company had run headlong into the heat-related dangers of Iowa. Because the human body uses sweat as a means to cool down, too much humidity in the air seriously impairs the body’s ability to cool down on hot days. As the temperature approaches 90º F with as little as 70 percent humidity, the atmosphere can simulate 105º temperatures, which makes it difficult for the human body to cool down. Sunstroke and heatstroke become real factors to address because the humidity in Iowa often approaches 90 percent. Mary Williams may well have eaten some green plums, but William Woodward’s diagnosis of her cause of death was probably right.

Thursday, July 24

4:40 a.m.–7:20 p.m.

This morning after prayers we left at 7:30 a.m. and proceeded on our journey 2 miles & encamped on Big Bear Creek, where we remained during the day. This afternoon we buried Sister Williams in the town burying ground and procured timber & made her a decent coffin. Prest. Willie & several of the brethren attended the funeral. In the evening we held a meeting & after prayer Prest. Willie with Elders Atwood & Woodward addressed the meeting and gave such counsel as was needed pressing upon the Saints the necessity of being one in all things.

Every journal mentioned either the meeting or the problems that were occurring. Levi Savage complained about reduced rations. He wrote that they received 10 ounces of flour per day and 10 ounces of pork for 28 days. They also received unspecified rations of tea, coffee, sugar, rice, and dried apples. He said, “It is not enough.” Peder Madsen reported wickedness among the English, including milking strangers’ cows and killing their pigs. William Woodward noted that the meeting was held and that a family had left to live with the Gentiles. President Willie’s job was not easy. The “town burying ground” was probably in Brooklyn, Iowa.

Friday, July 25

4:41 a.m.–7:19 p.m.

This morning at 7 a.m. we left the Camp and traveled as far as Muddy Creek, 13 miles. We stopped twice by the way to rest. The weather being very warm just before we encamped we were overtaken by the Sheriff with a warrant to search the waggons, &c. under the idea that women were detained contrary to their wish with ropes. After showing their authority, they had permission to examine any part of the Company & were fully satisfied that the report was without foundation & left us. We were disturbed last night by about 30 men with supposed bad pretensions & called over their names but finding us on guard left without committing any depredations.

The heat from the sun was now accompanied by hassles from the locals. During the day, the Poweshiek County sheriff stopped the company with a search warrant. William Woodward reported that the sheriff claimed, “We had some persons tied down in our wagons.” Levi Savage reported that a man in Brooklyn, Iowa, had been their accuser. The sheriff searched, realized his folly, and left.

Saturday, July 26

4:42 a.m.–7:17 p.m.

There is a nice air this morning. We had prayers & were in readiness for our journey at 8 a.m. when it commenced raining very fast & made the carts run very heavy. It continued to rain till about 10 a.m. when it ceased and the roads soon began to dry up. We arrived at Sugar Creek 11 miles at 1 o’clock and encamped for the night. Wood & water being pretty handy.

As the Saints prepared to start they were met by a two-hour rainstorm, which soaked them and then bogged down their handcarts. It seemed like every day brought a new set of challenges.

Sunday, July 27

4:43 a.m.–7:16 p.m.

This morning we had prayers, packed our tents, luggage, &c., and were on our journey by 7:50 a.m. We traveled as far as Skunk Creek, 6 miles, where we encamped for the day being Sunday to attend to washing, prayers, preaching, &c. The Camp is getting strong & the sick are a mending very fast. There is a good supply of wood & water here. We had a meeting this afternoon, Elder Savage presided & he & Elder Woodward addressed us. The weather is quite pleasant & very congenial to our feelings.

It was Sunday, so the Saints traveled only half of the day. Levi Savage mentioned that he preached in the afternoon, but his comment on the continued persecution dominated his entry. He wrote as follows: “A goodly number of the citizens came to view our camp and hear preaching. A few ruffians also came. One of them picked up a hatchet and put it in his pocket. This caused some angry words. During the day and evening they made great threats of disturbing us, but they did not put their threats into execution. We were prepared to defend ourselves.”

Monday, July 28

4:44 a.m.–7:16 p.m.

This morning the air was very pleasant. After we had packed our luggage, had prayers &c., we were on our journey. we proceeded on for 9 or 10 miles when we halted for an hour or two & pursued our journey to Cherry Creek, 14 miles. Here we encamped for the night. On our way we passed through Newton, where it was rumored we should meet with some difficulty, but we got our Company together & passed through very quietly. The Saints were all pretty tired & arrived at Cherry Creek about 6 o’clock. Wood & water pretty handy, all going along well although their journey throughout was very rough & hilly and tired them all out.

Seleam Haren, daughter of James & Eliza Haren, aged 14 days died about 11 a.m. this day with the rash in the mouth. Sister Haren’s child was buried this day with Elder Savage & others in attendance.

Death:

Selena Hurren, age 14 days

They passed through Newton, Iowa, expecting more trouble, but it did not materialize. The people just came out to gawk. They tried to camp outside of towns, so as to avoid the local people’s harassment. Sadly, James and Eliza Hurren’s two-week-old baby girl died.

Driving Directions

Monday, July 28

In Newton, US Highway 6 runs through town and combines with I-80. Follow US Highway 6 and then drive west on the combined US Highway 6 and I-80 to the Mitchellville exit, which is Exit 149.

Tuesday, July 29

4:45 a.m.–7:15 p.m.

This morning we were up, had prayers, breakfast, &c., and were on our journey by 7:15 a.m. This morning there is a small breath of air & beautiful traveling. We proceeded as far as Castle Green 8 miles where we halted two hours, then pursued our journey as far as Skunk Creek where we arrived at 4 p.m. We had some very heavy hills to ascend & made 12 miles this day. There is plenty of wood & water here. On our journey Brother Henry Boden of the Worcester Branch of the Worcestershire Conference left us.

William Woodward identified the deserter as Henry Newman, who left the company “to live with the Gentiles.” On a more positive note, Peder Madsen wrote that the Danish division was ordered to take the lead. He described the bridges as being dilapidated and in need of repair. As usual he then went on to describe how well things were, despite the day’s hardships.

Driving Directions

Tuesday, July 29

Take the Mitchellville exit, Exit 149, and drive south along the western edge of town to the stop sign by the Women’s Correctional Facility. Turn left at the stop sign and drive east to Central Avenue. Turn right at Central Avenue and drive south out of town. When the road divides, take the roadway that continues straight south toward Runnells, Iowa, for about three and a quarter miles to University Avenue. Turn right onto University Avenue and drive west toward Des Moines. In Des Moines turn left and drive south on Hubbell Avenue, which is just past 22nd Street. Hubbell Avenue soon joins Grand Avenue. Drive west on Grand Avenue.

Wednesday, July 30

4:47 a.m.–7:14 p.m.

We arose had breakfast, prayers, &c., and were on our journey by 7 o’clock, the air beautiful. We proceeded on our journey about 8 or 10 miles when we halted for about 2 hours, and were on our journey again at 2 o’clock intending to go about 4 miles to the next creek, but the Danes having the lead went some distance by the Camping ground through some misunderstanding, & after consulting a while, it was thought better to proceed to the next creek, rather than turn back. And being misinformed about the distance we pursued our journey as far as Fort Des Moines without coming to a convenient camping ground. We arrived about 7:30 p.m. all very tired. Wood & water is plentiful here. We stopped just outside the Town and had many visitors from the Town to see us & kept themselves very quiet. We traveled 21 miles this day.

Language was clearly a barrier. On the rotation, the Danish Saints continued in the lead and did not stop where the English leaders had planned. It did, however, lead to one of the biggest travel days in Iowa. Unfortunately, it also made them arrive at their campground just after sunset. There was almost no moonlight because it was the night before the night of the new moon. Consequently, they would have been setting up their tents and starting fires after dark.

In 1856, Des Moines, Iowa, did not exist as a city. It was created by combining Fort Des Moines with East Fort Des Moines, in January 1857. The handcart company stopped just outside of East Fort Des Moines, a little west of the present State Capitol Building, on the eastern edge of town.8

Thursday, July 31

4:48 a.m.–7:13 p.m.

This morning we were all up, had prayers, breakfast, &c., and were on our journey by 6:30 a.m. We crossed on the Flat-Boat-Bridge & passed about a mile through the Town where we stopped till 2 o’clock to give the cattle water & grass. We pursued our journey again about 4 miles where we encamped for the night. Wood & water pretty plentiful here. (Walnut Creek). Mr. Charles Good, a respectable gentleman from the City who seemed very favorable to the Gospel from no impure motive brought a present of 15 pairs of children’s boots & being given with a free spirit we received them. The Saints all seem in pretty good spirits this day although they were very much fatigued last night by the long day’s journey.

One of the truly Christian acts of kindness in Iowa was Charles Good’s gift of shoes. His unselfish act of charity was offset by William Woodward’s report that “some noisy men from Fort Des Moines came to interrupt our camp, but were foiled by the Guard.” Levi Savage further reported that “a large number of ruffians came determined to disturb our camp.”

The company journal stated that the Saints crossed the Des Moines River on a “Flat-Boat-Bridge.” William Woodward called it a “floating bridge.” In 1855 a pontoon bridge that was used for only two years was built where the Grand Avenue Bridge is today. It enabled the Willie Company to cross in 1856 without any trouble.9

Driving Directions

Thursday, July 31

To approximate the path that the Willie Company would have followed through Des Moines, continue driving west on Grand Avenue across the Des Moines River. This was where the pontoon bridge would have been located. Turn right immediately after the Grand Avenue Bridge onto Second Avenue. Drive north on Second Avenue to I-235. Turn left onto I-235 and travel west to Exit 123, where I-235 intersects I-35 and I-80. Take Exit 123B and travel north on I-35 and I-80 to Exit 125. Take Exit 125 onto US Highway 6 and travel west again on US Highway 6 toward Adel, Iowa.

Friday, August 1

4:49 a.m.–7:12 p.m.

This morning the air is very refreshing. We travelled about 10 miles & halted for about 2 hours for refreshment & pursued our journey again as far as Timber Point where we encamped for the night. The weather was very hot indeed the latter part of the journey which made it very bad travelling. The Saints all seem pretty well, the inhabitants round were very civil & obliging. Wood & water are plentiful here. We came 14 miles this day.

William Woodward and Levi Savage both reported that part of the company went past the planned campground. Instead of the whole group catching up to them, as they did on July 30, a mule team was sent after them.

Saturday, August 2

4:50 a.m.–7:11 p.m.

This morning there is a beautiful air. We started about 7:50 a.m., after the general duties had been attended to. We passed through O Del. Before entering the town we had to ford a river about knee deep. A great many of the towns people came to see us & got trying to get the sisters away, but they took no notice of them & we passed through very quietly. We also forded another river & mud hole this day on our journey, & arrived at Middle Coone Creek about 5 or 6 o’clock. Wood & water plentiful here, & a good spirit prevails in our midst. We travelled 17 miles this day.

They crossed the North Raccoon Creek according to William Woodward and traveled through Adel, Iowa, which is misspelled as “O Del.” The company stopped at Middle Raccoon Creek for the night, which is where Wiscotta, Iowa, is today. Raccoon is called “Coone” in the journal.

Along the way some of the local citizens tried to persuade Emily Hill, age 20, and her sister, Julia Hill, age 23, to abandon the trek. They were handed anonymous letters and warnings from sympathizing outsiders that set forth the hardships of their journey and offered inducements to stay behind. The sisters resisted. (Note: Emily Hill later wrote the words to the Mormon hymn, “As Sisters in Zion.”)10

Driving Directions

Saturday, August 2

In Adel, Iowa, US Highway 6 turns south and joins I-80. The Willie Company would have traveled west out of Adel toward Wiscotta, Iowa. From Adel, follow County Road F 60, which in Adel is Green Street, driving west toward Redfield. Redfield is about a mile north of Wiscotta.

Sunday, August 3

4:49 a.m.–7:10 p.m.

This morning is a beautiful morning & we were on our journey by 6:45 a.m., & arrived at the South Coone Creek at 10:15 a.m. where we encamped for the day being Sunday to attend to washing, &c. Wood & water are pretty plentiful here. We travelled 10 miles this morning & rested ourselves the remainder of the day.

The last few days the company had traveled at least 15 miles per day. It was Sunday, and to give them some rest they only walked until midday. The people had settled into the routine and were handling things fairly well.

Driving Directions

Sunday, August 3

From this point there are two routes that can be followed. The first route goes directly to Anita, Iowa, while the second route goes to Anita by way of Dalmanutha. The second route more closely approximates the Willie Company’s route. To take the first route, from Redfield simply drive south to I-80. Then drive west on I-80 for 30 miles to Exit 70. Take Exit 70 and drive south to Anita on State Road 148. The second route to Anita is a little more complicated, but it is not hard. (Note: Almost all of the roads used in the second route are asphalt. The gravel portions will be indicated. The gravel roads are well maintained and can be traveled in wet weather.) To take the second route, while approaching Redfield from the east turn right at the Y intersection and drive into Redfield. This street runs west and then north, eventually becoming First Street. At the stop sign in town turn left onto Thomas Street and drive west. Thomas Street becomes Bridge Street and then County Road F 59 as it heads west out of town. Follow County Road F 59 west as it winds to County Road P 28. At County Road P 28 turn right and travel north toward Panora, Iowa. Follow County Road P 28 as it winds north and west to County Road F 51. At County Road F 51 turn left and travel west toward Monteith, Iowa. Continue driving west through Monteith to State Road 25. At State Road 25 turn left and travel south for about 4.6 miles to County Road F 63. At County Road F 63 turn right and drive west for three miles to Koala Avenue. At Koala Avenue turn right and drive north on the gravel road for about 1.7 miles to Lost (or Lock) Trail. Turn left and drive about a quarter of a mile west to the Dalmanutha Cemetery, which is at the top of the hill and very easy to see. It is located at GPS N 41 35.205’ W 094 33.354’. From this point return to County Road F 63. Turn right onto County Road F 63 and drive west until it intersects Frontier Road, which is also County Road N 54. Turn left and drive south on County Road N 54 to the stop sign outside of Adair, Iowa. Turn right at the stop sign onto White Pole Road and drive into Adair, Iowa. Drive south through Adair to I-80 and take I-80 traveling west to Exit 70. Take Exit 70 and then drive south on State Road 148 to Anita.

Dalmanutha, Iowa, cemetery

Monday, August 4

4:52 a.m.–7:08 p.m.

We started out about 7 o’clock, a beautiful morning and a nice air. We halted as usual 2 hours for refreshment & then continued our journey to Bear Grove Creek 17 miles where we arrived about 2 p.m. We stopped at a spring being no houses on our journey for refreshments. Wood is very scarce here. The Saints generally in pretty good spirits.

The trail led them to Bear Grove Creek. It was described by Peder Madsen as being “very hilly and only sparsely settled.” Little has changed in 150 years. The Saints were following the “Newton” stagecoach trail. They stopped within about a mile of the newly planned town of Dalmanutha, Iowa. On August 5 they would pass Dalmanutha and travel about 3 miles west to the spine of Iowa, which is the point in Iowa where the rivers no longer flow east toward the Mississippi River; they begin to flow west toward the Missouri River. (Note: There appears to be some confusion about the company’s path through Guthrie County, Iowa. This confusion comes from the fact that there was a Bear Grove Creek Station and a Bear Grove Creek Post Office. The station was near Dalmanutha, while the post office was about six miles northwest of Dalmanutha.)11

Tuesday, August 5

4:54 a.m.–7:07 p.m.

We started about 6:30 a.m. & travelled 8-½ miles to a spring where we rested for an hour & then went on to Turkey Creek 18½ miles & arrived about 3 p.m. Wood rather scarce here but a beautiful spring of water. In the evening Elders Willie & Atwood reproved the Saints for being so dilatory & told them if they did not repent they would not have the blessings of the Lord & would not get through this season.

On the topic of being dilatory, Elizabeth Xavier Tait, age 24, told a story that may well have happened in this area. She reported that she was tired one day when the company stopped for dinner. (Note: Dinner was the midday meal. Supper was the evening meal.) She and another lady companion went a little distance from the group and fell asleep. When it was time to go, they could not be found. The young women awoke later and to their horror could not find the company. They anxiously followed the tracks. When it became dark, their fear kept them going. They finally came to a stream of water and their shouts led to their rescue by the company that was camped nearby.12

William Woodward reported that they camped at “Morrison’s” on Turkey Creek. “Morrison’s” or “Morrison’s Grove” was the forerunner to the town of Anita, Iowa.

Wednesday, August 6

4:55 a.m.–7:06 p.m.

This morning the rain came down in torrents till about 7 a.m. & we started about 9 a.m. after the tents had dried. We halted for two hours at a creek and then pursued our journey to Jordan Creek 14 miles where we halted for the night very much fatigued, the journey being very hilly—water pretty plentiful but no wood within a mile and a half. We arrived in Camp about 6 p.m.

Birth:

a child to Ane K. and Peter Jacobsen

Peder Madsen recorded that “Sister Jacobsen gave birth.” No mention of a birth is found in the other records. There was a married “Sister Jacobsen” in the company. She was Ane K. Jacobsen, age 32, who was married to Peter Jacobsen, age 24 or 29. They had a child, Jens Peter Jacobsen, age 3.13 This birth was most likely a stillbirth. The Jacobsens were apparently troubled because on August 12 they were rebaptized for “health reasons.”

Peder Madsen also reported that for several nights it had been cold and had rained during the night, which made the roads slick. As a consequence of the weather, he had counted 12 other Saints that had colds and two additional children that were very sick.

The reference to “Jordan Creek” is certainly an error. Jordan Creek is actually 10 miles west of Indian Town, which town they did not reach until the seventh. The river they camped at was seven miles from Indian Town according to both Levi Savage and William Woodward.

Driving Directions

Wednesday, August 6

Near Anita, State Road 148 intersects State Road 83. Drive southwest toward Atlantic, Iowa, on State Road 83. Three miles before Atlantic, State Road 83 joins US Highway 6. Follow US Highway 6 west and then south out of Atlantic toward Lewis, Iowa. After about 6.5 miles there is a sign for Lewis. Follow the sign by turning left and driving south into Lewis.

Thursday, August 7

4:56 a.m.–7:05 p.m.

We started out about 6:30 a.m. A beautiful morning & splendid roads. We passed through Indian Town on our way, about 11:30 & halted for refreshments 2 hours and pursued our journey again as far as Walnut Creek 16 miles where we arrived at 4 oc wood & water very plentiful here. We had splendid roads this day & travelled some part of the journey at the rate of nearly 4 miles an hour. The Saints all in good spirits. Bro. Smith of the Wiltshire Conference went into a store to purchase some things & left his purse in the shop with 6 sovereigns in it.

Indian Town, on Indian Creek, was a small settlement about one mile west of Lewis, Iowa. From Lewis until Council Bluffs, Iowa, and Florence, Nebraska Territory, the Willie Company followed the 1846 Mormon Trail as it wound across Iowa from Nauvoo. Lewis was a major junction of the trails that crossed Iowa in 1856.

The most noteworthy event in Indian Town was the misplacement and then theft of Isaac Smith’s money purse. Not only was it mentioned in the company journal, but Levi Savage and William Woodward also referred to it. William Woodward was one of four people who were sent back to get a search warrant in an effort to try to recover the money. The sovereign is a British gold coin, designated as a British pound. Peder Madsen wrote on May 21 that the ocean passage cost two pounds. In his June 19 entry, he reported that a pound was worth slightly less than five American dollars. No money was ever recovered.

Driving Directions

Thursday, August 7

Note: There are two markers in the Lewis area that are related to the Mormon trail in general. The first marker is in the Lewis Town Park. This marker was formerly in Indian Town, but was later moved to the park in Lewis. The Lewis Town Park is on Main Street between Market Street and Webster Street. To find the marker drive south in Lewis until the road intersects Main Street. Turn right on Main Street and drive west to the park. The second marker is on Minnesota Street, which is two blocks north of Main Street. To find the marker, drive north and turn left onto Minnesota Street, which is the road out of town. Drive west until the road changes to gravel. The marker is in the small park on the north side of the road, about one quarter of a mile west of where the road becomes a gravel road. Indian Town was still further west on the gravel road.

From the Lewis area, the trail goes west across the rolling hills into Council Bluffs, following the path the Mormons took in 1846 as they left Nauvoo and went to Council Bluffs. To follow its general path, drive west from Lewis on the gravel road to State Road 48, which is also 550th Street. Turn left and drive south on State Road 48 to Griswold. In Griswold turn right and drive west on State Road 92 to Council Bluffs. An alternative route to Council Bluffs follows the Willie Company’s trail more closely. This route includes a 13-mile stretch of gravel road. To take this route, follow State Road 92 west, as just described. As it nears Carson look for US Highway 59. US Highway 59 intersects State Road 92 just east of Carson. At the sign for US Highway 59 turn right and follow the short exit road north and west. At the intersection with US Highway 59 turn left and travel south about three miles to County Road G 66. Turn right on County Road G 66 and travel west through Macedonia. Continue west about four miles to a stop sign. Turn left at the stop sign and travel south for one-half mile to again find County Road G 66. Turn right and follow County Road G 66, a well-maintained gravel road, as it winds its way west toward Council Bluffs.

Friday, August 8

4:56 a.m.–7:04 p.m.

This morning there is a nice air, we started out at 7:30 a.m., travelled 8 or 9 miles & crossed the East Nishna Botany River and took dinner on its banks & pursued our journey as far as West Nishna Botany Creek 15 miles where we halted for the night, wood & water pretty plentiful. Bro. Woodward went back with witnesses and got a search warrant for Bro. Smith’s purse, but did not succeed in finding it. We arrived in camp about 3 oc.

The August 6 “Jordan Creek” error was carried forward through the river crossings of the eighth. The “East Nishna Botany River” that they crossed would certainly have been Jordan Creek. The nearly treeless, rolling hills of western Iowa apparently all looked the same. On August 6 the company journal reported that there was no wood within a mile and a half of their camp. It is a wonder that there were not more errors regarding names of rivers and creeks.

Saturday, August 9

4:58 a.m.–7:01 p.m.

This morning we arose, had prayers, &c., and were on our journey at 6:30 a.m. & travelled to Silver Creek where we halted for refreshments about 2 hours & pursued our journey to Keg Creek 16 miles where we arrived about 3 oc. wood & water pretty plentiful here. In the evening Elders Willie & Atwood addressed the meeting & we had a first rate time of it with much of the Spirit of the Lord in our midst. On our way to this creek Bro. Gurnly of the Wiltshire Conference left us with his daughter.

The company journal reported that “Bro. Gurnly” and his daughter abandoned the journey, but Levi Savage’s record reported a more complete account of the incident. He wrote that, “Here Brother Garner, his daughter and son left us. His wife remained and traveled with us.” Levi Savage further recorded that on August 10 Brother Garner and his two children returned. Brother Garner “desired to go on with us,” and “he was sorry and would ask forgiveness for he had been wrong and would do better for the future.” It can easily be assumed that Sister Garner’s choice to remain with the company had an impact on his decision to return and repent. Levi Savage, who appeared to be the captain over the Garner’s hundred, consented to take him along.

Sunday, August 10

5:01 a.m.–7:00 p.m.

The Saints are all busy washing this morning. We left Keg Creek about 4 p.m. this day & travelled to Mosquito Creek 9 miles where we arrived at 7:20 p.m., a good spirit generally prevailing in our midst. Wood & water plentiful.

On Sundays they occasionally did their wash and eased away from their normal travel schedule. They waited until 4 p.m. to start walking nine miles to Mosquito Creek, which was just outside of Council Bluffs, Iowa. The company actually stopped 20 minutes after sunset, but the phase of the moon was such that they would have had at least some moonlight while they set up camp. None of the other records gives a reason for this late, Sunday afternoon trek.

Levi Savage struggled throughout his record with the correct spellings and names of physical features they encountered. As one typical example, he called Keg Creek, “Cass Creek,” and he called Mosquito Creek, “Musket Creek.” However, he was by no means the only diarist that misnamed or misspelled landmarks. The names of these two creeks today remain Keg and Mosquito.

Driving Directions

Sunday, August 10

In the Council Bluffs, Iowa, area the alternative route needs to reach State Road 92. From County Road G 66, continue driving west. A stop sign marks the intersection with County Road L 35. Turn right onto County Road L 35 and drive northwest toward Council Bluffs. When County Road L 35 intersects State Road 92, turn left onto State Road 92 and travel west to I-29. Take I-29 and travel north. To follow the Saints’ path through Council Bluffs, take the exit to State Road 192 and drive north on State Road 192 as it winds through Council Bluffs and rejoins I-29. To avoid Council Bluffs, simply stay on I-29. Either way, continue driving north on I-29 until it intersects I-680 a few miles north of Council Bluffs. Drive west on I-680 across the Missouri River toward Omaha, Nebraska, and take Exit 13. At Exit 13 turn left and travel south on 30th Street. (Note: The area around Council Bluffs has plenty of Mormon Trail related markers and monuments. None of them directly relate to the Willie Company or to the other handcart companies until Florence. However, they are nonetheless interesting.)

Monday, August 11

5:01 a.m.–6:59 p.m.

This day we started at 7:15 a.m. with a beautiful air & good roads in our favor. We passed through Bluffs City & 2 or 3 small towns on our way and proceeded to a Creek 10 miles where we intended to halt but finding no water we proceeded on to the Missouri River 16 miles where we took the ferry & crossed over to the Camp of Florence arriving about 4 oc & encamped for the night, all very tired. Bro. McGaw came & assisted us in crossing the river & Bro. Kimball welcomed us on our arrival.

Levi Savage gave a much more interesting account of the trip through “Bluffs City,” or Council Bluffs, and of Brother McGaw’s assistance. As had happened throughout Iowa, some of the local residents came out to gawk and to “make sport” of the handcart Saints. James McGaw, age 32, the Church’s agent and presiding authority in Florence, Nebraska Territory, apparently did not appreciate this verbal abuse. He defended the handcart system and the Saints against these “gentiles and apostates.” Levi Savage recorded that McGaw, “consequently, got into a fist fight with them. He whipped one or two of them, but received no material injury to himself except getting his hair well pulled.”

Peder Madsen recorded that there were 520 cows and heifers, along with 123 calves grazing near the river. They had been purchased by John Van Cott for the Saints to take west.

Five children were born in Iowa. This included two that were born on July 15, which was the day before they left with the handcarts to start walking across Iowa. The only baby to be born as they walked was the unnamed Jacobsen baby, who was born on August 6, and who may have been stillborn.

The Saints had trekked about 300 miles and had come to the edge of the wilderness. Six deaths were recorded while they were enduring the weather in the Iowa City area, in some instances without tents, while only two deaths were recorded as they walked. One of these two deaths was the baby born on July 14 (recorded on July 15), the day before they began walking.

12:["$","$L1c",null,{"book":{"id":61,"title":"The Willie Handcart Company","subtitle":null,"image_id":"website-files-bucket/books/book_cover_images/WillieHandcart.png","excerpt":null,"book_series_id":null,"series_ordering":0,"ebook_link_kindle":null,"ebook_link_deseret":null,"ebook_link_nook":null,"free_book":0,"pdf_id":"website-files-bucket/books/book_pdf/WillieBook.pdf","footnotes":null,"public":1,"slug":"the-willie-handcart-company","wp_id":null,"product_link":"product/the-willie-handcart-company","author_id":null},"chapter":{"id":571,"title":"Chapter 3: Iowa City, Iowa, to Florence, Nebraska Territory","subtitle":null,"online_book_id":61,"excerpt":null,"content":"$1d","intro_text":"

\"If ye suffer for righteousness' sake, happy are ye.\" 1 Peter 3:14

","page_number":53,"previous_chapter":"chapter-2-new-york-city-new-york-to-iowa-city-iowa","next_chapter":"chapter-4-florence-nebraska-territory-to-fort-laramie-nebraska-territory","pdf_id":"website-files-bucket/books/chapter_pdf/BYUS-BK-WHC-03-Iowa-City-Iowa-to-Florence-Nebraska-Territory.pdf","footnotes":"$1e","slug":"chapter-3-iowa-city-iowa-to-florence-nebraska-territory","public":1,"wp_id":null,"test":"570","podcast_file_id":null,"section_heading":null,"chapter_author":null},"topics":[],"scriptures":[],"authors":[],"processedContent":{"html":"$1f","headings":[{"id":"heading-0","textContent":"Friday, June 27","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-1","textContent":"Friday, June 27","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-2","textContent":"Saturday, June 28","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-3","textContent":"Sunday, June 29","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-4","textContent":"Monday, June 30","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-5","textContent":"Tuesday, July 1","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-6","textContent":"Wednesday, July 2","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-7","textContent":"Thursday, July 3","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-8","textContent":"Friday, July 4","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-9","textContent":"Saturday, July 5","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-10","textContent":"Sunday, July 6","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-11","textContent":"Monday, July 7","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-12","textContent":"Tuesday, July 8","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-13","textContent":"Wednesday, July 9","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-14","textContent":"Thursday, July 10","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-15","textContent":"Friday, July 11","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-16","textContent":"Saturday, July 12","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-17","textContent":"Sunday, July 13","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-18","textContent":"Monday, July 14","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-19","textContent":"Tuesday, July 15","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-20","textContent":"Wednesday, July 16","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-21","textContent":"Wednesday, July 16","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-22","textContent":"Thursday, July 17","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-23","textContent":"Friday, July 18","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-24","textContent":"Saturday, July 19","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-25","textContent":"Sunday, July 20","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-26","textContent":"Monday, July 21","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-27","textContent":"Tuesday, July 22","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-28","textContent":"Wednesday, July 23","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-29","textContent":"Thursday, July 24","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-30","textContent":"Friday, July 25","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-31","textContent":"Saturday, July 26","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-32","textContent":"Sunday, July 27","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-33","textContent":"Monday, July 28","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-34","textContent":"Monday, July 28","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-35","textContent":"Tuesday, July 29","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-36","textContent":"Tuesday, July 29","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-37","textContent":"Wednesday, July 30","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-38","textContent":"Thursday, July 31","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-39","textContent":"Thursday, July 31","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-40","textContent":"Friday, August 1","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-41","textContent":"Saturday, August 2","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-42","textContent":"Saturday, August 2","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-43","textContent":"Sunday, August 3","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-44","textContent":"Sunday, August 3","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-45","textContent":"Monday, August 4","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-46","textContent":"Tuesday, August 5","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-47","textContent":"Wednesday, August 6","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-48","textContent":"Wednesday, August 6","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-49","textContent":"Thursday, August 7","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-50","textContent":"Thursday, August 7","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-51","textContent":"Friday, August 8","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-52","textContent":"Saturday, August 9","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-53","textContent":"Sunday, August 10","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-54","textContent":"Sunday, August 10","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-55","textContent":"Monday, August 11","tagName":"H2"}]}}]