Tuesday, August 12

5:02 a.m.–6:59 p.m.

This morning the brethren are busy getting the Saints to sign bonds finding out who intend stopping, what hand-carts want repairing, with many other things which are requisite before proceeding on our journey across the plains. In the evening Bro. McGaw and Bro. Willie addressed the Saints and gave them some needful instructions & advice before proceeding on the remainder of the journey.

August 12 and 13 were spent by the Saints repairing handcarts and settling up accounts. They were also days of decision. Shortly after the Saints left Florence, civilization would end. Unlike the previous month crossing Iowa, they would not be passing through a series of small villages. They had approximately 1,000 miles of uncivilized territory to cover before they would arrive in the Salt Lake Valley. It was the last real chance to stop.

William Woodward completed his entry with the statement, “Many of our company agreed to leave the company.” Levi Savage reported that “Many are going to stop.” He then went on to express his feelings on the matter as follows: “Others are faltering and I myself am not in favor of, but much opposed to, taking women and children through when they are destitute of clothing, when we all know that we are bound to be caught in the snow and severe cold weather long before we reach the valley.”

Peder Madsen did not discuss stopping. It was almost as if the Danish Saints were unaware of the people that were choosing to quit the trek, or perhaps with their language barrier they simply chose to go on to the valley. Instead, he recorded the spiritual activities of the Danish Saints. For example, he told of the rebaptisms of five Danish Saints, including his own daughter, Petrea Madsen, age 36, along with Peter and Ane Jacobsen, the parents of the child born on August 6. These baptisms were specifically done for the person’s health. Over the next two days he reported two more baptisms to renew covenants.

Driving Directions

Tuesday, August 12

The Mormon Trail Center in Omaha, Nebraska, is worth a stop. It has information on Florence from the time that it was known as Winter Quarters into the later handcart era. There is a statue depicting handcart travelers just outside the main entrance. From I-680 take Exit 13 and drive south on 30th Street. At the intersection of 30th Street and State Street turn right and travel three blocks west to the top of the hill. The Mormon Trail Center is at GPS N 41 20.117’ W 095 57.918’. There is a pioneer cemetery across the street to the west. The cemetery is north of the Winter Quarters Temple.

Wednesday, August 13

5:03 a.m.–6:58 p.m.

The Brethren are busy settling up accounts, finding out those who are going to stop, &c. In the evening Prest. Willie with Elders Atwood & Savage addressed us and bore their testimonies & gave their opinions of the journey before us & after prayers we were dismissed & went to our tents.

Although the company journal entry was brief, this meeting would prove to be a pivotal point in their journey. President Willie exhorted them to go forward regardless of the sacrifice. Presenting a contrary opinion, Levi Savage warned them of how great the sacrifice would be and of the dangers he anticipated if they continued to cross the plains. He wrote in his journal on August 13 the following: “August 13, 1856, Wednesday, Florence, Nebraska Territory. Today we continued preparations for starting. Evening we held meeting in camp. Brother Willey exhorted the Saints to go forward regardless of suffering even to death. After he had spoken, he gave me the opportunity of speaking. I said to him that if I spoke I must speak my mind, let it cut where it would. He said certainly to do so. I then related to the Saints the hardships that we should have to endure. I said that we were liable to have to wade in snow up to our knees and shovel at night, lay ourselves in a thin blanket and lie on the frozen ground without a bed. I said that it was not like having a wagon that we could go into and wrap ourselves in as much as we like and lay down. ‘No,’ said I, ‘we are without wagons, destitute of clothing and could not carry it if we had it. We must go as we are. The handcart system I do not condem. I think it preferable to unbroken oxen and inexperienced teamsters.’ The lateness of the season was my only objection to leaving this point for the mountains at this time. I spoke warmly upon the subject, but spoke truth, and the people, judging from appearance and expressions, felt the force of it. (However, the most of them determined to go forward, if the authorities say go.) Elder Willey then spoke again in reply to what I had said, evidently dissatisfied. He said that the God that he served was a God that was able to save to the utermost. He said that was the God that he served, and he wanted no Job’s comforters with him. I then said that what I had said was the truth, and if Elder Willey did not want me to act in the place where I am, he is at full liberty to place another man in my stead. I would not think hard of him for it. But, I did not care what he said about Job’s comforters, I had spoken nothing but the truth and he knew it. Elder Atwood then spoke mildly and to the purpose. He said that he had been listening to what had been said. He exhorted the Saints to pray to God and get a revelation and know for themselves whether they should go or stay, for it was their privilege to know for themselves. The meeting was dismissed, all manifesting a good feeling and spirit.”

John Chislett, like Levi Savage, was a captain of a hundred. Years later he indicated the full character of Levi Savage as a true supporter of the cause. Even though the Saints voted against the advice of Levi Savage, he promised to give his all to help them. It was no wonder that President Willie left Levi Savage as a captain over a hundred. John Chislett wrote the following: “Savage was accordingly defeated, as the majority were against him. He then added: ‘Brethren and sisters, what I have said I know to be true; but, seeing you are to go forward, I will go with you, will help you all I can, will work with you, will rest with you, will suffer with you, and, if necessary, I will die with you. May God in his mercy bless and preserve us. Amen.’”1

Millen Atwood had instructed the Saints to seek their own answers from the Spirit. After Levi Savage’s speech, Emma James, age 16, recorded that there was a long silence, as the people contemplated the choice before them. She was frightened. Her father looked pale, while her mother looked determined. Emma felt they really did not have a choice, because there was no work for them and no way to live in Florence through the winter. Her mother said, “We must put our trust in the Lord, as we have alway [sic] done.”2 They chose to walk on to the west. Her father, William James, who “looked pale,” would eventually have his worst fears realized as he passed away crossing Rocky Ridge in October.

Thursday, August 14

5:04 a.m.–6:56 p.m.

It is splendid weather & the Saints are getting up their strength while the Brethren are busy loading up flour, taking the names of those going through, preparing the hand-carts, &c., together with many other things necessary before proceeding on our journey.

In Peder Madsen’s record he commented that some of the English were staying behind. However, only one Danish couple chose to stay in Council Bluffs. He reported that they were staying with apostates. The enticement for the Danish couple, Niels and Anne C. Hansen, was apparently the lure of high wages.

Friday, August 15

5:05 a.m.–6:54 p.m.

This morning the sun is out beautiful, all the Brethren who can work at the carpentering & iron work were up early and all went at the hand-carts in good earnest under the Presidency of Elder Willie in order to forward our starting as much as possible. Last night Sister Mary Ann Hanson.

Death:

Maren Hansen, age 52

The company journal did not finish the Mary Ann Hansen statement. She was a Danish Saint and Peder Madsen wrote, “Maren Hansen, 52 years old, died.” She was not the only one who was sick. On August 13, William Woodward had been sent across the Missouri River to get some hoop iron for the handcarts. He returned on August 14. On August 15, he wrote that he was taken very sick with a fever. He received a priesthood blessing and partially recovered. However, as late as August 22, he still was reporting in his daily journal that he felt sick.

The format and coverage of the official company journal changed from August 15 to August 16. It is hard to determine who the official company journal writer or writers were from May 1 through October 1. However, one clue might be that, on May 3, Peder Madsen listed George May as the company clerk. George was a single, 24-year-old British convert. Although he sailed with the Thornton, he ultimately was listed as coming to the Salt Lake Valley with the Hunt Wagon Company. He could have easily kept the journal until he was assigned to stay and help the wagon trains at either Florence or Fort Laramie. All that is known for certain is that William Woodward took over clerk duties after October 1. Nowhere does it state who wrote the company journal prior to that date.

Saturday, August 16

5:06 a.m.–6:53 p.m.

Part of the 4th Company of Hand-carts 85 in number under the presidency of Elder James G. Willie started from Florence in company with 11 waggons (P.E.Fund & Independent) about one o’clock p.m. and journey to Little Pappea where they camped for the night with Col. Babbitt and 4 waggons of his. The Handcart Company had been organized into hundreds by President Daniel Spencer at Iowa City and subsequently sanctioned by President James McGaw. Millen Atwood, Capt. of 1st Hundred, Levi Savage Capt. of 2nd Hundred, William Woodward Capt. of 3rd Hundred, John Chislett Capt. of 4th Hundred, J.A. Ahamason, Capt. of 5th Hundred. Brother Jost borrowed a yoke of oxen from Bro. Cantwell in consequence of his own being unmanageable. Promised to return said yoke tomorrow—6 miles from Florence.

President James McGaw, the presiding Church authority at Florence, confirmed the leadership arrangement set down by President Daniel Spencer in Iowa City. The Saints had been in Florence less than a week and at least part of the company was on its way again.

As part of the company moved out, the Saints were accompanied by “Colonel” Almon W. Babbitt. His role in their next few weeks of traveling turned out to be tragic for him. He was the Secretary of the Utah Territory. At this time he was returning to the territory after having conducted business back in “the states.” He had four wagons in his traveling group. Within just a matter of days his wagons would be attacked and destroyed, and he would subsequently be killed by hostile Indians.

As they left Florence, there were just over 400 people remaining in the handcart company. An actual census was not taken until September 12 by President Franklin D. Richards. He reported that as of September 12 there were “404 persons, 6 wagons, 87 handcarts, 6 yoke of oxen, 32 cows, and 5 mules.”3

President Richards’s census most likely did not include the “Independent Waggons.” The “Independent Waggons” were a group of Saints traveling by wagon to the Salt Lake Valley. It was unsafe to travel in too small of a group through Indian Territory, so four wagons were added to the Willie Handcart Company in Florence. There were already some wagons traveling with the handcarts to carry tents, provisions, and the sick. Each group of 100 Saints had a wagon to assist them. It was thought that the addition of a few independent wagons would not slow down the handcarts too much. The company record included a list of people attached to the “Independent Waggons.” There were 26 people, led by Andrew L. Siler, age 31, who was officially installed as their captain on August 18 by President McGaw.

Peder Madsen noted two interesting facts at this point in his record. First, shoes were already a problem. He wrote, “Measurements of the feet of those who needed shoes were taken, and those who had shoes that were too small were given to the ones who could fit them. The others will instead get new shoes.” Second, the Danish Saints had obviously not left the company in the same numbers as the English. He reported that the English sections were considerably reduced in number when they left Florence, which explained the reduction in total number of travelers from about 500 to about 400.

The company journal referred to their stopping point as the Little “Pappea.” Levi Savage called it the Little “Papaw.” It is in fact known today as the Little Papillion Creek.

The trail the Willie Company traveled between Florence and New Fort Kearney is fairly well documented. In 1856, Captain John H. Dickerson of the United States Army was ordered to locate and construct a territorial road in the Nebraska Territory between a point opposite Council Bluffs, Iowa, and New Fort Kearney. He started out following the “Winter Quarters Trail” and continued pursuing “very nearly the route over which the Mormon and California emigrants have been passing for several years.”4 “Old” Fort Kearney was established in 1847 in Nebraska City, Nebraska Territory. Dickerson referred to “New” Fort Kearney, which was the name attached to the Fort Kearney that existed near present-day Kearney. “New” Fort Kearney provided protection for users of the Oregon, California, and Mormon trails.

On Captain Dickerson’s survey trip to Fort Kearney, he passed a Mormon wagon train at the Loup Fork River crossing, just south of present-day Columbus, Nebraska, on July 8. On his return trip he followed the Platte River in the hope of finding a route that would avoid following the Loup Fork River. He noted that two handcart trains had passed by, while he had been on the alternative path. On August 5 near the Shell Creek crossing, west of present-day Rogers, Nebraska, he met a “Mormon hand cart train.” In his record he expressed a very derogatory view of the people in that handcart company, commenting especially on their apparent weariness. He completed his survey on August 14, just missing the Willie Company.5 The handcart train he encountered was the third handcart company, led by Edward Bunker.

Driving Directions

Saturday, August 16

The first camp was in the area of what is now State Road 133 and Military Road, where the Little Papillion Creek intersects Military Road. To reach the area, return to I-680 and travel west to Exit 6. Take Exit 6 and travel southeast on State Road 133 until it intersects 90th Street. Take the 90th Street Exit and drive south to Military Road. The creek and the camp were less than one quarter of a mile east.

Sunday, August 17

5:08 a.m.–6:52 p.m.

Staid in camp all day. Bros. Jost and Geary returned to Florence with Bro. Cantwell’s oxen. Remainder of handcarts and waggons arrived in Camp from Florence with President Willie. This evening Capt. Atwood gave the Saints some good instruction relative to their present and future duties which he plainly told them must and should be performed and referring to his satisfaction at some grumblers having deserted from the ranks told the balance that those of them who might still feel double-minded had better do the same as this was about their last chance. Capt. Atwood was addressing the Saints when President Willie arrived. A smart shower or two to-day.

The Willie Company was traveling with 37 beef and milk cows, in addition to their draft animals. Levi Savage reported they were still short a wagon. Each wagon was loaded “with thirty-five and forty hundred of provisions.” The Saints still had a little over a ton more in provisions, i.e., “twenty-five hundred” pounds, but no wagon. Fortunately, William Woodward wrote that another wagon was added on August 18 that covered the shortfall. Even with this addition John Chislett later wrote that each handcart was required to carry one extra sack of flour. Each sack of flour weighed 98 pounds. The flour carried in the handcarts was used first, in order to lighten the burden of those pulling the handcarts.6

By the end of the day on August 17, both parts of the company had gone the six miles from the outfitting grounds in Florence to the Little Papillion Creek campground. Certainly the feelings of some of these Saints were expressed by Peder Madsen when he wrote that they were now in the wilderness.

Monday, August 18

5:09 a.m.–6:51 p.m.

Left camp about 3 p.m. and camped for the night at Great Pappea. President James McGaw and Elder Wm. H. Kimball with one or two other brethren visited the Camp. President McGaw placed the Independent Waggon Company in the same organization as the Handcart Company and appointed Andrew L. Siler, Capt. of such Company. 9 miles from Florence.

The group traveled only three miles to the “Great Pappea” or “Big Papaw” Creek as it is variously referred to, but which is today called Big Papillion Creek.

Driving Directions

Monday, August 18

To drive to the area of the second campground, follow Military Road west to 108th Street. Turn right and drive north on 108th Street for about one quarter of a mile, until it again intersects Military Road. Turn left and drive west as Military Road winds west through the subdivisions for a little less than three miles, to where it crosses Big Papillion Creek, which is where it intersects with 126th Street. Military Road appears to have been given its name because it generally follows the road surveyed by Captain Dickerson of the United States Army.

Tuesday, August 19

5:10 a.m.–6:50 p.m.

Rolled out about 6 a.m. and ferried the Elk Horn River in the middle part of the day, the cattle swimming the stream. Prest. Willie appointed Bro. Niel, Lars Christiansen, interpreter and Counsellor to the Danish Saints and obtained a unanimous vote from the Camp to support every other appointment which had been made. Camped for the night on a creek about 3 miles from the River. 27 miles from Florence.

Once again the company was asked to formally sustain the leaders of their group. The only change appears to be that “Niel, Lars Christiansen,” age 27, (who was also known as Niels L. Christensen and Niel Larsen Christensen) was appointed to be over the Danish hundred. He was a missionary returning to the Salt Lake Valley. No explanation was given regarding John Ahmanson’s replacement. On September 4 and 5, Christiansen was referred to as Captain Christiansen. The vote was unanimous in support of the appointed leaders.

The handcarts were ferried across the Elkhorn River, while the livestock swam. They used the established ferry crossing. After their crossing they camped on an unnamed creek, just three miles past the ferry. William Woodward’s record identified this unnamed creek as Raw Hide Creek, which they followed in a northwesterly direction.

Driving Directions

Tuesday, August 19

The location of the Elkhorn River crossing has been identified with a very small marker that is not at the river. To continue along the trail and travel to the marker, continue west and northwest on Military Road until it joins Bennington Road. Turn left and follow Bennington Road west for 100 yards until it intersects State Road 31, which is also 204th Street. Turn right onto State Road 31 and travel north until it intersects State Road 36. Turn left onto State Road 36 and travel west until it intersects 240th Street. Stop at that T intersection. The marker for the Elkhorn River ferry is 30 feet south of the asphalt edge of State Road 36, at a point that is directly south of the midline of 240th Street. It is at GPS N 41 22.725’ W 096 17.542’.

Wednesday, August 20

5:11 a.m.–6:48 p.m.

Stopped in camp till one p.m. to wash, prepare weapons, &c. Started at one o’clock & arrived at the Platte River about dusk. 39 miles from Florence.

William Woodward wrote that they were delayed in leaving because “Bro. Savage” had to go back to the “Pappea” to get a cow. Levi Savage recorded that on August 19 a cow had lost her calf. They left the cow behind to see if she could find her calf. On August 20 he was sent back to retrieve the cow and, if possible, the calf. However, no calf had been found and he brought back only the cow.

They took advantage of the delay and spent the morning cleaning themselves and their clothes and preparing the wagons for departure. For the first few weeks the company journal recorded the distance from Florence. Based on that record, they traveled 12 miles. Twelve miles of traveling would have taken them a few miles past present-day Fremont, Nebraska.

Driving Directions

Wednesday, August 20

To follow their trail, continue driving west on State Road 36 until it intersects US Highway 275. Travel northwest on US Highway 275 toward Fremont. At Fremont, travel through the city by taking US Highway 30 (Business) from the east to the west side of the city. To avoid the city, take the belt route. Travel north and then west and south on US Highway 30 (West) and follow it around the city. Either way, end up traveling on US Highway 30 toward Columbus, Nebraska, which path roughly parallels the trail of the Saints to Columbus. There are at least five pioneer trail markers in the Fremont area, although none of them directly relate to the Willie Handcart Company.

Thursday, August 21

5:12 a.m.–6:47 p.m.

Last night rather stormy. Journey resumed at 6:30 a.m. Reached Platte River where it joins the road about 2 p.m. The sun being very hot and cattle much exhausted train ordered to stop here till 5 p.m. when the journey resumed. Travelled about 6 miles further and camped on the open prairie without wood or water the cattle having been watered just previous to starting. Ordered to move off in the morning before breakfast. About 55 miles from Florence.

The trail in this area ran within a mile of the Platte River. The humidity and heat apparently were taking a toll on the people and the cattle again, as they appeared to be trying to avoid travel in the middle of the day. They traveled about 16 miles, camping some miles west of present-day North Bend, Nebraska.

All four of the journals mentioned the lunch break. However, they disagreed on its starting and stopping times and on its length. The company journal stated it was from 2 p.m. until 5 p.m. for three hours. Levi Savage stated it was from 1 p.m. until 6 p.m. for five hours. Peder Madsen stated it was for two hours starting at 12 noon. William Woodward did not give a starting time or an overall length of time, but he did record that they started up after the break at 5 p.m.

Friday, August 22

5:13 a.m.–6:46 p.m.

Order to move before breakfast, obeyed. Weather very hazy and grass very wet but about 9 it became fine. Stayed 2 hours at Shell Creek to breakfast, &c. Resumed journey and travelled about 12 miles further camping at sunset near Platte River by the side of a long lake. During the afternoon Sister Sophia Geary had her left foot run over by Bro. Wilford’s waggon. She was administered to in the evening by Bros. Siler, Cantwell and Geary, Capt. Siler officiating. He sealed the blessing of health and strength upon her and promised that inasmuch as she would exercise faith she should walk tomorrow. 75 miles from Florence.

Twenty miles of traveling in the hot, humid weather was a long day. The Saints started before breakfast, again to avoid the heat of the day. Although not mentioned in the company journal, it appeared that there may well have been a bridge over Shell Creek.7 Levi Savage mentioned buying things from Isaac Albertson’s trading post by the Shell Creek crossing. They crossed it a few miles east of present-day Schuyler, Nebraska. They then continued on in a fairly straight line, probably staying to the north of Lost Creek. In this area, the Platte River was up to three miles wide and constantly changing its course. Those changes left large and small lakes, including probably the long lake on which the Saints camped. Captain Dickerson mentioned camping on a “long pond” in the former river bed on July 7, when he and his crew came through the Shell Creek area on their survey.8

Sister Sophia Geary’s left foot was run over by William Wilford’s wagon. The wagon wheels were rimmed with iron and the wagons themselves probably weighed close to two tons. This action should have crushed her foot. Three of the men in the company gave her a blessing, wherein she was promised that through the exercise of her faith she would walk the next day. She walked the next day.

Saturday August 23

5:15 a.m.–6:45 p.m.

Rolled out about 6:30 a.m. ferried the Loup Fork River, the cattle fording it. While at the Loup Fork Prest. Willie had a cow and calf killed for the Handcart Company. Camped for the night on the other side. Plenty of wood and water and abundance of rich feed for cattle in the shape of pea-vines. Sis. Geary walked a considerable distance pursuant to Bro. Siler’s promise. About 86 miles from Florence.

The company journal, Levi Savage, and William Woodward all reported ferrying across the Loup Fork River on August 23 and camping at the crossing south of present-day Columbus, Nebraska. The record of Levi Savage referred to it as the “Soap Fork” and not the Loup Fork River. In 1847 the primary route west required the wagon trains to cross the Loup Fork River at a point upstream from the 1856 ferry. Typically, those earlier wagon trains might have crossed at a point near Genoa, just as Brigham Young did in 1847. His company then went south to the Platte River. In contrast, the Willie Company took what had become the primary route when they crossed at the ferry. After the Willie Company crossed the Loup Fork River, they then followed its south side the next few days for about 57 miles, before they turned south across the open prairie and headed for the Platte River.

Peder Madsen reported that each person was allocated one pound of meat from the cow and calf that had been butchered.

Driving Directions

Saturday, August 23

From Columbus, Nebraska, there are two routes that can be taken. To take the first route, travel southwest on US Highway 30 through Grand Island and then follow I-80 west toward North Platte, Nebraska. To take the second route, in Columbus, when US Highway 30 intersects US Highway 81 at 33rd Avenue, take US Highway 81 and drive west and north out of Columbus. About four miles north of Columbus, US Highway 81 intersects State Road 22. Turn onto State Road 22 and travel west through Monroe and Genoa, and on toward Fullerton. Just north of Fullerton, State Road 22 intersects State Road 14. Turn south onto State Road 14 and travel through Fullerton. At this point either continue to drive south to Central City and then on to Grand Island, or, for a closer look at the country the handcarts pulled through, note the mileage at the south side of the bridge over the Loup Fork River just south of Fullerton. Travel south for 5.6 miles and turn right onto an unmarked gravel road, which is X Road. The GPS point at the turn is N 41 15.828’ W 097 59.000’. (Note: about 0.7 mile after the bridge over the Loup Fork River there is a “Mormon Pioneer Campsite” marker that mentions the handcart pioneers.) Travel west on X Road for four miles. At the stop sign turn left and travel south on the gravel road, which is 13th Road, for one mile to the asphalt road, which is W Road. Turn right and travel west for 10 miles on W Road to the stop sign. (Note: after driving about seven of the 10 miles look north about a mile. Somewhere in that area is where the company would have camped on August 26.) Turn left onto 3rd Road and travel south for four miles. 3rd Road goes through present-day Palmer. At the stop sign turn right and travel west on State Road 92 for four miles. Turn left at Brady Road and travel south on the gravel road for eight miles. Turn right onto 3rd Avenue and travel west for two miles across a set of railroad tracks and through a stop sign to US Highway 281. (Note: About 1.5 miles short of US Highway 281 is the area where they would have camped on August 27.) Turn left and travel south on U. S Highway 281 toward Grand Island. Follow US Highway 281 around to the west side of Grand Island to where it intersects US Highway 30. Take US Highway 30 toward Kearney, Nebraska, and travel west. As an alternative, continue traveling south until US Highway 281 intersects I-80 and then travel west. Both US Highway 30 and I-80 run parallel to the trail the Saints followed through the present-day city of North Platte. The trail actually runs right where US Highway 30 is, near present-day Gibbon, Nebraska. (Note: About a mile east of Gibbon is where they camped on August 30.) To get to I-80 after traveling through Gibbon, travel about five miles on US Highway 30 until it intersects State Road 10. Turn left and travel south on State Road 10 until it intersects I-80. Turn onto I-80 and travel west toward North Platte, Nebraska.

Sunday, August 24

5:16 a.m.–6:43 p.m.

Left Camp at 6:30 a.m. Journeyed about 6 miles and stayed for dinner and to water cattle for nearly an hour at a bend of the Loup Fork. Travelled a considerable distance further and stayed again sufficiently long to water, then journeyed about 12 miles further turned off the road and camped on the bank of the Loup Fork with plenty of grass wood and water. A good hard road nearly the whole day’s march. Say 100 miles from Florence.

It is not really clear how many miles they traveled. Without an odometer, they merely guessed how far they traveled each day. The company journal stated that they traveled 6 miles before dinner, their midday meal, and then traveled on 12 more miles for a total of 18 miles. It stated further that they were 86 miles from Florence as of August 23 and “Say 100 miles from Florence” as of August 24, for a total of 14 miles. Levi Savage’s journal reported traveling 15 miles, camping by the river, and catching some fish. William Woodward’s record stated that they traveled 14 miles. Peder Madsen wrote that they traveled 23 miles.

The road was described as “a good hard road” nearly all day. While traveling in the Platte River valley, they had to pull their handcarts through many sandy areas. It was much easier to pull a handcart on a firm road instead of a sandy road.

Monday, August 25

5:18 a.m.–6:42 p.m.

Rolled out about 7 a.m. leaving Bro. Griffiths on a mule to hunt for 3 cows which had been lost. He got into Camp in the evening about dusk with one cow only which he reported as having found on terms of close intimacy with 2 wolves. Travelled about 8 miles opposite the Pioneers’ Ford of the Loup Fork (1½ mile to right of Camp) and stayed there for water and dinner. Had to double teams up a steep sandhill between 2 bluffs at the top of which Camp dined. Journeyed about 12 miles further and camped for the night on the right hand side of a lake of water. No wood nearer than half a mile on the other side of the lake which was crossed at its head. About the time of arrival the Camp was favored with a drenching shower of rain. Good feed. About 120 miles from Florence.

About eight miles into the day’s traveling the company journal noted that they were one and a half miles south of the “Pioneers’ Ford of the Loup Fork,” which was near Genoa. Instead of turning south as the Mormons did in 1847, they continued to follow the south side of the Loup Fork River. Again the actual distance they traveled is uncertain. The company journal and William Woodward recorded 20 miles, while Levi Savage recorded 15 miles and Peder Madsen recorded 18 miles.

At times it was certainly difficult to keep over 400 people moving together. People were occasionally asked to stay behind or to go search for something while the rest of the handcarts went forward. The company journal reported leaving Brother Edward Griffiths, age 25, to hunt for three lost cows. After having a close encounter with two wolves, he returned with only one cow. As another example, Joseph Wall, age 18, was traveling with his sister Emily, age 15. A few days after leaving Florence, he became ill. The company leadership decided to leave him to be picked up or buried by the Martin Company, when they came along. Emily refused to leave him because she had been promised that they would safely arrive in the Salt Lake Valley. Emily insisted that he stay with them and she promised to pull him in her handcart. With the aid of a small girl she did pull him until he was well again, three days later.9

Elizabeth Smith, age 13, told of the power of President Willie’s prayers. She related an experience, which may well have been on August 25, when storms arose with thunder and lightning. President Willie stood in the middle of the road and stopped the handcarts. He had the Saints join him in prayer. He talked to God as one man talks to another. Many felt the Lord was near. The storms parted on the right and on the left. Finally, when they got into camp and the tents were set up, the storm burst in all its fury.10 The company journal recorded that “a drenching shower of rain” greeted them on their arrival at their campsite.

Tuesday, August 26

5:19 a.m.–6:41 p.m.

Started about 7 a.m. and after journeying about 10 miles stayed on the open prairie to rest for half an hour and then travelled about 5 miles further camping for the night near the Loup Fork with good feed and water but little wood. A fine cool day for travelling. The king-bolt of Bro. Chislett’s waggon broke soon after starting this morning. This detained his and another waggon’s company for some time but they all arrived in Camp early in the evening. About 135 miles from Florence.

The king bolt that broke on John Chislett’s wagon connected the animals to the wagon and was essential. They were on a road but miles away from any help. The company could not wait, so another wagon, which Levi Savage stated was his, stayed to help repair the broken wagon. William Woodward reported that they replaced it with a wooden king bolt and by the end of the day they were reunited with the company.

Levi Savage reported catching “a fine mess of catfish.” Peder Madsen wrote that they had found tracks and that there were buffalo in the wilderness. He looked forward to getting buffalo steak soon.

Wednesday, August 27

5:21 a.m.–6:39 p.m.

Left Camp about 7 a.m. Travelled over heavy sandy roads more or less all day stopping for an hour or 2 in the middle of the day to eat and to water cattle at a well about 8 miles on the way. A large quantity of lizards on the road. Camped for the night on the open prairie having found a slough of water on the left hand side of the road. 150 miles from Florence.

Levi Savage recorded that “this morning we left the Soap Fork at twelve o’clock.” The company journal reported sandy roads and a large quantity of lizards as they left the relative comfort of the Loup Fork River, with its fresh water, good feed, and abundant wood. They were crossing the open prairie. They camped next to a slough for water. Captain Dickerson’s surveyed route went south and west. They were following his route, which was, at that time, the main trail.11

Thursday, August 28

5:22 a.m.–6:38 p.m.

Rolled forth about 7 a.m. Staid to water cattle and to dine at Prairie Creek which Camp subsequently crossed arriving at Wood River after dark. Camped there with plenty of wood & water but rather indifferent feed. Roads were sandy throughout the morning. Four buffaloes seen during the afternoon. They were fruitlessly pursued by Bros. Siler & Savage for several miles. They saw a large herd in the distance. Bro. Haley (an old man) was missed on the arrival of the Camp this evening. Several went out in search with a lantern but without success. 165 miles from Florence.

Although the journals stated that they were at the Wood River, they were not. The river they had arrived at was Silver Creek. They had arrived at their campsite after dark. It was often hard to determine where locations were on the open prairie in the daylight. After sunset it would have been justifiably difficult to know which stream of water they had encountered. Fortunately, Captain Dickerson had identified the locations of both the Indian encampment and the attack on Colonel Babbitt’s wagons. That information, along with his survey, allows their trail to be fairly well identified through this region.12 The company journal stated that the Willie Company camped on August 29 about one-half mile from the Indian encampment. Ultimately, from their camp on Silver Creek they followed Prairie Creek to the west until their travel on August 30 finally took them to their actual Wood River crossing.

For the first time in these Europeans’ lives, they saw buffalo. Initially, they had seen only four animals. Fresh buffalo meat would have been a welcome change in their diet.

Friday, August 29

5:23 a.m.–6:36 p.m.

A tremendous storm arose early this morning and lasted for several hours. A large number of scouts started after breakfast in search of Bro. Haley. The lost sheep was found 30 yards from the road after about 2 hours’ search thoroughly drenched with water. His voice was scarcely audible. He said that the Bro. with the lantern passed nearly close to him last night but that he (Haley) could not make himself heard. Left camp at one o’clock p.m. and after journeying about 3 miles met a number of mounted Omaha Indians one of whom (the Interpreter) produced a letter from Capt. Stewart of the U.S. Army dated recently at Fort Kearney and addressed to Col. Babbitt stating that on last Monday (25 August) his waggons were attacked by the Cheyenne Indians who killed 2 of his men and a little child shot a 3rd man through the thigh and carried a woman captive, the wounded man with another who escaped unhurt being, at date of letter, at Fort Kearney. President Willie and Captains Atwood, Savage and Siler visited a large encampment of Omaha Indians about half a mile from our Camp. These Indians were very numerous and had a great quantity of horses. They seemed friendly disposed and bartered Buffalo meat for different articles. Our Camp stopped early in the afternoon about half a mile from the Indian Camp. 175 miles from Florence.

August 29 was a memorable date. Between the search for William Haley and the rain, the company did not get started until 1 p.m. An hour or so later, they met 800 Native Americans as recorded by Levi Savage. Although the Indians were friendly, their report of Colonel Babbitt’s wagons being attacked by unfriendly Cheyenne on August 25 sent a shock wave through the Saints. This was the same Colonel Babbitt who had traveled with them on August 16 as they were leaving the Florence area. This was the first major contact for these European immigrants with buffalo and Indians, two of the greatest symbols of the American West.

Margaret Caldwell, age 40, traveling with her four children, reported that she traded small articles or trinkets for buffalo meat.13 George Cunningham, age 16, traveling with his family, reported that they were invited to camp one night with a large group of Omaha at Wood River, which they did.14

Two young people told of the amazement that the Indians had with the handcarts. The Indians wanted to push the handcarts. Four-year-old Sarah Ann Oakey was afraid, so her mother took her out of the handcart. However, upon being reassured that the Indians were friendly, she was placed back in the handcart and rode to the camp.15 Mary Anne James, age 11, wrote that one of the Indians was so fascinated that he leaped from his horse and pushed a cart so hard that it nearly ran over the woman and her daughter that were pulling it. After pushing for a while, he returned to his horse and rode off.16

Saturday, August 30

5:25 a.m.–6:35 p.m.

Left camp about 7 a.m. Immediately met some Californians with a large herd of horses for the States. They confirmed the Indians’ report of the murder of Col. Babbitt’s men and stated that they met several Mormon trains at different points on the route and that good health prevailed generally. After travelling some distance we came up to the graves of the 2 men and the child. President Willie and Capt. Atwood assisted by the brethren piled large quantities of earth on the graves to protect them from the wolves and to smother the effluvia which was beginning to arise.

Journeyed on till we arrived at the “Lone Tree” where we crossed creek and staid to water cattle and dine. While dining some of the brethren noticed on the hills about 2 miles off some animals which looked like oxen. Capt. Savage and Bro. Joseph Elder started in pursuit the one on a mule the other on horseback and after a long chase succeeded in bringing into Camp a yoke of oxen which were added to Bro. Jost’s team. Travelled on after about 2 hours’ delay crossed Wood River and camped for the night on its bank about 4 miles above the crossing with plenty of grass wood and water. Shortly after camping Col. Babbitt, with a man, & a Scotch sister named Stewart arrived in Camp with 5 mules and a carriage. They camped with us for the night and the Col. arranged for Sis. Stewart going through to the Valley in Bro. Cantwell’s waggon. This evening Bro. Robert Culwell’s collar bone got broken by a cow which he was attempting to milk. About 200 miles from Florence.

Peder Madsen also reported that the Indians had come early in the morning to trade with them. It appeared that the major items of trade were buffalo meat and shoes, which were traded for handkerchiefs and clothing. He secured a pair of shoes for some handkerchiefs.

The fresh graves of the two men and the child that had been killed five days earlier were discovered by the company. For the two years prior to 1856, there had been Indian troubles on the trail. Certainly the members of the handcart company knew about them or soon learned about them after finding these graves. Even Peder Madsen wrote in his record about the military overtaking and shooting 16 Indians. The two major incidents were the Grattan Massacre of 1854, when a number of soldiers had been killed by Indians near Fort Laramie, and the Harney Massacre of 1855, when an even larger number of Indians had been killed by soldiers near Ash Hollow. These Saints had come to see firsthand that the threat of Indian trouble was real.

The company journal recorded that they arrived at the “Lone Tree.” The tree was a landmark and, in 1856, there were so few trees in some areas that finding even one was sufficient to merit a journal entry. However, there was more than one “Lone Tree” on the trail. Frequent prairie fires kept the number of trees low, except on islands in the Platte River. Today trees near the Platte River appear to be everywhere.

Colonel Almon W. Babbitt had arranged to have Nancy Stewart travel with Andrew Siler’s independent wagons. She was described by Levi Savage on August 31 as an “elderly sister from Florence” whom Colonel Babbitt intended to take to the Salt Lake Valley. This change proved to be lifesaving for her since Babbitt was killed by Indians only a few days further up the trail. She ultimately ended up traveling with the Hodgetts wagon train after another change in arrangements at Fort Laramie.

“Bro. Robert Culwell” was very likely Thomas Caldwell. Thomas, age 14, had a brother named Robert. His mother, Margaret Ann McFall Caldwell, age 40, related that they had bought some “old Texas cows” to milk. Thomas offered to help some girls that were struggling to milk one of those cows. When he roped a cow so that the girl could milk it, the cow bolted. His foot was caught in the rope and he was thrown to the ground breaking his collarbone and causing him constant pain. As reported on August 31, President Willie personally administered to him and things improved, but he continued to struggle to get over the injury because of gangrene.17

Although the Saints reported crossing the Wood River on August 28, they most likely crossed the Wood River on August 30 just west of present-day Shelton and then traveled four miles further west. Their trail between Shelton and Gibbon, Nebraska, followed US Highway 30.

Sunday, August 31

5:26 a.m.–6:36 p.m.

Started out of Camp about 7 a.m. leaving Col. Babbitt behind. He however overtook us at the point where the road leaves Wood River and where we took in water. He went ahead of us to Fort Kearney. Travelled on for about 16 miles further to the place where the road nearly strikes Platte River. On our way met 4 Californians who gave good reports of our trains and stated that crops in the Valley were first-rate when they passed through on 2nd August. I omitted to state yesterday that Bro. Culwell whose collar bone was broken was promptly administered to by President Willie and his shoulder and arm bandaged. He is doing well today. About 218 miles from Florence.

Their road left the Wood River and went closer to the Platte River. In contrast to the discouragement and harassment the Saints had experienced in Iowa, the four Californians they met gave a favorable report about “the Valley” and reported that the crops in the Salt Lake Valley were “first-rate.”

In a rare example of near agreement, three records reported traveling 18 miles. Peder Madsen recorded traveling 20 miles. They were now on the main Mormon–California Trail, which they followed on and off several times. They camped in the vicinity of present-day Kearney, Nebraska. Fort Kearney was on the opposite side of the Platte River. No one was allowed to camp within the ten-mile square military reservation that surrounded the fort. The city of Kearney developed just outside of that boundary some years later. Levi Savage referred to Fort Kearney as “Fort Carney.” His spelling was clearly phonetic because that is how it is still pronounced by its residents today.

Monday, September 1

5:28 a.m.–6:33 p.m.

Left Camp about 7:30 a.m. and crossed 2 dry creeks besides Elm Creek where we watered cattle and dined. Journeyed to Buffalo Creek on a bend of which we camped for the night with plenty of grass and wood and rather indifferent water it being very low and consequently stagnant. Capt. Siler and Bros. Jost and Elder by permission went ahead of the Camp in pursuit of Buffalo and succeeded in killing one which was not brought into Camp till about 11 p.m. A cow was killed today previous to the Buffalo by direction of Prest. Willie. About 238 miles from Florence.

Fresh meat was intended to balance the company’s diet. After the successful buffalo hunt, William Woodward recorded that the meat was brought in by several men using handcarts. This was the second time they saw buffalo and their first successful hunt.

Levi Savage’s record related having “disagreeable words concerning Brother Siler’s driving his teams after the handcarts and in front of the handcart teams.” He and President Willie had disagreed as to the order of the procession. Levi Savage argued that the handcart support wagons were to be used as an aid for sick handcart trekkers and should follow the handcarts directly. President Willie prevailed. From his entry it is clear that the handcarts went first in the line. They were followed by the “independent” wagons. Last in the line were the handcart support wagons.

Tuesday, September 2

5:29 a.m.–6:31 p.m.

Cutting up weighing and delivering meat occupied some little time this morning. Left Camp about 9 a.m. and after crossing a dry creek journeyed to crossing of Buffalo Creek where we dined. After crossing journeyed to the point where that Creek leaves the road. Camped there for the night with plenty of grass wood and water. We camped here in consequence of its being probable that water could not be reached in less than 10 miles. About 250 miles from Florence.

The distribution of fresh meat caused a delay in starting. Peder Madsen wrote that “¾ pound cow and 1½ pound buffalo” were distributed per person. In addition, he recorded their regular food rations: “sugar, coffee, tea, salt, soap, rice etc. for 6 days and 1 pound fine flour per person per day.”

On September 1 the Saints camped on a bend of Buffalo Creek. On September 2 they crossed a dry creek and then went to a crossing of Buffalo Creek. The Saints crossed the creek, went an unknown distance further, and camped where the trail left the creek. This trail took them on a path that would have left them about six miles from the Platte River, with miles of open, waterless prairie to cross. The main Mormon–California Trail stayed much closer to the Platte River.

Wednesday, September 3

5:31 a.m.–6:30 p.m.

Elizabeth Ingra of the Cambridgeshire Conference in England died about daybreak this morning and was buried in a grave 5 feet deep before starting of Camp which moved off about 8 a.m. President Willie and other Brethren staid behind for an hour to complete the interment and to cut and erect a tombstone. After travelling about 6 miles passed 2 bands of a creek of water on our left and stopped after about 12 miles journey to dine on the open prairie without wood or water at which point the Brethren killed 2 buffaloes which came within shot of the handcarts. Good hard road this morning except at intervals where it was studded with patches of sand. The country rolling. Pursued our journey till we arrived at a pit or small lake of water on our left where we camped for the night without wood but with good feed. 265 miles from Florence.

Death:

Elizabeth Ingra, age 75

Not since August 15, about three weeks earlier, had anyone died in the company. Elizabeth Ingra, age 75, who Levi Savage reported had been carried in a handcart since Iowa City, died. In contrast with how things would be in just six short weeks, a five-foot-deep grave was dug and a tombstone erected.

Buffalo were now plentiful. This was ideal buffalo country. The Platte River Valley, near present-day Cozad and Lexington, Nebraska, is more than 12 miles wide. There were seemingly endless low rolling hills covered with grass. Levi Savage stated that buffalo could be seen in all directions and that having no wood they were cooking with buffalo chips. The animals were coming close enough to the handcarts to be shot by the hunters. Peder Madsen stated that they saw thousands of them and that Ole Madsen, age 41, a Dane, shot a large buffalo, and so did an unnamed Englishman. There was so much meat that two pounds per person were distributed.

Thursday, September 4

5:32 a.m.–6:29 p.m.

It being ascertained this morning that 30 head of cattle had strayed away (most probably in a stampede) during the night, President Willie despatched all the able-bodied men to search for them and after several hours’ search the Brethren returned with reports of failures. A council was then called by Prest. Willie and afterwards different brethren under the command of Capt. Savage, Siler and Christianson started in different directions. Capt. Siler with his company returned about 5 and Captains Savage and Christianson with theirs about 8 p.m. (Capt. Savage’s was a mule company, and Captains Siler and Christianson’s were on foot), after a fruitless search. This morning Col. Babbitt overtook us and reported that it was uncertain whether Mrs. Wilson (the woman who was stated in this journal of 29ult. to have been “taken captive”) was dead or alive, but that she had not yet been found—that the statement made to him by his 2 men (the one “Parish” by name and the other called “John” and wounded through the thigh) whom he had found at Fort Kearney was that one of them (Parish) being on guard and noticing some Indians coming upon their camp alarmed the other men who were sleeping under the waggons, as also Mrs. Wilson—that the Indians immediately began to fire & he (the guard) shot at them with a revolver several times from behind a waggon during which time he saw the waggon-master shot dead, and that finding the numbers too great he and “John” made their escape to Fort Kearney. Col. Babbitt also reported that the Cheyenne Indians attacked a small waggon-train from California last Sunday and killed a woman- that the U. S. Dragoons had killed 13 Cheyennes and taken a number of horses. The Col. also stated that according to report this tribe was concentrating all its strength in the neighborhood of Ash Hollow where the troops were expecting a fight. The Col. very kindly lent me a letter which he found amongst Mrs. Wilson’s papers, and which he said was written by herself containing a short history of occurrences between Florence and the Loup Fork from whence it was dated on 21st ult. It commenced with the words “Dear Cousin” and was left unfinished, the later half being written in pencil. It was manifest from the tenor of the letter that the writer was very uneasy and had more or less during the whole journey entertained apprehensions of danger from some source or other. It would seem that she wrote the letter while some of the men had gone in search of their cattle which they found 18 miles from their Camp. Col. B. reported that Prest. Smoot’s train would probably be opposite to us on the other side of the Platte this evening which turned out to be the case.

The single biggest setback the company would suffer happened during the night between the third and the fourth. The Willie Company was in the area near present-day Cozad, Nebraska. They camped by a small lake, called by Levi Savage Chutah or Chutak Lake. It was described in the company journal on September 3 as “a pit or a small lake.” Identifying the trail through Dawson County and where the company’s cattle were lost is very difficult. The journals provided very little precise location information. One of the earliest histories of Nebraska and Dawson County described the physical situation. “On the north the tributaries of (the Platte River) are Buffalo Creek and several very small creeks, most of them containing running water only a portion of the year.” The history also explained the potential source of Levi Savage’s Chutah Lake. “The beds of the streams are dotted with deep holes, that always contain water furnished by springs at the bottom.”18 While surrounded by buffalo, 30 of their “best working cattle” strayed or stampeded away. Their search was fruitless. They never found any of the 30 animals.

The company journal and Levi Savage’s record treated the oxen becoming lost almost matter of fact. George Cunningham, age 16, wrote that the stampede was followed by a terrible prairie storm. Along with thunder and lightening, the storm included wind so harsh that the tents had to be held down to avoid being blown away. In the morning the cattle were discovered missing and their tracks were obliterated by the heavy rain.19 Levi Savage agreed. He recorded that, “We had an awful storm last night.” Peder Madsen commented, “During the night a storm raged with strong hurricane like winds that threw some of the tents down and brought much disturbance.”

On September 4 the Saints were also distracted by Colonel Babbitt meeting them again. He had learned more details of the Indian attack that his wagons had suffered a few days earlier. He also reported that a battle was expected between the Cheyenne and the United States Army in the Ash Hollow area. They would be to Ash Hollow in a matter of days. Not realizing how disastrous the loss of their animals was, they focused much of their concern on the anticipated Indian attack.

Note: “Ult.” as used in the company journal means ultimo or preceding; “29ult.” refers to the previous month, August 29.

Friday, September 5

5:33 a.m.–6:27 p.m.

This morning Prest. Willie sent out together Capt. Savage in command of a mule company and Captain Christianson in command of a foot company in search of the missing cattle, but the 2 parties returned at dark together this evening and reported a complete failure. Capt. Siler and other Brethren visited President Smoot’s Company this morning which they overtook 12 miles from our Camp. President Smoot and Capt. O. P. Rockwell returned with our brethren and met with our Officers in Council this evening. They camped with us for the night.

Abraham O. Smoot and Orin Porter Rockwell were both leading wagon trains toward Salt Lake City traveling on the south side of the Platte River along the Oregon Trail. Colonel Babbitt had reported on September 4 that Smoot’s train was on the south side of the Platte River. In President Franklin D. Richards and Daniel Spencer’s official report of their travels to Salt Lake City from Florence, it was reported that there were 88 people and 42 wagons in Smoot’s train, but that they were struggling with only 33 men fit to drive the wagons. Porter Rockwell’s train was much smaller with only five wagons.20

The leaders met in a council that evening to discuss their plight. The meeting was mentioned in the company journal, in William Woodward’s history, and in Peder Madsen’s journal. Peder Madsen was the only one to relate the plan they formulated. The company was to be divided into two divisions. The first group would use their animals to move forward and then send back the animals to help bring the second group forward.

Saturday, September 6

5:35 a.m.–6:26 p.m.

This morning President Smoot at the request of our President made some cheering remarks to the Saints and showed us the necessity of strict and ready obedience at the conclusion of which President Willie told the Brethren to yoke up their remaining cattle and the cows and be ready for an immediate move. The first and second hundred and part of the third hundred accompanied by the P.E.F. waggons to start first which was done accordingly. At the same time Bros. Joseph Elder and Andrew Smith were sent back to search for the lost cattle with instructions to go on till they met Franklin D. Richards. After a few hours’ absence the teams which had moved off the first half of our Company returned and took away the remaining half the whole Company about 4 or 5 miles nearer the Valley in the bend of a fine creek near the Platte. This evening at Prayers Capt. Siler made some remarks to that portion of the Camp entrusted to his charge on the principle of obedience & more particularly as it bore on the Saints’ present position here and which remarks had a tendency to prepare their minds for some coming trial of their confidence in God and his Servants. President Smoot and Capt. Rockwell left us this afternoon for their Camp.

Due to the loss of oxen to pull the heavily laden wagons, the company was now in serious trouble and they knew it. Peder Madsen gave specific details of what they did. In the morning the first three hundreds, along with seven wagons, moved four miles up the trail. The animals were allowed to rest and then taken back to the fourth and fifth hundreds and the remaining five wagons. The animals were then hitched up to the five wagons and used to haul the wagons up the trail to where the first set of wagons were waiting. It quickly became obvious that this approach was simply not workable.

At the end of the day, Andrew Siler, the captain of the “independent” wagons, urged his group to be obedient. He seemed to feel the gravity of the situation and remarked that this experience was preparing the people’s minds for some coming trial of their faith.

Sunday, September 7

5:36 a.m.–6:25 p.m.

This morning a council was held and soon afterwards the whole Camp was called together by the well known sound of the horn. President Willie called on Capt. Atwood to preside over the meeting. After singing, “How firm a foundation ye Saints of the Lord” &c., Prest. Atwood called on Captains Chislett, Woodward, Savage and Siler (in the order of their names) to address the Saints which these Brethren did showing very clearly the difficulties of our present position and urging on the people the absolute necessity for doing away with the spirit of grumbling, strife, pilfering and disregard of counsel which was now on the increase in the Camp and substituting in its place the spirit of contentment, peace, union and strict obedience. President Atwood then addressed the Saints stating his cordial approbation of the Brethren’s remarks which he believed would be heeded and thus reduced into practice by the people. He adverted (as also did Capt. Siler in his observations) to the “Independent Waggon Company” and said his feelings was for the owners to consecrate waggons and teams and everything belonging to them to the Lord through his Servant President Willie to be used in the present emergency as the Holy Ghost should dictate through him. Prest. Atwood urged the pilferers to come forward and openly confess their faults before their Brethren who would then extend to them the friendly hand of forgiveness. He told the Saints plainly they must one and all from this time as far as they knew how, literally obey the counsel of each particular officer placed immediately over them without repining or grumbling openly or secretly. President Willie then summed up the whole matter examining minutely the ground occupied by the preceding speakers and expressing his approbation of their remarks. He said (as also did President Atwood in his preceding speech) that the whole strength of the Camp, that of men, women, children and beasts—must be applied under the direction of the Officers of the Camp for the one object in view, the early resumption and speedy & final completion of the journey which he (with President Atwood) considered might, even now, be continued at the rate of from 10 to 15 miles per day according to circumstances. He urged on the Brethren and Sisters attached to the “Independent” Waggons and who had no particular occupation except to walk alongside those vehicles or to ride inside them to walk altogether or as much as practicable and besides to confer honor on themselves by assisting to pull handcarts or doing anything else which their Superior Officer might direct or which they might see required to be done even though it should be to leave their luggage on the Plains. Prest. Willie said he would not enter into full particulars of the plan of operations which he contemplated further than by saying that if the Brethren or Sisters drawing handcarts should be required by their Captain to draw 4 or 5 hundred of flour they must do it cheerfully and the Waggon Company must act on the same principle by carrying anything and everything which might be required of them by like authority. He entirely concurred in the remarks of President Atwood and the other Brethren and would like to see all the grumblers, pilferers, liars and so forth if any were still so in their hearts immediately stand by themselves aside from the rest so that the Brethren might better know them. He concluded by suggesting that President Atwood test the feelings of the Camp by obtaining their vote to sustain the various Officers in their respective positions to the very uttermost in carrying out such measures as the Holy Ghost might devise through them for most safely and speedily gathering this Company to Zion, expressing his strong desire that none would raise their hands toward Heaven in support of such a vote unless they meant it from their hearts and would literally and willingly carry out its spirit when the Officers came to execute their duty. President Atwood then put the question in the affirmative terms mentioned by President Willie at the same time wishing the people not to lower their hands till he told them to do so. The motion was carried unanimously and on its being put in the negative not a single hand was held up. The Meeting was then dismissed and the Brethren immediately went to work to execute the will of President Willie which was cheerfully responded to. Afterwards President Willie and Captains Atwood and Siler with other Brethren yoked up many of the cows which was an arduous task. Early this morning some animals were observed at a considerable distance from our Camp and supposing they might be our missing cattle President Willie, Captain Savage and others went out to reconnoitre but found the animals were a small herd of horses belonging to some men from California who afterwards came to our Camp to purchase flour, a mission in which they completely failed as none were willing to sell in our present emergency. They said they gave 20 cents a pound for flour at Fort Laramie which they left 12 days ago leaving a poor lean horse on the road 25 miles above this point. They reported having met a handcart company on the Sweetwater and 2 other Companies behind them “all right” and that grass was scarce for 3 days’ journey from this point though afterwards we should find it very plentiful. One of these men who gave his name as “James M. Hurn” stated that he lived in Salt Lake City in 1854. The only thing in the shape of provisions which this party wanted for was breadstuffs.

This was the longest entry in the company journal. It reflected the serious nature of the company’s plight. They stayed put and spent the day trying to yoke up the wild cows. The “spirit of grumbling, strife, pilfering and disregard of counsel” was to be replaced by a positive spirit. It is apparent that conflicts surrounding the “Independent Waggon Company” had come to a head. The suggestion was made that the owners of these independent wagons should consecrate their wagons, their teams, and everything belonging to them to the Lord to be used in this emergency. The owners of these wagons were not willing to do so. It was also a source of trouble to have Saints struggling with handcarts, while others walked carefree along the trail. The carefree walkers were asked to join the sacrificing by helping to pull the handcarts. There is no evidence that they were willing to do even that much to help.

President Willie had an alternative plan, which would require great sacrifice among his company. With the loss of the 30 animals, the teams could not pull the weight of the wagons. The flour carried in the Perpetual Emigration Fund wagons was essential. The plan was to have each handcart carry some of the flour. He said that if the handcarts were asked “to draw 4 or 5 hundred of flour they must do it cheerfully.” The thought of pulling 400 or 500 pounds of additional flour by handcart would have been daunting. Peder Madsen confirmed that the five P. E. F. wagons would be pulled by 12 oxen and the best cows, while sacks of flour and tents would be loaded onto the handcarts.

Robert Reeder, age 19, wrote that the best oxen were lost in the stampede. Some flour was taken from the wagons and put on the handcarts depending on the strength of those pulling the carts. His brother-in-law, James Hurren, age 29, was considered the strongest man in the company. He put five of the 100-pound sacks of flour on his handcart, along with two small girls who were not able to walk, and his family’s baggage.21 James Hurren was also very willing to do more than his share of general camp duties, including additional nighttime guard duty. President Willie promised James “that if only one man reached the valley, it would be him.” He did reach the Salt Lake Valley.22

Monday, September 8

5:37 a.m.–6:24 p.m.

This morning a man who gave his name as “Henry Bauichter” came into our camp on horseback. He stated that he was a discharged Soldier from Fort Laramie which he left on 29th ult, and that after travelling about 30 miles he overtook a waggon with 2 mules and 2 horses, the one an Indian horse with a white face, the mules alone drawing the waggon, accompanied by 2 men, one of whom gave his name as “Thomas Margetts” and the other as “James Cowdy”—that the former appeared to have a wife and the latter a wife and child, the whole of whom, as the 2 men stated, were on their way from Great Salt Lake City to the States—that about 70 miles ahead of us on what is supposed to be the North Bluff Creek he and Thomas Margetts went out on horseback in search of buffalo—that this was between 1 and 2 p.m. on 6th inst.—that he (Bauichter) soon killed a buffalo upon which Margetts returned to the Waggon to fetch some things for carrying away part of the animal which Bauichter staid behind to dress—that on Margetts’ return from the waggon he filled one utensil, principally with tallow, and started again for the waggon while Bauichter remained behind to fill up another utensil which Margetts had brought—that the buffalo was over the bluff about a mile and a half from the waggon—that he (Bauchter) was occupied half an hour or so, after Margetts’ last departure, in cutting up meat and filling the other utensil immediately whereupon he also returned in the direction of the waggon noticing before his arrival there that the wagon-cover had been stripped off and that neither mules nor horses were to be seen—that on his (B’s) arrival he discovered on the ground the bodies of Margetts, Cowdy, his wife and child, all dead, except the child that was crying and bloody—that he (B) saw no wounds on any of the bodies and an arrow was sticking in Cowdy’s thigh (whether the right or left one he could not say) and Mrs. C. was sitting in an upright posture leaning against some raised ground, with her breasts and private parts exposed and her head leaning backwards and seemed to have been brutally treated by her murderers—that the waggon, the hinder part of which was on fire, had been completely ransacked and all that was of any immediate use taken away—that he (B) looked around for Mrs. Margetts whom he could not find—that the feathers from a bed had been strewn on the ground by the side of the waggon but he could not see the bed-tick—that he saw at some considerable distance 12 men or so on horseback apparently riding fast and, as far as he could discover, Indians—that none of the bodies were scalped—that he heard no report of fire-arms during his absence from the waggon and that not feeling himself safe in the neighborhood of the murders he escaped with his horse, and with the loss of his discharge and other papers, about $300, a gold watch and other things which he had deposited in the waggon and made the best of his way to this point intending to reach Fort Kearney and report the facts there as quickly as possible. Bauichter said he did not meet any one on his journey from Fort Laramie to our Camp where he arrived stating that he had not eaten for 50 hours. His wants in this respect were supplied and he was furnished with food and ammunition to Fort Kearney for which place he started about 11 a.m. He stated that the 2 horses were ridden at intervals during the journey by Mr. and Mrs. Margetts. The fixing up of our remodelled teams and the changing of freight from one waggon to another occupied the entire morning. We started about noon and after travelling along the Platte Bottom for about 10 or 12 miles, part of the road being very swampy and sandy, we camped for the night close to the River with good feed. Fetched wood from an Island in the River.

This was Henry Bauichter’s report of another Indian attack that happened two days earlier near North Bluff Creek. Levi Savage recorded that Margetts and Cowdy were from Salt Lake City and were well known by the Saints. Almost as an afterthought, the day’s report of progress was made. It is hard to imagine the fear and helplessness that the Saints endured as they found themselves 300 miles from civilization with reports of Indian attacks about 70 miles ahead and with the loss of their best pulling animals.

Levi Savage reported that forty 100-pound sacks of flour were transferred from the wagons to the handcarts. The company’s milk cows had to be yoked up to pull the wagons. Placing a yoke on a milk cow that has never been yoked is a rodeo-worthy event. These untrained animals did not understand how to pull together. He reported that the experience went “extraordinarily well.” He concluded his entry by writing, “Surely the hand of the Lord is with us yet.”

Sadly, Peder Madsen’s journal ended without any explanation on September 8. He eventually died just outside of Salt Lake City, in Echo Canyon, on November 5.

Note: “Inst.” as used in the company journal means instant or present; “6th inst.” refers to the present month, September 6.

Tuesday, September 9

5:38 a.m.–6:22 p.m.

Rolled out of Camp at 8:30 a.m. our teams still being very troublesome to fix up. Journeyed about 6 miles and then stopped to water cattle and to dine over a sand bluff to cross which we had to double teams. Continued our journey from the river upon the banks of which we camped for the night close to the point where Skunk Creek empties itself into the River. Very heavy sandy roads throughout the day. About 285 miles from Florence.

Pawnee Creek empties into the Platte River near present-day Brady, Nebraska. Skunk Creek must have been the name of present-day Pawnee Creek. The trail had to hug the bluffs to avoid the Pawnee swamp. The various journals mentioned the sandy roads and sandy bluffs. The Saints were entering the “sandhills” of Nebraska. This area of Nebraska was primarily a series of low hills that were really sand dunes stabilized by grass. When a wagon or a handcart rode over the grass, it left unstabilized sand. As the Saints already knew, sandy roads were much harder to pull a wagon or a handcart across. At one point they had to double the teams to pull up the wagons.

Wednesday, September 10

5:40 a.m.–6:21 p.m.

Left Camp a little before 9 a.m. & journeyed on to crossing of Skunk Creek, President Willie, Capt. Atwood and other brethren carrying the Sisters over the stream. Camped for the night at a good spring of clear cold water on the south side of the road with good feed but no wood. Roads worse than yesterday. 295 miles from Florence.

President Willie and “other brethren” carried the sisters over Skunk Creek because of the long skirts they wore throughout the trek. In the California gold rush period, some women who crossed the plains had begun to wear “bloomers,” which were very baggy pantaloons. Unlike the long skirts of the day, the bloomers were not as likely to get filthy and shredded as they walked. However, most women would have no part of bloomers. Their long skirts provided them privacy as they took care of important personal matters out on the open prairie. However, when a woman’s skirt got wet, it held plenty of water. The added weight made it difficult to walk. Consequently, some of the men carried the women across this creek.

Thursday, September 11

5:41 a.m.–6:19 p.m.

Left Camp about 8 a.m. crossed Carrion Creek, nooned on banks of Platte River and camped for the night on the banks of the same. Buffalo killed this evening after arrival of Camp. Some of the Brethren thought they saw horsemen and carriages coming along this evening at dusk but it unfortunately turned out to be a “bag of moonshine”. Good feed and lots of “chips” as usual. We have most delightful weather and are being prospered beyond our utmost expectations. Better roads today; the health of the Camp which has been indifferent for some time past is improving and all is well with us. About 300 miles from Florence. Our camping place for the night was on the north fork of the Platte about 9 miles above the junction.

They were still in the heart of buffalo country and a buffalo was killed for meat. The Indians that inhabited the Nebraska Territory in 1856 were Plains Indians. The Plains Indians’ culture was built around the buffalo and required that every part of the buffalo be used. This included their droppings, which were called buffalo chips. The journal reported that there were lots of chips as usual. When dried, most buffalo manure breaks roughly into quarter-inch slices, referred to as “chips.” When wood was not available, the pioneers used buffalo chips to build their fires.

Present-day Whitehorse Creek must have been Carrion Creek. Their camp “9 miles above the junction” on the North Platte River would have put them a few miles past present-day North Platte, Nebraska.

Friday, September 12

5:42 a.m.–6:18 p.m.

Pursuant to a previous threat or promise Capt. Atwood pulled down a tent or two this morning (about an hour and a half after the horn had blown) exposing the serene features of its sleeping inmates much to their chagrin and the amusement of bystanders. Some of the sleepers wanted to draw the tent back over them as a covering but it was “no go”—they stood confessed to the “vulgar gaze.” Buffalo meat served out this morning first thing—Left Camp about 8:30 a.m., crossed a fine creek nooned on the banks of the Platte and afterwards crossed the North Bluff Fork. Pretty good feed. This evening President Franklin D. Richards and suite (with Bros. Elder and Smith who went in search of the missing cattle) arrived just before dusk in 3 carriages and 2 waggons. They were loudly greeted by the hearty hurrahs of the Saints whom they met after supper when Prest. Willie in a few appropriate remarks introduced Prest. Richards into whose hands he gave the Meeting to be led by him as the Holy Ghost might dictate. Bro. Richards then called on Bro. Dunbar for a song. He accordingly sang one of the Songs of Zion. Prest. Richards then addressed the Saints expressing his satisfaction at their having journeyed thus far & more especially with handcarts and congratulating them on the loss of their cattle which he knew had proved and would prove their salvation if they would hearken to and diligently obey counsel to the letter in which event he promised in the name of Israel’s God and by the authority of the Holy Priesthood that no obstacle whatever should come in the way of this Camp but what they should be able by their united faith and works to overcome God being their helper and that if a Red Sea whould interpose they should by their union of heart & hand walk through it like Israel of old dryshod. On the same conditions he promised that though they might have some trials to endure as a proof to God and their Brethren that they had the true “grit” still the Lamanites heat nor cold nor any other thing should have power to seriously harm any in the Camp but that we should arrive in the Valleys of the Mountains with strong and healthy bodies and that this should be the case with the aged the sick and the inform. He said that next to the Pioneers the Handcart Companies would meet with the most hearty and gracious reception from Prest. Young the Authorities under him and all the Saints in Utah of any Companies that ever entered the Valley. Prest. Richards said although it was a scheme at which many had already scoffed and which they were yet deriding it was nevertheless the Lord’s plan, a plan which would first puzzle and astonish the nations and then strike terror into their hearts. He encouraged the Saints to live the principles of their religion not only openly before the world but privately in their families and in their intercourse with each other and to scorn all the trials and difficulties which might come in their way, assuring them as the result of such a course that they should find favor with God, and have the confidence of the Brethren things which were to him at all events far above all the gold, silver and precious stones in the Universe. His words had the tendency to build up, strengthen and encourage the people and seemed to electrify his hearers as it were. The Holy Ghost was felt in its almighty and renovating power during the whole time we were together and the people seconded his sentiments by a hearty “Amen” from time to time. Counsellors Daniel Spencer and Cyrus H. Wheelock addressed the Saints in a few stirring remarks bearing testimony to the truth of the words spoken by Prest. Richards. These Brethren exhorted the Saints to obedience, union and brotherly love as they valued their salvation across these Plains. The meeting was then dismissed with prayer by Capt. Atwood after which an account was taken of the number of cows, oxen, waggons, fire-arms, &c., for representation by President Richards to the First Presidency. Bro. Dunbar sang several songs of Zion during the meeting. Camped for the night on the North Bluff Fork of the Platte—320 miles from Florence.

The Saints were leaving later each day. One cause of their lateness appears to have been some people sleeping in at least an hour and a half after the horn had blown to wake them. Millen Atwood had threatened to pull down the tents of these “sleeping inmates” and he did. He refused to let them set the tents back up, so they were forced to suffer this humiliation.

Juxtaposed against that low point was the arrival of President Franklin D. Richards and his traveling group of missionaries in the evening. President Richards’s group was literally racing to get to Salt Lake City, but stopped for the night to encourage the Saints. He gave a rousing speech which invited the Holy Ghost. Brother Dunbar, who was asked to sing twice on September 12 and once on September 13, was William C. Dunbar, age 36, a missionary returning to Utah. He was the same William C. Dunbar who was on board the steamboat Saluda on April 9, 1852, when she blew up near Lexington, Missouri. He lost his wife and two children in the explosion on his initial trip to the Salt Lake Valley.23

North Bluff Fork or North Bluff Creek is now called Birdwood Creek. This was the area where the Margetts and the Cowdys had been killed by Indians just days earlier. This Indian attack may have been a factor in the direction of President Richards to have the handcarts cross the North Platte River on September 13, rather than to proceed on toward Fort Laramie, where the Mormon Trail normally crossed the North Platte River.

Saturday, September 13

5:44 a.m.–6:17 p.m.

This morning we were summoned together about 7 o’clock. Prest. Richards opened the Meeting by calling on Counsellor C.H. Wheelock to engage in prayer. Bro. Dunbar then sang an appropriate song at the conclusion of which Prest. R. gave the Saints some good and wholesome instruction especially impressing on their minds the absolute necessity of literal and prompt obedience and reminding them that Prest. Willie was invested with absolute authority to direct the affairs of this Camp. President R’s remarks were well received by the Saints and there was a perfect unanimity of feeling manifested. He then dismissed the meeting with prayer at the conclusion of which our President moved that we give 3 cheers for Prest.R. and Suite which was quickly responded to by the waveing of hats, handkerchiefs and bonnets and 3 united hearty and uproarious hip—hip—hip -hurrahs. He then said that as he had found a good place for crossing the Platte nearly opposite our present camping ground our Company had better cross at once. He and his Suite crossed and Prest. Willie immediately gave instructions for all of us to follow. The crossing occupied till pretty late in the afternoon and the teams being wearied he decided on camping on the south side of the Platte. A calf was killed this morning from our herd for Prest.R. Father William Haley of the Warwickshire Conference in England died this afternoon from general decay of constitution aged 66 years.

Death:

William Haley, age 66

Levi Savage reported that the company got up at 4 a.m. and was ready to go by 7 a.m. This was in contrast to the previous 8:30–9:00 a.m. starts. Instead of leaving at 7 a.m., President Richards called a special meeting. The company journal described its purpose as to emphasize “the absolute necessity of literal and prompt obedience” to President Willie. The Saints were united in support of President Richards’s admonishment. On the other hand, Levi Savage’s journal described it as a meeting to chastise him for his comments in Florence and his “disagreeable words” concerning Captain Siler’s independent wagon teams on September 1. William Woodward confirmed Levi Savage’s conclusion, by stating in his history that Levi Savage was given “a severe reprimand.” Levi Savage humbly asked for forgiveness.

President Richards instructed the company to cross the North Platte River at that point, which they did. The river was a mile wide and took the whole day to cross. This does not appear to have been a normal crossing point, but there was a trail on the south side of the North Platte River which they could follow. William Haley, age 66, the same man who had been lost on the night of August 28, died.

Driving Directions

Saturday, September 13

To follow the company’s trail at North Platte, Nebraska, there are two options. To take the easier route, which generally follows the Oregon Trail stay on I-80 and travel west to Exit 126. At Exit 126 take US Highway 26 and travel north and west through Ash Hollow. To follow a route that approximates the Willie Handcart Company route but requires some travel on gravel roads, take Exit 177 and travel north into the city of North Platte on US Highway 83. Three and one-half miles north of the off ramp is a road called North River Road. It is past the North Platte River Bridge on the north side of the North Platte River. The GPS point at the turn is N 41 09.747’ W 100 45.448’. Turn left onto the North River Road and travel generally west and north for about three miles as it winds along to a sharp, left-hand curve. Curve to the left and follow the asphalt road, which is still the North River Road, and travel west again. The road eventually changes to gravel. Continue traveling west one more mile to where the road turns south. Travel south for one-half mile and, where the road turns west again, travel west along the river to a stop sign. Turn south at the stop sign onto Prairie Trace, an asphalt road, and travel south, across the bridge, for 2.2 miles. Turn right onto Snake Road, a gravel road, and travel west as it snakes around to the west for about 1.5 miles. Snake Road turns south and goes up a hill to a stop sign. Turn right at the stop sign and drive west on Snake Road, an asphalt road, for 3.5 more miles to another stop sign. Turn right and travel west for four miles to the end of the asphalt. When the asphalt ends, continue traveling west on what Keith County calls East 120 for five more miles to a T intersection. At the intersection turn left and travel south one-half mile on the asphalt road and then turn right. Travel west again on East 120, a gravel road, for about nine miles as it makes various right and left curves until it intersects East 110. At the intersection with East 110, which is nearly at the top of the hill, turn right onto East 110 and travel west for two miles to an intersection with East J. Turn right onto East J and travel one mile north until it intersects East 120. Turn left and drive west for seven miles on East 120 through a stop sign and to an asphalt road, State Road 61. Turn left on State Road 61 and travel west for about two miles to its junction with US Highway 26. Proceed straight through onto US Highway 26 and travel west through Ash Hollow.

Sunday, September 14

5:45 a.m.–6:16 p.m.

William Haley was buried this morning on our yesterday’s camping ground, a grave-board being inscribed with his name, age, and date of death. Left Camp about 8:30 a.m. nooned at a bend of the Platte and camed for the night about 7 miles further up on the same river. Bro. Joseph Elder killed 2 buffaloes just before arriving in Camp this evening.

Following the Mormon Trail would have kept the company on the north side of the North Platte River. There was, however, a less-used trail on the south side of the North Platte River. It was the path they chose to follow. On the other hand, the Oregon Trail went even farther south and followed the South Platte River to one of three crossings: the Lower Crossing, near Sutherland; the Middle Crossing, near Ogallala; or the Upper Crossing, past Brule, the primary trail crossing. The south side of the North Platte River trail could be accessed by either the Lower or Middle Crossings.24

Monday, September 15

5:46 a.m. 6:14 p.m.

Left Camp about 8:30 a.m. soon after which Father Richard F. Turner of the Worcestershire Conference in England died. He was buried at a bend of the Platte River where we nooned. Journeyed some distance when 3 mounted Indians armed with bows & arrows met us. They represented themselves as of the Tribe called “the Arraphoes” and wished us to camp with their party on the Platte tonight which was not acceded to we being too far from the river. By signs as far as the Brethren could understand them these 3 men represented that some Emigrant Train was attacked by the Sioux Indians 5 days ago, and they thought our train would be attacked also. The Brethren by signs said we had plenty of rifles, powder, lead and caps. The 3 Indians shook their heads. Camped for the night on the open prairie close to a small muddy pool of water scarcely sufficient for cooking purposes. Poor feed. Cattle chained to the waggons for the night. They have had a long & tedious day’s journey and seem quite exhausted though the roads on the whole have been tolerably good. Prest. Willie notified the Saints that the horn would blow in the morning at rise at 3 so as to start at 4.

Death:

Richard F. Turner, age 66

When traveling on the south side of the North Platte River, there were two spots where the river passed so closely to the bluffs that the bluffs had to be ascended. The bluffs were skirted by cliffs, 10 to 20 feet high, but even that little of a cliff made it impossible for the wagons and handcarts to cross them. The first spot was near the present-day Kingsley Dam, which created Lake McConaughy. The second spot was one-half mile or so downstream from the mouth of Ash Hollow. On the approach to the first spot, about 10 miles west of present-day Sarben, Nebraska, there was an area where the bluffs could be ascended. The company took that path. At the top of the bluff, they met three Arapahoe who told of a Sioux attack within the last week. That night the company camped very cautiously on the open prairie without feed or good water. Levi Savage’s and William Woodward’s records also noted that their animals were chained up so there was no chance of the animals being separated from the company.

Tuesday, September 16

5:47 a.m.–6:13 p.m.

Rolled out about 4 a.m. accordingly and after travelling through a deep winding ravine over a very heavy sandy road we nooned on the banks of the Platte with splendid feed. Since noon yesterday we have been travelling over a long range of bluffs which have opened at noon today on the Platte Bottom. The guard saw several Indians round our Camp about 2 this morning on the bluffs but on going up to the spot they could not be found though they with their dogs were heard in the distance. Journeyed over some heavy sandy bluffs this afternoon and camped for the night in the valley by the side of the Platte.

There was no water on the bluffs, so the company had to return to the North Platte River. An 1898 topographical map reportedly showed two roads from the top of the bluffs to the river bottom. They were one-half mile and two miles west of the Kingsley Dam. Both locations would have been difficult descents to the river. Lake McConaughy now covers the trail from this point until west of Eagle Canyon, which is seven miles east of Ash Hollow.25

Although Levi Savage reported that the Saints were fatigued by the sandy roads, not everyone was so worn out. Agnes Caldwell, age 9, and her friend, Mary Hurren, age 7, remembered traveling through an area inhabited by rattlesnakes. They would hold hands and jump over the snakes. Agnes said, “It seemed to me we were jumping for more than a mile. Due to the protecting hand of the Lord, we were not harmed.”26

Wednesday, September 17

5:49 a.m.–6:12 p.m.

We were delayed this morning (as we had been on previous occasions in consequence of some handcarts which had been broken requiring repair. Left Camp about 9:30 a.m., nooned on the banks of the Platte and camped for the night on the banks of the same River. Very bad sandy roads throughout the day which, combined with a very high wind rendered it the most arduous day’s trip up to this point.

A cold front appears to have passed over the company as they were getting underway. Levi Savage reported “a cold and strong wind arose from the northwest,” so they traveled only about 10 miles. William Woodward recorded, “The wind blew terrific thro’ the day.” They stayed on the banks of the North Platte River and fought the sand and wind all day.

Thursday, September 18

5:50 a.m.–6:10 p.m.

Last night and this morning we had a very sharp frost. Rolled forward about 9 a.m. and after travelling some distance over our usually (of late) sandy roads nooned at the foot of some high bluffs near the River from which we took a 7 mile supply of water. I omitted to state in my journal for yesterday that Bro. J.S. Cantwell’s daughter Ellen (aged 7 years) was bitten by a large rattlesnake as she was playing in the sand. Capt. Siler killed the snake and applied the best known remedy at hand (a mixture of powder and lard externally and some whisky internally) after which she slept soundly for some time. After dinner today we made a start up the side of the bluffs which occupied a considerable time—journeyed over hill and dale for several miles till after passing through Ash Hollow we again entered the Platte Bottom where we camped for the night. Fine cedar found on the bluffs. Sister Stewart was found to be missing on the arrival of the Camp and as her footsteps were traced in advance of us Bros. Oliver and Smith were sent ahead in search and returned reporting that they had failed in their mission thus far. 380-¾ miles from Florence.

For the first time that year, it froze during the night. The company continued along the North Platte River until noon, when they had to detour and turn up into the bluffs for a final ascent and then descent into Ash Hollow. The detour from the river bottom to Ash Hollow began about one-half mile from the main trail through Ash Hollow. They had to endure this lengthy detour due to two factors. First, the river ran so close to the bluffs that the ground on the direct path, alongside the river, was an impassable marsh. Second, the trail ascended more than two miles up the bluffs and then back down another two or three miles into the Ash Hollow bottoms because there were numerous cliffs that impeded travel. The trail weaved through the hills as it avoided these cliffs. Levi Savage reported that they had to double their teams to get up the steep hill.

Unlike Agnes Caldwell and Mary Hurren, poor Ellen Cantwell, age 7, did not fare so well with the snakes. She was severely bitten on her hand by a rattlesnake. She did not fully recover until the following January and kept a scar for the rest of her life.27 The company journal reported that they applied a remedy of “powder and lard,” with a little whiskey.

Nancy Stewart, who had been traveling with the independent wagons, was discovered missing at the noon meal. She had joined the Willie Company on August 31, at the request of Colonel Babbitt, and she had been assigned to James Cantwell’s independent wagon. With James’s daughter, Ellen, having been bitten by a snake on September 17 and then his passenger, Nancy Stewart, becoming lost, it is safe to assume that things were not going well for the Cantwells. While struggling into Ash Hollow, they had to send out searchers. Ash Hollow, even today, has an abundance of trees and is an area where people could get lost easily. Levi Savage referred to Almon Babbitt as “Brother Babel.” He designated Nancy Stewart as “Sister Reade.”

Driving Directions

Thursday, September 18

To see where the company’s detour began, follow the main road through Ash Hollow and turn right onto Road 44. Road 44 is a gravel road at the mouth of Ash Hollow. The GPS point at the turn is N 41 18.472’ W 102 07.498’. Travel east about one-half mile to the first draw. They would have gone south up the draw, weaving between the bluffs.

Friday, September 19

5:52 a.m.–6:09 p.m.

After breakfast this morning, Prest. Willie sent out many of the brethren to search for Sister Stewart, while Capt. Siler, Bro. Jost with the assistance of some Brethren repaired the axle-trees and other parts of some broken-down handcarts. The Scouts for Sis. Stewart returned without her about dinner-time. Prest. Willie then called a Council after which he with 11 Brethren went out on a 3rd expedition. They had been absent about 4 hours when she came into Camp stating that hearing the lowing of cattle and the sound of the axe she made for the spot and found Captain Woodward and others (who had been sent into Ash Hollow by Prest. Willie for timber to make axles) cutting wood. On arriving in Camp she appeared much exhausted and was scarcely able to speak. A cow having been killed this morning, she partook of some beef soup which revived her and she fell asleep. This evening after supper, Capt. Atwood called the Saints together for Prayer as usual and was afterwards conversing about the best plan to be adopted to bring back Prest. Willie and Company to the Camp (Capts. Woodward & Chislett having volunteered to go in search on horseback) when they all entered the Camp Prest. Willie stating that having discovered and lost Sis. Stewart’s back track about dark he had deemed it best to return to the Camp for the night and make a fresh start in the morning if necessary. We were all much rejoiced at being restored to each other again.

While some of the men searched for Nancy Stewart, the rest of the company took a day to repair handcarts. There was plenty of wood in the hollow. Levi Savage reported that Sister Stewart had walked on ahead of the company on Thursday. When she reached the main road into Ash Hollow, she turned left toward the South Platte River, instead of right toward the North Platte River. William Woodward and some others found her while cutting wood. Naturally, she was exhausted from her 36-hour ordeal.

Saturday, September 20

5:53 a.m.–6:07 p.m.

This morning Sis. Stewart stated that when she descended into Ash Hollow instead of turning to the right towards the River (where our Camp was) she turned to the left because she saw a road in that direction—that she went for a long distance on such road and then not seeing anything of the Camp turned back to the place where we nooned yesterday near which she slept last night on the bluffs of the open prairie and that she was followed by some wolves one of which came within 2 yards of her and seemed inclined to be rather too familiar which unlawful propensity she instantly checked by a steady gaze accompanied by an authoritative shake or waive of her right hand. The repairs of the handcarts commenced early this morning and we were not able to leave Camp till about 2 p.m., after which we wended our way to the next point where the road joins the Platte at which place we camped for the night about 6 p.m. Roads fast improving with better feed.

After only an occasional mention before the first frost, Levi Savage provided almost daily weather reports in his record for the next few days. Cool and an evening mist of rain was the September 20 weather report, which contrasted with the September 19 report of “extremely warm” weather.

Driving Directions

Saturday, September 20

To follow their trail, travel northwest from Ash Hollow on State Road 92 and US Highway 26 toward Gering and Scottsbluff, Nebraska. When the State Road and the US Highway separate, follow State Road 92. State Road 92 combines with US Highway 385 for a short period of time; stay on State Road 92. Their actual trail was on the south side of the North Platte River and may be partially traceable by following gravel roads on the south side of the river. A few miles past Lewellyn is a roadside marker noting the Battle of Blue Water in 1855. That is another name for the Harney Massacre, which was a big part of the Indian troubles that continued to plague the trail in 1856.

Sunday, September 21

5:54 a.m.–6:06 p.m.

2 handcarts having been broken down yesterday afternoon we were delayed a little this morning for their repair and we therefore did not leave Camp till about 9 a.m. Very wet unpleasant weather. Travelled till 1 p.m. when we camped on the Platte for dinner. Started again at 2 and camped for the night on a bend of the same River with indifferent feed. Roads on the whole heavy and sandy throughout the day. W.N. Leason, son of Sister Ruvinia Leason, of Quincy, Illinois, died at 11:30 p.m. of canker in the stomach. He was born on 7 Nov. 1854.

Death:

William N. Leason, age 22 months

The weather was starting to adversely impact the company. The system was set up so that the sick could ride in the wagons. Levi Savage reported that many were “sick and stopping back to get in the wagons.” The sandy roads were wet, which made them even more difficult to pull through. Two 66-year-old men had died in the previous eight days and now a child had died. Death had begun to stalk the Willie Company.

Monday, September 22

5:56 a.m.–6:05 p.m.

W. N. Leason was buried this morning at 7 o’clock, a suitable inscription in wood being placed on the grave. Rolled out about 7:30 a.m. & nooned and camped for the night on the Platte. A hard and long day’s journey, the roads being more or less very heavy and sandy notwithstanding which Prest. Willie considers we have made from 18 to 20 miles since the morning. In about an hour after the starting of the Camp this afternoon Bro. Jesse Empy of Eaton Bray Branch in the Bedfordshire Conference in England died from scrofula, age 31. Weather turned warm and pleasant about noon but cold set in again before sunset.

Death:

Jesse Empy, age 31

How far they traveled in any day was an estimate. On September 22, President Willie estimated 18 to 20 miles. William Woodward agreed, estimating “about 19 miles.” Levi Savage stated that they traveled “twelve miles.” The weather went quickly from cold to warm to cold. It was typical fall weather on the plains of Nebraska.

Jesse Empy, age 31, died an hour after starting to travel in the afternoon. Rather than stop and bury him, they kept on going. The Saints carried him until he was buried the next morning. Levi Savage recorded that his hands and arm were covered with sores and that he had been having “ague,” probably malaria. It was hard to determine his cause of death. Glandular swellings are associated with scrofula. Fever is associated with ague. But it is unknown what the sores on his hands and arm had to do with his death. Was the weather hastening the deaths of some of the weakened Saints?

Tuesday, September 23

5:57 a.m.–6:03 p.m.

Bro. Empy was buried this morning before starting of Camp, a suitable wooden inscription being placed on the grave. Rolled out of Camp at 8:30 a.m., nooned a short distance from the road on the Platte and camped for the night on that River about 5:30 p.m. Roads much better though interspersed with heavy sand occasionally.

Both the company journal and William Woodward had brief entries for September 23. Levi Savage’s entry was quite telling, as it demonstrated his continued concern about hurrying along. He recorded: “This morning was cold and foggy. The Saints slow in rising and getting breakfast early, notwithstanding Brother Willey’s repeated order to arise at the sound of the bugle (daylight). Apparently not realizing the necessity of our making as much distance as possible in order to reach the Valley before too severe cold weather, some complain of hard treatment, because we urge them along. Many hang on to the wagons.”

Wednesday, September 24

5:59 a.m.–6:02 p.m.

Left Camp about 7:30 a.m., nooned between the road and River and camped for the night on the banks thereof about 2 miles on the southwest side of “Chimney Rock”. A very interesting meeting at which Prest. Willie & Capts. Atwood and Savage earnestly exhorted the Saints to the more diligent performance of their duties. A cow was killed this evening.

No trail went “southwest” of Chimney Rock because Chimney Rock hugged the western mountains. If they were “south” of Chimney Rock, they would have been “east” or “southeast” of it. Levi Savage wrote that he “thought we were nearer last night to it than we are.” In the fairly flat North Platte River Valley, it was very hard to judge distance. Since it was so flat, major monuments like Chimney Rock were visible for many miles. Due to the monotony of the landscape they appeared to be closer than they actually were.

Driving Directions

Wednesday, September 24

Chimney Rock National Historic Site is east of Chimney Rock, a mile or so off the highway. The marked turn to the visitors center is about 12 miles past Bridgeport, Nebraska.

Thursday, September 25

6:00 a.m.–6:01 p.m.

Rolled out of Camp about 7:30 a.m., nooned at a point where the road and river meet and camped for the night at another similar point a short distance beyond 2 vacant Trading-posts with indifferent feed. Roads pretty good throughout the day.

The trading posts in this area were from trader Joseph Robidoux. In the Scott’s Bluff area, there were multiple Robidoux trading posts. The posts were constructed in various places, as the trail around and then through Scott’s Bluff changed. Although the company journal and William Woodward’s record did not refer to these posts by name, Levi Savage called them “Rubadore’s” posts. The posts referred to by the journal were established in the 1850s about three miles west of present-day Melbeta, Nebraska.28 The trading posts were referred to by William Woodward as “old,” and by the company journal as “vacant.” The Saints were traveling very late in the season. Whether the buildings were old or merely vacant, they had no supplies and were of no help to the company.

Friday, September 26

6:01 a.m.–5:59 p.m.

Left Camp at 7:30 a.m., immediately struck off from the River for “Scotts Bluffs” near which we nooned and nearer to which we camped for the night, close to a very deep ravine or creek the sides of which were studded with fine Cedar which as well as water was hard to procure. The water was obliged to be dammed up in order that the cattle might drink. Feed dried up. Sis. Ann Bryant aged 69 from Bristol in England died this afternoon of general decay of constitution. Roads today “half and half”, i.e., partly sandy & partly good.

Death:

Ann Bryant, age 69

Levi Savage reported that Ann Bryant, “who had been ill for sometime, but not thought dangerous, was found dead in the wagon in a sitting posture, apparently asleep.”

The Oregon Trail splits a few miles past Robidoux’s 1850s trading posts. The pre-1850 primary route of the trail was through Robidoux’s Pass. From 1851 on, the primary route was through Mitchell’s Pass. These passes were not called by their current names until years later. They were simply unnamed passes in the Scott’s Bluff area.29

From the journal descriptions, it appears that the Willie Company took the older Robidoux’s Pass route, rather than the newer Mitchell’s Pass route. This decision might have been due in part to the weather. People believed that bad weather favored the older route. In the company journal it described problems finding water on September 26 and nooning on a creek 10 miles from Horseshoe Creek to get water on September 27. These were both indicators of their use of the Robidoux’s Pass route because the Mitchell’s Pass route returned to the Platte River and there was no creek to “noon” at on September 27. On the Robidoux’s Pass route, the trail paralleled Owl Creek on September 27, which provided them a creek to noon at as the record stated. Note that William Woodward’s record stated the company camped at Scott’s Bluffs on September 26, which at first glance was inconsistent with traveling through Robidoux’s Pass. However, if they camped at Mitchell’s Pass, they could not have traveled the 14 miles that Levi Savage recorded. It makes more sense to conclude that they camped at Robidoux’s Pass. Levi Savage’s entry confirmed these conclusions. He reported traveling 14 miles without water and camping at “Rubadore’s Old Trading Post.” It was nearly 14 miles from Robidoux’s 1850s trading posts to the old Robidoux’s Pass trading post, and the trail was without any water source.

Driving Directions

Friday, September 26

To go to Robidoux’s Pass on a gravel road, continue on State Road 92 until it intersects State Road 71 as you approach Gering. (Note: Scotts Bluff National Monument is straight ahead on State Road 92. It is worth a stop.) Take State Road 71 south and drive southwest for about two miles. At the Robidoux Road sign turn right and drive west to a stop sign. Drive straight through the stop sign intersection and onto the gravel road that winds out to Robidoux’s Pass. There is a pioneer grave marker about eight miles up the gravel road. About one and one-half miles farther west, the road curves south. The monument for Robidoux’s Pass is on the curve. There is no sign pointing to the marker, which is out roughly 200 yards west of the road in the grass. Stop and follow the trail out to see it. The GPS location for the marker is N 41 48.885’ W 103 51.198’. Continue traveling south for one-half mile from the curve to an intersecting gravel road right after a cattle guard. Turn right on the gravel road and travel west on Summit Ranch Road for about five miles to a stop sign. Turn right at the stop sign and travel north on Stegal Road, which is asphalt, to State Road 92. Turn left and travel west and north on State Road 92. It eventually joins US Highway 85 and heads toward Torrington, Wyoming. In order to avoid Robidoux’s Pass and the gravel road, simply follow State Road 92 through Gering and travel west toward Torrington, Wyoming.

Saturday, September 27

6:02 a.m.–5:57 p.m.

Sis. Bryant was buried before starting of Camp, which took place about 7:30 a.m. nooned on some Creek and about 10 miles further & crossed over Horseshoe Creek where we camped for the night with a little better feed.

Horse Creek joined the Platte River very near the present Nebraska/Wyoming state line. The Mitchell’s Pass and the Robidoux’s Pass routes reunited at that point. The Saints were again traveling along the south side of the North Platte River. Levi Savage’s entry for September 27 was only two sentences long. His second sentence seemed to accurately state the obvious, “The old appear to be failing considerably.”

Sunday, September 28

[caption] Harney Massacre monument.[/caption]

6:04 a.m.–5:56 p.m.

Left Camp about 7:30 a.m., nooned on the road about ¾ of a mile from the Platte with good feed. Met a company of emigrants returning from Salt Lake City in 11 wagons. Peter Burgess one of the party informed us that Mr. Babbitt and 2 men who accompanied him had been killed by the Cheyennes. We afterwards met a Company of U.S. Dragoons the Officer commanding which confirmed, Burgess’s report. The Officer and several of his men took possession of a horse which we found several days back and which he claimed as his property. He refused to see President Willie before taking the horse. Camped for the night on the road near the River with good feed.

As the handcart company traveled they met two groups. First, they met a company of nearly 100 apostates on their way back to the states as reported by President Willie, Levi Savage, and William Woodward. This meeting did not seem to adversely impact the attitudes of the Saints in this struggling company. Later they met a company of soldiers, who confirmed the apostates’ report that Almon Babbitt and two of his men had been killed and who took a stray horse that the company had found on September 25.

[caption] Grattan Massacre monument.[/caption]

During the day the Saints passed the area where, in 1854, the Sioux Indians killed Second Lieutenant Grattan and 29 soldiers in a massacre. Those killings led to the 1855 Harney Massacre of even more Indians north of Ash Hollow. These incidents were the primary sources of the Indian unrest that haunted the Willie Company throughout the Nebraska Territory.

Driving Directions

Sunday, September 28

In the Torrington area there are two options. To take the first, travel through Torrington to US Highway 26 and follow it west to Fort Laramie, Wyoming. To take the second, stay on the south side of the North Platte River and travel through the area that the Willie Company would have traveled. As US Highway 85 approaches Torrington it intersects State Road 156. Turn left onto State Road 156 and travel west and north as it winds around to Lingle, Wyoming. Just south of Lingle, State Road 156 intersects State Road 157. Turn left and travel west and then north on State Road 157 to Barnes, Wyoming. When State Road 157 intersects US Highway 26 near Barnes, turn left and travel west to Fort Laramie. (Note: About three miles west of the start of State Road 157, on the north side of the road, is a marker for the Grattan Massacre.)

[caption] "Old Bedlam" at restored Fort Laramie in Wyoming.[/caption]

Monday, September 29

6:06 a.m.–5:55 p.m.

Left Camp about 8 a.m., passed an Indian Agency Station where some Sioux Indians were camped. Nooned at a vacant Trading Post 7 miles from Fort Laramie and camped for the night on the road near an Indian Burying Ground about 4 miles from that Fort with weeds and young cottonwood for the cattle.

Near any semblance of civilization, feed for the animals became harder to find. They camped about four miles from Fort Laramie and fed their cattle weeds and young cottonwood trees, both of which were very poor sources of feed for cattle.

William Woodward recorded that he and Joseph B. Elder went to Fort Laramie “to obtain letters” for the camp. He received a letter from William H. Kimball. However, a more important letter was addressed to President Willie from President Franklin D. Richards. William Woodward did not reveal the contents of the letters. However, Levi Savage wrote, “Brother Richards has no cattle provided for us here and no other provisions made.”

The first frost was on the night of September 17. With the colder weather, death began to haunt the company. Seven Saints had died while crossing the area that would become the state of Nebraska. Four of the deaths were of people over 60. The facts that there were no provisions at Fort Laramie and that the weather had turned cold would hasten the demise of many of these Saints.

1e:T1583,

1. Chislett, “Mr. Chislett’s Narrative,” 317.

2. Dixon, “Biography of William James,” 4.

3. F. D. Richards and Daniel Spencer, “Report by F. D. Richards and Daniel Spencer,” Deseret News, October 22, 1856, in Journal History of the Church, October 4, 1856, Church Archives, microfilm copy in Harold B. Lee Library, Brigham Young University, Provo, Utah.

4. “Report of the Secretary of War to the first session of the 35th Congress,” January 4, 1858, Appendix L, 525–27, Special Collections, U.S. Military Academy Library, West Point, New York.

5. John Dickerson, “Notes on the Survey of a Territorial Road between Fort Kearney N.T. and Council Bluffs Iowa made in July and August 1856,” 6, 26, 29, 30, 35, Special Collections, U.S. Military Academy Library.

6. Chislett, “Mr. Chislett’s Narrative,” 317.

7. Don H. Smith, “U.S. Military Maps and Survey Notes Correct 1856 LDS Emigration Misrepresentations,” Nauvoo Journal 11 (Spring 1999): 10.

8. Dickerson, “Notes on the Survey,” 6.

9. “Handcart Pioneers of Utah,” in Heart Throbs of the West, comp. Kate B. Carter, 12 vols. (Salt Lake City: Daughters of the Utah Pioneers, 1939–51), 8:80.

10. Betsy Smith Goodwin, “The Tired Mother: Pioneer Recollections,” Improvement Era 22 (July 1919): 778.

11. Smith, “U.S. Military Maps,” 15–17, 26–28.

12. Smith, “U.S. Military Maps,” 15–17, 26–28.

13. Rosilla E. Osborn, “Biography of Agnes Caldwell Southworth,” dictated by Agnes Caldwell Southworth to her daughter Rosilla E. Osborn, April 20, 1921, p. 3, Daughters of Utah Pioneers Library.

14. “Handcart Pioneers,” in Treasures of Pioneer History, 253.

15. “Handcart Pioneers,” in Treasures of Pioneer History, 257.

16. Dixon, “Biography of William James,” 5.

17. “The Mormons from Ireland,” in Our Pioneer Heritage, comp. Kate B. Carter, 20 vols. (Salt Lake City: Daughters of the Utah Pioneers, 1958–77), 13:354–55.

18. A. T. Andreas, “Dawson County,” in History of the State of Nebraska (Chicago: Western Historical, 1882), viewed online at http://www.rootsweb.com/%7Eneresour/andreas/dawson/dawson-p1.html (accessed June 1, 2006).

19. “Handcart Pioneers,” in Treasures of Pioneer History, 253–54.

20. Richards and Spencer, “Report,” October 4, 1856.

21. Robert Reeder, “History of Robert Reeder Written by Himself,” 2, Daughters of Utah Pioneers Library.

22. Lapreal Wight, “History of James Hurren,” 1, Daughters of Utah Pioneers Library.

23. William G. Hartley, “‘Don’t Go aboard the Saluda!’: William Dunbar, LDS Emigrants, and Disaster on the Missouri,” Mormon Historical Studies (Spring 2003): 40–70.

24. Karl Baresel and Dorothy Baresel, “Trails and Fords above the Junction of the North and South Platte,” Overland Journal 6, no. 2 (1988): 13–24.

25. Baresel and Baresel, “Trails and Fords,” 21.

26. Osborn, “Biography of Agnes Caldwell Southworth,” 3.

27. Blair R. Holmes, “The Journal of James Sherlock Cantwell,” typescript copy, 38, Perry Special Collections.

28. Merrill J. Mattes, The Great Platte River Road (1969; repr., Lincoln: University of Nebraska, 1987), 438–47.

29. Mattes, Great Platte River Road, 421–79.

1f:T208ee,

Tuesday, August 12

5:02 a.m.–6:59 p.m.

This morning the brethren are busy getting the Saints to sign bonds finding out who intend stopping, what hand-carts want repairing, with many other things which are requisite before proceeding on our journey across the plains. In the evening Bro. McGaw and Bro. Willie addressed the Saints and gave them some needful instructions & advice before proceeding on the remainder of the journey.

August 12 and 13 were spent by the Saints repairing handcarts and settling up accounts. They were also days of decision. Shortly after the Saints left Florence, civilization would end. Unlike the previous month crossing Iowa, they would not be passing through a series of small villages. They had approximately 1,000 miles of uncivilized territory to cover before they would arrive in the Salt Lake Valley. It was the last real chance to stop.

William Woodward completed his entry with the statement, “Many of our company agreed to leave the company.” Levi Savage reported that “Many are going to stop.” He then went on to express his feelings on the matter as follows: “Others are faltering and I myself am not in favor of, but much opposed to, taking women and children through when they are destitute of clothing, when we all know that we are bound to be caught in the snow and severe cold weather long before we reach the valley.”

Peder Madsen did not discuss stopping. It was almost as if the Danish Saints were unaware of the people that were choosing to quit the trek, or perhaps with their language barrier they simply chose to go on to the valley. Instead, he recorded the spiritual activities of the Danish Saints. For example, he told of the rebaptisms of five Danish Saints, including his own daughter, Petrea Madsen, age 36, along with Peter and Ane Jacobsen, the parents of the child born on August 6. These baptisms were specifically done for the person’s health. Over the next two days he reported two more baptisms to renew covenants.

Driving Directions

Tuesday, August 12

The Mormon Trail Center in Omaha, Nebraska, is worth a stop. It has information on Florence from the time that it was known as Winter Quarters into the later handcart era. There is a statue depicting handcart travelers just outside the main entrance. From I-680 take Exit 13 and drive south on 30th Street. At the intersection of 30th Street and State Street turn right and travel three blocks west to the top of the hill. The Mormon Trail Center is at GPS N 41 20.117’ W 095 57.918’. There is a pioneer cemetery across the street to the west. The cemetery is north of the Winter Quarters Temple.

Wednesday, August 13

5:03 a.m.–6:58 p.m.

The Brethren are busy settling up accounts, finding out those who are going to stop, &c. In the evening Prest. Willie with Elders Atwood & Savage addressed us and bore their testimonies & gave their opinions of the journey before us & after prayers we were dismissed & went to our tents.

Although the company journal entry was brief, this meeting would prove to be a pivotal point in their journey. President Willie exhorted them to go forward regardless of the sacrifice. Presenting a contrary opinion, Levi Savage warned them of how great the sacrifice would be and of the dangers he anticipated if they continued to cross the plains. He wrote in his journal on August 13 the following: “August 13, 1856, Wednesday, Florence, Nebraska Territory. Today we continued preparations for starting. Evening we held meeting in camp. Brother Willey exhorted the Saints to go forward regardless of suffering even to death. After he had spoken, he gave me the opportunity of speaking. I said to him that if I spoke I must speak my mind, let it cut where it would. He said certainly to do so. I then related to the Saints the hardships that we should have to endure. I said that we were liable to have to wade in snow up to our knees and shovel at night, lay ourselves in a thin blanket and lie on the frozen ground without a bed. I said that it was not like having a wagon that we could go into and wrap ourselves in as much as we like and lay down. ‘No,’ said I, ‘we are without wagons, destitute of clothing and could not carry it if we had it. We must go as we are. The handcart system I do not condem. I think it preferable to unbroken oxen and inexperienced teamsters.’ The lateness of the season was my only objection to leaving this point for the mountains at this time. I spoke warmly upon the subject, but spoke truth, and the people, judging from appearance and expressions, felt the force of it. (However, the most of them determined to go forward, if the authorities say go.) Elder Willey then spoke again in reply to what I had said, evidently dissatisfied. He said that the God that he served was a God that was able to save to the utermost. He said that was the God that he served, and he wanted no Job’s comforters with him. I then said that what I had said was the truth, and if Elder Willey did not want me to act in the place where I am, he is at full liberty to place another man in my stead. I would not think hard of him for it. But, I did not care what he said about Job’s comforters, I had spoken nothing but the truth and he knew it. Elder Atwood then spoke mildly and to the purpose. He said that he had been listening to what had been said. He exhorted the Saints to pray to God and get a revelation and know for themselves whether they should go or stay, for it was their privilege to know for themselves. The meeting was dismissed, all manifesting a good feeling and spirit.”

John Chislett, like Levi Savage, was a captain of a hundred. Years later he indicated the full character of Levi Savage as a true supporter of the cause. Even though the Saints voted against the advice of Levi Savage, he promised to give his all to help them. It was no wonder that President Willie left Levi Savage as a captain over a hundred. John Chislett wrote the following: “Savage was accordingly defeated, as the majority were against him. He then added: ‘Brethren and sisters, what I have said I know to be true; but, seeing you are to go forward, I will go with you, will help you all I can, will work with you, will rest with you, will suffer with you, and, if necessary, I will die with you. May God in his mercy bless and preserve us. Amen.’”1

Millen Atwood had instructed the Saints to seek their own answers from the Spirit. After Levi Savage’s speech, Emma James, age 16, recorded that there was a long silence, as the people contemplated the choice before them. She was frightened. Her father looked pale, while her mother looked determined. Emma felt they really did not have a choice, because there was no work for them and no way to live in Florence through the winter. Her mother said, “We must put our trust in the Lord, as we have alway [sic] done.”2 They chose to walk on to the west. Her father, William James, who “looked pale,” would eventually have his worst fears realized as he passed away crossing Rocky Ridge in October.

Thursday, August 14

5:04 a.m.–6:56 p.m.

It is splendid weather & the Saints are getting up their strength while the Brethren are busy loading up flour, taking the names of those going through, preparing the hand-carts, &c., together with many other things necessary before proceeding on our journey.

In Peder Madsen’s record he commented that some of the English were staying behind. However, only one Danish couple chose to stay in Council Bluffs. He reported that they were staying with apostates. The enticement for the Danish couple, Niels and Anne C. Hansen, was apparently the lure of high wages.

Friday, August 15

5:05 a.m.–6:54 p.m.

This morning the sun is out beautiful, all the Brethren who can work at the carpentering & iron work were up early and all went at the hand-carts in good earnest under the Presidency of Elder Willie in order to forward our starting as much as possible. Last night Sister Mary Ann Hanson.

Death:

Maren Hansen, age 52

The company journal did not finish the Mary Ann Hansen statement. She was a Danish Saint and Peder Madsen wrote, “Maren Hansen, 52 years old, died.” She was not the only one who was sick. On August 13, William Woodward had been sent across the Missouri River to get some hoop iron for the handcarts. He returned on August 14. On August 15, he wrote that he was taken very sick with a fever. He received a priesthood blessing and partially recovered. However, as late as August 22, he still was reporting in his daily journal that he felt sick.

The format and coverage of the official company journal changed from August 15 to August 16. It is hard to determine who the official company journal writer or writers were from May 1 through October 1. However, one clue might be that, on May 3, Peder Madsen listed George May as the company clerk. George was a single, 24-year-old British convert. Although he sailed with the Thornton, he ultimately was listed as coming to the Salt Lake Valley with the Hunt Wagon Company. He could have easily kept the journal until he was assigned to stay and help the wagon trains at either Florence or Fort Laramie. All that is known for certain is that William Woodward took over clerk duties after October 1. Nowhere does it state who wrote the company journal prior to that date.

Saturday, August 16

5:06 a.m.–6:53 p.m.

Part of the 4th Company of Hand-carts 85 in number under the presidency of Elder James G. Willie started from Florence in company with 11 waggons (P.E.Fund & Independent) about one o’clock p.m. and journey to Little Pappea where they camped for the night with Col. Babbitt and 4 waggons of his. The Handcart Company had been organized into hundreds by President Daniel Spencer at Iowa City and subsequently sanctioned by President James McGaw. Millen Atwood, Capt. of 1st Hundred, Levi Savage Capt. of 2nd Hundred, William Woodward Capt. of 3rd Hundred, John Chislett Capt. of 4th Hundred, J.A. Ahamason, Capt. of 5th Hundred. Brother Jost borrowed a yoke of oxen from Bro. Cantwell in consequence of his own being unmanageable. Promised to return said yoke tomorrow—6 miles from Florence.

President James McGaw, the presiding Church authority at Florence, confirmed the leadership arrangement set down by President Daniel Spencer in Iowa City. The Saints had been in Florence less than a week and at least part of the company was on its way again.

As part of the company moved out, the Saints were accompanied by “Colonel” Almon W. Babbitt. His role in their next few weeks of traveling turned out to be tragic for him. He was the Secretary of the Utah Territory. At this time he was returning to the territory after having conducted business back in “the states.” He had four wagons in his traveling group. Within just a matter of days his wagons would be attacked and destroyed, and he would subsequently be killed by hostile Indians.

As they left Florence, there were just over 400 people remaining in the handcart company. An actual census was not taken until September 12 by President Franklin D. Richards. He reported that as of September 12 there were “404 persons, 6 wagons, 87 handcarts, 6 yoke of oxen, 32 cows, and 5 mules.”3

President Richards’s census most likely did not include the “Independent Waggons.” The “Independent Waggons” were a group of Saints traveling by wagon to the Salt Lake Valley. It was unsafe to travel in too small of a group through Indian Territory, so four wagons were added to the Willie Handcart Company in Florence. There were already some wagons traveling with the handcarts to carry tents, provisions, and the sick. Each group of 100 Saints had a wagon to assist them. It was thought that the addition of a few independent wagons would not slow down the handcarts too much. The company record included a list of people attached to the “Independent Waggons.” There were 26 people, led by Andrew L. Siler, age 31, who was officially installed as their captain on August 18 by President McGaw.

Peder Madsen noted two interesting facts at this point in his record. First, shoes were already a problem. He wrote, “Measurements of the feet of those who needed shoes were taken, and those who had shoes that were too small were given to the ones who could fit them. The others will instead get new shoes.” Second, the Danish Saints had obviously not left the company in the same numbers as the English. He reported that the English sections were considerably reduced in number when they left Florence, which explained the reduction in total number of travelers from about 500 to about 400.

The company journal referred to their stopping point as the Little “Pappea.” Levi Savage called it the Little “Papaw.” It is in fact known today as the Little Papillion Creek.

The trail the Willie Company traveled between Florence and New Fort Kearney is fairly well documented. In 1856, Captain John H. Dickerson of the United States Army was ordered to locate and construct a territorial road in the Nebraska Territory between a point opposite Council Bluffs, Iowa, and New Fort Kearney. He started out following the “Winter Quarters Trail” and continued pursuing “very nearly the route over which the Mormon and California emigrants have been passing for several years.”4 “Old” Fort Kearney was established in 1847 in Nebraska City, Nebraska Territory. Dickerson referred to “New” Fort Kearney, which was the name attached to the Fort Kearney that existed near present-day Kearney. “New” Fort Kearney provided protection for users of the Oregon, California, and Mormon trails.

On Captain Dickerson’s survey trip to Fort Kearney, he passed a Mormon wagon train at the Loup Fork River crossing, just south of present-day Columbus, Nebraska, on July 8. On his return trip he followed the Platte River in the hope of finding a route that would avoid following the Loup Fork River. He noted that two handcart trains had passed by, while he had been on the alternative path. On August 5 near the Shell Creek crossing, west of present-day Rogers, Nebraska, he met a “Mormon hand cart train.” In his record he expressed a very derogatory view of the people in that handcart company, commenting especially on their apparent weariness. He completed his survey on August 14, just missing the Willie Company.5 The handcart train he encountered was the third handcart company, led by Edward Bunker.

Driving Directions

Saturday, August 16

The first camp was in the area of what is now State Road 133 and Military Road, where the Little Papillion Creek intersects Military Road. To reach the area, return to I-680 and travel west to Exit 6. Take Exit 6 and travel southeast on State Road 133 until it intersects 90th Street. Take the 90th Street Exit and drive south to Military Road. The creek and the camp were less than one quarter of a mile east.

Sunday, August 17

5:08 a.m.–6:52 p.m.

Staid in camp all day. Bros. Jost and Geary returned to Florence with Bro. Cantwell’s oxen. Remainder of handcarts and waggons arrived in Camp from Florence with President Willie. This evening Capt. Atwood gave the Saints some good instruction relative to their present and future duties which he plainly told them must and should be performed and referring to his satisfaction at some grumblers having deserted from the ranks told the balance that those of them who might still feel double-minded had better do the same as this was about their last chance. Capt. Atwood was addressing the Saints when President Willie arrived. A smart shower or two to-day.

The Willie Company was traveling with 37 beef and milk cows, in addition to their draft animals. Levi Savage reported they were still short a wagon. Each wagon was loaded “with thirty-five and forty hundred of provisions.” The Saints still had a little over a ton more in provisions, i.e., “twenty-five hundred” pounds, but no wagon. Fortunately, William Woodward wrote that another wagon was added on August 18 that covered the shortfall. Even with this addition John Chislett later wrote that each handcart was required to carry one extra sack of flour. Each sack of flour weighed 98 pounds. The flour carried in the handcarts was used first, in order to lighten the burden of those pulling the handcarts.6

By the end of the day on August 17, both parts of the company had gone the six miles from the outfitting grounds in Florence to the Little Papillion Creek campground. Certainly the feelings of some of these Saints were expressed by Peder Madsen when he wrote that they were now in the wilderness.

Monday, August 18

5:09 a.m.–6:51 p.m.

Left camp about 3 p.m. and camped for the night at Great Pappea. President James McGaw and Elder Wm. H. Kimball with one or two other brethren visited the Camp. President McGaw placed the Independent Waggon Company in the same organization as the Handcart Company and appointed Andrew L. Siler, Capt. of such Company. 9 miles from Florence.

The group traveled only three miles to the “Great Pappea” or “Big Papaw” Creek as it is variously referred to, but which is today called Big Papillion Creek.

Driving Directions

Monday, August 18

To drive to the area of the second campground, follow Military Road west to 108th Street. Turn right and drive north on 108th Street for about one quarter of a mile, until it again intersects Military Road. Turn left and drive west as Military Road winds west through the subdivisions for a little less than three miles, to where it crosses Big Papillion Creek, which is where it intersects with 126th Street. Military Road appears to have been given its name because it generally follows the road surveyed by Captain Dickerson of the United States Army.

Tuesday, August 19

5:10 a.m.–6:50 p.m.

Rolled out about 6 a.m. and ferried the Elk Horn River in the middle part of the day, the cattle swimming the stream. Prest. Willie appointed Bro. Niel, Lars Christiansen, interpreter and Counsellor to the Danish Saints and obtained a unanimous vote from the Camp to support every other appointment which had been made. Camped for the night on a creek about 3 miles from the River. 27 miles from Florence.

Once again the company was asked to formally sustain the leaders of their group. The only change appears to be that “Niel, Lars Christiansen,” age 27, (who was also known as Niels L. Christensen and Niel Larsen Christensen) was appointed to be over the Danish hundred. He was a missionary returning to the Salt Lake Valley. No explanation was given regarding John Ahmanson’s replacement. On September 4 and 5, Christiansen was referred to as Captain Christiansen. The vote was unanimous in support of the appointed leaders.

The handcarts were ferried across the Elkhorn River, while the livestock swam. They used the established ferry crossing. After their crossing they camped on an unnamed creek, just three miles past the ferry. William Woodward’s record identified this unnamed creek as Raw Hide Creek, which they followed in a northwesterly direction.

Driving Directions

Tuesday, August 19

The location of the Elkhorn River crossing has been identified with a very small marker that is not at the river. To continue along the trail and travel to the marker, continue west and northwest on Military Road until it joins Bennington Road. Turn left and follow Bennington Road west for 100 yards until it intersects State Road 31, which is also 204th Street. Turn right onto State Road 31 and travel north until it intersects State Road 36. Turn left onto State Road 36 and travel west until it intersects 240th Street. Stop at that T intersection. The marker for the Elkhorn River ferry is 30 feet south of the asphalt edge of State Road 36, at a point that is directly south of the midline of 240th Street. It is at GPS N 41 22.725’ W 096 17.542’.

Wednesday, August 20

5:11 a.m.–6:48 p.m.

Stopped in camp till one p.m. to wash, prepare weapons, &c. Started at one o’clock & arrived at the Platte River about dusk. 39 miles from Florence.

William Woodward wrote that they were delayed in leaving because “Bro. Savage” had to go back to the “Pappea” to get a cow. Levi Savage recorded that on August 19 a cow had lost her calf. They left the cow behind to see if she could find her calf. On August 20 he was sent back to retrieve the cow and, if possible, the calf. However, no calf had been found and he brought back only the cow.

They took advantage of the delay and spent the morning cleaning themselves and their clothes and preparing the wagons for departure. For the first few weeks the company journal recorded the distance from Florence. Based on that record, they traveled 12 miles. Twelve miles of traveling would have taken them a few miles past present-day Fremont, Nebraska.

Driving Directions

Wednesday, August 20

To follow their trail, continue driving west on State Road 36 until it intersects US Highway 275. Travel northwest on US Highway 275 toward Fremont. At Fremont, travel through the city by taking US Highway 30 (Business) from the east to the west side of the city. To avoid the city, take the belt route. Travel north and then west and south on US Highway 30 (West) and follow it around the city. Either way, end up traveling on US Highway 30 toward Columbus, Nebraska, which path roughly parallels the trail of the Saints to Columbus. There are at least five pioneer trail markers in the Fremont area, although none of them directly relate to the Willie Handcart Company.

Thursday, August 21

5:12 a.m.–6:47 p.m.

Last night rather stormy. Journey resumed at 6:30 a.m. Reached Platte River where it joins the road about 2 p.m. The sun being very hot and cattle much exhausted train ordered to stop here till 5 p.m. when the journey resumed. Travelled about 6 miles further and camped on the open prairie without wood or water the cattle having been watered just previous to starting. Ordered to move off in the morning before breakfast. About 55 miles from Florence.

The trail in this area ran within a mile of the Platte River. The humidity and heat apparently were taking a toll on the people and the cattle again, as they appeared to be trying to avoid travel in the middle of the day. They traveled about 16 miles, camping some miles west of present-day North Bend, Nebraska.

All four of the journals mentioned the lunch break. However, they disagreed on its starting and stopping times and on its length. The company journal stated it was from 2 p.m. until 5 p.m. for three hours. Levi Savage stated it was from 1 p.m. until 6 p.m. for five hours. Peder Madsen stated it was for two hours starting at 12 noon. William Woodward did not give a starting time or an overall length of time, but he did record that they started up after the break at 5 p.m.

Friday, August 22

5:13 a.m.–6:46 p.m.

Order to move before breakfast, obeyed. Weather very hazy and grass very wet but about 9 it became fine. Stayed 2 hours at Shell Creek to breakfast, &c. Resumed journey and travelled about 12 miles further camping at sunset near Platte River by the side of a long lake. During the afternoon Sister Sophia Geary had her left foot run over by Bro. Wilford’s waggon. She was administered to in the evening by Bros. Siler, Cantwell and Geary, Capt. Siler officiating. He sealed the blessing of health and strength upon her and promised that inasmuch as she would exercise faith she should walk tomorrow. 75 miles from Florence.

Twenty miles of traveling in the hot, humid weather was a long day. The Saints started before breakfast, again to avoid the heat of the day. Although not mentioned in the company journal, it appeared that there may well have been a bridge over Shell Creek.7 Levi Savage mentioned buying things from Isaac Albertson’s trading post by the Shell Creek crossing. They crossed it a few miles east of present-day Schuyler, Nebraska. They then continued on in a fairly straight line, probably staying to the north of Lost Creek. In this area, the Platte River was up to three miles wide and constantly changing its course. Those changes left large and small lakes, including probably the long lake on which the Saints camped. Captain Dickerson mentioned camping on a “long pond” in the former river bed on July 7, when he and his crew came through the Shell Creek area on their survey.8

Sister Sophia Geary’s left foot was run over by William Wilford’s wagon. The wagon wheels were rimmed with iron and the wagons themselves probably weighed close to two tons. This action should have crushed her foot. Three of the men in the company gave her a blessing, wherein she was promised that through the exercise of her faith she would walk the next day. She walked the next day.

Saturday August 23

5:15 a.m.–6:45 p.m.

Rolled out about 6:30 a.m. ferried the Loup Fork River, the cattle fording it. While at the Loup Fork Prest. Willie had a cow and calf killed for the Handcart Company. Camped for the night on the other side. Plenty of wood and water and abundance of rich feed for cattle in the shape of pea-vines. Sis. Geary walked a considerable distance pursuant to Bro. Siler’s promise. About 86 miles from Florence.

The company journal, Levi Savage, and William Woodward all reported ferrying across the Loup Fork River on August 23 and camping at the crossing south of present-day Columbus, Nebraska. The record of Levi Savage referred to it as the “Soap Fork” and not the Loup Fork River. In 1847 the primary route west required the wagon trains to cross the Loup Fork River at a point upstream from the 1856 ferry. Typically, those earlier wagon trains might have crossed at a point near Genoa, just as Brigham Young did in 1847. His company then went south to the Platte River. In contrast, the Willie Company took what had become the primary route when they crossed at the ferry. After the Willie Company crossed the Loup Fork River, they then followed its south side the next few days for about 57 miles, before they turned south across the open prairie and headed for the Platte River.

Peder Madsen reported that each person was allocated one pound of meat from the cow and calf that had been butchered.

Driving Directions

Saturday, August 23

From Columbus, Nebraska, there are two routes that can be taken. To take the first route, travel southwest on US Highway 30 through Grand Island and then follow I-80 west toward North Platte, Nebraska. To take the second route, in Columbus, when US Highway 30 intersects US Highway 81 at 33rd Avenue, take US Highway 81 and drive west and north out of Columbus. About four miles north of Columbus, US Highway 81 intersects State Road 22. Turn onto State Road 22 and travel west through Monroe and Genoa, and on toward Fullerton. Just north of Fullerton, State Road 22 intersects State Road 14. Turn south onto State Road 14 and travel through Fullerton. At this point either continue to drive south to Central City and then on to Grand Island, or, for a closer look at the country the handcarts pulled through, note the mileage at the south side of the bridge over the Loup Fork River just south of Fullerton. Travel south for 5.6 miles and turn right onto an unmarked gravel road, which is X Road. The GPS point at the turn is N 41 15.828’ W 097 59.000’. (Note: about 0.7 mile after the bridge over the Loup Fork River there is a “Mormon Pioneer Campsite” marker that mentions the handcart pioneers.) Travel west on X Road for four miles. At the stop sign turn left and travel south on the gravel road, which is 13th Road, for one mile to the asphalt road, which is W Road. Turn right and travel west for 10 miles on W Road to the stop sign. (Note: after driving about seven of the 10 miles look north about a mile. Somewhere in that area is where the company would have camped on August 26.) Turn left onto 3rd Road and travel south for four miles. 3rd Road goes through present-day Palmer. At the stop sign turn right and travel west on State Road 92 for four miles. Turn left at Brady Road and travel south on the gravel road for eight miles. Turn right onto 3rd Avenue and travel west for two miles across a set of railroad tracks and through a stop sign to US Highway 281. (Note: About 1.5 miles short of US Highway 281 is the area where they would have camped on August 27.) Turn left and travel south on U. S Highway 281 toward Grand Island. Follow US Highway 281 around to the west side of Grand Island to where it intersects US Highway 30. Take US Highway 30 toward Kearney, Nebraska, and travel west. As an alternative, continue traveling south until US Highway 281 intersects I-80 and then travel west. Both US Highway 30 and I-80 run parallel to the trail the Saints followed through the present-day city of North Platte. The trail actually runs right where US Highway 30 is, near present-day Gibbon, Nebraska. (Note: About a mile east of Gibbon is where they camped on August 30.) To get to I-80 after traveling through Gibbon, travel about five miles on US Highway 30 until it intersects State Road 10. Turn left and travel south on State Road 10 until it intersects I-80. Turn onto I-80 and travel west toward North Platte, Nebraska.

Sunday, August 24

5:16 a.m.–6:43 p.m.

Left Camp at 6:30 a.m. Journeyed about 6 miles and stayed for dinner and to water cattle for nearly an hour at a bend of the Loup Fork. Travelled a considerable distance further and stayed again sufficiently long to water, then journeyed about 12 miles further turned off the road and camped on the bank of the Loup Fork with plenty of grass wood and water. A good hard road nearly the whole day’s march. Say 100 miles from Florence.

It is not really clear how many miles they traveled. Without an odometer, they merely guessed how far they traveled each day. The company journal stated that they traveled 6 miles before dinner, their midday meal, and then traveled on 12 more miles for a total of 18 miles. It stated further that they were 86 miles from Florence as of August 23 and “Say 100 miles from Florence” as of August 24, for a total of 14 miles. Levi Savage’s journal reported traveling 15 miles, camping by the river, and catching some fish. William Woodward’s record stated that they traveled 14 miles. Peder Madsen wrote that they traveled 23 miles.

The road was described as “a good hard road” nearly all day. While traveling in the Platte River valley, they had to pull their handcarts through many sandy areas. It was much easier to pull a handcart on a firm road instead of a sandy road.

Monday, August 25

5:18 a.m.–6:42 p.m.

Rolled out about 7 a.m. leaving Bro. Griffiths on a mule to hunt for 3 cows which had been lost. He got into Camp in the evening about dusk with one cow only which he reported as having found on terms of close intimacy with 2 wolves. Travelled about 8 miles opposite the Pioneers’ Ford of the Loup Fork (1½ mile to right of Camp) and stayed there for water and dinner. Had to double teams up a steep sandhill between 2 bluffs at the top of which Camp dined. Journeyed about 12 miles further and camped for the night on the right hand side of a lake of water. No wood nearer than half a mile on the other side of the lake which was crossed at its head. About the time of arrival the Camp was favored with a drenching shower of rain. Good feed. About 120 miles from Florence.

About eight miles into the day’s traveling the company journal noted that they were one and a half miles south of the “Pioneers’ Ford of the Loup Fork,” which was near Genoa. Instead of turning south as the Mormons did in 1847, they continued to follow the south side of the Loup Fork River. Again the actual distance they traveled is uncertain. The company journal and William Woodward recorded 20 miles, while Levi Savage recorded 15 miles and Peder Madsen recorded 18 miles.

At times it was certainly difficult to keep over 400 people moving together. People were occasionally asked to stay behind or to go search for something while the rest of the handcarts went forward. The company journal reported leaving Brother Edward Griffiths, age 25, to hunt for three lost cows. After having a close encounter with two wolves, he returned with only one cow. As another example, Joseph Wall, age 18, was traveling with his sister Emily, age 15. A few days after leaving Florence, he became ill. The company leadership decided to leave him to be picked up or buried by the Martin Company, when they came along. Emily refused to leave him because she had been promised that they would safely arrive in the Salt Lake Valley. Emily insisted that he stay with them and she promised to pull him in her handcart. With the aid of a small girl she did pull him until he was well again, three days later.9

Elizabeth Smith, age 13, told of the power of President Willie’s prayers. She related an experience, which may well have been on August 25, when storms arose with thunder and lightning. President Willie stood in the middle of the road and stopped the handcarts. He had the Saints join him in prayer. He talked to God as one man talks to another. Many felt the Lord was near. The storms parted on the right and on the left. Finally, when they got into camp and the tents were set up, the storm burst in all its fury.10 The company journal recorded that “a drenching shower of rain” greeted them on their arrival at their campsite.

Tuesday, August 26

5:19 a.m.–6:41 p.m.

Started about 7 a.m. and after journeying about 10 miles stayed on the open prairie to rest for half an hour and then travelled about 5 miles further camping for the night near the Loup Fork with good feed and water but little wood. A fine cool day for travelling. The king-bolt of Bro. Chislett’s waggon broke soon after starting this morning. This detained his and another waggon’s company for some time but they all arrived in Camp early in the evening. About 135 miles from Florence.

The king bolt that broke on John Chislett’s wagon connected the animals to the wagon and was essential. They were on a road but miles away from any help. The company could not wait, so another wagon, which Levi Savage stated was his, stayed to help repair the broken wagon. William Woodward reported that they replaced it with a wooden king bolt and by the end of the day they were reunited with the company.

Levi Savage reported catching “a fine mess of catfish.” Peder Madsen wrote that they had found tracks and that there were buffalo in the wilderness. He looked forward to getting buffalo steak soon.

Wednesday, August 27

5:21 a.m.–6:39 p.m.

Left Camp about 7 a.m. Travelled over heavy sandy roads more or less all day stopping for an hour or 2 in the middle of the day to eat and to water cattle at a well about 8 miles on the way. A large quantity of lizards on the road. Camped for the night on the open prairie having found a slough of water on the left hand side of the road. 150 miles from Florence.

Levi Savage recorded that “this morning we left the Soap Fork at twelve o’clock.” The company journal reported sandy roads and a large quantity of lizards as they left the relative comfort of the Loup Fork River, with its fresh water, good feed, and abundant wood. They were crossing the open prairie. They camped next to a slough for water. Captain Dickerson’s surveyed route went south and west. They were following his route, which was, at that time, the main trail.11

Thursday, August 28

5:22 a.m.–6:38 p.m.

Rolled forth about 7 a.m. Staid to water cattle and to dine at Prairie Creek which Camp subsequently crossed arriving at Wood River after dark. Camped there with plenty of wood & water but rather indifferent feed. Roads were sandy throughout the morning. Four buffaloes seen during the afternoon. They were fruitlessly pursued by Bros. Siler & Savage for several miles. They saw a large herd in the distance. Bro. Haley (an old man) was missed on the arrival of the Camp this evening. Several went out in search with a lantern but without success. 165 miles from Florence.

Although the journals stated that they were at the Wood River, they were not. The river they had arrived at was Silver Creek. They had arrived at their campsite after dark. It was often hard to determine where locations were on the open prairie in the daylight. After sunset it would have been justifiably difficult to know which stream of water they had encountered. Fortunately, Captain Dickerson had identified the locations of both the Indian encampment and the attack on Colonel Babbitt’s wagons. That information, along with his survey, allows their trail to be fairly well identified through this region.12 The company journal stated that the Willie Company camped on August 29 about one-half mile from the Indian encampment. Ultimately, from their camp on Silver Creek they followed Prairie Creek to the west until their travel on August 30 finally took them to their actual Wood River crossing.

For the first time in these Europeans’ lives, they saw buffalo. Initially, they had seen only four animals. Fresh buffalo meat would have been a welcome change in their diet.

Friday, August 29

5:23 a.m.–6:36 p.m.

A tremendous storm arose early this morning and lasted for several hours. A large number of scouts started after breakfast in search of Bro. Haley. The lost sheep was found 30 yards from the road after about 2 hours’ search thoroughly drenched with water. His voice was scarcely audible. He said that the Bro. with the lantern passed nearly close to him last night but that he (Haley) could not make himself heard. Left camp at one o’clock p.m. and after journeying about 3 miles met a number of mounted Omaha Indians one of whom (the Interpreter) produced a letter from Capt. Stewart of the U.S. Army dated recently at Fort Kearney and addressed to Col. Babbitt stating that on last Monday (25 August) his waggons were attacked by the Cheyenne Indians who killed 2 of his men and a little child shot a 3rd man through the thigh and carried a woman captive, the wounded man with another who escaped unhurt being, at date of letter, at Fort Kearney. President Willie and Captains Atwood, Savage and Siler visited a large encampment of Omaha Indians about half a mile from our Camp. These Indians were very numerous and had a great quantity of horses. They seemed friendly disposed and bartered Buffalo meat for different articles. Our Camp stopped early in the afternoon about half a mile from the Indian Camp. 175 miles from Florence.

August 29 was a memorable date. Between the search for William Haley and the rain, the company did not get started until 1 p.m. An hour or so later, they met 800 Native Americans as recorded by Levi Savage. Although the Indians were friendly, their report of Colonel Babbitt’s wagons being attacked by unfriendly Cheyenne on August 25 sent a shock wave through the Saints. This was the same Colonel Babbitt who had traveled with them on August 16 as they were leaving the Florence area. This was the first major contact for these European immigrants with buffalo and Indians, two of the greatest symbols of the American West.

Margaret Caldwell, age 40, traveling with her four children, reported that she traded small articles or trinkets for buffalo meat.13 George Cunningham, age 16, traveling with his family, reported that they were invited to camp one night with a large group of Omaha at Wood River, which they did.14

Two young people told of the amazement that the Indians had with the handcarts. The Indians wanted to push the handcarts. Four-year-old Sarah Ann Oakey was afraid, so her mother took her out of the handcart. However, upon being reassured that the Indians were friendly, she was placed back in the handcart and rode to the camp.15 Mary Anne James, age 11, wrote that one of the Indians was so fascinated that he leaped from his horse and pushed a cart so hard that it nearly ran over the woman and her daughter that were pulling it. After pushing for a while, he returned to his horse and rode off.16

Saturday, August 30

5:25 a.m.–6:35 p.m.

Left camp about 7 a.m. Immediately met some Californians with a large herd of horses for the States. They confirmed the Indians’ report of the murder of Col. Babbitt’s men and stated that they met several Mormon trains at different points on the route and that good health prevailed generally. After travelling some distance we came up to the graves of the 2 men and the child. President Willie and Capt. Atwood assisted by the brethren piled large quantities of earth on the graves to protect them from the wolves and to smother the effluvia which was beginning to arise.

Journeyed on till we arrived at the “Lone Tree” where we crossed creek and staid to water cattle and dine. While dining some of the brethren noticed on the hills about 2 miles off some animals which looked like oxen. Capt. Savage and Bro. Joseph Elder started in pursuit the one on a mule the other on horseback and after a long chase succeeded in bringing into Camp a yoke of oxen which were added to Bro. Jost’s team. Travelled on after about 2 hours’ delay crossed Wood River and camped for the night on its bank about 4 miles above the crossing with plenty of grass wood and water. Shortly after camping Col. Babbitt, with a man, & a Scotch sister named Stewart arrived in Camp with 5 mules and a carriage. They camped with us for the night and the Col. arranged for Sis. Stewart going through to the Valley in Bro. Cantwell’s waggon. This evening Bro. Robert Culwell’s collar bone got broken by a cow which he was attempting to milk. About 200 miles from Florence.

Peder Madsen also reported that the Indians had come early in the morning to trade with them. It appeared that the major items of trade were buffalo meat and shoes, which were traded for handkerchiefs and clothing. He secured a pair of shoes for some handkerchiefs.

The fresh graves of the two men and the child that had been killed five days earlier were discovered by the company. For the two years prior to 1856, there had been Indian troubles on the trail. Certainly the members of the handcart company knew about them or soon learned about them after finding these graves. Even Peder Madsen wrote in his record about the military overtaking and shooting 16 Indians. The two major incidents were the Grattan Massacre of 1854, when a number of soldiers had been killed by Indians near Fort Laramie, and the Harney Massacre of 1855, when an even larger number of Indians had been killed by soldiers near Ash Hollow. These Saints had come to see firsthand that the threat of Indian trouble was real.

The company journal recorded that they arrived at the “Lone Tree.” The tree was a landmark and, in 1856, there were so few trees in some areas that finding even one was sufficient to merit a journal entry. However, there was more than one “Lone Tree” on the trail. Frequent prairie fires kept the number of trees low, except on islands in the Platte River. Today trees near the Platte River appear to be everywhere.

Colonel Almon W. Babbitt had arranged to have Nancy Stewart travel with Andrew Siler’s independent wagons. She was described by Levi Savage on August 31 as an “elderly sister from Florence” whom Colonel Babbitt intended to take to the Salt Lake Valley. This change proved to be lifesaving for her since Babbitt was killed by Indians only a few days further up the trail. She ultimately ended up traveling with the Hodgetts wagon train after another change in arrangements at Fort Laramie.

“Bro. Robert Culwell” was very likely Thomas Caldwell. Thomas, age 14, had a brother named Robert. His mother, Margaret Ann McFall Caldwell, age 40, related that they had bought some “old Texas cows” to milk. Thomas offered to help some girls that were struggling to milk one of those cows. When he roped a cow so that the girl could milk it, the cow bolted. His foot was caught in the rope and he was thrown to the ground breaking his collarbone and causing him constant pain. As reported on August 31, President Willie personally administered to him and things improved, but he continued to struggle to get over the injury because of gangrene.17

Although the Saints reported crossing the Wood River on August 28, they most likely crossed the Wood River on August 30 just west of present-day Shelton and then traveled four miles further west. Their trail between Shelton and Gibbon, Nebraska, followed US Highway 30.

Sunday, August 31

5:26 a.m.–6:36 p.m.

Started out of Camp about 7 a.m. leaving Col. Babbitt behind. He however overtook us at the point where the road leaves Wood River and where we took in water. He went ahead of us to Fort Kearney. Travelled on for about 16 miles further to the place where the road nearly strikes Platte River. On our way met 4 Californians who gave good reports of our trains and stated that crops in the Valley were first-rate when they passed through on 2nd August. I omitted to state yesterday that Bro. Culwell whose collar bone was broken was promptly administered to by President Willie and his shoulder and arm bandaged. He is doing well today. About 218 miles from Florence.

Their road left the Wood River and went closer to the Platte River. In contrast to the discouragement and harassment the Saints had experienced in Iowa, the four Californians they met gave a favorable report about “the Valley” and reported that the crops in the Salt Lake Valley were “first-rate.”

In a rare example of near agreement, three records reported traveling 18 miles. Peder Madsen recorded traveling 20 miles. They were now on the main Mormon–California Trail, which they followed on and off several times. They camped in the vicinity of present-day Kearney, Nebraska. Fort Kearney was on the opposite side of the Platte River. No one was allowed to camp within the ten-mile square military reservation that surrounded the fort. The city of Kearney developed just outside of that boundary some years later. Levi Savage referred to Fort Kearney as “Fort Carney.” His spelling was clearly phonetic because that is how it is still pronounced by its residents today.

Monday, September 1

5:28 a.m.–6:33 p.m.

Left Camp about 7:30 a.m. and crossed 2 dry creeks besides Elm Creek where we watered cattle and dined. Journeyed to Buffalo Creek on a bend of which we camped for the night with plenty of grass and wood and rather indifferent water it being very low and consequently stagnant. Capt. Siler and Bros. Jost and Elder by permission went ahead of the Camp in pursuit of Buffalo and succeeded in killing one which was not brought into Camp till about 11 p.m. A cow was killed today previous to the Buffalo by direction of Prest. Willie. About 238 miles from Florence.

Fresh meat was intended to balance the company’s diet. After the successful buffalo hunt, William Woodward recorded that the meat was brought in by several men using handcarts. This was the second time they saw buffalo and their first successful hunt.

Levi Savage’s record related having “disagreeable words concerning Brother Siler’s driving his teams after the handcarts and in front of the handcart teams.” He and President Willie had disagreed as to the order of the procession. Levi Savage argued that the handcart support wagons were to be used as an aid for sick handcart trekkers and should follow the handcarts directly. President Willie prevailed. From his entry it is clear that the handcarts went first in the line. They were followed by the “independent” wagons. Last in the line were the handcart support wagons.

Tuesday, September 2

5:29 a.m.–6:31 p.m.

Cutting up weighing and delivering meat occupied some little time this morning. Left Camp about 9 a.m. and after crossing a dry creek journeyed to crossing of Buffalo Creek where we dined. After crossing journeyed to the point where that Creek leaves the road. Camped there for the night with plenty of grass wood and water. We camped here in consequence of its being probable that water could not be reached in less than 10 miles. About 250 miles from Florence.

The distribution of fresh meat caused a delay in starting. Peder Madsen wrote that “¾ pound cow and 1½ pound buffalo” were distributed per person. In addition, he recorded their regular food rations: “sugar, coffee, tea, salt, soap, rice etc. for 6 days and 1 pound fine flour per person per day.”

On September 1 the Saints camped on a bend of Buffalo Creek. On September 2 they crossed a dry creek and then went to a crossing of Buffalo Creek. The Saints crossed the creek, went an unknown distance further, and camped where the trail left the creek. This trail took them on a path that would have left them about six miles from the Platte River, with miles of open, waterless prairie to cross. The main Mormon–California Trail stayed much closer to the Platte River.

Wednesday, September 3

5:31 a.m.–6:30 p.m.

Elizabeth Ingra of the Cambridgeshire Conference in England died about daybreak this morning and was buried in a grave 5 feet deep before starting of Camp which moved off about 8 a.m. President Willie and other Brethren staid behind for an hour to complete the interment and to cut and erect a tombstone. After travelling about 6 miles passed 2 bands of a creek of water on our left and stopped after about 12 miles journey to dine on the open prairie without wood or water at which point the Brethren killed 2 buffaloes which came within shot of the handcarts. Good hard road this morning except at intervals where it was studded with patches of sand. The country rolling. Pursued our journey till we arrived at a pit or small lake of water on our left where we camped for the night without wood but with good feed. 265 miles from Florence.

Death:

Elizabeth Ingra, age 75

Not since August 15, about three weeks earlier, had anyone died in the company. Elizabeth Ingra, age 75, who Levi Savage reported had been carried in a handcart since Iowa City, died. In contrast with how things would be in just six short weeks, a five-foot-deep grave was dug and a tombstone erected.

Buffalo were now plentiful. This was ideal buffalo country. The Platte River Valley, near present-day Cozad and Lexington, Nebraska, is more than 12 miles wide. There were seemingly endless low rolling hills covered with grass. Levi Savage stated that buffalo could be seen in all directions and that having no wood they were cooking with buffalo chips. The animals were coming close enough to the handcarts to be shot by the hunters. Peder Madsen stated that they saw thousands of them and that Ole Madsen, age 41, a Dane, shot a large buffalo, and so did an unnamed Englishman. There was so much meat that two pounds per person were distributed.

Thursday, September 4

5:32 a.m.–6:29 p.m.

It being ascertained this morning that 30 head of cattle had strayed away (most probably in a stampede) during the night, President Willie despatched all the able-bodied men to search for them and after several hours’ search the Brethren returned with reports of failures. A council was then called by Prest. Willie and afterwards different brethren under the command of Capt. Savage, Siler and Christianson started in different directions. Capt. Siler with his company returned about 5 and Captains Savage and Christianson with theirs about 8 p.m. (Capt. Savage’s was a mule company, and Captains Siler and Christianson’s were on foot), after a fruitless search. This morning Col. Babbitt overtook us and reported that it was uncertain whether Mrs. Wilson (the woman who was stated in this journal of 29ult. to have been “taken captive”) was dead or alive, but that she had not yet been found—that the statement made to him by his 2 men (the one “Parish” by name and the other called “John” and wounded through the thigh) whom he had found at Fort Kearney was that one of them (Parish) being on guard and noticing some Indians coming upon their camp alarmed the other men who were sleeping under the waggons, as also Mrs. Wilson—that the Indians immediately began to fire & he (the guard) shot at them with a revolver several times from behind a waggon during which time he saw the waggon-master shot dead, and that finding the numbers too great he and “John” made their escape to Fort Kearney. Col. Babbitt also reported that the Cheyenne Indians attacked a small waggon-train from California last Sunday and killed a woman- that the U. S. Dragoons had killed 13 Cheyennes and taken a number of horses. The Col. also stated that according to report this tribe was concentrating all its strength in the neighborhood of Ash Hollow where the troops were expecting a fight. The Col. very kindly lent me a letter which he found amongst Mrs. Wilson’s papers, and which he said was written by herself containing a short history of occurrences between Florence and the Loup Fork from whence it was dated on 21st ult. It commenced with the words “Dear Cousin” and was left unfinished, the later half being written in pencil. It was manifest from the tenor of the letter that the writer was very uneasy and had more or less during the whole journey entertained apprehensions of danger from some source or other. It would seem that she wrote the letter while some of the men had gone in search of their cattle which they found 18 miles from their Camp. Col. B. reported that Prest. Smoot’s train would probably be opposite to us on the other side of the Platte this evening which turned out to be the case.

The single biggest setback the company would suffer happened during the night between the third and the fourth. The Willie Company was in the area near present-day Cozad, Nebraska. They camped by a small lake, called by Levi Savage Chutah or Chutak Lake. It was described in the company journal on September 3 as “a pit or a small lake.” Identifying the trail through Dawson County and where the company’s cattle were lost is very difficult. The journals provided very little precise location information. One of the earliest histories of Nebraska and Dawson County described the physical situation. “On the north the tributaries of (the Platte River) are Buffalo Creek and several very small creeks, most of them containing running water only a portion of the year.” The history also explained the potential source of Levi Savage’s Chutah Lake. “The beds of the streams are dotted with deep holes, that always contain water furnished by springs at the bottom.”18 While surrounded by buffalo, 30 of their “best working cattle” strayed or stampeded away. Their search was fruitless. They never found any of the 30 animals.

The company journal and Levi Savage’s record treated the oxen becoming lost almost matter of fact. George Cunningham, age 16, wrote that the stampede was followed by a terrible prairie storm. Along with thunder and lightening, the storm included wind so harsh that the tents had to be held down to avoid being blown away. In the morning the cattle were discovered missing and their tracks were obliterated by the heavy rain.19 Levi Savage agreed. He recorded that, “We had an awful storm last night.” Peder Madsen commented, “During the night a storm raged with strong hurricane like winds that threw some of the tents down and brought much disturbance.”

On September 4 the Saints were also distracted by Colonel Babbitt meeting them again. He had learned more details of the Indian attack that his wagons had suffered a few days earlier. He also reported that a battle was expected between the Cheyenne and the United States Army in the Ash Hollow area. They would be to Ash Hollow in a matter of days. Not realizing how disastrous the loss of their animals was, they focused much of their concern on the anticipated Indian attack.

Note: “Ult.” as used in the company journal means ultimo or preceding; “29ult.” refers to the previous month, August 29.

Friday, September 5

5:33 a.m.–6:27 p.m.

This morning Prest. Willie sent out together Capt. Savage in command of a mule company and Captain Christianson in command of a foot company in search of the missing cattle, but the 2 parties returned at dark together this evening and reported a complete failure. Capt. Siler and other Brethren visited President Smoot’s Company this morning which they overtook 12 miles from our Camp. President Smoot and Capt. O. P. Rockwell returned with our brethren and met with our Officers in Council this evening. They camped with us for the night.

Abraham O. Smoot and Orin Porter Rockwell were both leading wagon trains toward Salt Lake City traveling on the south side of the Platte River along the Oregon Trail. Colonel Babbitt had reported on September 4 that Smoot’s train was on the south side of the Platte River. In President Franklin D. Richards and Daniel Spencer’s official report of their travels to Salt Lake City from Florence, it was reported that there were 88 people and 42 wagons in Smoot’s train, but that they were struggling with only 33 men fit to drive the wagons. Porter Rockwell’s train was much smaller with only five wagons.20

The leaders met in a council that evening to discuss their plight. The meeting was mentioned in the company journal, in William Woodward’s history, and in Peder Madsen’s journal. Peder Madsen was the only one to relate the plan they formulated. The company was to be divided into two divisions. The first group would use their animals to move forward and then send back the animals to help bring the second group forward.

Saturday, September 6

5:35 a.m.–6:26 p.m.

This morning President Smoot at the request of our President made some cheering remarks to the Saints and showed us the necessity of strict and ready obedience at the conclusion of which President Willie told the Brethren to yoke up their remaining cattle and the cows and be ready for an immediate move. The first and second hundred and part of the third hundred accompanied by the P.E.F. waggons to start first which was done accordingly. At the same time Bros. Joseph Elder and Andrew Smith were sent back to search for the lost cattle with instructions to go on till they met Franklin D. Richards. After a few hours’ absence the teams which had moved off the first half of our Company returned and took away the remaining half the whole Company about 4 or 5 miles nearer the Valley in the bend of a fine creek near the Platte. This evening at Prayers Capt. Siler made some remarks to that portion of the Camp entrusted to his charge on the principle of obedience & more particularly as it bore on the Saints’ present position here and which remarks had a tendency to prepare their minds for some coming trial of their confidence in God and his Servants. President Smoot and Capt. Rockwell left us this afternoon for their Camp.

Due to the loss of oxen to pull the heavily laden wagons, the company was now in serious trouble and they knew it. Peder Madsen gave specific details of what they did. In the morning the first three hundreds, along with seven wagons, moved four miles up the trail. The animals were allowed to rest and then taken back to the fourth and fifth hundreds and the remaining five wagons. The animals were then hitched up to the five wagons and used to haul the wagons up the trail to where the first set of wagons were waiting. It quickly became obvious that this approach was simply not workable.

At the end of the day, Andrew Siler, the captain of the “independent” wagons, urged his group to be obedient. He seemed to feel the gravity of the situation and remarked that this experience was preparing the people’s minds for some coming trial of their faith.

Sunday, September 7

5:36 a.m.–6:25 p.m.

This morning a council was held and soon afterwards the whole Camp was called together by the well known sound of the horn. President Willie called on Capt. Atwood to preside over the meeting. After singing, “How firm a foundation ye Saints of the Lord” &c., Prest. Atwood called on Captains Chislett, Woodward, Savage and Siler (in the order of their names) to address the Saints which these Brethren did showing very clearly the difficulties of our present position and urging on the people the absolute necessity for doing away with the spirit of grumbling, strife, pilfering and disregard of counsel which was now on the increase in the Camp and substituting in its place the spirit of contentment, peace, union and strict obedience. President Atwood then addressed the Saints stating his cordial approbation of the Brethren’s remarks which he believed would be heeded and thus reduced into practice by the people. He adverted (as also did Capt. Siler in his observations) to the “Independent Waggon Company” and said his feelings was for the owners to consecrate waggons and teams and everything belonging to them to the Lord through his Servant President Willie to be used in the present emergency as the Holy Ghost should dictate through him. Prest. Atwood urged the pilferers to come forward and openly confess their faults before their Brethren who would then extend to them the friendly hand of forgiveness. He told the Saints plainly they must one and all from this time as far as they knew how, literally obey the counsel of each particular officer placed immediately over them without repining or grumbling openly or secretly. President Willie then summed up the whole matter examining minutely the ground occupied by the preceding speakers and expressing his approbation of their remarks. He said (as also did President Atwood in his preceding speech) that the whole strength of the Camp, that of men, women, children and beasts—must be applied under the direction of the Officers of the Camp for the one object in view, the early resumption and speedy & final completion of the journey which he (with President Atwood) considered might, even now, be continued at the rate of from 10 to 15 miles per day according to circumstances. He urged on the Brethren and Sisters attached to the “Independent” Waggons and who had no particular occupation except to walk alongside those vehicles or to ride inside them to walk altogether or as much as practicable and besides to confer honor on themselves by assisting to pull handcarts or doing anything else which their Superior Officer might direct or which they might see required to be done even though it should be to leave their luggage on the Plains. Prest. Willie said he would not enter into full particulars of the plan of operations which he contemplated further than by saying that if the Brethren or Sisters drawing handcarts should be required by their Captain to draw 4 or 5 hundred of flour they must do it cheerfully and the Waggon Company must act on the same principle by carrying anything and everything which might be required of them by like authority. He entirely concurred in the remarks of President Atwood and the other Brethren and would like to see all the grumblers, pilferers, liars and so forth if any were still so in their hearts immediately stand by themselves aside from the rest so that the Brethren might better know them. He concluded by suggesting that President Atwood test the feelings of the Camp by obtaining their vote to sustain the various Officers in their respective positions to the very uttermost in carrying out such measures as the Holy Ghost might devise through them for most safely and speedily gathering this Company to Zion, expressing his strong desire that none would raise their hands toward Heaven in support of such a vote unless they meant it from their hearts and would literally and willingly carry out its spirit when the Officers came to execute their duty. President Atwood then put the question in the affirmative terms mentioned by President Willie at the same time wishing the people not to lower their hands till he told them to do so. The motion was carried unanimously and on its being put in the negative not a single hand was held up. The Meeting was then dismissed and the Brethren immediately went to work to execute the will of President Willie which was cheerfully responded to. Afterwards President Willie and Captains Atwood and Siler with other Brethren yoked up many of the cows which was an arduous task. Early this morning some animals were observed at a considerable distance from our Camp and supposing they might be our missing cattle President Willie, Captain Savage and others went out to reconnoitre but found the animals were a small herd of horses belonging to some men from California who afterwards came to our Camp to purchase flour, a mission in which they completely failed as none were willing to sell in our present emergency. They said they gave 20 cents a pound for flour at Fort Laramie which they left 12 days ago leaving a poor lean horse on the road 25 miles above this point. They reported having met a handcart company on the Sweetwater and 2 other Companies behind them “all right” and that grass was scarce for 3 days’ journey from this point though afterwards we should find it very plentiful. One of these men who gave his name as “James M. Hurn” stated that he lived in Salt Lake City in 1854. The only thing in the shape of provisions which this party wanted for was breadstuffs.

This was the longest entry in the company journal. It reflected the serious nature of the company’s plight. They stayed put and spent the day trying to yoke up the wild cows. The “spirit of grumbling, strife, pilfering and disregard of counsel” was to be replaced by a positive spirit. It is apparent that conflicts surrounding the “Independent Waggon Company” had come to a head. The suggestion was made that the owners of these independent wagons should consecrate their wagons, their teams, and everything belonging to them to the Lord to be used in this emergency. The owners of these wagons were not willing to do so. It was also a source of trouble to have Saints struggling with handcarts, while others walked carefree along the trail. The carefree walkers were asked to join the sacrificing by helping to pull the handcarts. There is no evidence that they were willing to do even that much to help.

President Willie had an alternative plan, which would require great sacrifice among his company. With the loss of the 30 animals, the teams could not pull the weight of the wagons. The flour carried in the Perpetual Emigration Fund wagons was essential. The plan was to have each handcart carry some of the flour. He said that if the handcarts were asked “to draw 4 or 5 hundred of flour they must do it cheerfully.” The thought of pulling 400 or 500 pounds of additional flour by handcart would have been daunting. Peder Madsen confirmed that the five P. E. F. wagons would be pulled by 12 oxen and the best cows, while sacks of flour and tents would be loaded onto the handcarts.

Robert Reeder, age 19, wrote that the best oxen were lost in the stampede. Some flour was taken from the wagons and put on the handcarts depending on the strength of those pulling the carts. His brother-in-law, James Hurren, age 29, was considered the strongest man in the company. He put five of the 100-pound sacks of flour on his handcart, along with two small girls who were not able to walk, and his family’s baggage.21 James Hurren was also very willing to do more than his share of general camp duties, including additional nighttime guard duty. President Willie promised James “that if only one man reached the valley, it would be him.” He did reach the Salt Lake Valley.22

Monday, September 8

5:37 a.m.–6:24 p.m.

This morning a man who gave his name as “Henry Bauichter” came into our camp on horseback. He stated that he was a discharged Soldier from Fort Laramie which he left on 29th ult, and that after travelling about 30 miles he overtook a waggon with 2 mules and 2 horses, the one an Indian horse with a white face, the mules alone drawing the waggon, accompanied by 2 men, one of whom gave his name as “Thomas Margetts” and the other as “James Cowdy”—that the former appeared to have a wife and the latter a wife and child, the whole of whom, as the 2 men stated, were on their way from Great Salt Lake City to the States—that about 70 miles ahead of us on what is supposed to be the North Bluff Creek he and Thomas Margetts went out on horseback in search of buffalo—that this was between 1 and 2 p.m. on 6th inst.—that he (Bauichter) soon killed a buffalo upon which Margetts returned to the Waggon to fetch some things for carrying away part of the animal which Bauichter staid behind to dress—that on Margetts’ return from the waggon he filled one utensil, principally with tallow, and started again for the waggon while Bauichter remained behind to fill up another utensil which Margetts had brought—that the buffalo was over the bluff about a mile and a half from the waggon—that he (Bauchter) was occupied half an hour or so, after Margetts’ last departure, in cutting up meat and filling the other utensil immediately whereupon he also returned in the direction of the waggon noticing before his arrival there that the wagon-cover had been stripped off and that neither mules nor horses were to be seen—that on his (B’s) arrival he discovered on the ground the bodies of Margetts, Cowdy, his wife and child, all dead, except the child that was crying and bloody—that he (B) saw no wounds on any of the bodies and an arrow was sticking in Cowdy’s thigh (whether the right or left one he could not say) and Mrs. C. was sitting in an upright posture leaning against some raised ground, with her breasts and private parts exposed and her head leaning backwards and seemed to have been brutally treated by her murderers—that the waggon, the hinder part of which was on fire, had been completely ransacked and all that was of any immediate use taken away—that he (B) looked around for Mrs. Margetts whom he could not find—that the feathers from a bed had been strewn on the ground by the side of the waggon but he could not see the bed-tick—that he saw at some considerable distance 12 men or so on horseback apparently riding fast and, as far as he could discover, Indians—that none of the bodies were scalped—that he heard no report of fire-arms during his absence from the waggon and that not feeling himself safe in the neighborhood of the murders he escaped with his horse, and with the loss of his discharge and other papers, about $300, a gold watch and other things which he had deposited in the waggon and made the best of his way to this point intending to reach Fort Kearney and report the facts there as quickly as possible. Bauichter said he did not meet any one on his journey from Fort Laramie to our Camp where he arrived stating that he had not eaten for 50 hours. His wants in this respect were supplied and he was furnished with food and ammunition to Fort Kearney for which place he started about 11 a.m. He stated that the 2 horses were ridden at intervals during the journey by Mr. and Mrs. Margetts. The fixing up of our remodelled teams and the changing of freight from one waggon to another occupied the entire morning. We started about noon and after travelling along the Platte Bottom for about 10 or 12 miles, part of the road being very swampy and sandy, we camped for the night close to the River with good feed. Fetched wood from an Island in the River.

This was Henry Bauichter’s report of another Indian attack that happened two days earlier near North Bluff Creek. Levi Savage recorded that Margetts and Cowdy were from Salt Lake City and were well known by the Saints. Almost as an afterthought, the day’s report of progress was made. It is hard to imagine the fear and helplessness that the Saints endured as they found themselves 300 miles from civilization with reports of Indian attacks about 70 miles ahead and with the loss of their best pulling animals.

Levi Savage reported that forty 100-pound sacks of flour were transferred from the wagons to the handcarts. The company’s milk cows had to be yoked up to pull the wagons. Placing a yoke on a milk cow that has never been yoked is a rodeo-worthy event. These untrained animals did not understand how to pull together. He reported that the experience went “extraordinarily well.” He concluded his entry by writing, “Surely the hand of the Lord is with us yet.”

Sadly, Peder Madsen’s journal ended without any explanation on September 8. He eventually died just outside of Salt Lake City, in Echo Canyon, on November 5.

Note: “Inst.” as used in the company journal means instant or present; “6th inst.” refers to the present month, September 6.

Tuesday, September 9

5:38 a.m.–6:22 p.m.

Rolled out of Camp at 8:30 a.m. our teams still being very troublesome to fix up. Journeyed about 6 miles and then stopped to water cattle and to dine over a sand bluff to cross which we had to double teams. Continued our journey from the river upon the banks of which we camped for the night close to the point where Skunk Creek empties itself into the River. Very heavy sandy roads throughout the day. About 285 miles from Florence.

Pawnee Creek empties into the Platte River near present-day Brady, Nebraska. Skunk Creek must have been the name of present-day Pawnee Creek. The trail had to hug the bluffs to avoid the Pawnee swamp. The various journals mentioned the sandy roads and sandy bluffs. The Saints were entering the “sandhills” of Nebraska. This area of Nebraska was primarily a series of low hills that were really sand dunes stabilized by grass. When a wagon or a handcart rode over the grass, it left unstabilized sand. As the Saints already knew, sandy roads were much harder to pull a wagon or a handcart across. At one point they had to double the teams to pull up the wagons.

Wednesday, September 10

5:40 a.m.–6:21 p.m.

Left Camp a little before 9 a.m. & journeyed on to crossing of Skunk Creek, President Willie, Capt. Atwood and other brethren carrying the Sisters over the stream. Camped for the night at a good spring of clear cold water on the south side of the road with good feed but no wood. Roads worse than yesterday. 295 miles from Florence.

President Willie and “other brethren” carried the sisters over Skunk Creek because of the long skirts they wore throughout the trek. In the California gold rush period, some women who crossed the plains had begun to wear “bloomers,” which were very baggy pantaloons. Unlike the long skirts of the day, the bloomers were not as likely to get filthy and shredded as they walked. However, most women would have no part of bloomers. Their long skirts provided them privacy as they took care of important personal matters out on the open prairie. However, when a woman’s skirt got wet, it held plenty of water. The added weight made it difficult to walk. Consequently, some of the men carried the women across this creek.

Thursday, September 11

5:41 a.m.–6:19 p.m.

Left Camp about 8 a.m. crossed Carrion Creek, nooned on banks of Platte River and camped for the night on the banks of the same. Buffalo killed this evening after arrival of Camp. Some of the Brethren thought they saw horsemen and carriages coming along this evening at dusk but it unfortunately turned out to be a “bag of moonshine”. Good feed and lots of “chips” as usual. We have most delightful weather and are being prospered beyond our utmost expectations. Better roads today; the health of the Camp which has been indifferent for some time past is improving and all is well with us. About 300 miles from Florence. Our camping place for the night was on the north fork of the Platte about 9 miles above the junction.

They were still in the heart of buffalo country and a buffalo was killed for meat. The Indians that inhabited the Nebraska Territory in 1856 were Plains Indians. The Plains Indians’ culture was built around the buffalo and required that every part of the buffalo be used. This included their droppings, which were called buffalo chips. The journal reported that there were lots of chips as usual. When dried, most buffalo manure breaks roughly into quarter-inch slices, referred to as “chips.” When wood was not available, the pioneers used buffalo chips to build their fires.

Present-day Whitehorse Creek must have been Carrion Creek. Their camp “9 miles above the junction” on the North Platte River would have put them a few miles past present-day North Platte, Nebraska.

Friday, September 12

5:42 a.m.–6:18 p.m.

Pursuant to a previous threat or promise Capt. Atwood pulled down a tent or two this morning (about an hour and a half after the horn had blown) exposing the serene features of its sleeping inmates much to their chagrin and the amusement of bystanders. Some of the sleepers wanted to draw the tent back over them as a covering but it was “no go”—they stood confessed to the “vulgar gaze.” Buffalo meat served out this morning first thing—Left Camp about 8:30 a.m., crossed a fine creek nooned on the banks of the Platte and afterwards crossed the North Bluff Fork. Pretty good feed. This evening President Franklin D. Richards and suite (with Bros. Elder and Smith who went in search of the missing cattle) arrived just before dusk in 3 carriages and 2 waggons. They were loudly greeted by the hearty hurrahs of the Saints whom they met after supper when Prest. Willie in a few appropriate remarks introduced Prest. Richards into whose hands he gave the Meeting to be led by him as the Holy Ghost might dictate. Bro. Richards then called on Bro. Dunbar for a song. He accordingly sang one of the Songs of Zion. Prest. Richards then addressed the Saints expressing his satisfaction at their having journeyed thus far & more especially with handcarts and congratulating them on the loss of their cattle which he knew had proved and would prove their salvation if they would hearken to and diligently obey counsel to the letter in which event he promised in the name of Israel’s God and by the authority of the Holy Priesthood that no obstacle whatever should come in the way of this Camp but what they should be able by their united faith and works to overcome God being their helper and that if a Red Sea whould interpose they should by their union of heart & hand walk through it like Israel of old dryshod. On the same conditions he promised that though they might have some trials to endure as a proof to God and their Brethren that they had the true “grit” still the Lamanites heat nor cold nor any other thing should have power to seriously harm any in the Camp but that we should arrive in the Valleys of the Mountains with strong and healthy bodies and that this should be the case with the aged the sick and the inform. He said that next to the Pioneers the Handcart Companies would meet with the most hearty and gracious reception from Prest. Young the Authorities under him and all the Saints in Utah of any Companies that ever entered the Valley. Prest. Richards said although it was a scheme at which many had already scoffed and which they were yet deriding it was nevertheless the Lord’s plan, a plan which would first puzzle and astonish the nations and then strike terror into their hearts. He encouraged the Saints to live the principles of their religion not only openly before the world but privately in their families and in their intercourse with each other and to scorn all the trials and difficulties which might come in their way, assuring them as the result of such a course that they should find favor with God, and have the confidence of the Brethren things which were to him at all events far above all the gold, silver and precious stones in the Universe. His words had the tendency to build up, strengthen and encourage the people and seemed to electrify his hearers as it were. The Holy Ghost was felt in its almighty and renovating power during the whole time we were together and the people seconded his sentiments by a hearty “Amen” from time to time. Counsellors Daniel Spencer and Cyrus H. Wheelock addressed the Saints in a few stirring remarks bearing testimony to the truth of the words spoken by Prest. Richards. These Brethren exhorted the Saints to obedience, union and brotherly love as they valued their salvation across these Plains. The meeting was then dismissed with prayer by Capt. Atwood after which an account was taken of the number of cows, oxen, waggons, fire-arms, &c., for representation by President Richards to the First Presidency. Bro. Dunbar sang several songs of Zion during the meeting. Camped for the night on the North Bluff Fork of the Platte—320 miles from Florence.

The Saints were leaving later each day. One cause of their lateness appears to have been some people sleeping in at least an hour and a half after the horn had blown to wake them. Millen Atwood had threatened to pull down the tents of these “sleeping inmates” and he did. He refused to let them set the tents back up, so they were forced to suffer this humiliation.

Juxtaposed against that low point was the arrival of President Franklin D. Richards and his traveling group of missionaries in the evening. President Richards’s group was literally racing to get to Salt Lake City, but stopped for the night to encourage the Saints. He gave a rousing speech which invited the Holy Ghost. Brother Dunbar, who was asked to sing twice on September 12 and once on September 13, was William C. Dunbar, age 36, a missionary returning to Utah. He was the same William C. Dunbar who was on board the steamboat Saluda on April 9, 1852, when she blew up near Lexington, Missouri. He lost his wife and two children in the explosion on his initial trip to the Salt Lake Valley.23

North Bluff Fork or North Bluff Creek is now called Birdwood Creek. This was the area where the Margetts and the Cowdys had been killed by Indians just days earlier. This Indian attack may have been a factor in the direction of President Richards to have the handcarts cross the North Platte River on September 13, rather than to proceed on toward Fort Laramie, where the Mormon Trail normally crossed the North Platte River.

Saturday, September 13

5:44 a.m.–6:17 p.m.

This morning we were summoned together about 7 o’clock. Prest. Richards opened the Meeting by calling on Counsellor C.H. Wheelock to engage in prayer. Bro. Dunbar then sang an appropriate song at the conclusion of which Prest. R. gave the Saints some good and wholesome instruction especially impressing on their minds the absolute necessity of literal and prompt obedience and reminding them that Prest. Willie was invested with absolute authority to direct the affairs of this Camp. President R’s remarks were well received by the Saints and there was a perfect unanimity of feeling manifested. He then dismissed the meeting with prayer at the conclusion of which our President moved that we give 3 cheers for Prest.R. and Suite which was quickly responded to by the waveing of hats, handkerchiefs and bonnets and 3 united hearty and uproarious hip—hip—hip -hurrahs. He then said that as he had found a good place for crossing the Platte nearly opposite our present camping ground our Company had better cross at once. He and his Suite crossed and Prest. Willie immediately gave instructions for all of us to follow. The crossing occupied till pretty late in the afternoon and the teams being wearied he decided on camping on the south side of the Platte. A calf was killed this morning from our herd for Prest.R. Father William Haley of the Warwickshire Conference in England died this afternoon from general decay of constitution aged 66 years.

Death:

William Haley, age 66

Levi Savage reported that the company got up at 4 a.m. and was ready to go by 7 a.m. This was in contrast to the previous 8:30–9:00 a.m. starts. Instead of leaving at 7 a.m., President Richards called a special meeting. The company journal described its purpose as to emphasize “the absolute necessity of literal and prompt obedience” to President Willie. The Saints were united in support of President Richards’s admonishment. On the other hand, Levi Savage’s journal described it as a meeting to chastise him for his comments in Florence and his “disagreeable words” concerning Captain Siler’s independent wagon teams on September 1. William Woodward confirmed Levi Savage’s conclusion, by stating in his history that Levi Savage was given “a severe reprimand.” Levi Savage humbly asked for forgiveness.

President Richards instructed the company to cross the North Platte River at that point, which they did. The river was a mile wide and took the whole day to cross. This does not appear to have been a normal crossing point, but there was a trail on the south side of the North Platte River which they could follow. William Haley, age 66, the same man who had been lost on the night of August 28, died.

Driving Directions

Saturday, September 13

To follow the company’s trail at North Platte, Nebraska, there are two options. To take the easier route, which generally follows the Oregon Trail stay on I-80 and travel west to Exit 126. At Exit 126 take US Highway 26 and travel north and west through Ash Hollow. To follow a route that approximates the Willie Handcart Company route but requires some travel on gravel roads, take Exit 177 and travel north into the city of North Platte on US Highway 83. Three and one-half miles north of the off ramp is a road called North River Road. It is past the North Platte River Bridge on the north side of the North Platte River. The GPS point at the turn is N 41 09.747’ W 100 45.448’. Turn left onto the North River Road and travel generally west and north for about three miles as it winds along to a sharp, left-hand curve. Curve to the left and follow the asphalt road, which is still the North River Road, and travel west again. The road eventually changes to gravel. Continue traveling west one more mile to where the road turns south. Travel south for one-half mile and, where the road turns west again, travel west along the river to a stop sign. Turn south at the stop sign onto Prairie Trace, an asphalt road, and travel south, across the bridge, for 2.2 miles. Turn right onto Snake Road, a gravel road, and travel west as it snakes around to the west for about 1.5 miles. Snake Road turns south and goes up a hill to a stop sign. Turn right at the stop sign and drive west on Snake Road, an asphalt road, for 3.5 more miles to another stop sign. Turn right and travel west for four miles to the end of the asphalt. When the asphalt ends, continue traveling west on what Keith County calls East 120 for five more miles to a T intersection. At the intersection turn left and travel south one-half mile on the asphalt road and then turn right. Travel west again on East 120, a gravel road, for about nine miles as it makes various right and left curves until it intersects East 110. At the intersection with East 110, which is nearly at the top of the hill, turn right onto East 110 and travel west for two miles to an intersection with East J. Turn right onto East J and travel one mile north until it intersects East 120. Turn left and drive west for seven miles on East 120 through a stop sign and to an asphalt road, State Road 61. Turn left on State Road 61 and travel west for about two miles to its junction with US Highway 26. Proceed straight through onto US Highway 26 and travel west through Ash Hollow.

Sunday, September 14

5:45 a.m.–6:16 p.m.

William Haley was buried this morning on our yesterday’s camping ground, a grave-board being inscribed with his name, age, and date of death. Left Camp about 8:30 a.m. nooned at a bend of the Platte and camed for the night about 7 miles further up on the same river. Bro. Joseph Elder killed 2 buffaloes just before arriving in Camp this evening.

Following the Mormon Trail would have kept the company on the north side of the North Platte River. There was, however, a less-used trail on the south side of the North Platte River. It was the path they chose to follow. On the other hand, the Oregon Trail went even farther south and followed the South Platte River to one of three crossings: the Lower Crossing, near Sutherland; the Middle Crossing, near Ogallala; or the Upper Crossing, past Brule, the primary trail crossing. The south side of the North Platte River trail could be accessed by either the Lower or Middle Crossings.24

Monday, September 15

5:46 a.m. 6:14 p.m.

Left Camp about 8:30 a.m. soon after which Father Richard F. Turner of the Worcestershire Conference in England died. He was buried at a bend of the Platte River where we nooned. Journeyed some distance when 3 mounted Indians armed with bows & arrows met us. They represented themselves as of the Tribe called “the Arraphoes” and wished us to camp with their party on the Platte tonight which was not acceded to we being too far from the river. By signs as far as the Brethren could understand them these 3 men represented that some Emigrant Train was attacked by the Sioux Indians 5 days ago, and they thought our train would be attacked also. The Brethren by signs said we had plenty of rifles, powder, lead and caps. The 3 Indians shook their heads. Camped for the night on the open prairie close to a small muddy pool of water scarcely sufficient for cooking purposes. Poor feed. Cattle chained to the waggons for the night. They have had a long & tedious day’s journey and seem quite exhausted though the roads on the whole have been tolerably good. Prest. Willie notified the Saints that the horn would blow in the morning at rise at 3 so as to start at 4.

Death:

Richard F. Turner, age 66

When traveling on the south side of the North Platte River, there were two spots where the river passed so closely to the bluffs that the bluffs had to be ascended. The bluffs were skirted by cliffs, 10 to 20 feet high, but even that little of a cliff made it impossible for the wagons and handcarts to cross them. The first spot was near the present-day Kingsley Dam, which created Lake McConaughy. The second spot was one-half mile or so downstream from the mouth of Ash Hollow. On the approach to the first spot, about 10 miles west of present-day Sarben, Nebraska, there was an area where the bluffs could be ascended. The company took that path. At the top of the bluff, they met three Arapahoe who told of a Sioux attack within the last week. That night the company camped very cautiously on the open prairie without feed or good water. Levi Savage’s and William Woodward’s records also noted that their animals were chained up so there was no chance of the animals being separated from the company.

Tuesday, September 16

5:47 a.m.–6:13 p.m.

Rolled out about 4 a.m. accordingly and after travelling through a deep winding ravine over a very heavy sandy road we nooned on the banks of the Platte with splendid feed. Since noon yesterday we have been travelling over a long range of bluffs which have opened at noon today on the Platte Bottom. The guard saw several Indians round our Camp about 2 this morning on the bluffs but on going up to the spot they could not be found though they with their dogs were heard in the distance. Journeyed over some heavy sandy bluffs this afternoon and camped for the night in the valley by the side of the Platte.

There was no water on the bluffs, so the company had to return to the North Platte River. An 1898 topographical map reportedly showed two roads from the top of the bluffs to the river bottom. They were one-half mile and two miles west of the Kingsley Dam. Both locations would have been difficult descents to the river. Lake McConaughy now covers the trail from this point until west of Eagle Canyon, which is seven miles east of Ash Hollow.25

Although Levi Savage reported that the Saints were fatigued by the sandy roads, not everyone was so worn out. Agnes Caldwell, age 9, and her friend, Mary Hurren, age 7, remembered traveling through an area inhabited by rattlesnakes. They would hold hands and jump over the snakes. Agnes said, “It seemed to me we were jumping for more than a mile. Due to the protecting hand of the Lord, we were not harmed.”26

Wednesday, September 17

5:49 a.m.–6:12 p.m.

We were delayed this morning (as we had been on previous occasions in consequence of some handcarts which had been broken requiring repair. Left Camp about 9:30 a.m., nooned on the banks of the Platte and camped for the night on the banks of the same River. Very bad sandy roads throughout the day which, combined with a very high wind rendered it the most arduous day’s trip up to this point.

A cold front appears to have passed over the company as they were getting underway. Levi Savage reported “a cold and strong wind arose from the northwest,” so they traveled only about 10 miles. William Woodward recorded, “The wind blew terrific thro’ the day.” They stayed on the banks of the North Platte River and fought the sand and wind all day.

Thursday, September 18

5:50 a.m.–6:10 p.m.

Last night and this morning we had a very sharp frost. Rolled forward about 9 a.m. and after travelling some distance over our usually (of late) sandy roads nooned at the foot of some high bluffs near the River from which we took a 7 mile supply of water. I omitted to state in my journal for yesterday that Bro. J.S. Cantwell’s daughter Ellen (aged 7 years) was bitten by a large rattlesnake as she was playing in the sand. Capt. Siler killed the snake and applied the best known remedy at hand (a mixture of powder and lard externally and some whisky internally) after which she slept soundly for some time. After dinner today we made a start up the side of the bluffs which occupied a considerable time—journeyed over hill and dale for several miles till after passing through Ash Hollow we again entered the Platte Bottom where we camped for the night. Fine cedar found on the bluffs. Sister Stewart was found to be missing on the arrival of the Camp and as her footsteps were traced in advance of us Bros. Oliver and Smith were sent ahead in search and returned reporting that they had failed in their mission thus far. 380-¾ miles from Florence.

For the first time that year, it froze during the night. The company continued along the North Platte River until noon, when they had to detour and turn up into the bluffs for a final ascent and then descent into Ash Hollow. The detour from the river bottom to Ash Hollow began about one-half mile from the main trail through Ash Hollow. They had to endure this lengthy detour due to two factors. First, the river ran so close to the bluffs that the ground on the direct path, alongside the river, was an impassable marsh. Second, the trail ascended more than two miles up the bluffs and then back down another two or three miles into the Ash Hollow bottoms because there were numerous cliffs that impeded travel. The trail weaved through the hills as it avoided these cliffs. Levi Savage reported that they had to double their teams to get up the steep hill.

Unlike Agnes Caldwell and Mary Hurren, poor Ellen Cantwell, age 7, did not fare so well with the snakes. She was severely bitten on her hand by a rattlesnake. She did not fully recover until the following January and kept a scar for the rest of her life.27 The company journal reported that they applied a remedy of “powder and lard,” with a little whiskey.

Nancy Stewart, who had been traveling with the independent wagons, was discovered missing at the noon meal. She had joined the Willie Company on August 31, at the request of Colonel Babbitt, and she had been assigned to James Cantwell’s independent wagon. With James’s daughter, Ellen, having been bitten by a snake on September 17 and then his passenger, Nancy Stewart, becoming lost, it is safe to assume that things were not going well for the Cantwells. While struggling into Ash Hollow, they had to send out searchers. Ash Hollow, even today, has an abundance of trees and is an area where people could get lost easily. Levi Savage referred to Almon Babbitt as “Brother Babel.” He designated Nancy Stewart as “Sister Reade.”

Driving Directions

Thursday, September 18

To see where the company’s detour began, follow the main road through Ash Hollow and turn right onto Road 44. Road 44 is a gravel road at the mouth of Ash Hollow. The GPS point at the turn is N 41 18.472’ W 102 07.498’. Travel east about one-half mile to the first draw. They would have gone south up the draw, weaving between the bluffs.

Friday, September 19

5:52 a.m.–6:09 p.m.

After breakfast this morning, Prest. Willie sent out many of the brethren to search for Sister Stewart, while Capt. Siler, Bro. Jost with the assistance of some Brethren repaired the axle-trees and other parts of some broken-down handcarts. The Scouts for Sis. Stewart returned without her about dinner-time. Prest. Willie then called a Council after which he with 11 Brethren went out on a 3rd expedition. They had been absent about 4 hours when she came into Camp stating that hearing the lowing of cattle and the sound of the axe she made for the spot and found Captain Woodward and others (who had been sent into Ash Hollow by Prest. Willie for timber to make axles) cutting wood. On arriving in Camp she appeared much exhausted and was scarcely able to speak. A cow having been killed this morning, she partook of some beef soup which revived her and she fell asleep. This evening after supper, Capt. Atwood called the Saints together for Prayer as usual and was afterwards conversing about the best plan to be adopted to bring back Prest. Willie and Company to the Camp (Capts. Woodward & Chislett having volunteered to go in search on horseback) when they all entered the Camp Prest. Willie stating that having discovered and lost Sis. Stewart’s back track about dark he had deemed it best to return to the Camp for the night and make a fresh start in the morning if necessary. We were all much rejoiced at being restored to each other again.

While some of the men searched for Nancy Stewart, the rest of the company took a day to repair handcarts. There was plenty of wood in the hollow. Levi Savage reported that Sister Stewart had walked on ahead of the company on Thursday. When she reached the main road into Ash Hollow, she turned left toward the South Platte River, instead of right toward the North Platte River. William Woodward and some others found her while cutting wood. Naturally, she was exhausted from her 36-hour ordeal.

Saturday, September 20

5:53 a.m.–6:07 p.m.

This morning Sis. Stewart stated that when she descended into Ash Hollow instead of turning to the right towards the River (where our Camp was) she turned to the left because she saw a road in that direction—that she went for a long distance on such road and then not seeing anything of the Camp turned back to the place where we nooned yesterday near which she slept last night on the bluffs of the open prairie and that she was followed by some wolves one of which came within 2 yards of her and seemed inclined to be rather too familiar which unlawful propensity she instantly checked by a steady gaze accompanied by an authoritative shake or waive of her right hand. The repairs of the handcarts commenced early this morning and we were not able to leave Camp till about 2 p.m., after which we wended our way to the next point where the road joins the Platte at which place we camped for the night about 6 p.m. Roads fast improving with better feed.

After only an occasional mention before the first frost, Levi Savage provided almost daily weather reports in his record for the next few days. Cool and an evening mist of rain was the September 20 weather report, which contrasted with the September 19 report of “extremely warm” weather.

Driving Directions

Saturday, September 20

To follow their trail, travel northwest from Ash Hollow on State Road 92 and US Highway 26 toward Gering and Scottsbluff, Nebraska. When the State Road and the US Highway separate, follow State Road 92. State Road 92 combines with US Highway 385 for a short period of time; stay on State Road 92. Their actual trail was on the south side of the North Platte River and may be partially traceable by following gravel roads on the south side of the river. A few miles past Lewellyn is a roadside marker noting the Battle of Blue Water in 1855. That is another name for the Harney Massacre, which was a big part of the Indian troubles that continued to plague the trail in 1856.

Sunday, September 21

5:54 a.m.–6:06 p.m.

2 handcarts having been broken down yesterday afternoon we were delayed a little this morning for their repair and we therefore did not leave Camp till about 9 a.m. Very wet unpleasant weather. Travelled till 1 p.m. when we camped on the Platte for dinner. Started again at 2 and camped for the night on a bend of the same River with indifferent feed. Roads on the whole heavy and sandy throughout the day. W.N. Leason, son of Sister Ruvinia Leason, of Quincy, Illinois, died at 11:30 p.m. of canker in the stomach. He was born on 7 Nov. 1854.

Death:

William N. Leason, age 22 months

The weather was starting to adversely impact the company. The system was set up so that the sick could ride in the wagons. Levi Savage reported that many were “sick and stopping back to get in the wagons.” The sandy roads were wet, which made them even more difficult to pull through. Two 66-year-old men had died in the previous eight days and now a child had died. Death had begun to stalk the Willie Company.

Monday, September 22

5:56 a.m.–6:05 p.m.

W. N. Leason was buried this morning at 7 o’clock, a suitable inscription in wood being placed on the grave. Rolled out about 7:30 a.m. & nooned and camped for the night on the Platte. A hard and long day’s journey, the roads being more or less very heavy and sandy notwithstanding which Prest. Willie considers we have made from 18 to 20 miles since the morning. In about an hour after the starting of the Camp this afternoon Bro. Jesse Empy of Eaton Bray Branch in the Bedfordshire Conference in England died from scrofula, age 31. Weather turned warm and pleasant about noon but cold set in again before sunset.

Death:

Jesse Empy, age 31

How far they traveled in any day was an estimate. On September 22, President Willie estimated 18 to 20 miles. William Woodward agreed, estimating “about 19 miles.” Levi Savage stated that they traveled “twelve miles.” The weather went quickly from cold to warm to cold. It was typical fall weather on the plains of Nebraska.

Jesse Empy, age 31, died an hour after starting to travel in the afternoon. Rather than stop and bury him, they kept on going. The Saints carried him until he was buried the next morning. Levi Savage recorded that his hands and arm were covered with sores and that he had been having “ague,” probably malaria. It was hard to determine his cause of death. Glandular swellings are associated with scrofula. Fever is associated with ague. But it is unknown what the sores on his hands and arm had to do with his death. Was the weather hastening the deaths of some of the weakened Saints?

Tuesday, September 23

5:57 a.m.–6:03 p.m.

Bro. Empy was buried this morning before starting of Camp, a suitable wooden inscription being placed on the grave. Rolled out of Camp at 8:30 a.m., nooned a short distance from the road on the Platte and camped for the night on that River about 5:30 p.m. Roads much better though interspersed with heavy sand occasionally.

Both the company journal and William Woodward had brief entries for September 23. Levi Savage’s entry was quite telling, as it demonstrated his continued concern about hurrying along. He recorded: “This morning was cold and foggy. The Saints slow in rising and getting breakfast early, notwithstanding Brother Willey’s repeated order to arise at the sound of the bugle (daylight). Apparently not realizing the necessity of our making as much distance as possible in order to reach the Valley before too severe cold weather, some complain of hard treatment, because we urge them along. Many hang on to the wagons.”

Wednesday, September 24

5:59 a.m.–6:02 p.m.

Left Camp about 7:30 a.m., nooned between the road and River and camped for the night on the banks thereof about 2 miles on the southwest side of “Chimney Rock”. A very interesting meeting at which Prest. Willie & Capts. Atwood and Savage earnestly exhorted the Saints to the more diligent performance of their duties. A cow was killed this evening.

No trail went “southwest” of Chimney Rock because Chimney Rock hugged the western mountains. If they were “south” of Chimney Rock, they would have been “east” or “southeast” of it. Levi Savage wrote that he “thought we were nearer last night to it than we are.” In the fairly flat North Platte River Valley, it was very hard to judge distance. Since it was so flat, major monuments like Chimney Rock were visible for many miles. Due to the monotony of the landscape they appeared to be closer than they actually were.

Driving Directions

Wednesday, September 24

Chimney Rock National Historic Site is east of Chimney Rock, a mile or so off the highway. The marked turn to the visitors center is about 12 miles past Bridgeport, Nebraska.

Thursday, September 25

6:00 a.m.–6:01 p.m.

Rolled out of Camp about 7:30 a.m., nooned at a point where the road and river meet and camped for the night at another similar point a short distance beyond 2 vacant Trading-posts with indifferent feed. Roads pretty good throughout the day.

The trading posts in this area were from trader Joseph Robidoux. In the Scott’s Bluff area, there were multiple Robidoux trading posts. The posts were constructed in various places, as the trail around and then through Scott’s Bluff changed. Although the company journal and William Woodward’s record did not refer to these posts by name, Levi Savage called them “Rubadore’s” posts. The posts referred to by the journal were established in the 1850s about three miles west of present-day Melbeta, Nebraska.28 The trading posts were referred to by William Woodward as “old,” and by the company journal as “vacant.” The Saints were traveling very late in the season. Whether the buildings were old or merely vacant, they had no supplies and were of no help to the company.

Friday, September 26

6:01 a.m.–5:59 p.m.

Left Camp at 7:30 a.m., immediately struck off from the River for “Scotts Bluffs” near which we nooned and nearer to which we camped for the night, close to a very deep ravine or creek the sides of which were studded with fine Cedar which as well as water was hard to procure. The water was obliged to be dammed up in order that the cattle might drink. Feed dried up. Sis. Ann Bryant aged 69 from Bristol in England died this afternoon of general decay of constitution. Roads today “half and half”, i.e., partly sandy & partly good.

Death:

Ann Bryant, age 69

Levi Savage reported that Ann Bryant, “who had been ill for sometime, but not thought dangerous, was found dead in the wagon in a sitting posture, apparently asleep.”

The Oregon Trail splits a few miles past Robidoux’s 1850s trading posts. The pre-1850 primary route of the trail was through Robidoux’s Pass. From 1851 on, the primary route was through Mitchell’s Pass. These passes were not called by their current names until years later. They were simply unnamed passes in the Scott’s Bluff area.29

From the journal descriptions, it appears that the Willie Company took the older Robidoux’s Pass route, rather than the newer Mitchell’s Pass route. This decision might have been due in part to the weather. People believed that bad weather favored the older route. In the company journal it described problems finding water on September 26 and nooning on a creek 10 miles from Horseshoe Creek to get water on September 27. These were both indicators of their use of the Robidoux’s Pass route because the Mitchell’s Pass route returned to the Platte River and there was no creek to “noon” at on September 27. On the Robidoux’s Pass route, the trail paralleled Owl Creek on September 27, which provided them a creek to noon at as the record stated. Note that William Woodward’s record stated the company camped at Scott’s Bluffs on September 26, which at first glance was inconsistent with traveling through Robidoux’s Pass. However, if they camped at Mitchell’s Pass, they could not have traveled the 14 miles that Levi Savage recorded. It makes more sense to conclude that they camped at Robidoux’s Pass. Levi Savage’s entry confirmed these conclusions. He reported traveling 14 miles without water and camping at “Rubadore’s Old Trading Post.” It was nearly 14 miles from Robidoux’s 1850s trading posts to the old Robidoux’s Pass trading post, and the trail was without any water source.

Driving Directions

Friday, September 26

To go to Robidoux’s Pass on a gravel road, continue on State Road 92 until it intersects State Road 71 as you approach Gering. (Note: Scotts Bluff National Monument is straight ahead on State Road 92. It is worth a stop.) Take State Road 71 south and drive southwest for about two miles. At the Robidoux Road sign turn right and drive west to a stop sign. Drive straight through the stop sign intersection and onto the gravel road that winds out to Robidoux’s Pass. There is a pioneer grave marker about eight miles up the gravel road. About one and one-half miles farther west, the road curves south. The monument for Robidoux’s Pass is on the curve. There is no sign pointing to the marker, which is out roughly 200 yards west of the road in the grass. Stop and follow the trail out to see it. The GPS location for the marker is N 41 48.885’ W 103 51.198’. Continue traveling south for one-half mile from the curve to an intersecting gravel road right after a cattle guard. Turn right on the gravel road and travel west on Summit Ranch Road for about five miles to a stop sign. Turn right at the stop sign and travel north on Stegal Road, which is asphalt, to State Road 92. Turn left and travel west and north on State Road 92. It eventually joins US Highway 85 and heads toward Torrington, Wyoming. In order to avoid Robidoux’s Pass and the gravel road, simply follow State Road 92 through Gering and travel west toward Torrington, Wyoming.

Saturday, September 27

6:02 a.m.–5:57 p.m.

Sis. Bryant was buried before starting of Camp, which took place about 7:30 a.m. nooned on some Creek and about 10 miles further & crossed over Horseshoe Creek where we camped for the night with a little better feed.

Horse Creek joined the Platte River very near the present Nebraska/Wyoming state line. The Mitchell’s Pass and the Robidoux’s Pass routes reunited at that point. The Saints were again traveling along the south side of the North Platte River. Levi Savage’s entry for September 27 was only two sentences long. His second sentence seemed to accurately state the obvious, “The old appear to be failing considerably.”

Sunday, September 28

Harney Massacre monument.

6:04 a.m.–5:56 p.m.

Left Camp about 7:30 a.m., nooned on the road about ¾ of a mile from the Platte with good feed. Met a company of emigrants returning from Salt Lake City in 11 wagons. Peter Burgess one of the party informed us that Mr. Babbitt and 2 men who accompanied him had been killed by the Cheyennes. We afterwards met a Company of U.S. Dragoons the Officer commanding which confirmed, Burgess’s report. The Officer and several of his men took possession of a horse which we found several days back and which he claimed as his property. He refused to see President Willie before taking the horse. Camped for the night on the road near the River with good feed.

As the handcart company traveled they met two groups. First, they met a company of nearly 100 apostates on their way back to the states as reported by President Willie, Levi Savage, and William Woodward. This meeting did not seem to adversely impact the attitudes of the Saints in this struggling company. Later they met a company of soldiers, who confirmed the apostates’ report that Almon Babbitt and two of his men had been killed and who took a stray horse that the company had found on September 25.

Grattan Massacre monument.

During the day the Saints passed the area where, in 1854, the Sioux Indians killed Second Lieutenant Grattan and 29 soldiers in a massacre. Those killings led to the 1855 Harney Massacre of even more Indians north of Ash Hollow. These incidents were the primary sources of the Indian unrest that haunted the Willie Company throughout the Nebraska Territory.

Driving Directions

Sunday, September 28

In the Torrington area there are two options. To take the first, travel through Torrington to US Highway 26 and follow it west to Fort Laramie, Wyoming. To take the second, stay on the south side of the North Platte River and travel through the area that the Willie Company would have traveled. As US Highway 85 approaches Torrington it intersects State Road 156. Turn left onto State Road 156 and travel west and north as it winds around to Lingle, Wyoming. Just south of Lingle, State Road 156 intersects State Road 157. Turn left and travel west and then north on State Road 157 to Barnes, Wyoming. When State Road 157 intersects US Highway 26 near Barnes, turn left and travel west to Fort Laramie. (Note: About three miles west of the start of State Road 157, on the north side of the road, is a marker for the Grattan Massacre.)

"Old Bedlam" at restored Fort Laramie in Wyoming.

Monday, September 29

6:06 a.m.–5:55 p.m.

Left Camp about 8 a.m., passed an Indian Agency Station where some Sioux Indians were camped. Nooned at a vacant Trading Post 7 miles from Fort Laramie and camped for the night on the road near an Indian Burying Ground about 4 miles from that Fort with weeds and young cottonwood for the cattle.

Near any semblance of civilization, feed for the animals became harder to find. They camped about four miles from Fort Laramie and fed their cattle weeds and young cottonwood trees, both of which were very poor sources of feed for cattle.

William Woodward recorded that he and Joseph B. Elder went to Fort Laramie “to obtain letters” for the camp. He received a letter from William H. Kimball. However, a more important letter was addressed to President Willie from President Franklin D. Richards. William Woodward did not reveal the contents of the letters. However, Levi Savage wrote, “Brother Richards has no cattle provided for us here and no other provisions made.”

The first frost was on the night of September 17. With the colder weather, death began to haunt the company. Seven Saints had died while crossing the area that would become the state of Nebraska. Four of the deaths were of people over 60. The facts that there were no provisions at Fort Laramie and that the weather had turned cold would hasten the demise of many of these Saints.

12:["$","$L1c",null,{"book":{"id":61,"title":"The Willie Handcart Company","subtitle":null,"image_id":"website-files-bucket/books/book_cover_images/WillieHandcart.png","excerpt":null,"book_series_id":null,"series_ordering":0,"ebook_link_kindle":null,"ebook_link_deseret":null,"ebook_link_nook":null,"free_book":0,"pdf_id":"website-files-bucket/books/book_pdf/WillieBook.pdf","footnotes":null,"public":1,"slug":"the-willie-handcart-company","wp_id":null,"product_link":"product/the-willie-handcart-company","author_id":null},"chapter":{"id":572,"title":"Chapter 4: Florence, Nebraska Territory, to Fort Laramie, Nebraska Territory","subtitle":null,"online_book_id":61,"excerpt":null,"content":"$1d","intro_text":"

\"Yea, though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death . . .\" Psalms 23:4

","page_number":83,"previous_chapter":"chapter-3-iowa-city-iowa-to-florence-nebraska-territory","next_chapter":"chapter-5-fort-laramie-nebraska-territory-to-sixth-crossing-of-the-sweetwater-river-nebraska-territory","pdf_id":"website-files-bucket/books/chapter_pdf/BYUS-BK-WHC-04-Florence-Nebraska-Territory-to-Fort-Laramie-Nebraska-Territory.pdf","footnotes":"$1e","slug":"chapter-4-florence-nebraska-territory-to-fort-laramie-nebraska-territory","public":1,"wp_id":null,"test":"571","podcast_file_id":null,"section_heading":null,"chapter_author":null},"topics":[],"scriptures":[],"authors":[],"processedContent":{"html":"$1f","headings":[{"id":"heading-0","textContent":"Tuesday, August 12","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-1","textContent":"Tuesday, August 12","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-2","textContent":"Wednesday, August 13","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-3","textContent":"Thursday, August 14","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-4","textContent":"Friday, August 15","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-5","textContent":"Saturday, August 16","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-6","textContent":"Saturday, August 16","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-7","textContent":"Sunday, August 17","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-8","textContent":"Monday, August 18","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-9","textContent":"Monday, August 18","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-10","textContent":"Tuesday, August 19","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-11","textContent":"Tuesday, August 19","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-12","textContent":"Wednesday, August 20","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-13","textContent":"Wednesday, August 20","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-14","textContent":"Thursday, August 21","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-15","textContent":"Friday, August 22","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-16","textContent":"Saturday August 23","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-17","textContent":"Saturday, August 23","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-18","textContent":"Sunday, August 24","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-19","textContent":"Monday, August 25","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-20","textContent":"Tuesday, August 26","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-21","textContent":"Wednesday, August 27","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-22","textContent":"Thursday, August 28","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-23","textContent":"Friday, August 29","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-24","textContent":"Saturday, August 30","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-25","textContent":"Sunday, August 31","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-26","textContent":"Monday, September 1","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-27","textContent":"Tuesday, September 2","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-28","textContent":"Wednesday, September 3","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-29","textContent":"Thursday, September 4","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-30","textContent":"Friday, September 5","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-31","textContent":"Saturday, September 6","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-32","textContent":"Sunday, September 7","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-33","textContent":"Monday, September 8","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-34","textContent":"Tuesday, September 9","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-35","textContent":"Wednesday, September 10","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-36","textContent":"Thursday, September 11","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-37","textContent":"Friday, September 12","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-38","textContent":"Saturday, September 13","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-39","textContent":"Saturday, September 13","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-40","textContent":"Sunday, September 14","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-41","textContent":"Monday, September 15","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-42","textContent":"Tuesday, September 16","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-43","textContent":"Wednesday, September 17","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-44","textContent":"Thursday, September 18","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-45","textContent":"Thursday, September 18","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-46","textContent":"Friday, September 19","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-47","textContent":"Saturday, September 20","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-48","textContent":"Saturday, September 20","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-49","textContent":"Sunday, September 21","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-50","textContent":"Monday, September 22","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-51","textContent":"Tuesday, September 23","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-52","textContent":"Wednesday, September 24","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-53","textContent":"Wednesday, September 24","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-54","textContent":"Thursday, September 25","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-55","textContent":"Friday, September 26","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-56","textContent":"Friday, September 26","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-57","textContent":"Saturday, September 27","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-58","textContent":"Sunday, September 28","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-59","textContent":"Sunday, September 28","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-60","textContent":"Monday, September 29","tagName":"H2"}]}}]