Brent L. Goates, Harold B. Lee: Prophet and Seer ( 1985)

Preface

On October 6, 1972, Harold B. Lee was sustained as President of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints at the Church's semiannual general conference. On that occasion he offered a humble formula for assessing his accomplishments: "The only true record that ever will be made of my service in my new calling will be the record that I have written in the hearts and lives of those with whom I have served and labored within and without the Church."

There is no question that President Lee gained the generous praise of those with whom he labored, and that which he called his "true record" was indeed an enviable one, written on the hearts of those whose lives he touched. Yet the written record between the covers of this book, largely of his own Origin, also might be acclaimed as part of that "true record." Hopefully it will be an enduring record of this illustrious prophet's labors.

From the time of his call to the apostleship until his death, Harold B. Lee served for thirty-two years and eight months as a General Authority of the Church. Because little thus far has been published about his early life or his entire career, this record of his preparation for his distinguished career should make an interesting contribution to Church literature. It will show that Harold B. Lee excelled at all he did, usually at an age earlier than his peers. He was destined to greatness.

I have intentionally made this book, as much as possible, an autobiography by quoting extensively from President Lee's own writings. I have therefore restrained my editorial commentary. Included in the panoramic view of his public, adult life are the "men of God" who walked across the common stage to form Church history from President Lee's missionary days in Denver, Colorado in 1920 to his death in 1973. The dominant sources I have drawn upon are the personal diaries, the family and personal histories, and the private letters of Harold B. Lee. For the thirty-three years following his call to the apostleship, President Lee maintained a daily journal. Because he recorded in common pocket-sized planning calendars, with two days allotted on each page, his entries were forced toward brevity. His technique became that of sketching-pen strokes on a drawing he couldn't linger to finish because of lack of time and of lines in his book. Rarely did he examine in depth a person or event, or his reactions to them. After reading all thirty-three diaries, I have come to know the man, who, in these hurried daily entries, has revealed essential insights into the dynamic life he lived.

The biography sources were to have been balanced, however, by many choice firsthand, personal stories telling how lives have been unalterably changed for the good by an intimate experience with President Lee. Obviously this treatment would never be found in the diaries of President Lee. While these anecdotal stories are prepared, the sheer volume of the biography has forced this counterbalancing material to come forth in a later publication.

As in reading most biographies, some readers might hope here for a piquant look into Harold B. Lee's personal life and public service. In an effort to provide a complete report some such treatment has been included, but it rather has been my pronounced objective to provide abundant evidences of his inner spirituality, shown in developing degrees as he moved onward and upward in his leadership climb. In a belief that most Church members seek an identity with their prophet-leaders, this record is prepared so that they might fulfill that desire to better appreciate and admire, for much information is included which is worthy of being cherished. It is hoped that all readers will look well beyond the candid facts to discover and appreciate the creative and spiritual mind of Harold B. Lee and observe how under his leadership some outstanding innovations in the Church were developed. Understanding why the Church operates as it does and scrutinizing the finished works left behind by President Lee is made possible here by his dutiful record keeping and the persistent work of family biographers. These authors are most anxious that the world, and especially the Church membership and historians, come to better appreciate President Harold B. Lee, prophet and seer.

The research for this volume began shortly after President Lee's passing in 1973. It was commenced first from the desire to preserve a true and complete record of his ministry for his progeny; second, from the belief that every President of the Church should be the object of an exhaustive and comprehensive biography; finally, from the wish to share with all the Church membership the multitude of faith-promoting experiences and a review of the concurrent Church history in the Harold B. Lee years. In the end, the final product had to be telescoped to make possible a general distribution. It is hoped that this reduction has not made significant deductions from the spirit of the work or from efforts to achieve the above triad of objectives.

The eleven-year labor of preparing this manuscript for publication has been demanding, its only interruption being my three-year service in the California Arcadia Mission (1975-1978). I express gratitude to my family members, who understandingly substituted for me often because of my preoccupation. There were many compensatory rewards for my efforts. The daily penetration into the spiritual realm of Harold B. Lee's world has helped to shield my family in part from the discordance of a more clamorous world. Perhaps it is not too much to hope that the messages of President Lee's life and labors might also provide this refuge for the readers of these pages.

I express gratitude to the office of the First Presidency of the Church for making available to me the personal correspondence files of Harold B. Lee, which contained all letters he wrote and received during the time he was President. I express appreciation also to the Church Historian's office staff, and to the late Elder G. Homer Durham, Church Historian, for his encouragement in the completion of this project.

All the poetry included in the book, except two cited verses, is the work of the late Elder S. Dilworth Young. On his own initiative, Elder Young sought to learn of President Lee's history and to write and paint it, using his artistic talent to draw near to the President, whom he loved and admired. Long before his death and in the earliest years of the preparation of this book, Elder Young turned over all this poetry to me with permission to use his verses as desired. The Lee family appreciates his work and his devotion.

The chief editor and critic for this manuscript has been my dear wife, Helen Lee Goates, the only survivor of Harold B. Lee's immediate family. She has painstakingly read, reread, and urged many rewrites to bring the text closer to how she perceived her father would have preferred it to be. Although my name alone shows as author, her faithful and extensive labor deserves a large measure of credit for this book.

Trusted and willing typists have worked over this extended period to refine the manuscript copies. I extend appreciation to Marilyn Lloyd Smith, Irma Hails, and Carol Steffensen, dear friends and professional colleagues, who became personally interested in this project as they typed this text.

Finally, while it would be convenient to ascribe all responsibility to President Lee for the contents of this book, as though it were indeed his autobiography, such would be far short of the truth. Actually an agonizing judgment was rendered on almost every page as decisions were made on the many possibilities combed from his writings and those of his contemporaries. The dilemma of the historian is probably best explained by Elder B. H. Roberts in his preface to A Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

It need not be said that this course has laid a heavy burden upon the writer of this history. It is always a difficult task to hold the scales of justice at even balance when weighing the deeds of men. It becomes doubly more so when dealing with men engaged in a movement that one believes had its origin with God, and that its leaders on occasion act under the inspiration of God. Under such conditions to so state events as to be historically exact, and yet, on the other hand, so treat the course of events as not to destroy faith in these men, nor in their work, becomes a task of supreme delicacy; and one that tries the soul and the skill of the historian.

I have felt deeply the burden of holding in my hands the "scales of justice," and having to decide, after much soul searching, which events would present a fair and honest portrayal of Harold B. Lee's life and times. To the extent that there is unintended but inevitable bias in this judgment, I accept the responsibility. My plea is the same as the Prophet Moroni's as he prepared the title page of the Book of Mormon, writing: "And now, if there are faults they are the mistakes of men; wherefore, condemn not the things of God...."

L. BRENT GOATES

Ancestry and Early Years

1 Ancestry

A Child of Promise

We talk of Margaret's bravery. Eleven times she placed Her life upon the block And offered it that Children might be born. No sterile chamber Where the doctor waits, The anesthetic cone And nurse in readiness, Could be her lot. The cabin walls absorbed The agonizing cries. With Death close by, He did not claim her life. Instead, he took each child— Each little one-to Heaven. All eleven.

Then came the twelfth.

For her the light burned Dim, then flickered low,

And out— But she had filled her life, and Given all that she could give. Her mission was performed; A son was born, The only child to live.

He was named his father's name— Samuel Lee. [^1]

Motherhood has produced heroines throughout history. Few women have tried more nobly and with greater persistence to enter the ranks of motherhood than Margaret McMurrin Lee. The family history records:

Samuel Marion Lee, Sr.

Margaret McMurrin Lee

She married Samuel Marion Lee in the Endowment House on November 4, 1863, at the age of seventeen. On the pioneer frontiers of southern Utah, she endured much hardship and her health began to fail soon after her marriage.

By those who knew her, she was described as modest, good-looking, and of a shy, sweet disposition. She was full of fun and was known as a beautiful dancer.

Because of ill health, her first babies were either stillborn or lived but a few minutes. She despaired of ever having a living baby until she received a patriarchal blessing at the hands of Patriarch Abel Lamb of Salt Lake City, which gave her renewed hope and anticipated joy at the thoughts of motherhood fulfillment.

In this blessing, the patriarch promised:

Thou shalt be blessed in every good thing in righteousness before the Lord. And your health shall be restored and notwithstanding your severe sickness at this time you shall yet live.... And you shall have a son and he shall be a mighty man in Israel and his name shall be the name of his father's; therefore trust in the Lord and have faith in His promises and it shall be fulfilled every whir and the blessings of Sarah of old shall be conferred upon thee in the due time of the Lord and you shall yet be a great blessing upon your parents and your companion; and I seal you up unto eternal life. Amen.

After ten bitter disappointments, with no child of her own to nestle in her arms and to love, the next baby following this blessing also was stillborn. This was but another test to survive, and she wondered at the fulfillment of her promise. Her only answer seemed to be: "for ye receive no witness until after the trial of your faith" (Ether 12:6).

After her trial of faith she did indeed receive a witness; the second child after the patriarch's blessing brought her reward. This promised son was premature, weighing but three and a half pounds at his birth on November 22, 1875, and so tiny that a large finger ring could be slipped over his arm.

Already weakened and in frail condition from the rigors of pioneer life in the arid frontier country, Margaret could not endure the long and arduous travail of bearing her son. She gave her life in the ultimate sacrifice, dying November 30, 1875, at the age of twenty-nine. She was buried at Panaca, Nevada, where the couple lived.

As prophesied by the patriarch, this "son of promise" was given the name of his father-Samuel Marion Lee.

Grief and loneliness filled the heart of Mary, the deceased Margaret's sister, as she undertook the heavy task of caring for the tiny babe after his mother's passing. Mary and Margaret had married two Lee brothers, Samuel Marion and Francis, Jr., and had accompanied their husbands to help settle what was then thought to be the Southern Utah Territory.

Mary McMurrin Lee took the child and for six months nursed him along with her own child, many times wondering if she would be able to keep this tiny baby alive. It seemed futile at times. After a while the strain from this double duty was too great, and she felt her own strength waning. So tiny Samuel was delivered to Grandmother McMurrin, Mary's mother, to have the wee one live with her in Salt Lake City.

Mary would live in Panaca until she died at the age of ninety-five. During all that time she would yearn to return to Salt Lake City, longing for the companionship of another sister, Maggie. Her greatest satisfaction, however, would come from seeing Samuel grow into a kind, stalwart man who always expressed his gratitude and love toward her. Tiny Samuel would prove to be worth every minute of her sacrifice.

Samuel Marion Lee, Jr., as a boy

The journey to the City of the Saints Was done. For fourteen Days the team had pulled the wagon Through the sand, the dust, and more.

"I'll give him one last nursing," Mary said. Her mother nodded; then, the task completed,

Mary laid the infant in his bed, And went away-back to Meadow Valley. [^2]

Thus, Samuel was raised in the home of his grandparents, Joseph and Margaret Leaing McMurrin. His father, still living in Nevada, assisted in his support and came occasionally to Salt Lake City to see him. At the age of fourteen, Samuel M. Lee went to Panaca, where he visited for a time with his father. There he saw his birthplace and the grave of his mother, and he personally thanked his Aunt Mary for the patient, loving care she had given to him. Without her valiant service this child of promise would not have lived to fulfill his special mission in mortality.

After the death of his grandmother on September 4, 1893, Samuel went to Clifton, Idaho, to live with his uncle and aunt, Riley and Jeanette McMurrin Davis. Here he met and fell in love with Louisa Bingham; they were sealed in marriage in the Logan Temple by Elder M. W. Merrill on May 13, 1895.

They were young at the time of the marriage. Louisa was always somewhat sensitive about this point. She thought it might not be a proper example if her family discovered what a young, little bride she was at age sixteen. They reared a fine family of six children in the little farming community of Clifton.

When she saw him, She knew his story well— The twelfth and only child Which lived; His mother died in Giving birth. From then until his Sixteenth year His grandmother had Kept her hearth Warm to his growing.

And so they came together, Drawn by a magnet Neither one could see, To be the parents of a Man of Destiny. [^3]

Theirs was the responsibility to rear a marked, choice spirit in their home, a soul chosen before he was born to become the eleventh President of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints-President Harold Bingham Lee.

Paternal Ancestry (Lee Family)

The Lee family's earliest ancestor in America was William Lee. Born on August 15, 1745, in Carrickfergus, one of the ancient capitals of Ireland, William, along with his brother, Francis, and Francis's wife, left their native land and sailed to America in 1770. They landed in Philadelphia.

One wonders now if he understood his unsettled feelings that led him to seek a better life in the New World. Doubtless he could not have known, as we do now, that he really came to start a chosen lineage in a free land so that in time it could match up with foreordained purposes.

Not long after his arrival in America, William married Susannah Chaffings. It must have been an exciting year for him-a new home and a new bride in the same year. Moving southward to North Carolina they established a home where four sons were born. Samuel Lee, the youngest, was born on April 14, 1775. Sorrow followed because shortly after Samuel's birth the young mother passed away.

To support his four sons William Lee left all his holdings with Judge McElroy, likely a close friend, and joined the army to fight in the Revolutionary War. He was wounded and left for dead in the Battle of Guilford County Courthouse, which was fought in the Carolinas in March, 1781. Thanks to the good nursing care he received, he recovered from his wounds, ultimately marrying his nurse, Sarah McMullen. They became the parents of seven children.

The history to be followed here is a lineage through the youngest son by his first marriage, Samuel Chaffings Lee. Samuel's sixth child was named Francis. Harold B. Lee's own account of his paternal ancestry gives more information about this man:

My great-grandfather, Francis Lee, was born at Wilmington, Ohio, in 1811, in a family of eight children. He joined The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints at Randolph County, Indiana, in 1832.

My great-grandmother, Jane Vail Johnson, joined at the same time and they were married in 1835.

They moved with the Saints into Missouri and lived at Liberty and Far West, where they were located in 1838 when the "Exterminating Order" was issued by Governor Boggs, and with their two children were with the 14,000 Saints who were forced thereby to leave the state. They found refuge at Payson, Illinois, until 1843, when they settled in Nauvoo.

Following the martyrdom of the Prophet Joseph Smith, Francis Lee, with others, made ready to go westward as the presiding brethren had counseled. In company with 225 other Saints, they crossed the Mississippi River on February 14, 1845, arriving at the Missouri on June 14, 1846. In 1850 they reached the Platte River, where cholera broke out and several died, among whom was their son, Jacob Edward. At the Missouri River camp they were by chance joined by Francis's father, my great-great-grandfather, Samuel Lee, who had started on foot to the California gold fields but from this point on accompanied his sons to Salt Lake, where they arrived on September 17, 1850. In 1851, my great-great-grandfather, Samuel Lee, joined the Church at Tooele, Utah.

Scarcely settled in their new community of Tooele, thirty-four miles to the southwest of Salt Lake City, Francis Lee heard his name read at the 1862 general conference of the Church in the Salt Lake Tabernacle, among those called by Brigham Young to leave with their families to settle the Utah "Dixie country." From the Santa Clara and St. George encampment, where the famed missionary to the Indians, Jacob Hamblin, was leader, Francis Lee was asked to settle the Indian Territory in Meadow Valley. That location became Panaca, which they considered at the time to be southwestern Utah, but which actually developed later to be in Lincoln County, Nevada. Here they lived in a dugout house, which consisted of a cubical hole dug in a hillside and covered with a roof of wooden poles, topped with clay.

Meadow Valley [Panaca, 1864]

The buttes and gray-clad hills Lie flat and quiet in the Noonday light. The sun beats down upon The sage-clad flats, Shrinking the shadows Underneath the sage to Polka dots upon the valley floor.

One comes upon the valley Suddenly, and there it lies- A green oasis in the

Somber hills. Its spring of water is Lifeblood to the meadowland, And to the cultivated Crops of pioneers, Sent to claim the land By Brigham Young.

The lazy smoke drifts slowly Toward the sky From 'dobe chimneys, While in the dark cool light Of shaded noon, the sombre Clothing of the women, Kneeling at their hearths and Poking at each stubborn blaze, Blends with the graying floor. A Blackened pot hangs strong Upon the crane-

It's dinner time in Meadow Valley.

In from the fields the men find Cooling peace and strength To face the sun of afternoon. The food is plain, but appetites Are strong, While hunger is as stimulating wine.

And soon more land is plowed, And seed is planted row on row To make plants bloom as Eden bloomed, Long, long ago.

The sun is setting low Behind the western hills. The purple shadows deepen On the sage. The cottonwoods Along the watercourse Glow bright, Then fade, As day becomes the night. [^4]

The Panaca settlers had so much difficulty with the Indians that the Church authorities gave them permission to abandon the project. Typical of the pluck of these indomitable pioneers, however, was Jane Vail Johnson Lee [Francis's wife] who said she was in Panaca to stay and refused to leave. One day two Indians came into her dugout home, and one of them spotted a rifle in the corner of the room. He demanded it, but Jane refused to give it to him. When he started for the gun, she struck him so hard with a piece of stove wood that it knocked him down. He staggered to his feet and drew his bow, attempting to aim an arrow at her. She used another piece of wood in defense, which smashed the Indian's bow and arrow. He and his companion fled for their lives. Francis Lee died in Panaca in 1866. Jane, his wife and Harold B. Lee's great-grandmother, died on July 10, 1875.

The third child of Francis Lee, Samuel Marion, was Harold B. Lee's grandfather and was born at Payson, Illinois, in 1841. He married Margaret McMurrin, and the couple also lived in Panaca, Nevada, where their only child to live more than a few short minutes, Samuel Marion, miraculously survived a premature birth. As earlier recounted, Margaret died on November 30, 1875, at the age of twenty-nine, eight days after the birth of her baby. Grandfather Samuel Marion Lee died in 1890.

Great-Grandfather and Great-Grandmother

Joseph McMurrin, Margaret's father, was born at Crossmaloof, Renfrewshire, Scotland, on July 26, 1822. He was an expert cooper, one who makes barrels and bends wood. Joseph married Margaret Leaing on November 25, 1842. Converted to the Church, the McMurrins crossed the plains in the 1850s with one of the handcart companies. Their arrival in Utah was delayed because his artisanship was required to repair many handcart wheels en route to the Salt Lake Valley.

They settled in Tooele, where two families were twice united-Samuel Marion Lee, St., married Margaret McMurrin, and Francis Lee, Jr., married Mary McMurrin, Margaret's sister. Each of the Lee brothers took his bride to Meadow Valley, in Panaca, Nevada.

To Joseph McMurrin and Margaret Leaing were born nine children. The three oldest children died as infants and were all given the name of Elizabeth. Another three children were Margaret [President Lee's grandmother], Mary [Lee] and Jeanette [Davis].

President Lee wrote further of his great-grandparents, Joseph McMurrin and Margaret Leaing:

Grandfather and probably Grandmother were baptized into the Church in 1854 and emigrated to Utah in 1855. The old home was located at Sixth South and Main Street, Salt Lake City. Grandfather married Jeanette Irvine in polygamy in 1869 and raised nine children by this marriage. Grandfather helped install the first telegraph line into Salt Lake City. He served in the bishopric of the Eighth Ward in Salt Lake, during which time he was incarcerated six months in the Utah State Penitentiary for his plural marriage. He was given charge of the Tabernacle grounds for a number of years and met many great personalities among the tourists, one of whom he notably remembered was a Senator McDonald, who gave him a $20 gold piece for the valuable information received from Grandfather. Later he had charge of the tithing-hay barn located where the Presiding Bishop's Office stood, at 40 North Main Street. In this position he came to know people from Canada to Mexico who came to Salt Lake to trade. Grandfather McMurrin was a large man, weighing over two hundred pounds. He died in 1897.

Margaret Leaing was born in Glasgow, Scotland, in 1826, and was endowed in the Endowment House in 1859. She died in 1893.

Of his paternal grandparents President Lee wrote:

Grandfather Samuel Marion Lee, third son of the before-mentioned Francis Lee, who was born at Payson, Illinois, in 1841, settled with his parents in Meadow Valley, a hostile Indian country. Here, in southern Utah, Great-grandfather Francis Lee, with his seven sons and three daughters, became widely known. He was nearly six feet tall, of medium weight, and had jet black hair, which could be mistaken for "Indian hair" when allowed to grow long. He was active in Church work, being a superintendent of the Sunday School for a number of years, and later, a counselor in the bishopric.

After the passing of Margaret Lee in childbirth, Samuel Lee, Sr., married Jane Rice, of Farmington, Utah, on June 29, 1877, and had four daughters and one son. Samuel Lee, St., died of yellow jaundice on January 27, 1890.

President Joseph W. McMurrin

One previous General Authority of the Church adds luster to Harold B. Lee's ancestry. President Joseph W. McMurrin, Harold B. Lee's great-grandfather, was appointed a member of the First Council of the Seventy in 1897. He went to Los Angeles to preside over the California Mission immediately after his call as a General Authority. He remained in this position until 1931, when he was released because of ill health that led to his death in Los Angeles on October 25, 1932. At his funeral services held in the Wilshire Ward chapel in Los Angeles were Elder David O. McKay of the Council of the Twelve and a majority of the First Council of the Seventy, including Elders B. H. Roberts, J. Golden Kimball, Rulon S. Wells, and Antoine R. Ivins. During his long and colorful career he filled one mission to Arizona and three in Europe, laboring in Scotland and England.

Joseph W. McMurrin

In November 1885, President McMurrin was shot twice through the abdomen by a United States deputy marshal while the officers were making a raid in quest of violators of the Edmunds-Tucker Act. The most eminent doctors despaired of his life. He was visited by fellow General Authority President John Henry Smith, who administered to him and promised him that if he desired to live, he would survive. His recovery was regarded as a medical miracle.

Maternal Ancestry (Bingham Family)

Great-Grandfather and Great-Grandmother

Harold B. Lee recorded in his own history:

My great-grandfather, Levi Perry Bingham, was born at Johnston, Canada, in 1834. My great-grandmother, Elizabeth Lusk, was born in Iowa in 1835. They were endowed May 27, 1856. Nine children were born in this family from 1855 to 1874 as they moved successively from crossing the plains to Payson, then Pleasant Grove and Three-Mile, Utah, and finally to Clifton, Idaho. The direct ancestor of this family was Perry Calvin Bingham, born at Payson, Utah, in 1857.

Those who knew Levi Perry Bingham tell about his careful, painstaking ways. He was a very exact man and his farm was a model of thrift and industry. After the death of his first wife, he sold his farm at Clifton, Idaho, and moved to Brigham City, Utah, where he married Elizabeth Tingey, who was many years younger than he. She died in Brigham City, on February 28, 1931, and I had the privilege of speaking at her funeral service.

An evidence of his careful planning is told by Aunt Susan Henderson. He resolved that when he married he would have his children two years apart. He almost accomplished his goal, as several of his children had their birthdays between the twenty-fifth of June and the first day of July, two years apart.

He was a stern man with a violent temper, which at times threatened the tranquility of his home. If he owed a dollar he would go out of his way to see that it was paid promptly. Likewise, when someone owed him money, he demanded the same kind of promptness. His wife is described as a model of sweetness, which offset her husband's temperamental ways. Grandfather used tobacco until he was fifty years of age.

Great-Grandmother

Elizabeth Lusk was the daughter of Samuel Winters Lusk and Elizabeth Maria Dixon. Her parents became estranged after her father became desirous of entering into polygamy. Her mother later married a man by the name of Thorn and joined the Josephites Church [Reorganites].

Grandfather

Perry Calvin Bingham was the oldest son of Levi Perry Bingham and Elizabeth Lusk and was born at Payson, Utah, June 29, 1857. While yet a boy he moved with his parents to Clifton, Idaho, where he engaged in farming. He was baptized into the Church on February 8, 1877, by Harvey Dixon and was confirmed the same day by the same Harvey Dixon.

He was married to Rachel Elvira Henderson, December 7, 1875, and they were endowed in the Endowment House at Salt Lake City in September, 1880. They were married in the temple by President Joseph F. Smith.

After his marriage, he spent most of his time freighting into Montana until the railroad was built. After this he engaged in the buying and selling of cattle for a number of years.

In the year 1902, he was elected sheriff of Oneida County, and in 1904 he was elected county assessor for a two-year term. Following this, he was appointed deputy warden of the Idaho State Penitentiary at Boise. It was on the occasion of a visit to Boise about 1906 that I first remember him. In 1909 his health broke and he returned to Clifton, Idaho, where he was an invalid dependent upon Mother and Father for eight years. He died July 17, 1916 at the age of fifty-nine. He held the office of a seventy in the priesthood at the time of his death.

Grandmother

Rachel Elvira Henderson was the daughter of Martin Henderson and Sarah Wheeler and was born at Kaysville, Davis County, Utah, January 25, 1858. Her parents were pioneers in southern Idaho, making their home at Clifton, Idaho. She was baptized and confirmed a member of the Church on August 6, 1876, by Harvey Dixon.

As a girl she was full of life and vigor, but shortly after her marriage to Perry Calvin Bingham, on December 7, 1875, she was broken down in health and was never again able to enjoy good health up to the time of her death. She was faithful in her Church duties, often walking the two miles to her meetings carrying a baby.

Grandmother had long, beautiful, black hair and even at her death it was of sufficient length to reach to her waist. She was a patient sufferer for many years, but a wonderful grandma, and I remember many times hieing away to her home for some luxury or a story. She died at Clifton, Idaho, at the age of forty-nine, on December 10, 1907.

The following children were born to Perry Calvin Bingham and Rachel Elvira Henderson: Sarah Bingham, born 1876, died 1879; Louisa Emeline, born January 1, 1879, died July 27, 1959; Perry Calvin, born 1882, died 1895; Effie Lucretia, born December 28, 1884, died October 22, 1946; and Zeida, died at birth, 1894.

Great-Grandfather and Great-Grandmother

Martin Henderson was born November 10, 1835, in Missouri and was married to Sarah Wheeler, who was born September 20, 1836, in Michigan. After the death of his first wife, Grandfather married Elizabeth Bake.

Martin Henderson was unschooled, as was his father, Samuel Henderson. He could neither read nor write, but is described as a typical pioneer and a hardy frontiersman, ready at a moment to fight for his honor. In his prime he weighed 180 pounds and was of medium build.

From such noble ancestors came a great posterity. Each ancestor has left something in the molding of a heritage that was to include a prophet of God, Harold B. Lee.

---
Notas:
[^1] Â© S. Dilworth Young 1976. Used by permission.
[^2] Â© S. Dilworth Young 1976. Used by permission.
[^3] Â© S. Dilworth Young 1976. Used by permission.
[^4] Â© S. Dilworth Young 1976. Used by permission.
