Brent L. Goates, Harold B. Lee: Prophet and Seer ( 1985)

2 Parentage

"I thank God today for my parentage. My father and mother are listening, either in this great assembly or on the radio, if perchance they did not get into this meeting. I think, perhaps, this is my way of paying tribute to the two family names they gave me at my birth, Bingham and Lee. I trust I shall not disgrace those names. I have been blessed with a splendid father and a grand and lovely mother."

Elder Harold B. Lee spoke this sincere tribute as he responded to his call as a member of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles on April 6, 1941.

Father: Samuel Marion Lee

In his personal journal Harold B. Lee wrote the following concerning his father:

Samuel Marion Lee, my father, was born at Panaca, Nevada, November 22, 1875, the "baby of promise" to Margaret McMurrin and Samuel Marion Lee. After the death of his mother, he was nursed for six months by his Aunt Mary Lee and was then taken and raised in the home of his maternal grandparents, Joseph and Margaret Leaing McMurrin.

Grandmothers have a way With growing boys. They have learned through rich Experience with their own. They give more love, The discipline is soft And kind, The cookie jar more full. There is more patience With expanding minds, When questioning the pull And tug of growth. And so this boy Brought to his grandmother Joy. In him she saw her Girl, her child, His manner hers, the Look about the eyes, The smile, Surely a look into Her daughter's paradise. [^1]

Occasionally young Samuel had a visit with his father, who was still living in Nevada. At age seventeen, his beloved grandmother, with whom he was living in Salt Lake City, died in his arms on September 4, 1893. Then he went to Clifton, Idaho, to live with his uncle and aunt, Riley Davis and Jeanette McMurrin Davis. Here Father met Louisa Bingham, and they were married in the Logan Temple by Apostle M. W. Merrill, on May 13, 1895.

Out on the farm Louisa Bingham Grew and blossomed Into girlish womanhood. Her blue eyes Caught the color of the Bright hills in spring, And in the fall they Danced with joy At autumn's coloring. At home she learned To wash and cook and sew, And winter Saw her Skating, sledding, and Riding in the bobsleigh Through the snow.

Then Samuel Lee, now Working on his uncle's farm, Watched her grow, Saw with his heart As well as with his eyes- The slow unfolding Of her girlish charm, The bloom of girlhood High upon her cheeks, A budding woman, Gentle, soft, and warm. [^2]

To Samuel and Louisa, my parents, the following children were born: Samuel Perry, December 5, 1896-August 14, 1979; Harold Bingham, March 28, 1899-[December 26, 1973]; Clyde Bingham, October 12, 1902-September 11, 1953; Waldo Bingham, November 24, 1905-February 14, 1959; Stella Bingham, December 21, 1907-[January 28, 1974]; and Verda Bingham, July 1, 1910-.

In the winter of 1895-96, Father taught in the Rushville School at a salary of $50 per month. Shortly after his marriage he was chosen assistant superintendent of the Sunday School with Henry J. Howell, and later served as the superintendent for five years. In May 1911 he was chosen second counselor to Bishop James W. Davis, and was sustained as the bishop of Clifton Ward on June 6, 1914. He was released as bishop on April 1, 1923. He was appointed treasurer of the Oneida Irrigation District, January 1909, and held this position until February 1920. He was a school trustee from 1918 to 1922.

On January 1, 1924, he moved with his family to Salt Lake City and lived in the Hawthorne Ward, where he was set apart as a ward teacher. In May 1926, he went to Green River, Wyoming, as manager of the Piggly Wiggly Grocery. During the ten months that he was there he served as the president of the Young Men's Mutual Improvement Association and as a block teacher. Upon his return he worked as a watchman at ZCMI. In due time he advanced to the position of night supervisor and held this position for ten years.

Samuel Marion Lee was an ardent genealogist in his last twenty years of life. By permission of his employers at ZCMI, he took his records to work with him; between rounds of his night watchman duties, he would copy diligently his genealogical records. Because of his dedication, there are now in existence three sets of copies of over 1,500 sheets of genealogical records, each set in his own handwriting. One set is in the Genealogical Library, one is with his daughter Verda, and one was given to his son Harold.

Personal Characteristics

Samuel Lee was described most often as a quiet, gentle, compassionate, unassuming, thoughtful man. Listening empathetically to his many "boys" at work as they spilled out all their troubles, including social dating woes, Samuel served as a wise counselor to them. He even at times tried his hand successfuly at matchmaking. Kenneth E. Knapp, one of "his boys," who later became a prominent Utah hospital administrator, wrote this character sketch of Samuel M. Lee.

When first I saw the man who was to be my boss, my impressions were immediate and certain. He was stocky and thick and appeared as solid and firm as the rock he resembled. He projected the image of a "big" man, belying his modest stature.

My eye impressions told me Sam Lee was a stern man who would be a "no nonsense" supervisor. The heavy, once dark mustache, now abundantly streaked with gray, did little to soften the initial impact of the man I saw and was waiting to know as a personality.

When finally introduced to him as "the new man you requested," I expected his words to roll out thunder-like from beneath that heavy mustache.

How wrong I was. Sam Lee was a soft-spoken man, so kind in his speech, I was momentarily caught off-guard. With the passing of time, I marveled often how totally wrong first impressions can be. Mr. Sam Lee was one of the fairest and most thoughtful men I have known. The harshness I anticipated was completely foreign to the man. The men under him loved and admired him, and he made each of us feel he was equally fond of us.

Many called him "Sam"-and I sensed he loved it-but I was not one of them. I was never quite able to address him by his first name. I was but twenty years old, fresh from the mission field, and the respect I had for this well-seasoned man just wouldn't permit that familiarity. To me, and apparently many others, he was "Bishop Lee," a title that somehow seemed so appropriate.

As part of the night force at the ZCMI Department Store, I scrubbed and waxed floors, dusted furnishings, polished the fixtures, and washed windows, display cases, walls and ceilings. Periodic welcomed relief occurred when Bishop Lee would assign the duty of making security rounds, or punching the security clocks, as we called it.

A dozen or so men were kept busy discharging the tasks and duties that rested on the "night force." There was never an awareness that all we did fell under the watchful eye of Bishop Lee, but, somehow, it must have. Sam Lee was uncanny. Without obviously observing, he knew exactly where we were in our work and where we ought to be at that hour. When it was time to break for our night-time lunch period, he would very kindly remind us where we should be in our assigned duties to complete our work on time and, when necessary, would offer suggestions that would enable us to "catch-up" so our schedules would be completed before the day force reported for duty.

The night-time break was a welcome time everyone looked forward to enjoying. We assembled where the white tile of the grocery met the carpeted floor of the book department in the old store. If Bishop Lee was management's commissioned leader of the night force during our actual working hours, he was our own designated natural leader during our breaks. Sam Lee was a gifted communicator. In delightful ways he regaled us with his reminiscings of days gone by and in making some distant character in history vividly come to life again.

His wisdom seemed limitless and I benefited often from his counsel. He loved the Church and espoused the gospel in a very inoffensive yet impressive way. As he talked to us, and we were a rather interesting array of opposites from every walk of life, his words seemed to register with each man. Always I could see his love of God and His teachings flow through in all he uttered.

The year was 1935 and the country was still in the throes of economic stress from The Great Depression. Bishop Lee was worried about people like me, young folks who were anxious to marry and establish homes and families. But he counseled me that it should only be done when we were ready to so prioritize our lives that we could live within our means. I listened to him then, and I'm still listening to him now, or at least to his teachings.

I remember Bishop Sam Lee, and as I do, I get a warm feeling inside. Like all his men, I wanted to do my best for him and he never failed to let us know he appreciated it when we did. He was easy to love and knew how to love back.

Throughout his life it was necessary for Samuel to conserve his meager financial resources. One exception, however, was food for his table, which was always spread well with good food.

To others, Samuel Lee appeared to be most generous. If he had an obvious fault, it was perhaps his tendency to carry charity to the extreme. Once started, he seemed to seldom know when to stop giving.

His youngest daughter, Verda, remembers well an experience with Inez Henderson, a neighbor in Clifton. Her husband had been killed and she was often without food in the home. One day Samuel was impressed to fill a large basket with the best available food, and when he opened the door to Sister Henderson's home to deliver it, she burst into tears, later explaining to her benefactor that she had been without food and that her only recourse had been to the Lord in prayer. Samuel had come that day in answer to her fervent supplications to God. Samuel M. Lee was a man our Heavenly Father could easily reach when he had a mission of mercy at hand.

He is well remembered as one who loved everyone. He was a man with whom people became easily acquainted. His grandchildren loved him dearly, and many of them still remember how his heavy moustache tickled their noses when he kissed them. His son-in-law, Charles Ross, knew him well for fourteen years before he married Samuel's daughter Verda, and remembers him as the warmest, friendliest man he has ever known.

Characteristic of his personality was the creation of his own "patented" swear word. When he was wont to vent his anger or frustration, he would say, "Oh, nickofishtoe." That always seemed to take care of the situation, with a release that seemed harmless enough to all present.

Despite the fame and prestige which came to his son Harold as an Apostle of the Lord, Samuel never forgot his patriarchal place to preside in honor and dignity over his home and posterity. After the long years of World War II had ended, the Church authorities commissioned Elder Lee to make the first visit of a Church leader to Hawaii since the bombing at Pearl Harbor. Regular passenger transportation was not yet available so Elder Lee was obliged to sail on a freighter ship. It was a dangerous mission, still under war-time conditions and filled with uncertainty.

Elder Lee's diary, under the date of June 24, 1945, contains an entry concerning this visit to Hawaii that captures their father-son relationship:

I went up to Father and Mother's for dinner and was very much concerned over Father's physical condition. He seemed to be losing weight and strength. He expressed a desire to give me a blessing, which he did, and reminded me of my lineage, rehearsed my life, and blessed me for the trip to Hawaii.

Samuel Marion Lee died on May 17, 1947, at the age of seventy-one. For over twenty years he had lived with his wife and their youngest daughter, Verda, and during the last year of his life also with Verda's husband, Charles Ross, in Salt Lake City. At the time of his passing he had sixteen grandchildren and six great-grandchildren.

Samuel Marion Lee, Jr.

Louisa Emeline Bingham

Mother: Louisa Bingham Lee

Harold B. Lee's journal contains this account of his mother's life:

Louisa Emeline Bingham was the second child of Perry Calvin Bingham and Rachel Elvira Henderson, and was born at Clifton, Oneida County, Idaho, on New Year's Day, January 1, 1879. She was baptized by William F. Garner on August 8, 1887, and was confirmed by John Sant on the same day.

When my mother was a young child she was obliged to shoulder the responsibility of caring for an invalid mother, as well as the younger children in the family, and to perform all the household duties in the home. In addition to doing the cooking, housework, and sewing, she often performed the outside chores as well. She was so small that she was required to stand on a box to enable her to reach far enough down into the tub to scrub the clothes on a washboard When she was sewing, her feet would hardly reach the machine treadles.

Her father was away much of the time freighting into Montana, and it became my mother's responsibility to bathe, feed, and care for not only her younger brother and sister, but also her bedfast mother. They lived about a five-minute walk from school, and Mother would arise very early, fix breakfast, dress and care for her brother and sister, bathe and feed her mother, then dash off for school. When all the other children were enjoying their games at recess, Mother would run home to care for her mother and begin preparing lunch. At noon she would hurry home again to take care of the family responsibilities which came upon her early in her life.

Mother owned a famous saddle pony named Maude, which she rode for the cows and on other errands. I often rode Maude in my own childhood.

At the age of fourteen, Mother was sustained as a Sunday School teacher in the Rushville School. In 1908, she became a counselor to Emma Garner in the Young Women's Mutual Improvement Association. She was made the president of this organization in 1914, and in 1920 was sustained as the second counselor to Millie G. Anderson in the stake presidency of the YWMIA of the Oneida Stake. She was released in December 1923. Simultaneously she worked in Primary and Relief Society and was chosen on the sewing committee, having the responsibility of sewing temple clothes for the dead. During all this Church activity she was rearing her family of four sons and two daughters, besides caring for an invalid father and mother.

Mother was an inveterate worker. Before we were old enough to work, Mother went into the fields with Dad and did mowing, raking, and practically everything a man did.

There are two characteristics that stand out in my memory of Mother. With her skill as a seamstress we were always considered well dressed as children, but practically all our outer clothing was made over from second-hand clothes.

Her other outstanding skill was in caring for the sick. She always began with castor oil, and so successful was she that never was a doctor in our home excepting when the babies came. I recall the many weary days and nights when four of us were down in bed at the same time with scarlet fever. Father was away much of the time, and for several days, my brother Clyde, particularly, was at death's door. I remember also Mother's bitterly successful fight to save his life when he suffered with diphtheria. She swabbed his throat constantly for several days and nights to prevent its closing.

Exerting great patience and skill, Louisa sat many long hours by the bedside of other sick persons, too, in the neighborhood and farm communities. Her nursing skills extended occasionally to service as a midwife. She assisted the doctor in the delivery of eight of her own grandchildren.

A further glimpse into this family's home life is seen through Harold's sisters' memories of their growing up in a setting made memorable by their mother's constant, watchful care and concern. Special mothers make special moments for children, and Verda and Stella remember their childhood home with fondness:

The simple joys created by a loving mother of hot, homemade tomato soup after sacrament meeting on Sundays; the "lumpy-dick," of which Harold was so fond; a very special evening when mother had made new flannel nightgowns for us as little girls; and the nights when we couldn't sleep, because the delicious aroma of baking bread cast its tantalizing aroma through the house to our nostrils in the bedroom-all will never be forgotten. It was on such occasions that, late at night, Father would open our bedroom door quietly, pick up his little girls in his arms, and carry us into the bright light of the kitchen and sit us on the table. Then Mother would place a plate of delectable slices of hot bread and honey on the table, along with a glass of cold milk for each of us. That was a treat for princesses, and we were treated that way. We did have the sweetest childhood.

Personal Qualities

There were times, of course, that little children erred and had to be taught right from wrong. Such lessons were essential in the home of a future President of the Church. Harold's mother supplied the more obvious discipline. Though it was firm, it was never harsh.

This rugged farm mother insisted that her children obey her. She wasn't domineering, but the children didn't argue with her either, because they knew she would support her words with action. She swished around her "little green willow" as a means of lending authority to her instructions.

After one tense moment, when one of the boys disobeyed and then hid in the lucerne patch to avoid the inevitable lashing, this undaunted mother made a speech over the silent field, promising retribution whenever the disobedient lad came home. Though always the hardest act she had to do, she never failed to carry out her pronouncements of justice; however, the application of the "little green willow" was always very light, and it hurt the mother more than the child.

Speaking of this incident, one of the biographers of Louisa Emeline Bingham Lee, Jaynann Morgan Payne, wrote appropriately: "Blessed are the mothers of this earth who will devote such minutes of their precious time awaiting at the edge of eternity for a child to think it over, to repent and learn to do his Father's will. Blessed is she who inspires this fusion of the practical with the spiritual, and points little souls to their eternal destiny."

Louisa would never defend her children if they were wrong or at fault, but if she felt they were unjustly treated or unfairly criticized, she was a little tigress and would defend them to the bitter end. From such an upbringing came Harold's intense family pride and fierce family loyalty.

Verda has reflected on her mother's philosophy of life as follows:

Although Mother's motto was "You can always do a little bit better," her example was the most potent sermon of all. Her home was shining and she was the most immaculate housekeeper. Daddy once said: "Mother, I do believe that you make dirt just because you enjoy cleaning it up so much!" And her personal grooming was just as neat and tidy as her home. In later years, when poverty no longer stalked our family, she dressed herself tastefully and elegantly in clothes that she created herself. We daughters, especially, remember hearing Mother's voice call to us: "I don't want any of you children to leave this house without a bath and clean underclothes. What if you are in an accident!"

Our home reflected a great love of beauty and fine taste. She was gifted in the art of flower arranging and her beautiful handiwork lent the stamp of her personality in our home. Though our family was poor for many years, we children were always well dressed and well fed because of Mother's thrifty efforts and talents. Our home was a haven of orderliness and beauty.

Harold B. Lee's personal history gives evidence of his respect for his mother:

I think I came to appreciate her first while teaching at Oxford, Idaho. Mother guessed the dangers that beset an eighteen-year-old school principal, susceptible to temptation and always in danger of a fatal step in such a responsible job. Never did she go to bed at night until I had come home. While I ate the hot lunch she always had for me, she questioned me about the day's work. She had a keen intuition and on some occasions compelled Dad to hitch up a team and go to meet me. This companionship has always continued, and in my manhood I value greatly Mother's wisdom. Mother was always blunt and outspoken and had a way of correcting that sometimes antagonized, but was always effective.

As with any good mother, she always knew where her children were. Her oldest son, Perry, recalls the unique approach she used:

Our mother had a system all her own in keeping her brood in line and under surveillance. She always saw to it that we went to our parties and various interests outside the home, two-by-two, secure in the knowledge that when we returned, she was bound to get the whole story-"from the mouths of two witnesses."

Her sense of humor was a recognized trait. Verda suffered with ill health for many years, and one day when she was preparing to go back to work after a particularly severe illness, her mother gave her this advice: "Verda, always remember to never, never look like you feel!"

In later years, after Harold had been called to membership in the Council of the Twelve, Verda recalled that her mother one day was comparing her children's similarities in personality. She said to Verda: "You know, I think you are a lot like your brother Harold in many ways." Then, lest Verda be flattered and be proud of the comparison, she quickly added with a twinkle in her eye, "And there are a lot of things I could improve in the both of you!"

After Louisa had an operation on her right knee, they wheeled her out of the hospital to meet her family. Her husband, Samuel, said to the waiting daughters, "You girls just don't seem to have nearly as pretty legs as your mother does." Louisa's quick reply was, "Now, Father, you know I haven't got a leg to stand on!"

But more important was her profoundly spiritual nature. Her Apostle son commented further on this:

She was deeply religious, more so than appeared on the surface. As just a high school boy, I went away on a high school debating team trip. We won the debate. I called Mother on the telephone only to have her say, "Never mind, son. I know all about it. I will tell you when you get home at the end of the week." When I came home she took me aside and said, "When I knew it was just time for this performance to start, I went out among the willows by the creekside, and there, all by myself, I remembered you and prayed God you would not fail." I have come to know that that kind of love is necessary for every son and daughter who seeks to achieve in this world. (Conference Report, April 6, 1941)

Her sons often came to their mother seeking her counsel. When asked what to say at a particular funeral or speaking commitment, Louisa would reply: "Just preach the gospel!" She told her son Harold that at too many funerals the speakers talked only about the deceased person. She firmly declared to Harold: "When I die, I want the gospel preached. My friends already know me and it won't do them any good to hear more about me; just preach the gospel to them!"

Into the Twilight

In the latter years of Louisa Bingham Let's life she suffered with heart problems. On more than one occasion her sons and her husband carried her almost unconscious outside her house to give her more air and oxygen to revive her. Yet she would never restrict her Church activity and loved to spend an entire day quilting at Relief Society. With her sparkling, pointed humor, she kept the sisters "in stitches." Sometimes she would be utterly spent after her strenuous sewing days at the Church and would collapse on the bed at home. But when her family and doctors cautioned her about her continuous activity, she would reply spunkily, "I am going to wear out, not rust out!" She was right, too, for she was active to the end of her eighty years.

About one year prior to her husband's death and just before Christmas, Samuel lay dying in the hospital at age seventy. Doctors had told Louisa that her husband had less than three days to live. Without hesitation she responded to that dire prediction with courage and faith: "That's what they think. I'm taking Father home!" She called for her sons at 10:30 P.M. to come to the hospital and administer to their father. Her faith was rewarded, for she took her husband home and he lived yet another year.

She remained a slender, attractive, well-groomed lady, whose hair stayed its natural, dark brown color until she was age eighty. This caused her to look years younger. She was alert and active until only a few hours before she died on July 27, 1959.

During the Twenty-fourth of July pioneer celebration in her final year, she sat watching the parade from the curb of a downtown street corner. Three days later, she lay critically ill in the hospital. Tubes were in both arms for intravenous injections, and she was fiat on her back in her hospital bed. Verda was caring for her and was reluctant to leave her side even for a moment. Louisa insisted, however, that she go home to eat with her husband. When Verda asked hesitantly, "But Mother, you'll be here when I get back, won't you?" Her mother perked up and replied with her typical wry humor: "Of course, I will. I can't go anyplace-I'm sewed to the bed!" She died at nine o'clock that night.

Final Tributes

Harold B. Lee's journal entries concerning his mother conclude with this tribute: "She was intensely loyal to her friends and equally vindictive toward her enemies. While never unreasonably upholding her family, she would defend them to her death against slander."

This family loyalty Elder Lee inherited from his mother.

When his mother's biography was being prepared for publication in a Church magazine the author, Jaynann Morgan Payne, came to President Lee's office to obtain his approval. As she turned to leave, President Lee stood and spontaneously offered his final tribute to his mother, saying: "She was an angel from heaven and she passed through the lights and shadows of life with great fortitude.... And when everyone else gave up, she didn't."

1899-1910. A decade of confidence. Peace, prosperity, and well-stocked stores. Immigrants came to America looking for work. The Wright brothers took a short but historic flight.

© S. Dilworth Young 1976. Used by permission.

© S. Dilworth Young 1976. Used by permission.

---
Notas:
[^1] © S. Dilworth Young 1976. Used by permission.
[^2] © S. Dilworth Young 1976. Used by permission.
