Brent L. Goates, Harold B. Lee: Prophet and Seer ( 1985)

3 Childhood (1899-1910)

Spring 1899

The March wind Shrills its tunes Along the eaves, Whistling songs of warning Of the cold: "Watch out! It's not yet spring," It seems to sing. The winter's not yet done, Though it be old. It's not quite time for spring to be.

The house stands warm

And firm against the cold. And with the birth of that first day Of spring, A son is born, a second son. A name was given, Harold Bingham Lee. [^1]

On a blustery March 28, 1899, Harold Bingham Lee was born in a humble cottage in Clifton, Oneida County, Idaho, the second child of Samuel Marion Lee and Louisa Emeline Bingham.

As was to be his nature, he came wide-eyed and questioning into this dreary, hard, pioneer life, without benefit of an attending physician, although aid to his mother was given by a midwife, Aunt Susan Henderson. Harold later wrote: "At the time of my birth, Father was away from home working on a canal and the weather was very stormy. It was necessary to send Bert Henderson with the news of the pending birth. There seems to have been some disappointment when I arrived, Mother having hoped for a girl."

Three years earlier an older brother, Samuel Perry, had become the firstborn of this family. Following Harold came other babies-two more brothers and two sisters. The entry of these children helped to shape that humble little cottage into a home of love and companionship.

After Harold ascended to the highest position in the Church, his brother Perry was asked if the President, as a child, had given any indication of his knowledge of his ultimate destiny as a Church leader. Perry chose to answer by quoting the lines of a Primary song sung by children: "He played as little children played, the pleasant games of youth."

Harold himself recalls his first day in school:

In 1904, I went with Perry to visit school. Chloe Howell, the teacher, set me at some work to keep me busy, and I surprised her by writing the ABCs and by writing my name. She persuaded Mother to permit me to start school, and although I was only five years of age and the school house was located over two miles from our home, Mother consented. Among the teachers that stand out in my memory are Chloe Howell, Emma Bybee Davis, James w. Davis, and H. Perry Howell.

Perry described his younger brother and playmate in these words:

Harold had beautiful, heavy, wavy, brown hair, and Mother, I think somewhat disappointed that her firstlings were not girls, took full advantage of his crowning glory to train his hair into dangling ringlets that reached below his shoulders. The neighborhood ladies would exclaim him a "beautiful picture" in his Lord Fauntleroy ruffles and lace-trimmed sleeves, but no boy could tolerate such a travesty to manhood, nor did he, for too long.

Left to right-Harold, Clyde and Perry, 1904

We arrived at the small school every day dressed in knee pants with white starched cuffs folded back over the coat sleeves and white, sailor-collars draped down over the shoulders. And those ringlets were carefully combed and painstakingly curled, dangling down our backs for all the world to see, and pull-and scoff.

Harold arrived at school still with his mass of beautiful hair, it may have been the first time he went into training for the hard knocks of life to come. Suffice to record that those curls caused more skinned knuckles and black eyes than either politics or religion. Finally, he had had enough. I remember now how our mother wept when he purloined a pair of scissors and literally "sawed" off one of the frontal danglers, spoiling the whole effect, which made it necessary to delete the remainder-a welcomed relief. He was at last a boy-a fat, chubby one and a pet of all the teachers.

Harold's journal concurs with this description and adds that his Grandfather Bingham finished cutting off his curls. Perry recalls:

Grandfather Bingham, who was deputy warden of the Idaho State Penitentiary, prevailed upon one of the inmates who had skill in such art, to braid the curly locks into two watch chains, which Mother kept among her treasures. Later one of them became the prized possession of my brother's wife, Fern.

Harold preserved another childhood memory in his journal:

In 1905, Mother took Perry, Clyde and me to Boise, Idaho, to visit with Grandfather and Grandmother, where I recall some visit happenings during this stay. During that time, a convict escaped from the chain gang and the bloodhounds were sent to track him down, with the traveling guard in the charge of Grandfather, following close behind. He was run down in the mountains, nearly frozen, and when word came that they were returning with the convict, Grandmother took us all in the house and pulled down the blinds lest we should see the return and be unfavorably impressed.

On another occasion, Perry and I were chased out of the guard's kitchen by the cook with a butcher knife when we were meddling in the kitchen. For his pains, the cook was put in solitary confinement and fed on bread and water for three days. One Sunday, Grandfather took me to a prison church service, and I shall never forget the sight of hundreds of prisoners, all dressed in stripes, as was the custom then.

Harold B. Lee's journal contains this brief but significant recollection of his baptism: "I was baptized a member of the Church on June 9, 1907, at Clifton, Idaho by Lester Bybee. The place was known as 'Bybee Pond' at the old lime kiln, located on the Bybee property. This was on a Sunday morning. I was confirmed the same day by Bishop E. G. Farmer."

Another never-to-be-forgotten childhood memory occurred on December 10, 1907, the night his Grandmother Bingham died. Harold recorded: "Following her death, Perry and I stayed a part of the night alone with her, which experience, to one as young as I, was not a pleasant one."

About sixty-five years later, President Lee expressed another early recollection. In an interview by a reporter from the Church News just prior to a general conference of the Church-now as President of the Church-he sat in his beautiful office in the Church Administration Building and recalled his first experience at a general conference. He then had been just a small boy living with his family in Clifton, Idaho.

My father had grown up in Salt Lake City. His parents had both died and his grandmother raised him until she, too, passed away. He then lived with an aunt in Idaho.

Naturally, my father was anxious for his boys to see some of the scenes he had remembered as a boy in Salt Lake City, so it was decided that we would go down to attend general conference. He took his two oldest boys; I was second oldest. Of course, the pending conference, as such, was not our most immediate interest. We wanted to see the sights of the big city.

My earliest recollection-I was just a young lad-was sitting in the south gallery of the Salt Lake Tabernacle and looking down at the pulpit and seeing President Joseph F. Smith sitting there. I was impressed at seeing for the first time the President of the Church.

I still recall, too, that Mother fixed food for us. I remember we had fried chicken, and all we needed, too.

That was my first visit to Salt Lake City.

Cache Valley

Who will dream of Cache Valley, A jewel hidden in among The mountains of the Wasatch? Its lush grass fed the ponies Of old Washakie And other Shoshone braves, While resting in their Teepees on the trail Which led To Ogden's Hole- And on and on Past mighty Timpanogos, Up the Wasatch Valley. Its streams, swift flowing streams, Where boys could learn To shoot a trout With arrows made with crudely boyish skill, Or track a beaver to its watery home.

One sees the dust kicked up By ponies of the braves Returning from a hunt In Ogden's Hole, And sees Jim Bridger Meet Kit Carson's men As furs are sold For liquid lightning. One year's work is gone In one summer's frenzied Rendezvous.

Piercing the hills From north and east, The waters of the Bear, Tired from their Tumbling hurried rush From old Bald Mountain's Heights, Meander through the Valley's fertile land.

The firs are far against The rising hills, The red-bark willow Lines the quiet banks, While here and there The cottonwoods rise up To shade the deer and elk. Wild ducks and geese Find here a happy resting place En route to summer-or to winter- Homes.

Into the valley come the pioneers, Peter Maughan, that rugged son Of England, and others with him, Spreading out upon the valley floor, Plowing up the fertile bottomland, Fencing in their pastures With aspen poles- Pastures lush with grass.

And after them, plodding To its northern end, Go other pioneers Who clear the land And make their farms at Clifton town, A sleepy pleasant place to live, Where two score gentle Kindly men make home, Their calloused hands the sign Of honest toil. [^2]

On the Farm

A small boy learns of many things Upon a farm. He catches pollywogs And sees that some Have legs while others don't, Then wiser folks tell him That they are baby frogs. He learns what holds The water skaters up; That swimming in an Irrigation ditch is fun.

He takes the cows to pasture After milking time, And brings them in again, And knows that evening shadows Are not like those of early morn. Ofttimes he sees the Wad come up the gullet As a cow starts chewing, And after a while he sees her swallow And bring up another one, Then wonders why he can't Do that himself.

He learns to milk a cow, And notices the music of this Act-the harsh metallic sound Of rhythmic ringing, Soon changing into softer Sighing as the foam rises higher, Higher in the pail. Then, too, the family cat, ten feet away, Enjoys a squirt of fresh warm milk. Some deep

And undefined urge is satisfied. [^3]

Family Life on the Farm

The growing-up years of Harold Lee as a barefoot, overall-clad lad, working with his father and brothers in the field to meet the unrelenting pressures of family life on the farm, were not untypical of the era. He later described that life to his grandchildren:

We lived on a farm of about a hundred acres at the foot of the mountain to the west of us and about two miles north of the ward meetinghouse and schoolhouse. There was a string of houses running from between the meetinghouse and our place, which gave the name "Stringtown" to the string of houses where we lived.

It was necessary for us to work hard on the farm and quite often there was little income to show for it. We did raise all the foodstuffs needed; we had gardens, orchards, cows, chickens, and pigs. We raised enough feed for our cows, whereas they produced the milk and the cream and occasionally cheese and some to market. We couldn't produce some things that were necessary, so we took eggs to the country store and traded for the things that we couldn't have otherwise.

On days of celebration, like the Fourth of July, we were given two or three dimes to spend on such a day, but we knew that if we spent it all on that day, there was a long season ahead of us when we might not have anything to spend, and we usually wound up with a few nickels left over.

We took our grain to a mill at Weston, Idaho, and from the returns we got our flour, our bran and shorts for feed, as well as our cereals.

Perry adds his recollection of their agricultural way of life:

our family everyone was required to work in some degree, according to his ability. Our father was a firm believer that we were here to literally "work out our salvation," with the emphasis on work. It became an axiom that, if we would eat well, we must labor for the things which we needed. Our garden was one of the main projects, and under the kindly persuasion of a wise father, each was led to do his fair share.

In those days on the farm, food storage for the future, especially in the winter, was a way of life; no last-minute trip to the grocery store or supermarket was possible. Our milk supply, as well as meat, eggs, and potatoes and other vegetables, were produced on the farm.

Milk in the summer was kept fresh and sweet in the sod-covered milk house that spanned a running stream near the house. Six-quart pans of milk were cooled therein and later skimmed. The resulting cream was hand-churned, and molded into pounds of butter to be bartered for groceries or for family use, and was stored in the milk-house to be drawn upon as needed. The by-product of the churning process was honest-to-goodness buttermilk flecked with tiny nodules of butter-a gourmet's delight.

Potatoes and vegetables were stored in an underground earth-topped pit. Eggs were stored in jars of waterglass. Wheat was taken from the thresher at harvest time to the mill and exchanged for fifty-pound sacks of flour-a year's supply. A steer and a hog were butchered in the fall, and then smoked or otherwise preserved to be used through the year.

Haying time brought various jobs. Harold graduated from riding the derrick horse that was used to lift the huge forks of hay onto the growing stack, to pitching the hay onto the wagon from the cured haycocks. He also learned to mow and rake the ripened alfalfa and other fodder grasses. He became adept at driving the four-in-hand team that hauled the lumbering wagonload of sugar beets to the loading dock.

These and other taxing, but interesting, tasks he mastered one by one, which conditioned the growing boy for the man he was to become. In the descriptive language of the scriptures, "He increased in wisdom and in stature and in favor with God and man." (Luke 2:52.)

Protected and Preserved

"Through my childhood there seemed to be a guiding hand over me." So wrote Harold B. Lee in his personal life history.

Perhaps he was recalling a close call he had with death during a bout with pneumonia when he was a young man: His mother bent over her seventeen-year-old son once more to feel his feverish head and listen to his tight, labored breathing. It was after midnight, and Harold's chest disease had not seemed to respond to his mother's mustard plasters. Anxiety clutched at her heart and she knew she must do something quickly, or her son would die in a few hours.

She hurried to the back porch and opened a large sack of onions, filled her apron, and went into the kitchen. After slicing a large panful of onions she dumped them into an empty flour sack and covered her son's chest with that wet, juicy sack. Then she prayed and waited for a miracle.

By morning his breathing was improved, and he was over the crisis. When the family praised Harold's mother for saving his life, she merely said: "Oh, but I didn't save his life. The Lord did. He just expects us to do everything we can do to help."

But this was not the only time that a protective influence seemed to be watching over him through his childhood years on the farm.

"During these years I had two exciting experiences," Harold wrote in his life's history.

Mother was making soap and had a large tub of lye preparation stored on a high shelf to keep it out of the reach of the younger children. She wanted to take it down, and since I was the only one home she enlisted my help. We climbed up on a chair and began to steady it down. When it was exactly above my head, our hold slipped and the tub and its burning lye water dashed over my face, head, and arms. As quickly as she could act, Mother seized me so I wouldn't run and kicked off the lid from a jar of beet pickles she had just made, and with her right hand cupped, dipped out the reddened, pickle vinegar from the beets over my burning face, neck and arms to stop the eating of the lye and save me from being badly scarred. What could have been a tragedy was averted because of her inspired action. Often she was intuitively led by the Spirit.

On another occasion, Father was away on the header and Perry and I had just finished doing the morning chores. I had just finished pouring the milk through the separator, which was a machine which separated the milk from the cream. While waiting for the separator to stop, I foolishly and absentmindedly was tapping my fingers on the outside wheel as it turned around. Not paying attention to what I was doing, I unwittingly put my fingers into the cogs and suffered a severe injury that tore the flesh from the first joint of the third finger of my right hand. Mother was sitting at the table under a bowery just outside and I ran out and put my finger, with the bone protruding, in front of her. She turned ill at the sight. Miraculously, Bishop Erastus E. Farmer appeared on the scene at the moment needed and squeezed the mashed flesh around the bone so it would heal. Mother bound up the wounded finger and the flesh began to grow. While my finger in adult life was somewhat disfigured, it never prevented me from playing the piano.

Obedience

The young boy Harold, Walking toward a barn, Heard a voice 'Way down within him say, "Don't go in that barn Today!" And, feeling that He should obey, Turned, And went another way. In later years He told the tale About the voice He had heard. Then someone said: "What was in the barn To cause you harm?" "I do not know," was the reply, "I did not go." [^4]

Harold cited in his journal two more examples of his being protected:

I had accompanied Father to the "flat" below Dayton, where we owned a forty-acre farm. Just over the fence to the east of the property, some old sheds and barns had blown down, and I set out on a tour of exploration. I had just parted the wires to crawl through when I heard a voice as distinctly as a person could speak, command: "Harold, don't go near that lumber over there!" I looked around quickly, wondering where the voice had come from and frightened at the unusual experience, and then ran as fast as possible away from some unknown danger. I have wondered what the danger could have been and have imagined everything from rattlesnakes to rusty nails.

During my early childhood, my grandmother lived in the old home and Mother used to send meals down with my older brother, Perry, and myself. It was a dark, stormy night when we went down this time, and I stood on the porch cleaning my feet, holding onto the sill, but my foot slipped and I fell backwards; my left hand fell on a broken bottle and cut a gash four or five inches long. I bear the scar of that accident. The treatment Mother gave me was to burn a sock and sift the ashes from the sock down into the open wound. Somehow it worked and avoided the possibility of blood poisoning. This injury kept me from attending school most of the year.

In telling these experiences to his grandchildren, Harold B. Lee would often demonstrate the scars on his fingers and his left palm to authenticate his boyhood escapes from near dangerous mishaps.

Among my earliest recollections was an occasion when my instinctive meddling got me into some trouble. Mother was putting up fruit, and as she finished there were sometimes juices left over which she allowed me to drink. On this occasion, I went to do the same thing, but after taking a few swallows I discovered that this was lye water she had put in to get rid of the burned fruit which was sticking to the inside of the pan. This time I remember my mother and Grandmother Bingham poured olive oil down my throat to save me from being fatally injured.

In my young boyhood there were many occasions, as I recall the earlier years of my life, when my mother's instructive and intuitive understanding prompted her to know that help was needed. Once on a stormy night, she directed my father to go and search for me, only to find that my horse had stumbled while crossing a stream of water and thrown me into a pool of half-frozen mud. My mother had known that help was needed.

One other incident stands out vividly in my memory. There was a severe thunderstorm raging near the mountain where our home was located. Our family, consisting of my grandmother, my mother, and two or three 'of the younger children, were seated in the kitchen before an open door, watching the great display of nature's fireworks. A flash of chain lightning followed by an immediate loud clap of thunder indicated that the lightning had struck very close.

I was playing back and forth in the doorway when suddenly and without warning, my mother gave me a vigorous push that sent me sprawling backwards out of the doorway. At that instant, a bolt of lightning came down the chimney of the kitchen stove, out through the kitchen's open doorway, and split a huge gash from top to bottom in a large tree immediately in front of the house. Had it not been for Mother's intuitive action, and if I had remained in the door opening, I wouldn't be writing this story today.

My mother could never explain her split-second decision. All I know' is that my life was spared because of her impulsive, intuitive nature.

Years later, when I saw the deep scar on that large tree at the old family home, I could only say from a grateful heart, "Thank the Lord for that precious gift possessed in abundant measure by my own mother and by many of the faithful mothers, through whom heaven can be very near in time of need."

Harold B. Lee often used these powerful personal experiences to teach the responsibility of parenthood and to emphasize the spiritual influences which could come to fathers and mothers in directing and protecting the lives of their children. His summary teachings on this point follow:

Within every person born into this world there is a heavenly gift which is called by the Lord in his revelations, "The Light of Christ, or the Light of Truth, or the Spirit of God," which even in early childhood gives to every person the ability to tell the difference between what is right and of the Lord, and that which is of the world. This might be called our conscience, or the voice of the Spirit of God within us.

When a person grows older, added to this first heavenly gift is given the gift of the Holy Ghost, which comes as a blessing from the elders of the Church following baptism. This gift, as explained by the Master, was "to teach us all things, bring all things to our remembrance, and to even show us things to come."

When one becomes a father or a mother, it is especially important that they prepare themselves to receive by these wonderful gifts from the Lord, a greater gift of understanding in raising their children, in order to make certain that their children are taught properly as commanded by the Lord, and to receive heaven-sent instructions or warnings for their family. This might be called intuition or the voice of the Lord coming into one's mind from heavenly sources to safeguard the welfare of the family as long as they are yet in the home. Therefore the parents have the responsibility of teaching and training in correct principles until their children are all old enough and have the stability and responsibility to make mature judgments and right decisions.

1910-1920. The nation became mobile. Men fought the Kaiser Bill, while women got the vote, drank, and smoked. Model T Fords rolled off assembly lines, and Mary Pickford was America's sweetheart. Babe Ruth hit his first major-league home run for the Boston Red Sox.

© S. Dilworth Young 1976. Used by permission.

© S. Dilworth Young 1976. Used by permission.

© S. Dilworth Young 1976. Used by permission.

© S. Dilworth Young 1976. Used by permission.

---
Notas:
[^1] © S. Dilworth Young 1976. Used by permission.
[^2] © S. Dilworth Young 1976. Used by permission.
[^3] © S. Dilworth Young 1976. Used by permission.
[^4] © S. Dilworth Young 1976. Used by permission.
