Brent L. Goates, Harold B. Lee: Prophet and Seer ( 1985)

4 Youth (1910-1920)

Childhood

What does the Lord say to his Chosen servant? Grow, my son, grow in knowledge And wisdom. Know, my son, the ways of the Wind, blowing from Gog and Magog, The ways of the cottontail and Weasel. Know the painting of the Lord upon his easel, The sky at sunset, The deep purple across the valley. Such color cannot be Matched by man. My son, you can See the wind waving The ripening grain Across the field. The yield is yours For your good And for your food. Feel the freedom of Climbing trees. Feel the strong branches Against your knees. Climb high, and in Your childhood imagery Reach and touch the sky Behind its curtain of Blue. I am where You can find me, If you pray Every day.

Hear my voice in the Wind and the rain. But better-seek the Still small voice with Which I speak To the humble and the meek. You heard it once and Remembered well- To hear it say: "Don't go in that barn today"- Now learn to hear it as You grow, And know that I the Lord Am teaching you to Know of me, the Lord-if you Would learn the harmony Of my holy word.

Each spirit comes from paradise To grace a home upon the earth- His talents, his desires, Hopes, and loyalties Well hidden in the mortal Clay which is his birth. Instinctively this boy Shied from the pranks And little sins of other boys, And so sought other Things to occupy his time. His mother, wise to his Unspoken thoughts, Provided music. So he grew, Loving the chords, Learning, absorbing, as one Who hears Within his heart The vast eternal music Of the spheres.

Such music as the Lord Would have him learn Found echo in his

Heart; Apart from other boys, He learned the art. [^1]

Harold B. Lee was ordained to the early offices of the priesthood as follows: Deacon: Dec. 20, 1909, by A. D. Henderson; Teacher: Feb. 23, 1913, by S. M. Lee [his father]; Priest: Jan. 24, 1915, by S. M. Lee [his father]; Elder: Nov. 11, 1917, by James L. Williams.

Because Harold started school nearly two years before other boys his age, he was ordained a deacon along with his classmates, although he was only ten years of age.

Harold remembered in these words his emergence from boyhood to young manhood, as marked by his graduation from the district school:

I graduated from the district school eighth grade in 1912 at the age of thirteen. My teacher was H. Perry Howell. The graduation exercises were held for the county at Franklin, Idaho. Father, Mother, and I, with Bishop J. W. Davis and his wife, drove a team of horses and a buggy from Clifton to Lewiston the day before the exercises. After staying overnight at the Bybee home, we made the remainder of the trip the next day.

Harold's brother, Perry, with whom he shared many youthful experiences away at school, describes his brother as follows:

Always studious in school and in his auxiliary and priesthood classes, he early displayed a talent for music. He champed his teachers and had ready rapport with his classmates and a wide circle of friends. He early learned to play the piano under the tutelage of a Scottish lady [Mrs. Sarah Gerard], who was prone to rap knuckles at the sound of a wrong note. Soon he was playing the piano or organ for Primary and Sunday School. Rest-time from farm labors found him at the piano, adding to his skill and to the pleasure and delight of homefolks at the sounds of music which he pleasantly provoked.

Perry also recalls the origin of the musical interest:

Our father surprised us one day as we were convalescing from a bout with scarlet fever by bringing into our sickroom two shining instruments-a baritone horn for Harold and a cornet for me. That cured the fever in jig time, but I'm afraid the raucous sounds that came from those shiny horns in the learning process gave our parents many a headache.

One of Harold's earliest adventures into the world of music resulted when a man named Cox came to town and organized the Clifton Silver Concert Band. From this experience came increasingly more interest with various instruments and musical organizations.

High School Days

Harold's personal history recalls the major change in his life when he went away to school for the first time:

In the fall of 1912, I entered the Oneida Stake Academy at the age of thirteen years. Mother had not yet permitted me to wear long pants, and when I entered high school I was the youngest of the class and was one of the only two in school who were wearing knee pants.

When I entered school I was anxious to continue my music training. The high school hand offered the best opportunity. My first instruments were an alto and the French horn. Later in my school, when I had attained a bit more ability, I was invited to join the Preston Military Band, and the second year I took up the baritone. Under the tutelage of Professor Charles J. Engar, I played through the summer and winter with the Preston Band. For these four years we concertized on all patriotic and civic occasions and were paid a fee for our services.

Perry and I were fitted up in a room and started our housekeeping in the home of Robert Dairies, located across the street from the Oneida Stake Academy. This was a Church-operated school, which later was donated to the state and became Preston High School.

Living in the same house were a total of thirteen boys, and one could easily guess the impromptu parties staged. Underneath our room were the quarters of the principal of the school, J. Robert Robinson. On various occasions, he appeared and soundly scolded us for the "ceiling-cracking" performance we sometimes staged.

In my second year at high school I became acquainted with Ethel Cole of Fairview, Idaho, and during our high school years and until I went on my mission in 1920, she and I kept up a rather constant, intimate friendship either by correspondence or by occasional visits. I remember her as my first "sweetheart" and the only girl with whom I kept steady company prior to my mission. I always admired her as a genuine friend.

Debater, Sportsman

In my senior year at high school, 1915-16, I was extremely busy with a number of school activities outside of my school work. One of my debating teammates was Sparrel Huff. The Oneida Academy was in a league with the Fielding Academy of Paris, Idaho, and the subject to be debated was "Resolved That the Monroe Doctrine Should Be Abolished." We defended the negative side and Louis Ballif and Irel Lowe the affirmative. Prior to the finals with the Paris teams, we staged debates all over the adjoining counties.

Never in the history of our school had a team won from Fielding Academy at Paris, but we succeeded in turning the tables in a thrilling two-to-one decision over a Paris team, composed of Nellie Parker and George Bateman. They gave us a banquet following the debate, and the next day we returned to Preston as conquering "heroes," where our home team was victorious and our student body gave us a real reception in a special assembly.

My favorite sport was basketball, and at the time I attended high school it was the major athletic sport. In my junior year I was elected athletic reporter for the Oneida, the school paper; and in my senior year, I was elected the student manager of athletics, which was the "plum" of all school offices because it carried the privilege of accompanying all athletic teams on their trips to handle the business affairs while en route, all expenses being paid by the school. Art Rynearson was the coach, and we were fortunate in having a team that competed on even terms with college teams like the UAC. Our team played games that took us from Rexburg, Idaho, on the north to Ogden, Utah, on the south. It was often my responsibility, also, to "scout" rival teams.

Besides managing the team, I gained considerable skill as a player. I was a member of the senior team that won the class championship. Following my graduation I continued to play and enjoyed some reputation as a basketball player.

In the graduating class there were but five girls and twenty-five boys; a great bunch of fellows. On the night of Founders' Day we climbed to the top of the flag pole over the Academy and nailed our class colors, and then each in turn climbed to the flag and kissed the colors. After singing and giving class yells we retired to our rooms, and awoke in the morning to discover that during the night our colors were taken down by the junior class. A grand fight followed which was finally stopped by officers.

Teacher Training

In the summer of 1916, at the age of seventeen, I attended the Albion State Normal School at Albion, Idaho, to receive preparatory training to become a teacher. This was a fine school, providing me some of the finest teachers of my lifetime. The laws of Idaho required a rigid test in fifteen subjects in order to qualify, and I spent a very strenuous summer in intensive study, losing twenty pounds in weight, but [I] gained my objective, passing the required examination with an average grade of 89 percent.

Albion was a quaint little old-fashioned town twenty or thirty relics from the nearest railroad at Burley, Idaho. Practically nothing was there but the school, which was splendid. There were no amusements except at the school, and the old board sidewalks indicated the general backwardness of the inhabitants. Removed as it was from all attractions that might detract from school, I think I never absorbed so much knowledge as during the summers of 1916 and 1917 when I earned my second-and third-class certificates. The second year I played in the town band with Lee M. Lockhard, and played baseball on the team from the school.

During both summers I lived at the home of the Burgess family of Albion.

First Teaching Assignment

Although only age seventeen, I was employed to teach my first school during the winter of 1916-17, at the Silver Star School,

Oneida Stake Academy debating team, 1915-16: Sparrel Huff and Harold B. Lee

Oneida stake Academy basketball team, 1915: Harold, team manager, standing at far right.

about five miles south of Weston, Idaho. Here in a one-room school, I had some real experience. With about twenty to twenty-five pupils, I had most of the grades represented from the first to the eighth grade. My program consisted of twenty-eight classes each day. So conscientious was I that I would count the youngsters on the grounds, and if they were all there, I would ring the bell, although it was many times not much after 8:30 a.m. Almost nightly I placed my school problems before the Lord, and although I never worried so much over a work, the Lord never deserted me and I learned some of the most valuable lessons of self-mastery of my life.

When I signed with the school board, I drew lots with them for my compensation. They wanted to pay me $60 and I wanted $65 a month. They flipped a coin and I lost and was paid the $60 a month, but I also was given an extra $15 a month for board and room with the family of Lars Rasmussen. This included furnishing feed for my horse, which I rode back and forth from home on the weekends.

When I came to take over the school, the board cautioned me against allowing the children to walk the picket fence surrounding the school for fear of injury. Within the first week, I looked out of the window and discovered my first-grader standing on his head on the fence. With my Kodak I took his picture, with feet pointing aloft, to show the trustees when they next came to warn me further about the danger of the picket fence.

Apparently this first-grader, the only one in this tiny one-room school, became famous or infamous. All the Lee family knew about him. Perry, Harold's brother, reported fifty-seven years later: "His lone first-grader, Varsal by name, was either his greatest problem or his prize pupil, for I heard his name muttered often in his nighttime dreams as he visited home on weekends. I remember his name still, and I am sure Harold has not forgotten him."

Oxford School

From the Silver Star School, Harold, now eighteen years of age, was promoted to Oxford, Idaho, where he became teacher and principal of a larger school at an increased salary. He led in the activities of the school as well as the sports of the community, of which he became an integral part. Of this year he records:

This one-room school was the community center where all dances were held. A banjo, violin, and a portable organ served as instruments in an orchestra. The dances would go until midnight, when a halt was called while the women prepared their coffee,

Silver Star School, Weston, Idaho, 1916-17-first teaching appointment

District school at Oxford, Idaho, where Harold (standing at right on steps) became principal at age eighteen.

cake, and sandwiches, and the men went outside to get their whiskey and beer which had been hauled from Utida, the state line, and kept for the occasion. Following this interlude the dance continued until daylight.

In the following year t was employed at $90 per month to become the principal of the district school at Oxford, Idaho, with Velma Sperry and Tressie Lincoln as associate teachers. Oxford had the reputation of having a rough crowd of boys, and the threat had been reported to me that I wouldn't last long in the school as the principal. In solving the situation, my basketball experience stood me in good stead. Because of my good size, I taught these big boys, some of whom were older than I, to play basketball, and during the lunch hours, I dressed in basketball togs and played with and against them, but as fortune would have it, I maintained sufficient dignity to win their confidence as their principal, and also win the kind of friendship that has lasted even to this clay.

I was principal of this school for three winters and was there during the severe influenza epidemic of 1918, our school being quarantined for some months. We had just reopened the school when every family but two came down with the disease, and it became necessary for neighboring towns to assist in supplying food and nursing until their recovery.

While I was there we organized the Oxford Athletic Club, composed of the town fellows. I played a forward position on the first team and we traveled into all the neighboring towns to play. This activity gave me some prestige in the town. Those were days when the rules were lax, and I bear today scars of some of those encounters.

Because my father had financed me through school, and I was staying at home, I turned over my paychecks from teaching school to him and then paid my extra expenses by playing in a dance orchestra. A family by the name of Frew had just moved into Oxford, Idaho, and bought a large ranch. Two of the boys had played in the Lagoon Resort Orchestra. One was a violinist and the other was a trap drummer. They auditioned for others to join them, looking for a trumpet player, a piano player, and they also wanted a slide trombone player. They tried out one of the men who had a slide trombone, but he wasn't sufficiently schooled in dance time to gain acceptance, so he urged me to take his trombone and fill the position. I had been taught music in my school days at home by Mrs. Sarah Gerard, so that I played the organ and the piano with enough ability to be the ward organist. Because of my ability to read both bass and treble cleffs, and because I could play a wind instrument, the only other requirement I needed to play the trombone was to learn the various positions on the slide to make the various

Harold B. Lee and his ladies chorus, 1919

notes. This required long hours of practice day and night, mostly nights, to the distraction of my entire family, who was glad when I finally got enough ability to play without this harrowing experience for the family.

We were the only dance orchestra from Logan, Utah on the south to Pocatello, Idaho on the north, and it was not uncommon for us to play two and three nights a week. The roads were muddy, the nights were dark, the automobiles were poor. In the wintertime the roads were hazardous. On occasion it was almost morning before we arrived home. After a few hours' rest I then went back to preside over the school. This, besides playing basketball, began to take its toll, and I came down with a severe case of pneumonia.

For three years I played slide trombone in this five-piece orchestra which played from town to town in our valley. Known as the Frew Orchestra, it was composed of Dick Frew, violin; Chap Frew, the drums; Marion Howell, the cornet; Reese Davis, the piano; and myself on the trombone.

The Frews were always drinking when possible and indulging in conduct at a level far below what it should have been. I know that through those years, my folks "held their breath" lest I allow this kind of association to overcome me.

Church Callings

Practically the only Church activity I engaged in at this time was as president of the elder's quorum, which was composed of the elders of the Clifton, Oxford, and Dayton wards. Walter Hatch and William Hardwick served as my counselors.

For two or three years I was organist of the Clifton Ward, and in connection with this activity in music I organized and trained a group of girls into a ladies' chorus. When I left for my mission, these girls gave me a gold ring.

© S. Dilworth Young 1976. Used by permission.

---
Notas:
[^1] © S. Dilworth Young 1976. Used by permission.
