Brent L. Goates, Harold B. Lee: Prophet and Seer ( 1985)

Years of Preparation

1920-1941

1920-1922. The search for normalcy after the end of World War I and the Russian Nationalities War. The Essex automobile was the first expensive sedan. The Jazz Age began.

5 Western States Mission (1920-1922)

A mission is a university, Teaching not of earth

But things of God, The Father of us all, And of his Son, His well-beloved Son. One learns to hear the Whispering, The Holy Ghost is talking To him now- Of where to go and What to do To find the hearts Of those he seeks, And what to speak, And when- Those words which Burn into the hearts

Of men To bring them to the truth. This youth, Now fully grown, With confidence went forth And proved his worth In bringing God's choice work To men on earth. [^1]

Having assumed so much responsibility for one so young in years, Harold B. Lee was maturing in personality; his mental training had demanded discipline. Now came his greatest development with the abrupt changes in life-style brought about by his call to the mission field.

In September of 1920, at the age of twenty-one, I received a call to fill a mission in the Western States Mission, with headquarters at Denver, Colorado.

There was no indoctrination for missionaries at that time. I was instructed to obtain my temple ordinances, so on November 6, 1920, Father and I went to the Logan Temple, where I received my endowments and made preparations to leave home to be in Salt Lake City to be set apart on November 9. Mother was at home with a new Baby and unable to go to the temple with us. I never realized how great a gap my family filled in my life until I bade them good-bye.

The parting words of my father when I left for the mission field were, "Harold, my boy, your father and mother are looking for big things from you."

No one was "greener" and more unused to city life than I was, and as a result, I lost my bearings and got turned around in Salt Lake. At the hands of the Presiding Patriarch, Hyrum G. Smith, I received my second patriarchal blessing.

After a one-hour meeting at the Church Office Building, I was set apart on November 9, 1920, by Brigham H. Roberts of the First Council of the Seventy. Elder Roberts promised me I would go and return in safety.

In company with Elder Owen H. Martin, of Salt Lake, I left for my mission at 5:30 p.m. on November 10, 1920, over the Union Pacific Railroad. We arrived in Denver the next day, Armistice Day, at noon, and were met at the depot by President John M. Knight and a group of missionaries.

We were taken to the Denver Chapel at the corner of Seventh Avenue and Pearl Street, where a Baptismal service was in session. The first missionary work I did was Relief Society visiting with Elder Daniel Peterson and the lady missionaries.

I was assigned to work with Elder Willis J. Woodbury, of Salt Lake. He was a cello player, and when he discovered I could play the piano, he insisted on regular musical practices.

We often carried his cello and some music with us when we went tracting, and during the day we were invited in to sing and play, thereby opening the way for the preaching of the gospel. With this approach usually we succeeded in being invited into three homes a day, which was about a record for us. In every home we were complimented and invited back again. After playing and preaching, we made real friends at each visit.

Humble Beginnings

It will be comforting to all missionaries who have represented the Church to know that President Lee began his labors in the same humble and discouraging manner as did they. Of his first day of tracting door-to-door in Denver he said: "The first lady we met shut the door in our faces while we were trying to tell her our message. We had eight gospel conversations, one lady promised to attend our church, and only two refused our literature."

What missionary hasn't approached his first priesthood ordinance work with some nervousness and apprehension? It was the same for the young Elder from Clifton, Idaho. His companion, Elder Woodbury, rehearsed with him over and over the anointing prayer as they were en route to bless a little girl. But when the time came to perform his first priesthood ordinance, Elder Lee's careful preparation failed him. He summarized the experience in these words:

When I began to anoint the girl I forgot the whole prayer and made a mess of things. While we were going home Elder Woodbury asked me if I would get sore at him if he told me something. Reassured, he said, "For pete's sake, don't ever do it like that." I will never forget that lesson.

Months later he was to be introduced to another stern discipline of missionary work, preaching to the public as they passed by at a street meeting. His written recollection of this experience follows:

We held our first street meeting last Saturday night, and they gave me the "honor" of being one of the speakers, along with Sister Dunn and Elder Bergeson. If you want a thrill you sure want to try street preaching. "Scared," did you say? I thought I would surely faint until I got started, then somehow I forgot myself and everyone else, I'm afraid. We are preaching on the corner of 19th and Welton Streets in Denver, and succeeded in keeping a few people sticking around all the time. I think if I keep on finding out how little I know, by the time my mission is over I will be convinced I don't know anything. Like the old professor at school used to say: "It's all right to say you don't know if you don't say it too often." But with me, it's getting quite frequent.

Other early tracting experiences were typically humiliating to this inexperienced missionary. His diary records:

While tracting I sold a lady two small books and promised to bring back to her a Book of Mormon the next day. I was as tickled as a boy with new shoes, but when I went back the lady wouldn't even come to the door. I sure thought I had a convert there.

A month later, the story was not much different. He writes:

We spent over five hours and never got a decent conversation. One lady, when I told her I was a Mormon, told me to go on down the street, that she had had more arguments with Mormon Elders. I asked her what she disagreed with and she said, "Oh, this faith and works stuff." She believed that "by grace ye are saved." When I attempted to quote from the scriptures, she slammed the door with the invective: "Go on down the street."

These disheartening but strengthening experiences were beginning to mold the leadership qualities of the young missionary. He had baptized several families and now was beginning to love his missionary work, despite its discouragements. After seven months in the mission field, he wrote:

We have, all totaled in the conference, about fourteen baptisms for this month, and if ever I felt like working, it is now, when I am just beginning to appreciate the responsibility that rests upon me. I am praying that I will always be kept just a "high private in the rear ranks" so that I can continue to do the work I am beginning to love.

Leadership Debut

Elder Lee's desires for obscurity were not granted. When he had been in the field but nine months, his mission president called him into his office and told him that he had been selected to be the next president of the Denver Conference. President Knight's words were, "I am just giving you a chance to show what is in you." Later in his journal Elder Lee wrote:

I know now I have gained what I'm sure Father would call "big things"-the confidence of President Knight.

Only nine short months today since I arrived in Denver; and when I think back on all the wonderful experiences that have been mine in that time, I feel as though it had been but a dream, but I thank the Lord continually. The crying necessities of today wake me up to the fact that I must be working always if God is to accomplish anything through me.

With companion, Elder Willis J. Woodbury, on first day of tracting.

John M. Knight, president of Western States Mission

Presiding over a "conference" in those days meant being the presiding authority over all the missionaries, branch presidents, and Saints in a geographical area now referred to as a district in the mission field. Elder Lee's territory extended northward from Denver to the Wyoming line-including Fort Collins, Greeley, Longmont, Boulder, and Steamboat Springs-and from Littleton on the south to the Nebraska border on the east. He had supervision of thirty-five missionaries.

From this time forward to the end of his mission he was constantly engaged in reorganizing the branches, advising the Saints on their personal lives-including marital counseling on pending divorces-administering to and blessing the Saints, solving the problems of the missionaries, and attempting, as much as time permitted, to continue to do active proselyting work. The demands on his time, energy, physical strength, and moral character were heavy and unrelenting. But such burdens were also the training for his amazing leadership skills as they developed and tested the young spiritual giant growing within him.

Many new experiences came to him as a result of his being conference president. His first marriage ceremony was for Oscar A. Anderson and Jennie Voorhees. He wrote the following of his first experience in arranging for and taking charge of a funeral service: "It was the request of the family that I talk, and this was my first attempt in a funeral. Although I felt pretty shaky in the knees, everything went all right and without a 'hitch.' " He added, "From now on, I suppose, the few missionaries that are here will have plenty to do in the way of preaching, with two street meetings every week besides the Sunday night meeting."

Such leadership positions had mundane roles, too, for Elder Lee's diary records that when the Elders went away on other assignments, he made the fire to heat the water for the baptismal services.

In retrospect, knowing that Harold B. Lee conceived of and introduced an improved approach to home teaching during the 1960s, it is interesting to see the earliest emergence of those concepts as they developed in the Denver Conference in 1921. Faced with the immense task of caring for the needs of all the Saints, yet desiring to be actively involved in missionary proselyting work most of the time, Elder Lee devised a new plan to shift to the missionaries the responsibility of "watching over the Saints," instead of attempting to handle the entire job himself as his predecessor had done. He felt certain that the missionaries would take a bigger interest in the work if they knew he was not going to assume all these extra assignments himself. At the same time he organized the Elders into continuing companionships in the firm belief that if they were kept together for designated periods of time, "two by two," they would be more circumspect and many embarrassing predicaments could be avoided. This was to be a firm conviction that would always remain in his leadership philosophy, for in later years he preached the same counsel for even the travels of the General Authorities.

Throughout the conference area the plan developed in the small branches as well as in Denver; instead of having the conference president visit the Saints all the time, he assigned the Elders to call on them once a month, a format similar to the ward teaching practices at that time in the strong stakes in Utah. In this manner, better "watch care" was given as the Saints were urged to attend to their duties, thereby relieving the conference president of much of that burden.

Later, he reported in a letter how the new plan was working:

We have our visiting districts arranged now so they can be covered in the shortest amount of time by having each missionary study his districts and arrange in rotation those that are near together. We are gradually working in a few of the local members of the priesthood, and someday I hope to be able to step out and leave the visiting entirely to the branch officers. I believe most of the families have given up the idea of having a visit from the conference president once a week, as my predecessor, Harry Jensen, did.

In addition to the heavy burdens he carried for the families under his jurisdiction, with five divorces pending at one point, Elder Lee devoted his major attention to developing the effectiveness of missionary work. One day he recorded in his diary:

With Elders Kelsey and Allred I had a fine day tracting. I sent them alone and when I got around the block I found them sitting under a tree utterly disgusted because they couldn't talk at the homes. After I preached "Mormonism" to them for fifteen minutes to give them an idea of what to say, they started out and had a very successful time, some of the conversations lasting half an hour.

The remainder of that first year in the mission field was spent in similar leadership and teaching experiences with the missionaries, such as urging them to wear their "derbies" in Denver and locating the eiders in Greeley for the winter, where they paid fifteen dollars rent per month for an excellent room. In a letter during this period he expressed his attitude on missionary converts as follows:

I almost feel as a little kid today and I cannot help but be happy. If all those who have promised to be baptized appear, there will be twelve or fourteen new members of the Church after our baptismal service today. Of course, many have experienced the satisfaction that comes when you are able to measure the effectiveness of your work by converts. Although our success can't possibly be measured in that way, yet therein is the fascination of missionary work.

One morning during study class, word reached the Elders that a member's little girl was dying. President Knight sent Elder Lee and the matron, Sister Winmill, to go to the home. They arrived just after the babe had died and found everything at the home in confusion. The hearse came while they were there, and they did their best to console the sorrowing mother. The sisters from the mission came and cleaned the house and washed the clothing, while Elder Lee went with the father and mother to make arrangements for the burial. The coffin cost $35, the hearse $15, embalming $20, and a burial lot $250, making a total of $320-more, including burial clothing. The father was making only $20 a week to keep a family of eight. Where would the money come from? Such problems were typical of the struggles of the conference president in Denver in 1921.

At times, such constant responsibility had its depressing side effects. One day he recorded in his journal:

Felt pretty blue all day because of many griefs and complaints brought by the missionaries and from different Saints. Felt as incapable as a babe and sure acted like one, too. Elders Hood and Peterson both seemed to sense my feelings and pledged the most encouraging kind of support.

Other entries, however, expressed the brighter side of his labors, such as these comments on his attitude toward his leadership appointment and his love for his fellow workers:

With such a splendid bunch of missionaries, I'm sure the president expects a great deal to be accomplished. Many times have I prayed that God would make me worthy to be a leader among such fine people. When the president selected me ms conference president, he told me he was giving me a chance to show what was in me. He certainly has played fair with me, and if I fail it will be because I wasn't a big enough man for Denver.

Second Year

Friday, November 11, 1921, marked completion of his first year in the mission field. The next month was a busy one as he prepared for a district conference. The first session, on a Friday, featured a priesthood meeting with twenty-seven missionaries in attendance. All had been asked to fast, and the meeting lasted six hours and fifteen minutes, during which time every missionary was asked to express his true feelings. His own reactions were recorded in his journal:

When conference finally arrived I was as happy as a little child, so much so, in fact, that when my turn came to talk it was very nearly impossible. Through sheer joy I could hardly speak. Never before have I been able to appreciate real people who are doing their best to help in God's great work, and words fail me in expressing my love toward them. We had a force of twenty-seven in attendance, six lady missionaries and twenty-one Elders.

After the conference President Knight and Elder Lee had a "splendid talk," during which President Knight told him how pleased he was with the meetings. Discussing the affairs of the conference, President Knight promised to give Elder Lee two Elders to work in Fort Collins and to maintain a force of thirteen Elders in Denver. Missionary productivity at that time was eight baptisms per Elder, but Elder Lee had hopes of raising that to around ten before Christmas 1921.

On Saturday and Sunday, February 18-19, 1922, the missionaries in Denver were stimulated immensely by a visit from Elder James E. Talmage of the Council of the Twelve. Arriving during a baptismal service on Saturday, Elder Talmage spoke briefly on the bestowal of the Holy Ghost and aided in confirming the newly baptized as members of the Church. He made suggestions freely during the missionary meeting that followed, teaching the Elders how to meet all forms of opposition while proselyting. That night Elder Talmage spoke on "Heaven's First Law-Obedience." Sunday night he spoke on the subject, "Will Many or Few Be Saved?" The Pearl and Seventh Avenue chapel was crowded to overflowing with the largest crowd of Latter-day Saints and their friends ever assembled to that point in Denver. Four hundred and fifty people assembled within the chapel walls. Many were compelled to sit on the floor, and about twenty-five persons were turned away because of lack of space to see and hear. That night Elder Lee played a piano accompaniment for a ladies' vocal duet, and, with President Knight, assisted Elder Talmage in blessing many people after the meeting.

The labors in the Denver Conference continued into 1922 with the usual problems and Elder Lee's persistent growth-through-adversity progress. One day he knew he had not measured up to a street meeting challenge. Of the experience he wrote: "I made a miserable mess of my part of the meeting, apparently because I was relying upon my strength and ability and not upon the Lord."

On a happier day, however, his attitude toward missionary work is revealed by this journal entry:

I'm as happy, despite the vying of Elders for credit for baptisms, as though it were I who had brought the proper pressure to bear to bring about their conversions, and I rejoice that I am able to erase my own selfish desires and to push loyally for the success of the entire conference-that anyone's success is a big boon to my individual appreciation. I'm going to live up to the expectations made of me to the end that patience and strength will prevail.

A glimpse into the budding personality and leadership qualities of this young churchman is seen by his recording of the comments made by the Denver branch president, President Smart, when he moved to Houston and was paying his parting respects to Elder Lee. The description from a letter says:

When he left me, he told me he respected me and was glad for the opportunity of working with me, saying that I was a hard one to say that about, because of the peculiar qualities that were distinctly mine that kept people long in the dark as to superior abilities that I might possess. That one fact of my makeup has caused me more misgivings as to my ability to succeed than any other. I wish someone would give me a recipe of instruction so I might overcome.

The work prospered under his leadership. An appraisal of the new plan of having the missionaries serve as monthly home teachers to the members showed good results. "In our meeting the missionaries reported the best of conditions among the Saints because of our visits to them to try to keep them in the path of duty."

On August 6, 1922, Elder Lee made a brief observation in his journal about a fast and testimony meeting in which a Sister Maulden and a Sister Haskan, older members of the ward, spoke of their personal acquaintance with the Prophet Joseph Smith.

Though sobered by the weight of such great responsibility, for one so young, Elder Lee was not devoid of a sense of humor. One entry in his diary refers to a humorous incident that occurred as Sister Knight, wife of the mission president, was conducting the sustaining of Relief Society sisters in their various positions in the branch. In doing so she said: "All who are in favor of sustaining these officers in their various 'dispositions' may make it manifest by raising the right hand." Of this blooper Elder Lee wrote: "Amen, we have to do it daily with our sisters here in Denver."

Another example came after a street meeting one day, which he recorded in his diary: "When Elder Murdock declared 'the heavens were opened,' one old fellow gazed solemnly up at the sky!"

The financial burdens on Elder Lee's family to maintain their first missionary were not out of his mind during these closing months of his mission. In a letter dated August 27, 1922, he wrote:

I received a most encouraging letter from Father, who told me they would never ask for my release and would only pray God to increase their crops so I can stay until released. I am so appreciative of my people at home. Waldo, my sixteen-year-old brother, just sent me a check for $40, saying he wanted some credit, too, so you see they all consider that they are doing the Lord's work when they help to keep Harold in the mission field. I could cry when I think of it all, and my prayer is that God will make me humble so that I shall not disappoint them when I do go home.

The progress he felt taking place in the last months of his mission among his colleagues is reflected in this comment: "Among the missionaries is growing the knowledge that the Lord is blessing their labors to the extent that many are believing in their testimonies, and we have hopes that in years to come, some of the work we are doing will be felt in the lives of these people." It no doubt came as a product of extensive effort properly directed.

The work schedule and results of these days, as noted in a letter dated September 22, 1922, are summarized as follows:

I've just returned from choir practice. This week, among other activities, I have done thirty hours tracting, attended three cottage meetings, and preached on the street Wednesday night, and I am slated to preach in church on Sunday night. We have a total of seventy-two baptisms so far this year; one more than for the year 1921 in the Denver Conference.

Perhaps the most trying and personally challenging problem of his mission came through personal conflicts emerging from his competence and unusual leadership abilities. The jealousy and envy of some fellow workers brought much criticism, with which he had to learn to cope. In this early conflict we can see the character developing to meet the adversity as would be required in the years ahead when often he was younger than those he would preside over.

After one such experience, the most stressful of his entire mission, Elder Lee pleaded to his closest missionary friend: "Lend me your courage while I pray always that I might be submissive to authority and forget self in a last effort to go all the way in this sacred work."

The Closing Weeks

As his mission was coming to a close, the pace quickened. These comments from letters in October 1922 tell of the intense activity in which he was routinely engaged.

When I tell you we are having to hold eighteen cottage meetings this week, besides street meetings and Mutual and choir practice, and only fifteen missionaries here in Denver, you can know that we have but little spare time if we measure up with our other requirements. There is a healthy spirit of competition among the Elders here now, the very condition I have wanted to see; and as a result the pace is fast and furious and all will be well if someone doesn't weaken. But don't think I'm getting too straight-backed to admit of foolishness at times, because my indulgence in that on occasions has kept me alive. Times are so strenuous that we don't have time to get sick or die. This week, too, I have been fighting off a bad cold, but have been unable to slacken up because of the work demanded of me. A number of the missionaries have likewise had colds, but with twenty-four cottage meetings to hold, we haven't had much time to lose.

In his third November in the missionary field (November 9, 1922), President Knight showed his reliance on the now fully developed Denver Conference president by asking Elder Lee to take his place in conducting a conference in Sheridan, Wyoming. The president was called away suddenly to attend to missionary problems elsewhere and gave Elder Lee but two hours' notice to make the train. Elder Lee's letters indicated his reply:

I told the president he was giving me a bigger bite than I could chew, but if the best I could do was all right, that I would go. He said there was no one else he would rather trust and the Church would pay my expenses. I did the best I could-preached, played the piano, conducted the singing, and helped settle the difficulties in the branch. When President Knight arrived on Monday, Elder Scadlock insisted that I talk again, but I graciously declined and played the part of wisdom. While there, the president took me into his confidence more than he has ever done before and took me with him wherever he went. I wish I could tell you more details (letters are unable to convey the thoughts intended) regarding the value of this trip to me, coming, as it has, at the close of my mission when many thoughts have crowded themselves upon me to make me more appreciative and humble in the responsibility that is mine-to determine whether or not I can make good among strangers, etc.

Meanwhile, conditions at home were worrying Elder Lee. A letter from his brother Clyde made him feel despondent for days. He wrote his reactions in these words:

He told how Father seems to be getting much older because of the worries he had. To think that I have caused my parents worry and hardship makes my heart ache. Sometimes I feel as though I couldn't stay to finish under the circumstances, but I've come to know out here that ofttimes when things are the blackest, just then, things begin to happen. Never again, if I know it, will my folks be in the position they are in today. What I shall do in the future is dark and uncertain; my prayer to God is that things will happen for the best.

Release Plans

Elder Lee didn't have time to anguish long over financial conditions at home, for in two weeks the answers were provided. From his diary this important announcement was recorded:

Before the president left for Omaha, Nebraska, he called me into his office and told me to sit down in an easy chair. He asked about my finances and if it would be possible to get a school contract this late in the year. He told me I would get my release at the December conference, and that he would leave with me for Salt Lake City on December 14, 1922.

Elder Lee enlarged on this discussion in these words:

The president talked to me a long time about the past and the future. He expressed the wish that I might stay until spring, but after I had explained the circumstances he thought it best to go now. Of course, I'm up in the air, and lucky for me there will be so much to do from now on that no time will be granted me to even think of the future or to regret the past. President Knight is urging the hundred baptisms from Denver before January l, and I hope to get them by conference time. Barring accidents, everything looks promising.

Elder Lee plunged into the work challenge and lost himself anti his thoughts of the coming change in his life by a saturating effort. Even the meetinghouse got a final cleaning by the presiding Elder, who wanted to leave everything in proper order: "We declared a housecleaning day and cleaned the church from top to bottom. We scrubbed and oiled the entire upstairs and downstairs, and washed and oiled all the woodwork and the chairs I crawled up and down the floors on my knees until my knees were calloused and my back ached."

Two days later his final conference in the mission field began. The Saturday priesthood meeting started at 8:00 A.M. and lasted until 4:00 P.M., with twenty-eight missionaries present to help engender a most wonderful spirit. His diary records:

Each missionary related his experience of the summer, and everyone seemed to radiate a general feeling of good fellowship. When my turn came to speak, after all the others had talked, I found I was up against a hard proposition. I was finally able to control myself after a time, and then say what I wanted. The president likewise experienced the same difficulty when he attempted to speak. He praised the missionaries for what they had done and gave instructions.

Release and Return

At the Sunday sessions of conference a new attendance record was set, with 310 persons in attendance for the evening meeting. Elder Lee's talents were much in evidence-he sang in a mixed quartet and in a male quartet, spoke in the evening, and played the accompaniments for all the musical selections-as the president announced his release to the missionaries and the Saints assembled.

The next day's diary entry (Monday, December 11, 1922), described the missionary meeting as follows:

When the president announced that I was released, he said that it would bankrupt the English language to tell how much he thought of me and said that I had been on the firing line from the time I had arrived in Denver. Elder Andrew Hood was chosen in my place. He is sixty-two years old. The missionaries presented me with a beautiful watch chain. A total of thirty-three of them had contributed funds to purchase it for me.

There followed a busy week of leave-taking, last-minute converts to baptize, babies of close friends to bless, and many good-byes.

Finally, the day of departure arrived. On a Thursday morning, December 14, 1922, Elder Lee left his work in Denver, where so many spiritually developing experiences had occurred in his life. Traveling with him on the Denver and Rio Grande train was President John M. Knight, who was going to Salt Lake City to attend the Ensign Stake quarterly conference. He had never been released as the second counselor in the stake presidency while serving his mission in Denver. Also accompanying them were Sister Harriet Jensen, who was to be hospitalized in Salt Lake City for surgery. All the missionaries came to the depot to say good-bye to their conference president. Also in the throng was Mabel Hickman, Elder Lee's first convert in Denver. The journey home was uneventful, lout was full of anticipation and expectation.

An interesting diary entry for Friday, December 15, 1922 states, "While talking to President Knight about my next mission, he said that someday I would be sent to preside over one of the missions."

Elder Lee attended the Ensign Stake conference on Sunday, December 17, 1922, with his mission president, and surprisingly he was called on to speak for ten minutes. Nearly a thousand people were present, and Elder Lee later discovered, when they complimented him personally on his sermon, that many of the General Authorities were present.

That night Elder Lee had his first insight into reality as he began the adjustment to less spiritual conditions at home. He attended one of the Salt Lake City wards and wrote of the visit, "I discovered a sad falling off from the Spirit manifested in the mission field."

The final chapter of his mission return was written under date of Monday, December 18, 1922, describing how President Knight took him to meet a number of Church officials. Here in the Church Office Building, where he was destined someday to be the presiding officer, the young returned missionary met President Charles W. Penrose; Elders Joseph Fielding Smith, Nephi L. Morris, John W. Wells, Richard R. Lyman, and Andrew Jensen; Louie B. Felt of the Primary Association; and a host of others. If they could have known then how the life and mission of this obscure young missionary was to later be joined with theirs in the service of the Lord, perhaps they would have greeted him differently as they met for the first time.

Elder Lee was given a letter of recommendation that was approved by President Penrose, which permitted him to enter the Salt Lake Temple for ordinances he performed two days later. He officially reported his mission to Elder Harold G. Reynolds at the Church offices. The final introduction made by President Knight was to a Sister Green, who was told by President Knight that "Harold B. Lee was going to be sent back to the Western States Mission to preside, after he himself was released and sent home."

The last mission diary entry records the courtesy visits Elder Lee made to missionary friends and parents of missionaries, and to Freda Jensen, whom his former missionary companion Elder Murdock hoped to make his wife. She could not then know what a profound influence Harold B. Lee would be in her life . . . as her husband some forty years later.

A Special Visit

More than a courtesy call, however, was the visit Elder Lee made to the home of Sister Fern Tanner in the Granger area of Salt Lake City. He wrote of this visit in these words:

Little did I realize what it meant to face a cold and unsympathetic world after living for two wonderful years in the idealistic atmosphere of the gospel. The president gave me to understand as we reached Salt Lake City that from there on out I must shift for myself and that his responsibility was at an end.

My first thought upon arriving in Salt Lake was to find Fern L. Tanner, with whom I had corresponded practically during our entire mission, she having returned from the Western States Mission in July 1922.

Fern met me with her brother, Bud, and his wife, Ethel, that night at the Kenyon Hotel, and I went to her home, where I first met Daddy and Mother Tanner.

We talked far into the night, I think more as missionary friends than as sweethearts. There was much to ask and much to tell. Both of us had experienced joys and disappointments, but through it all we had gained a deep testimony of the gospel of Jesus Christ, the real value of which we then but little realized.

Back Home to Idaho

After spending a week in the Salt Lake City area, during which time he attended the temple twice, Elder Lee arrived home in Clifton, Idaho, just a few days before Christmas 1922.

The patriarchal blessing given by Presiding Patriarch Hyrum G. Smith on the head of Harold Bingham Lee as he was leaving for the Western States Mission had indeed been fulfilled. In it Patriarch Smith had predicted:

And, if thou wilt honor the Holy Priesthood which has been given thee, thou shalt be advanced therein in due time, and be called into positions of trust and responsibility and leadership, and shall have an influence for good among thine associates.

Personal Missionary Highlights

In addition to the diary entries and letters written while Elder Lee served as a missionary, he also summarized his mission for inclusion in a family history. In this summary many of the more interesting personality sketches, experiences, and travels are detailed. A few excerpts from this text follow:

First Converts

The first converts I baptized were Mabel and Florence Hickman, at whose home we were rooming. Mabel was an active member of the First Christian Church, and when she and Florence joined the Church, their family and the Christian Church members accused them of everything from immorality to insanity. They proved their conversion to the gospel and became splendid aids in the Denver Branch. They were both expert stenographers.

During my mission I had the privilege of baptizing 45 converts. Their religions were as follows: Christian Science (2); Methodist (11); Salvation Army (2); Christian (11); Seventh-Day Adventists (3); Catholic (2); Baptist (3); Lutheran (3); no Church affiliation (8). I made a complete list of these converts in the middle of the Bible I used in the mission field.

Missionary Companions

I was made president of the Denver Conference to succeed Elder Harry Jensen, and my companion at this time-midsummer of 1921-was Vernal Bergeson, of Cornish, Utah. We "batched" for a time and later moved to 740 Grant Street in Denver. "Berg" had been spending eighty to ninety dollars each month before this time, but immediately cut his expenses to less than half in order to conform to my pocketbook.

Elder David S. Murdock, of Heber City, was one of the most loyal companions I had in the mission field. He was a tireless worker but had a personality that offended some people. He had an unusual knack in making friends, and he baptized many converts.

A Scoutmaster

During the first few months of my mission, I had charge of a scout troop of the Denver Branch of the Capitol Hill District. This troop was made up of boys of ten different denominations and some splendid contacts were made. We took two hikes and overnight outings to Starbuck and up to Boulder Canyon.

Fern L. Tanner

Working in the mission office Was a woman, Young, and strong in spirit, True to her ideals of gospel truth. Gentle was her voice, Gracious in her walk And talk. Her spirit, too, reached back Into eternity. She saw the need to testify, To warn the world, To bring souls to repent and Serve the Lord. And so they met And each saw in The other one Their future destiny, But waited till Each one had done his part Of missionary work To speak the thoughts and Yearning of the heart. [^2]

Fern L. Tanner arrived in Denver just two weeks before I did, and I met her on her birthday, November 14, 1920, three days after I arrived. From that day, her influence became a power in my life. Little did I dream that some day she would become my wife and the mother of my children. She was transferred to the Pueblo Conference,

Harold B. Lee, 1921

Fern Lucinda Tanner, 1920

and we corresponded during the entire time she labored there. She later returned to the mission office in Denver to work a short period before her release.

F. Elinor Johnson

F. Elinor Johnson, of Benjamin, Utah, was the matron in charge of the work of the lady missionaries when I arrived. She was a most cultured lady, having graduated from the Brigham Young University, yet she was a genial "mixer" with all classes. Fern was assigned to be her companion, and among the three of us there was formed a "trinity" that "sat in judgment" on most of the affairs of the mission during those first few months.

During her mission she was constantly in contact with people who had tuberculosis. Near the close of her mission she became ill with what the doctor diagnosed as stomach trouble. When she arrived home, it was found that she had an advanced case of tuberculosis, and after a lingering sickness, most of the time in the County Hospital at Salt Lake City, she died; her funeral services were held at Payson, Utah, in March 1925.

When she knew the end was near, she began to plan her services and had the entire program worked out when she died, even to the individuals she invited to offer the prayers. I was asked to speak. In the closing moments of her life she wrote her testimony until the stupor of death halted her writing.

Mission President

John M. Knight was the president of the Western States Mission. As president of the Denver Conference, I was close to him. I came to learn his virtues as well as his weaknesses. He was a fearless fighter in his missionary work and was always on the go, visiting the various divisions of the mission, which extended from North Dakota to New Mexico and from West Colorado to East Nebraska. At the time of the Pueblo flood in the month of June 1921. I accompanied him to inquire about the safety of the Saints and missionaries in the Pueblo District, where 1,500 people were estimated to have lost their lives. Losses up to $30 million were reported.

Visit to Nauvoo

One year later, in June 1922, Elder Lee accompanied his mission president on another memorable journey, this time on a tour of the eastern part of the Western States Mission, including a brief extension into the area of Nauvoo and Carthage, Illinois.

This trip made a deep impression on the now matured missionary, for he recorded his every impression with meticulous detail, even taking many photographs to give lasting memory to his written summary. From this unforgettable experience with the historical centers of the early Church, Elder Lee was to draw time after time as he traveled throughout the Church teaching the Saints and missionaries over his thirty-three-year span as a General Authority. He frequently repeated those vivid impressions when testifying of the divine calling of the Prophet Joseph Smith and of his martyrdom with Hyrum, his brother, on June 27, 1844.

1924-1931. Charles Lindbergh completed the first solo, nonstop transatlantic flight from New York to Paris. Valentino died, and the stock market climbed, then plunged. Ford cars sold for $290, but Chevrolet had a successful competitor to the Model T. Transatlantic radio and telephone began, and the first all-talking, full-color motion picture was introduced. The Hawley-Smoot Tariff Act was enacted. The first non-stop transpacific flight was made.

© S. Dilworth Young 1976. Used by permission.

© S. Dilworth Young 1976. Used by permission.

---
Notas:
[^1] © S. Dilworth Young 1976. Used by permission.
[^2] © S. Dilworth Young 1976. Used by permission.
