Brent L. Goates, Harold B. Lee: Prophet and Seer ( 1985)

6 Marriage and Early Church Callings

It was a happy Christmas in Clifton for the Samuel M. Lee family now that Harold had returned for the 1922 holidays. The young missionary, however, like many of our Lord's servants fresh from the mission field, had mixed feelings, and he especially found it difficult to smile and say he was happy to be home. He discovered that his parents were listening carefully to discover if he was going to express any dissatisfactions with home through suggesting that he was leaving.

Sober thoughts were running through Harold's mind. For the first time, he realized that his parent's home and farm were in financial jeopardy due to the severe economic depression all farmers had experienced in the past two years while he had been gone. The payments on the mortgages had not been made during that time. Harold wrote, "I thank the Lord that my parents didn't tell me all their difficulties." Had he known all, he might have returned early from the mission field to help.

Though no one seemed to have any answers, there was a family solidarity and beautiful spirit in his home. He wrote of that Christmas: "Although people have no money in their pockets, they have bushels of love in their hearts and I believe there has never been a time when there was more of the real Christmas spirit."

Harold tried with pronounced effort to adjust from the spiritual influence of the mission field to the less than ideal circumstances at home. He endeavored to fit himself into those activities by which he could accomplish the most good. To be a companion to his younger brother Clyde, who needed his positive influence, Harold had to take up basketball again, for Clyde was the leading athlete in the town. Basketball with Clyde was not without its risks, however. In the mission field Harold had developed a hernia, which was aggravated by his attempts on the basketball court. Other physical problems ensued.

After being home only three weeks, Harold took part in a basketball game between Clifton and Oxford, the town where he had taught school before his mission. In that game, which was played considerably more physically then than now, Harold sustained a wrenched back that necessitated his being carried off the floor. Two years away from sports had produced a softened condition not to be overcome in just three weeks of activity at home.

Already the townsfolk were urging Harold to qualify to teach in the high school the next year, although a degree from a college would be required of Harold if the high school were to be accredited. He was examining several offers to teach at this time, and knew well that the family's financial condition urged such an investigation.

Church activity in his life was increased when the stake presidency asked Harold to return to his premissionary assignment as president of the elders quorum for Oxford, Dayton, and Clifton wards. Additionally, he was called to be the theological teacher in Sunday School. Characteristic of a faithful missionary, he longingly noted, however, "It doesn't give the satisfaction that missionary work brings."

As January drew to a close, Samuel Lee wondered if he should start plowing soon. It was a frustrating thought, because he and his boys had begun to despair, having worked hard the previous summer only to fail to even cover expenses. Everywhere in the area people were talking about selling their farms.

A cloak of gloom hung over the town of Clifton anti the Lee farm, located just two miles from the meetinghouse. Harold was depressed in his valiant efforts to make home better than it was when he rejoined the family, but still he strove to prove he was mature enough to hold on to the success he had achieved in Denver. Word from the mission field thrilled him when he learned that after his departure all records for convert baptisms in the past had been broken when the year-end count was tallied.

A snowy period in early February restored conditions for sleighing, which earlier had melted under unseasonal sunshine. Harold donned his hightop boots and a sweater, pulled on heavy outer clothing, and mused over his uncertain future as he tramped around in the snow, chopping and sawing wood, "a last resort" choice-a necessity for fuel and an outlet for his frustrations. It seemed better than basketball for profitable exercise, as he had painfully discovered.

That same January, Harold took a cold fifteen-mile ride to Preston, Idaho, where he was installed in the elders quorum work at the Oneida Stake quarterly conference. The stimulation from this experience provided the first adequate spiritual experience he had enjoyed since his days in the Denver Conference.

A minstrel show sponsored by the M-Men, which Harold helped to produce, soon brought an outlet for his musical interest. His share was the musical production, and his brother Perry wrote the comic script. His notation about the event was, "I will be qualified after this week to give expert advice on the staging of minstrel shows."

Deeper thoughts filled his mind. He had thought he understood conditions at home well enough to adapt himself without difficulty, but he finally confessed to himself and others that for these past months it was only with intense effort that he could find his way through the maze to a new path of accomplishment and a firm future. A new plan finally emerged. It was only too apparent that he must set his stakes down away from Clifton.

Move to Salt Lake City

"My first move in that direction was made when I went to the Salt Lake City Latter-day Saints Hospital for a hernia operation in February 1923, where I remained for one month. I went to the Tanner home to convalesce after I left the hospital," wrote Harold in summary of his decision to break away and start anew.

In Salt Lake City while recovering from surgery, he received a most distressing letter from his mother, vaguely intimating some problems at home and announcing that his father, who had served ten years as bishop of the Clifton Ward, had been released. His brother Perry soon arrived in Salt Lake City for the annual general conference of the Church in April; afterwards, both Harold and Perry returned to the family farm in Clifton to assist in straightening out the difficulties.

His parents told Harold at that time of their concern about his feelings that his mission might have placed an added financial burden on them, and their fear was that this might have weakened Harold's faith in the gospel and the blessings of the Lord. Harold wrote his reactions:

It gave me a joy I am unable to express to see their pride and satisfaction in my missionary service. I could cry when I think that in the midst of all their trouble and grief they have placed uppermost the spiritual values, and in their great stress, have found peace and rest through the gospel.

Father and Mother have gone through a veritable hell and appear to have aged years since I last saw them. Even in the short time I have been gone to Salt Lake, Father's hair is more gray than ever and I'm sure that only love and hard work will ever make back to them what they have lost.

Then Harold recorded the conclusion that emerged from his visit back home:

We have decided unanimously that I should go to work to get ahead financially, so I will return to Salt Lake and find employment as soon as possible. I'm going to do the right, as the Lord directs.

This same resolute determination would later mark his illustrious career. A formula that never failed to meet all the problems in the life of Harold Bingham Lee was to study the circumstances, search out the solution, apply all one's energies to its accomplishment, and through it all trust continuously and everlastingly in a loving Heavenly Father for guidance and direction.

Marriage

Determined to launch a new future path, Harold B. Lee returned to Salt Lake City to attend school at the University of Utah during the summer of 1923 and to plan for his forthcoming marriage. His springboard for economic independence started with part-time employment at the Paris department store. A few months later, in the fall of that year, he obtained an appointment as the principal of the Whittier School and later of the Woodrow Wilson School in the Granite School District in the Salt Lake City area.

Of those memorable days of marriage and of their becoming a separate family, Harold wrote:

On November 14, 1923, I was married to Fern L. Tanner in the Salt Lake Temple, with Elder George F. Richards of the Council of the Twelve officiating. Never doubting our ability to get ahead together, we put our full trust in each other and moved into our first home at 1538 West 800 South, owned by Daddy Tanner, and obligated ourselves for $800 of furniture and a used Ford automobile for $300, on my salary of $135 per month.

At the time of his marriage, Harold was teaching school in Hunter, Salt Lake County, in the Granite School District. When he returned to school on a Monday morning, after his wedding announcement was published over the weekend, one ingenious student placed on his desk the newspaper clipping of the bride's photograph and announcement and scrawled at the bottom of the page, "Is November 14 a holiday from school?"

Harold reported in his journal the birth of his only two children, both daughters:

The first year of our married life was a glorious honeymoon in which we made preparations for our first baby. Despite the fact that we carefully followed the instructions of Dr. A. C. Callister, Fern came near losing her life from a serious hemorrhage when our baby [Maurine] was born.

Maurine was born September 1, 1924. Within fifteen months our second baby came. Fern had been in constant labor pain for sixty hours before Helen was born on November 25, 1925. With her birth we saw the beginning of a sweet companionship of close sisters that developed with each year of their lives. They were both born in the Latter-day Saints Hospital in Salt Lake City.

Harold and Fern Lee in front of their first home

Employment and Homes

During the first years of our married life I struggled to complete my education at the University of Utah by extension study and summer school work while I taught school. I was forced to seek new employment each summer to support my little family until school would begin in the fall. One summer I sold meats and produce for Swift and Company, the next I dispensed gas and oil and checked out equipment at the Salt Lake City Street Department under Commissioner T. T. Burton from 3:00 p.m. to 11:00 p.m. The next two summers I was a watchman and train checker at the Union Pacific north yards under the special agent's department. Some of my choicest friends during these years were Superintendent D. W. Parratt, of the Granite Schools, Commissioner T. T. Burthen, and Edward H. Eardley.

Fern was never content that I should remain in the school teaching profession. I sold Nash automobiles one summer, and later worked for the grocery department of ZCMI, and for the Bennett Gas and Oil Company. Finally, in 1928, I was invited by L. A. Ray to become a salesman for the Foundation Press, Inc. I was guaranteed a salary of $50 per week, and an over-writing on all sales of the salesmen whom I had trained. I resigned in the fall of 1928 from the Granite schools. My new work took me into Wyoming, Colorado, Washington, Oregon, and Idaho, and on many of these trips I was accompanied by Fern and our two girls.

In 1930, I was called to Denver by E. H. Ferris, president of the Foundation Press, and notified that I was to continue in the promotion of Master Library sales, and L. A. Ray was to spend his time with the "Pageant of the Nation," a collection of pictures. This move caused friction between myself and Mr. Ray, and consequently, in September 1930, I was designated to continue alone as the Intermountain manager, with offices in the McIntyre Building in Salt Lake City.

Shortly after his marriage in 1923, Harold had sent for his parents to join him in Salt Lake City. At that time, all his family moved from the farm in Clifton, Idaho, to obtain work in Salt Lake City. His father first took work at the Utah Wholesale Grocery; later, when the depression hit hardest, he was obliged to work in Green River, Wyoming, as manager of the Piggly Wiggly Grocery store. The family lived at several Salt Lake City locations before finally establishing a home which his parents occupied until their deaths, located at 213 F Street. Father Samuel M. Lee ultimately gained permanent employment as a night watchman for the ZCMI Department Store in Salt Lake City and eventually became the night supervisor.

In his family history, Harold gave further details of those years of growth and changes:

When Maurine was born we were forced to move into a larger home at 1534 West 8th South Street. In 1928, Fern's father and mother gave up their home at 1310 Indiana Avenue, because of their old age, to live with their daughter, Emily, in Granger, Utah. We purchased the old home for $2,700 at $25 per month at 7 percent interest.

Fern's father, Stewart T. Tanner, died July 23, 1931, and her mother, Janet Coats Tanner, died July 6, 1932.

From the time our two babies were born their Grandpa and Grandma Tanner seemed to take a great interest in their care and never less than once or twice a day did they plan to see the girls. Grandpa Tanner always called Maurine his "pal." They were a lovable father and mother, wise and just, making no distinction between their own children and their sons-and daughters-in-law.

It has been my joy to see perpetuated in Fern many of the fine traits of her mother. Like her mother, Fern is quiet and unassuming and yet vigorous in her denunciation of unfairness and calumny, generous to a fault, sensitive, impressionable, a splendid mother, and an ideal homemaker. Mother Tanner endured the hardships of pioneer life without a murmur, but was not content until their farm house in Granger was the finest in that community. A close parallel is to be found in Fern. No matter how often public duty takes me away from home, there is always an assurance of her loyal support. We began married life on a borrowed $300. Due to her high standards, our present home has all the conveniences possible, and while small and not the most convenient, it has breathed the influence of a charming wife and a loving mother. These sterling qualities were apparent on the first night of our marriage when she reminded me of our family prayers.

Church Callings

Harold B. Lee was on his way to his destined greatness. He accepted calls to serve in Church and community as they came to him with surprising regularity for one so young in years.

His personal record gives the following account of his early Church appointments.

My first Church responsibility after coming to Pioneer Stake was M-Men instructor in the Poplar Grove Ward. We had a fine group of boys who had suffered from lack of leadership. In stake competition our boys were victorious in basketball, debating, male quartet, public speaking, etc. The second year I was made Sunday School Superintendent of Poplar Grove Ward, with Bert Crockett and Wilford Brown as assistants.

After two years in ward work in the Sunday School, I was drafted in 1926 as the superintendent of religion classes in the Pioneer Stake by President D. E. Hammond. This was a pioneer experience with almost a complete rejuvenation and reorganization necessary.

In 1927 I was chosen as a member of the Pioneer Stake high council, along with Joseph Jenkins. I was ordained a high priest and set apart as a high councilor by Elder Richard R. Lyman of the Council of the Twelve.

Upon the release of T. T. Burton in 1928, I was released as superintendent of religion classes and made stake superintendent of Sunday Schools. My counselors were Edwin Bronson and E. Albert Rosenvall.

Before I had been set apart to this position, and while attending the October Pioneer Stake quarterly conference, I was startled to hear my name announced as the selection of President D. E. Hammond for the position of second counselor in the stake presidency. Charles S. Hyde was advanced to first counselor and J. A. Hancock was released.

I greatly enjoyed my association with President Hammond and Charles S. Hyde, and the experience I gained from this association was profitable, for at the Pioneer Stake quarterly conference one year later, in October 1930, President Hammond was released as stake president by Apostles Rudger Clawson and George Albert Smith of the Council of the Twelve.

President of Pioneer Stake

On the Friday preceding the quarterly conference, I was called to the office of President Rudger Clawson, where I was told by President Clawson and Elder George Albert Smith that I had been chosen by the First Presidency and the Twelve as the new president of Pioneer Stake. I told them I would much prefer working as a counselor to Brother Hyde, and was bluntly told by George Albert Smith that I had been invited to meet with them, not to tell them what should be done, but to find out if I was willing to do what the Lord wanted me to do. There followed a discussion on the selection of my counselors. Again I was told when I asked if they had any suggestions on that, "We have suggestions, but we are not going to tell you-that is your responsibility. If you are guided by the Spirit of the Lord, you will choose those whom we have in mind."

Seeking spiritual direction in choosing his counselors was another learning experience for this young leader.

I retired that night, or rather early morning, to a fitful sleep, about three o'clock in the morning, after earnest prayer for guidance. During the few hours I tried to sleep it would seem that I had chosen two counselors and was trying to hold council meetings with them. Disagreements, obstacles, and misunderstandings would arise, and I would awake with a start to realize that my first choices were wrong. This process was repeated with ten or twelve of my brethren until, when morning came, I was certain the Lord had guided me to choose Charles S. Hyde and Paul C. Child as my counselors. When I announced to the Brethren my decision the next morning, they smiled their approval. The men whom they had desired had been selected.

On the Saturday night following our conference priesthood convention, I went for a long ride with Brother Hyde, who was many years my senior in age and experience, and informed him of the proposed change and of my desire for him to be my first counselor. It was like a thunderbolt to him, and he deferred his answer until he could think it over and talk with President Clawson the next day. Paul C. Child had been my bishop in the Poplar Grove Ward for seven years, and he was not aware of his selection until his name was placed before the conference.

The reorganization of the stake presidency took place on October 26, 1930. President Lee's new work was before him now and he plunged in with characteristic fervor, as his journal describes:

No sooner had the reorganization been effected than we were faced with many stern and serious problems. The Cannon, Poplar Grove, and Thirty-second wards had been disorganized by the change when their bishops were made high councilors and Bishop Child was appointed a counselor in the presidency. Also the [stake] Genealogical Society and the high priest's presidency underwent a change.

Church Courts

In requiring an accounting preceding the transfer of leadership in each ward being reorganized, it was discovered that there was a serious shortage in one ward's tithing and building funds. A complete audit was conducted, and, as a presidency, an investigation of the entire matter was undertaken, which resulted in a high council trial in which a former bishop of the ward, who was by then serving as a member of the Pioneer Stake high council, was disfellowshipped from the Church.

This was my first experience in conducting a high council trial. The trial involved the straining of friendships formed over a period of ten years. When the decision of the presidency was announced after the trial had gone on until four o'clock a.m., the high council refused to vote their approval, whereupon I merely announced that the decision of the presidency was not the decision of the council, and promptly dismissed the trial. On the next Sunday morning, the council was reconvened to show why our decision should not be sustained, and we then received their unanimous vote. The suddenness of our decision had seemed to stun them until they could be given a chance to think the matter over more carefully.

Following that stressful experience came many other excommunications for adultery, polygamy, and apostasy. Some of the most trying were the cases of those charged with immorality and adultery, one involving a nineteen-year-old girl, as well as one for alleged dishonesty against a member of the high council.

Seminary Teaching

In 1931 the Church decided to establish a seminary in connection with the newly constructed South High School in Salt Lake City, and I was asked to be associated with Merrill D. Clayson as a teacher. Two classes each day were held, at eight o'clock each morning and three-thirty after school. I worked with some splendid youngsters during two winters and a part of the third. Coming early in the morning I found it possible to teach the morning class before office hours, and this I did without much difficulty until the late fall of 1933 when the demands of my position as city commissioner made necessary my resignation. This was the most enjoyable teaching I ever did. My associate, Merrill Clayson, was a master at directing the social activities, which ranged from bonfire parties to dancing and Sunday night programs. This association to me was life at its best, and I was loathe to leave a work where I saw such possibilities for doing good. The morning Dr. Joseph F. Merrill left for Europe to preside over the European Mission, he called and asked that I consent to at least get the work started at the seminary that fall, 1933.

Thus commenced the intense Church leadership career of Harold B. Lee. At age thirty-one, he was the youngest stake president in the Church at that time. His appointment at such an early age to preside in Pioneer Stake, even compared with his many other attainments, was without doubt one of the highlights of his Church service and laid the foundation for his teaching and leadership for the years to come.

1932-1933. Prosperity ended and the Great Depression began. So did sit-down strikes. The New Deal was launched and the gold standard suspended. Ford introduced a low-priced V-8 rumble-seat model.
