Brent L. Goates, Harold B. Lee: Prophet and Seer ( 1985)

7 Concern for the Poor and Needy

Forerunner to the Church's security program was a Pioneer Stake plan that emerged from the constant prayers, big hearts, and bright minds of President Harold B. Lee's stake presidency. Several years before the Church moved to help its general membership in the Great Depression, Pioneer Stake, where great numbers of the poor and distressed resided in Salt Lake City, was a scene of intense action to stave off economic disaster. Because this program was the embryo of the famed welfare plan to come later, it is interesting to hear the details of it in Harold B. Lee's own words, summarizing the imaginative, valiant work of a stake presidency whose action told of their charity, or the true love of Christ, for those over whom they presided.

The Depression

In November 1929 there was ushered in an economic upheaval that came to be known as the "Depression." Millions of men and women were thrown out of employment and business houses of long standing closed their doors, as did banks and investment concerns. By 1933 the national jobless rate became a shocking 24.9 percent. Out of a work force of 51,132,000, [approximately] 12,830,000 were unemployed. Some of the most notable businesses to fold in Salt Lake City were Walker Brothers store, Columbia Trust Company, Deseret Savings Bank, Western Building and Loan Company, Consolidated Music Company, Ashton Jenkins Real Estate, and many others. It was no uncommon sight to see dozens of vacant stores along Main Street with a For Rent sign in each window.

In Pioneer Stake,President Harold B. Lee's words, "deplorable 'ghetto' conditions in Redwood Road area" during the Depression

My business with the Foundation Press, Inc., suffered along with others, but I was able, by exerting all my energy, to maintain my office and keep up some production until I severed my connections with the Foundation Press, December 1, 1932, widen I was appointed a city commissioner of Salt Lake City.

Many of the meetings of the Pioneer Stake presidency were devoted to a prayerful study of our stressful conditions and of plans to cooperate in relieving the economic distress of our Saints. Our study reached a climax when word reached us that Alfons J. Finck, of our high council, was one of the organizers and promoters of the Natural Development Association originated by Ben J. Stringham.

Pioneer Stake Relief Plan

In response to our invitation, Brother Finck met in council with us. We pointed out the error of his course and outlined our plans for Pioneer Stake. The meeting ended by our appointing Brother Finck as a key man in our program to further perfect our relief organization. o

If the story were left with the brief account described above, an important element would be missing. We learn additional information from the writings of Alfons J. Finck himself, which tell of his feelings and the deft handling of a delicate situation by President Lee. A document entitled The Early Days of the Welfare Plan in Pioneer Stake, written By Brother Finck, contains this elaboration:

The stakes were advised of President Grant's attitude and pronouncement that the "Natural Government" movement was "radical." . . . I felt that in the absence of any Church effort it was unjust to label the activities of well-meaning men "radical" when thousands of Church members were seriously affected and individual efforts were futile. . . . During our high council meeting we were informed about the decision of President Grant. My personal resentment almost made me resign.

I was invited to a special meeting with the presidency of the stake-President Harold B. Lee, President Charles S. Hyde, and President Paul C. Child. Their meeting was in President Lee's office in the Mcintyre Building on Main Street.

When I met with the brethren I was still in a resentful mood. But thanks to God, they did not rebuke me, but offered to me, in a wonderful spirit of love and tolerance, the opportunity to work in the cause of the welfare of our people in the Church, and not outside of it. The manner in which they did this disarmed me, and without hesitation I accepted and thus became a participant in the early struggles of the welfare work in Pioneer Stake. At the same time, I realized that these brethren had not been idle but had sought wisdom and inspiration about this matter, and when they invited me they had already achieved in council the plan which was to become a permanent part of Church activities. Incidentally, the "Natural Government" did not live long after that.

It was under such circumstances that the presidency of Pioneer Stake went into action. Much fasting and prayer went into the organization and work. From their own council meetings the entire high council with the stake presidency formulated principles of the welfare work, which still is the basic plan of today.

President Lee's historical account of the organization of Pioneer Stake's welfare work in 1932 continues:

A stake committee-consisting of President Child as chairman, with C. O. Jensen, Thomas E. Wilding, and Brother Finck and Fred J. Heath-was appointed to secure a storehouse agreeable to our plans and to work out the details of its operation, including a suitable bookkeeping and merchandising system.

Within a week their report was submitted to the stake presidency and high council for approval. A suitable warehouse was secured without cost at 333 Pierpont Avenue, belonging to the Browning interests of Ogden. Bishop Jesse M. Drury of the Fifth Ward, who was unemployed, was selected as manager. Brother Finck was selected as head bookkeeper and Gladys May as stenographer. Bishops C. E. Davey, R. F. W. Nickel, and James Graham, also unemployed, were sent into the country districts adjoining Salt Lake City to enter into contract with the farmers in behalf of Pioneer Stake, by which we agreed to furnish labor to farmers to harvest crops when they were ready, for which we were to receive a share of the harvest.

A census of the unemployed of the stake revealed the startling fact that of our 7,300 people, there were over 4,800 who were wholly or partially dependent upon outside agencies for a livelihood. An employment committee in each ward, consisting of a member of the bishopric and the chairman of the welfare committees of the Melchizedek Priesthood quorums and the Relief Society welfare workers, kept in touch with the available male and female workers. Directed by Fred J. Heath of the stake central committee, workers from all wards were assigned to farm and industrial projects, which were organized from Provo on the south to Layton on the north.

Workers were told that for their services the stake would undertake to see that food and fuel and shelter for themselves and their families would be provided fully. Hundreds of tons of produce soon began to roll in-peaches, tomatoes, fruits, vegetables, and meats. Relief Society women were organized and two canning machines

Pioneer and salt Lake Stake Bishop's Storehouse, 333 Pierpont Avenue, Salt Lake City, 1933

were purchased for their own use. After exhausting all surplus bottles in the area through a "drive," we purchased ten to twenty thousand cans from the American Can Company at 1.5 cents each.

After supplying our families and stocking our storehouse, we were able to sell considerable surplus to outside people.

The storehouse was known as the Pioneer Stake bishop's storehouse and the bishops of our eleven wards were organized into an executive committee, with Bishop Joseph H. McPhie of the 25th Ward as chairman. They were instructed to meet regularly and to manage and initiate the policies of the storehouse. The First Presidency, after hearing our plan, agreed to permit withdrawals from the tithes to supplement the food received from our own efforts. With these funds we purchased at wholesale prices butter, eggs, flour, sugar, coal, etc., to provide a wide variety of foodstuffs for our people.

The authorization by the First Presidency was more dramatic than attested by President Lee's terse explanation. Some thought the dynamic young leaders in Pioneer Stake had just appropriated the tithing funds for their worthy project of taking care of the poor. An added testimony comes from President Paul C. Child as captured on a tape recording just before his death by Elder Glen C. Rudd of the General Welfare Committee. President Child recalls this tense decision:

No, President Lee just didn't take those funds. We had been authorized to use the tithing, but even this wasn't enough. After appealing to the Presiding Bishop for more money, President Lee asked for a meeting with the First Presidency. We went in and presented our problem to President Grant and his counselors.

President Grant, after listening carefully, turned to President Ivins, his first counselor, and said, "What do you think, Tone?"

President Ivins said, "I think these brethren had better take care of their people."

President Grant turned to President Clark, asking, "What do you think, Reub?"

President Clark said: "I agree with President Ivins. These brethren ought to take care of their people, and we ought to be grateful that we have the one stake presidency in the Church that strongly feels the way they do."

President Grant then banged his fist on the table to emphasize his support for the welfare program of Pioneer Stake, saying: "Brethren, take care of your people, and that is the instruction from the First Presidency of the Church. If you need additional money, more than your tithing and fast offering, you are to come directly to the Presidency of the Church from now on, and get the help you need."

That was a great moment in the history of welfare in the Church. Thereafter changes were made in all aspects of the work so that the poor people could receive the help they needed.

President Lee included in his personal history an article taken from the Salt Lake Tribune of that time to further explain the Pioneer Stake relief program, from which the following is quoted:

Exchange Idea Assures Many Jobs for Idle

Stake Adopts Cooperative Methods Successful in Pioneer Days

As in the pioneer clays of Barter and trade, when a man did a day's work for a quantity of oats, exchange is the Basis of the cooperative movement to relieve unemployment now in operation in the LDS Pioneer Stake. The movement is under the direction of Harold B. Lee, president of Pioneer Stake, and eleven ward bishops.

No charity is involved, and the unemployed person works strictly on a no-wage basis, receiving goods and foods necessary for his immediate needs. . . .

For the past month, unemployed carpenters, painters, and other workmen have been working on the Building, which includes a storage basement, a mezzanine sewing department for renovating old clothes, a main floor for canned goods and groceries, and a second floor for dry goods and clothing. Pioneer Stake members have donated trucks for transportation of goods from outlying districts and from stake homes. Jesse M. Drury, bishop of the Fifth LDS Ward, is manager of the storehouse, and Miss Gladys May is the stenographer.

Each ward bishop is the chairman of a make-work committee. As many as twenty men a day are being sent out to pitch hay on Salt Lake County farms, or to pick peas in American Fork, or cherries and apricots in Bountiful and other towns, each man receiving his pay in produce as distributed from the storehouse.

Mr. Lee announced that Pioneer Stake men are keeping busy in other ways, too, as in the managing of a community vegetable garden at Second West and Thirteenth South streets. The chief benefit of the plan, Mr. Lee said, is that it keeps unemployed men busy and repays them with their greatest needs.

President Lee's history continues with another newspaper article:

The following information, recorded in a newspaper editorial. relates how thirteen men, who were being employed at the Pioneer Stake bishop's storehouse, were seriously injured in a wreck:

October 27, 1932

The Wreck at the Crossing

With the news that 13 men had been seriously injured, one perhaps fatally, when an interurban car struck a loaded truck in the northern part of this city, the sympathy of the people went out to the injured and their families. The men were among the 20,000 of this county who have no regular work and were being employed through the efforts of the Pioneer Stake organization, whose work in meeting this depression has been most commendable. . . .

Meanwhile the injured men are being cared for, and President Harold B. Lee, of the Pioneer Stake, states that the accident has drawn the people more closely together than he would have believed possible. In the southwestern quarter of the city, where there is a very large proportion of unemployment, the stake authorities have been sending out some 75 to 100 men a day, alternating them in work that they have secured from farmers in different parts of the state. There has been a general spirit of unity to help each other, and he states that last night when the knowledge of this serious accident had spread among the people, prayers were offered in the homes of the wards for those who have had added to their already difficult plight, this sudden and serious misfortune.

A Miraculous Assistance in a Crisis President Lee's account continues, as he recorded it in his historical account:

In the fall of 1932 it became apparent that the drain upon the finances of the Church was more than the Church could stand, and the tithes of our wards had so decreased that they could not pay the relief needs of the people. We were determined that our promise to the people should be made good, but how was a big question. The government had just launched a huge relief program, known as the Reconstruction Finance Corporation, and the Church sent out word that hereafter, relief of Church members was to come from that source. It seemed that we must break faith with our people.

At this critical juncture, we called a meeting of our bishops. They asked us what they were to do. As though moved by the Spirit of the Lord, President Child said: "We want you to see to it that every one of your people is taken care of. We don't know where the money will come from to pay the bills, But our people must he provided with their needs." I heartily seconded his instruction, but as we left the stake hall we wondered from where our help would come.

The answer came within the next two weeks. Through our efforts, our storehouse, with its entire personnel, was made a county auxiliary storehouse to serve our district and the government agreed to purchase all the produce we had on hand at regular prices. My appointment as city commissioner seemed to come at just the psychological time to give us prestige in accomplishing our objective. With the government purchasing our supplies garnered from the previous summer's effort, we were able to take care not only of those who came within the scope of the Reconstruction Finance Corporation, but all our worthy Latter-day Saints who were entitled to help from the Church. When the RFC discontinued its operations the next spring, we found we had between four and five thousand dollars in the bank and approximately two thousand dollars worth of produce in the storehouse. Certainly the Lord had "ordered" events for the succor of his children.

Pioneer Stake Gym

The Pioneer Stake gym was undertaken as a work project [in 1933] under our Pioneer Stake relief program. The First Presidency gave us $4,500, the unemployed of the stake furnished us with carpenters, masons, painters, bricklayers, and laborers, and the balance of the cost was taken from funds earned in produce the previous summers. The work on the gymnasium was directed by T. T. Burton and the laborers were organized by Fred J. Heath. Both of these brethren were unemployed and were members of the high council of the stake. When completed, a fine opening social was held, at which President Heber J. Grant and Bishop Sylvester Q. Cannon, Presiding Bishop of the Church and native of our stake, were present. All the rough lumber for the building and all the bricks were secured from old dilapidated buildings which were obtained from the owners for the tearing down and cleaning up the premises. Bishop Nicholas G. Smith, of the 17th Ward, donated an old building that provided most of our large timbers.

The following account, from a newspaper article, gives a description of this project:

Men are busily engaged in putting the roof on the new Pioneer Stake gymnasium at Eighth West between Fifth and Sixth South streets. Work on this $15,000 building was begun last spring and will be completed by the time winter sets in. The building was carried forward as a make-work project. . . .

Approximately 25 to 30 men have been at work each day for the past six weeks on the new Pioneer Stake gymnasium, to rush it to a completion by the middle of September, it was announced Saturday by President Harold B. Lee, of the Pioneer Stake.

These men, President Lee reports, have donated their time at no cost to the stake, and the building, although approved as a make-work project, has been erected without the aid of the federal funds, as was announced Friday. President Lee said that it was a stake project and that to have accepted the federal make-work funds for the building, they would have been forced to employ men living outside of the stake boundaries.

This gymnasium, which at its completion will be valued at approximately $30,000, will have been erected at a cash expenditure of about $3,000. Those men working on the building are among the unemployed of the stake, and their families have received aid through the facilities of the stake warehouse. . . .

When the gymnasium has been completed it will be operated under the direction of a stake committee.

President Lee's historical record then told how the new gym was used.

Activities of the Gym: 1933—34

The MIA organizations and the Primary were given charge of the activities of the gym, and from October 1933 through the winter, every night from six o'clock until eleven o'clock was programmed with activities involving the various groups, from Primary age to adult women and men. Bleachers seating four hundred people were provided, and it was no uncommon sight to see from four hundred to seven hundred spectators enjoying the evening's contests and sports. In many instances the recreation provided at the gym was the only recreation these people had enjoyed since the depression in 1929.

1934 Recreational Plan

In 1934 we planned to further intensify its use. Our objective for the stake was "to provide fully for the spiritual, physical, educational, and recreational needs of every member of Pioneer Stake." To attain that objective, recreationally, we promoted a uniform stake budget plan by which the purchasers in one ward may be admitted to all events in their ward and in the stake and in every other ward in the stake. Those who were able were asked to pay sufficient to provide entertainment for those who were dependent, and, upon the bishop's recommendation, the latter may even receive his budget ticket gratis. All wards were put on a strict budget for all maintenance and organizational needs. All public dances in the stake were held in the gymnasium and participated in by all holders of stake budget tickets in order to control the character of the participants and to provide the highest standard of entertainment.

The building of the gym was a veritable inspiration; had it been started one month later, its success and the ultimate ridiculously low cost would have been jeopardized.

Pioneer Stake Gymnasium constructed in 1933 as a work project under the Pioneer Stake relief program.

"A Marvel to Visitors"

In our plan for the relief of the people of Pioneer Stake, there was no new organization effected-it was merely the setting of the quorums and organizations of the Church in motion. And, while it was a marvel to visitors not of the Church and unacquainted with the Church organization, it was merely the applying of the Lord's method to the solution of the present problem.

A Salt Lake Tribune reporter wrote a news article at the instance of John F. Fitzpatrick, the newspaper's publisher, who, through President J. Reuben Clark, Jr., asked to visit our storehouse. I explained our plan from the issuance of the "pay" slip to the workman to the "pay-off" through the storehouse, and then took him to visit the Second West garden and the gym to see the men actually at work, then to the storehouse to see the Relief Society women canning fruits and vegetables and remodeling and sewing clothes for needy persons.

Several Eastern men also came to visit our projects, among whom was a Mr. Pearmain, from Washington, who was connected with government relief; Mr. Markey, a friend of President Clark's from New York; and a brother of the Reverend Webb, who years ago wrote "The Case Against Mormonism." Each was the same in saying without hesitation: "We dream of these accomplishments being possible in the East, but never hoped to have it worked out as practically as you have it here."

Many a relief worker during those years "thanked God for the storehouse," but through our experience with this cooperative relief plan, we learned first-hand why the people of the Church are not prepared to live the United Order.

LDS Scrip

At the first of 1933, the Presiding Bishopric reduced its appropriation to wards for ward maintenance. As a consequence there was such an alarming decrease in individual donations for this purpose that the six city stakes, Salt Lake, Ensign, Liberty, Granite, Grant, and Pioneer, entered into an organization known as "Six Salt Lake City Stakes Associated." The purpose of such an organization was to foster a scheme of financing that amounted to a 2 percent sales tax on all purchases made with "Guaranteed Emergency Certificates" issued by the "Six Salt Lake City Stakes Associated." The earnings from the sale of stamps were required to be affixed to the certificate to validate the purchase and was returned to the sixty-six wards of the six stakes in proportion to the participation of each. The sale of the $100,000 issue started briskly, with business houses and ward members cooperating splendidly. Opposition quickly arose from these sources: first, from employees of the Church offices and Church institutions who feared they would receive too much scrip for their salaries; second, from the Church bankers who saw in the plan a danger to their institutions; and third, from non-Mormon institutions who objected to paying into a proposition that had for its objective the paying of ward expenses by the Mormon Church. President A. W. Ivins had favored it in the absence of President Heber J. Grant, but when President Grant returned, he branded it as something that looked too much like "getting something for nothing." Gradually, one institution after another refused to honor the scrip, after first having consented, until it was found advisable to recall all certificates at their full value. President Wilford Beesley was chairman of the organization, with President B. S. Hinckley, President Winslow Fart Smith, President Hugh B. Brown, President Joseph J. Haynes, and myself as associates. Bishop Gordon Taylor Hyde served as secretary.

Government Employment Activities

The gigantic work-relief program instituted by the government, known as the Civil Works Administration, will probably go down in history as the most stupendous expenditure of federal funds for direct unemployment relief ever attempted. Under this program money was allocated to the various states as an outright grant based upon the number of unemployed in the state. "Re-employment bureaus" for registering all unemployed men and women were opened in every county. Untrained workers and lack of definiteness in this registration caused much confusion, and it was no uncommon practice for the same men to register four or five times and to receive as many cards calling him for various work projects.

In this program, cash was paid outright, with the wage scale ranging from 50Â¢ an hour for laborers to $1.25 an hour for skilled mechanics. It was apparently the thought of federal authorities that these billions of dollars poured into the pockets of the consumers of the country would act as a "prime" to revive business. While this continued, all business did flourish, but the revival was apparently but temporary, for after a trial of five months, from December 1932 to May 1933, this program was halted and there came into existence another organization known as the Federal Emergency Relief Administration, or the FERA.

The FERA refused to accept men for work on its accepted projects unless they were adjudged to be in need of relief. Each applicant was compelled to sign an affidavit declaring his assets. Such stipulations were required to be certified before a notary public, and if it were found that the man had money in savings, life insurance policies that might have a surrender value, etc., he was refused help until such time as he had exhausted his last resources. Great consternation followed and I thought surely here was a similar condition to that described in the Bible as the "grinding the faces of the poor." Workers under this program were far less efficient and much dissatisfaction was the result, with groups of Communists staging demonstrations before legislative officials and public office holders.

Riots and Countermeasures

On one of these occasions, the rioters halted a sheriff's sale on the steps of the City and County Building and forced the sheriff with his deputies back into the building, down the steps to the first floor, where the officers attempted to halt them with streams of water from a fire hose. The Communists promptly took the hose away and the officers resorted to tear gas bombs. These were thrown back at the officers, and they retreated into the sheriff's office and out of the windows while the marchers took possession of the building. All city and county employees were ordered to vacate the offices until order could be restored and the tear gas fumes ventilated from the building. Following the escapade, the Communists became bolder, openly threatening government officials until their demands were met. They marched to the state capitol while the state legislature was in session and demanded a hearing. Oscar Larson, an alien leader, and others were permitted to appear before a joint session of the House and Senate. Here a disgraceful scene was staged, which thoroughly disgusted even those among the lawmakers who had been inclined to be friendly.

In order to combat this menace, a secret meeting of the American Legion was called at the Armory on Fourth East and Fourth South, attended by city and county officials, who explained the purpose of the meeting. All Legionnaires were sworn in as special officers and each one armed with a hickory wagon spoke with a buckskin string through one end to sling upon the wrist. The following day the Communists had planned a second raid upon the City and County Building. At 7:30 a.m., the American Legion began to assemble. First-aid supplies and tear [gas] bombs were deposited on the third floor in the city council chamber. No one was allowed to enter the building except they were properly identified. As the Communists began to gather they encountered the grim-looking men seated on the steps at all entrances to the building. Mass meetings were held throughout the day which were addressed by the leaders. There was no violence whatever, but the Legion men left that day keenly and visibly disappointed that there had been no fight. Shortly thereafter, [the rioters'] leader, Larson, was arrested and deported, and it appeared that sane thinking was to replace un-American tactics in trying to iron out the difficulties of unfortunates who were forced to accept charitable assistance.

A Blessing to the Needy

This record of President Lee's stake presidency years demonstrates his unbounded concern for the poor and the needy during the Great Depression, when a majority of the members of Pioneer Stake were unemployed. Here we can readily perceive the principles that were developing in his mind, concepts that would later become famous in the operation of the Church welfare plan.

When President Lee later instructed Church members on the principles of the welfare program, no one ever doubted the authenticity of his counsel. He had been through the program's travail from its earliest labor pains. His mind, aided by devoted associates, had conceived of the principles, as inspired by heaven and in answer to earnest prayers from an impoverished people. No one in Church history had more firm understanding of the welfare program than did Harold B. Lee, for his knowledge and conviction was born of personal struggles. Untold thousands of Latter-day Saints throughout the Church have been blessed by those early efforts in Pioneer Stake.

1932-1934. Franklin D. Roosevelt was elected president of the United States and his fireside chats soothed a troubled nation. Frequency-modulation (FM) radio was perfected by a United States scientist named Edwin Armstrong. A United States astronomer, Karl Jansky, invented the science of radio astronomy, allowing men to "see" deep into space. The Security Exchange Act was passed.
