Brent L. Goates, Harold B. Lee: Prophet and Seer ( 1985)

8 Entrance into Politics

Although heavily involved in the stressful endeavors of helping his Pioneer Stake membership survive the economic depression, President Lee also found time to serve his community.

Appointment to City Commission

Here is his account of his entry into the political arena:

During the latter part of October 1932, Commissioner Joseph H. Lake died following an operation at the Latter-day Saints Hospital.

A day or two after his death I made a casual call upon John M. Knight, Commissioner of Public Safety and my former mission president, at the Public Safety Building to discuss the details of a meeting held a few weeks before in the Pioneer Stake Hall, where I had defended the honor of John M. Knight and T. T. Burton against the accusations of Richard R. Lyman, Gordon T. Hyde, Heber C. Iverson, and others. During our conversation, the death of Commissioner Lake was mentioned and John M. Knight asked if I would accept the appointment if it were offered to me. It was the furthest thing from my mind, and I asked him what chance he thought I would have. He said he thought I had all the chance in the world. He called Police Chief Payne into his office, then be left immediately to make contacts that would start a sentiment in my interest. As I walked out into the lobby, I was met by Clarence Cowan, my brother-in-law, who was then active in city government, who asked the same question as to why I should not seek the vacant appointment on the city commission.

I had business later that day at the Presiding Bishop's Office, and as I walked in the door, I was met by Frank Penrose and Charles S. Hyde, who told me they just had been talking about the possibilities of my being appointed to the city commission.

The coincidence was rather startling, and from that moment it seemed that I was shoved from this place to the other, where I contacted some of the most influential friends, all close to the Board of Commissioners. Among those most active in urging my appointment were Clarence Cowan, Joseph H. Preece, E. C. Davies, Jack Findling, and Lee Lovinger.

One of the most powerful friends I met at this time was John F. Fitzpatrick, manager of the Kearns interests and publisher of the Salt Lake Tribune and the Salt Lake Telegram.

During the weeks of anxiety and uncertainty as to the outcome of my candidacy, Paul Child said to me, "Well, I have placed the matter before the Lord, and if you're to be the next commissioner, it will be because he wants you there." This statement defined very clearly my own feelings, and it was with that thought in my mind that I accepted the appointment to take office on December 1, 1932.

The following is an announcement of my appointment as city commissioner as recorded in a newspaper clipping:

Board Elects West Side Man To City Office

Appointment Effective Dec. 1 Under Action of Commission

Nominated By Marcus

Officer Due To Be Assigned To Street Department

Harold Bingham Lee, 34, of 1310 Indiana Avenue, was appointed City Commissioner Wednesday to fill the unexpired term of the late Commissioner Joseph H. Lake.

The appointment is effective December 1. While it was pro posed by Mayor Louis Marcus, Commissioners Harry L. Finch, George D. Keyser and John M. Knight unanimously concurred in the appointment....

"I will endeavor to give the people of Salt Lake City the same business-like and efficient service they have been receiving and cooperate fully with other members of the commission," said Mr. Lee.

Mr. Lee was born March 28, 1899, in Clifton, Idaho and moved to Salt Lake ten years ago. He has been a resident of the westside ever since his arrival and joins the commission as a representative of that section. He has been prominent in civic organizations, particularly those interested in building up and improving the westside of the City. He has been the leader in battles before the City Commission for the maintenance of adequate public transportation for westside residents....

The term of office which Mr. Lee will complete begins December 1 and expires January 1, 1934, and will be preceded by the usual municipal primary election in October, 1933, and the regular city election for the purpose of selecting two commissioners and a city auditor in November, 1933.

It is regarded as certain that he will be a candidate for reelection next fall. The availability of a candidate as election timber for the coming year was frequently and openly discussed by members of the City Commission during the consideration of the 30 or more applicants for the position.

It is also regarded certain that Harry L. Finch, commissioner of parks and public property, will be a candidate to succeed himself. Holdover members of the Commission will be Mayor Louis Marcus and Commissioners George D. Keyser and John M. Knight, who arc serving their first year of the present administration, though Mr. Keyser was a commissioner many years ago.

The Salt Lake Tribune commended Harold B. Lee and the city commission for his selection in an editorial the day following announcement of his appointment:

A Wise Selection

Salt Lake finds a promising executive in Harold B. Lee, who has just qualified for the vacancy in the city commission caused by the death of Joseph H. Lake, commissioner of streets. The commission is entitled to public commendation for its wise and happy selection.

Mr. Lee is well and favorably known throughout the city and state. While he has not been active in politics, his civic interest has been keen. He is well acquainted with local problems and is ably qualified for the work which he has undertaken.

The new commissioner is young and vigorous, carrying with him the full courage of his convictions. By reason of these virtues the public may expect a strong and efficient administration of his department.

As a resident of the west side, his selection is entirely compatible with the sectional complexion of the city commission as determined by the election of his predecessor. Mr. Lee, undoubtedly, will be given every measure of public cooperation in his new work. The Tribune extends its congratulations to the new commissioner and commends the remainder of the commission for an appointment so promising of sound public service.

Salt Lake City commissioners and other officials, 1938-39: (left to right) George D. Keyser, Ethel McDonald, Harold B. Lee, Charles Finlayson, William Murdock, P. H. Groggin, and Mayor E. B. Erwin

Work as Commissioner

Harold B. Lee later reflected on those first days of public service:

I entered upon my new work with considerable fear and many misgivings. Most of my close friends bemoaned my "entrance into politics" as disastrous to my character and standing. Then, too, I was entering the governing body of the city at a time when the finances and business affairs were in a precarious condition. While the demands of the people were the same as formerly, the available funds were the lowest since the inauguration of the commission form of government in about 1915. By the 15th of December, the budgets had to be prepared, and immediately after my taking office I worked day and night in a study of the Departments of Streets and Public Improvements in order to make a fairly intelligent budget of the department's needs for 1933. At the time, John M. Knight and I were the only Mormons on the board. [The others were] Marcus, Keyser, and Finch....

The year 1933 saw the expansion of government aid in relief as an attempt to stem the depression. Following the demise of the Reconstruction Finance Corporation work relief activities, there followed, with the incoming national Democratic administration under Franklin D. Roosevelt, the Civil Works Administration, by which the city was required to furnish the materials and supervision while the CWA provided the labor.

A feature story article was written for the Salt Lake Tribune under date of January 28, 1934, again at the instance of my old friend, John F. Fitzpatrick. He saw in this project and others under my direction, as Commissioner for Streets and Public Improvements, much to commend. He instructed one of their leading reporters, Monte Wilson, to write the story and obtain photographs telling of our many projects to make Salt Lake City a better place to live.

In his article, Wilson was extremely thorough and took special care to avoid exaggerations.

Upon taking office, I found it necessary to discharge the super visor of streets.... He threatened me if I should let him go. Because of the lack of finances, I abolished the position of office manager, which was held by Lou Fisher.

The only new appointment I made was that of John S. Corless as foreman of maintenance.

A newspaper article about the new commissioner's first day in office contained the following comments:

Harold B. Lee voted officially on the motions before the City Commission Thursday when, under an appointment effective December 1, he took his place as a member of the board that governs Salt Lake City.

He voted first in the affirmative on a motion made by Commissioner John M. Knight that Mr. Lee be assigned to the Street Department, the position held by the late Commissioner Joseph H. Lake, whom Mr. Lee succeeds....

Aside from a study of the budget for 1933, Mr. Lee said his experience was as yet insufficient to make any definite announcement as to policy.

So far as political obligations are concerned, he said, he has only those inherited from Commissioner Lake and regards it an obligation to fill the place vacated by the late commissioner.

"There will be no changes in the present personnel of the Street Department to meet any of my personal obligations or favor, even for the friends who have worked for me," he said.

"The streets and sidewalks and the collection of garbage and ashes and other services of the department that spends so much public money, must be maintained. The only duties I have pertain to efficient service and city economy."

First Political Campaign

The year 1933, my first in public office, was one full of new experiences and responsibilities. The Department of Streets and Public improvements employed more men than any other city department except the public safety, which was operated largely under civil service. I found that to be responsible for a half-million dollars annually in the management of the department required intensive study of the organization itself and the personnel. Then, too, I accepted the appointment as city commissioner with the understanding that I would be a candidate for election in the fall of 1933.

My only hope to be successful in the election was to build my department into a political organization that could cope successfully with other political groups. To this end, I began the first of September to segregate my 250 employees into precincts and to hold meetings with them to become better acquainted, to outline plans, to define my position on various questions, to prepare them to answer complaints, and to meet opposition that might come.

In answer to those who declared that the Street Department was "not worth a damn" politically, we were successful in polling 13,336 voters in the primary election, to qualify the highest of the four winning candidates in the primary election.

I had chosen as an advisory committee, Joseph H. Preece, Clarence Cowan, E. C. Davies, and Lauren W. Gibbs, with Parley Eccles as my campaign manager.

There were about twenty candidates for the office of city commissioner and four for the office of city auditor. Among the candidates was my old supervisor, J. Fields Greenwood, who had sworn to defeat me. He polled slightly less than five hundred votes in the primary voting.

The two weeks between the primary and the election was a veritable nightmare, with each of the four qualifying candidates fighting for every advantage. The questions of prohibition and the proposed Municipal Power Plant likewise were to be decided in the same balloting.

In order to push the liquor question into the campaign, the editors of the Salt Lake Tribune demanded a statement from each of the candidates as to their position on the prohibition question. I took the position that it was not an issue for the city election, but finally it was thought wise that I prepare such a public statement. Seeking counsel from my old friend, John F. Fitzpatrick, of the Kearns interests, I worded a brief statement to the effect that "I was not satisfied with conditions as they were under prohibition and I certainly could not sanction the old saloon conditions of the past."

My opponents immediately attacked this statement saying I was dry, while others said I had "straddled" the fence, but my good friends upheld and defended me and my position, that I had the courage of my convictions and had taken the only position I could without being a traitor to my professions as a Church man and a known dry.

The Goggin forces were radical wets, and Finch and Mullins were both wet.

I was favored by two natural advantages in the election: first, I was the only Mormon left in the race; and second, I was the only westside candidate.

Admittedly I was in an awkward position as a stake president running for office at the time when Salt Lake City was voting two to one to repeal prohibition. In spite of these handicaps, I led the other three candidates by nearly three thousand votes, the official tabulation giving me 29,336 votes.

Finch blamed the Utah Power and Light Company for his defeat, saying that they had financed Goggin.

There were only three pieces of campaign literature circulated in my behalf, chiefly because there was no source from which money could be obtained for a greater advertising campaign. On one of the handouts there were listed the names of men and women who were a truly representative group from all classes, political parties, and religions.... While this group of sponsors are commonly known to politicians as "scenery," I found these persons to be warm friends and splendid backers.

Following is the copy from one piece of campaign literature, which documents the accomplishments of Commissioner Lee in his first year in office:

Harold B. Lee

was appointed City Commissioner on December 1, 1932, to fill the vacancy caused by the death of the late Street Commissioner, Joseph H. Lake.

Some of his first year's accomplishments:

Â Has operated his department on $145,682.75 less than in 1931.

Â Saved the taxpayers in one year $24,629.03, as certified to by the City Auditing Department.

Â Has rendered efficient service in the maintenance of streets, sanitary sewers, and storm sewers.

Â Increased efficiency, economy, and sanitation in garbage disposal.

Â Maintained 535 miles and resurfaced 70.7 miles of city streets. Because of the increased efficiency and consequent savings as above set forth, and regardless of the low budget, has employed more laborers than in 1932, without reducing the wage scale.

Instrumental in securing the expenditure of 2Â½ million dollars of federal and state funds for building cement highways in our community in 1933-34.

Has worked harmoniously with the present Commission to maintain a business-like administration.

A tribute to Commissioner Lee's accomplishments in this regard is well set forth in the following quotation from a local paper:

"The Salt Lake City Commission, despite the shrinkage in valuations, kept down the levy and proceeded to cut and carve and save in the operation of city government."

Mr. Lee's accomplishments are a tribute to the young man of today.

A vote for Harold B. Lee is a vote for sound, constructive, efficient and economical administration of your public business.

Harold B. Lee (third from left), commissioner of the Salt Lake City department of Streets and Public Improvements, with officials and employees of that department in front of the City and County Building

Another interesting sidelight is a visit that the victorious commissioner had with a member of the First Presidency. In his personal journal Harold B. Lee recorded the following excellent advice to men in political office, counsel which he himself passed on to dozens of public figures as they, in time, came to him for advice on how to conduct themselves in office:

Following the election I called on the First Presidency of the Church and had a visit with President A. W. Ivins. I told him it would be my pleasure to counsel with them on any matters in which they were interested. He [told me] that the only counsel he had to offer was that I should take the actions I thought were right. He said, "I would ten times rather a man would make a mistake while doing that which he thought was right than to do right just for policy sake." President Heber J. Grant and President J. Reuben Clark, Jr., were in the East during the election, but both came to the county clerk's office and voted. President Clark and his wife came to my office afterward and wished me "good luck."

Because of the utmost importance of this campaign to be elected city commissioner, both from the standpoint of my economic welfare and my political future, or opportunities for a continuance in public life, I kept minute records of election returns, district by district, as they were reported in the public press.

My work brought me in contact with the leaders in every field, and I have formed friendships that wouldn't be possible otherwise. I have had the opportunity to see men at their best and at their worst. One of my choice associations was with John M. Knight. Assigned to the Public Safety Department, he was constantly a target at which everyone was shooting. With a rough exterior, he was always vigorous and at times defiant, and yet in our intimate contacts I found him as pliable as a child.

1934-1948. Amelia Earhart and her plane were missing over the Pacific Ocean. German dirigible Hindenburg exploded. German physicist Otto Hahn split atoms of uranium to produce a reaction called "nuclear fission." Invasion of Poland and Austria by Hitler started World War II. The jet age began with the flight of a German Heinkel 178 aircraft, powered by a gas-turbine jet engine. Congress passed draft laws. John Ford's Stagecoach was the first adult western movie. The United States found relief in celluloid musicals, radio, and Big Bands.
