Brent L. Goates, Harold B. Lee: Prophet and Seer ( 1985)

9 Family Life

What is it like to grow up in the home of a prophet?

In a small home on Indiana Avenue on the west side of Salt Lake City, where they had moved in 1928, the Lee family-Harold and Fern and their two little girls-continued to build their loving and exemplary relationships. For some reason known only to our Heavenly Father, this was destined to be the permanent size of this little family.

The idealism of these parents immediately began to leave a lasting impression on their children, their friends, and their neighbors. They consistently demonstrated a simple joy and appreciation for each other and the absolute assurance that God was near and would bless their every pursuit.

Helen's childhood memories illustrate the loving relationship of this young father with his little girls:

We were living in a home my parents had bought from my Grandfather and Grandmother Tanner, my mother's parents. A sleeping porch had been built onto the back of this house where space heaters were supposed to keep it warm in the wintertime; however, they were not very adequate, and it always was cold out there. Our nightly ritual would begin with the four of us kneeling together in prayer in the living room, and then Daddy would take one of us in each of his arms and carry us to our bed so we wouldn't have to walk across the cold floor. As we grew bigger, he would still carry us by putting one of us on his back and the other in his arms, reluctant I suppose to give up that special "togetherness." He always had some endearing words to say to us as he tucked the covers tightly around us.

He knew then, and later was to teach the entire Church, how important it was that children feel their father's love for them. It was through experiences such as this nightly routine that Maurine and Helen grew up knowing of their father's interest and concern for his little girls. Helen reflects even today on that important emotional foundation, saying, "I have often thought about that expression of father love to us and ever will be grateful that love, security, and tenderness were planted deep in our hearts."

First Lesson

Helen's earliest recollection of her father's teachings reach back to the day she first was introduced to her Heavenly Father in an unforgettable lesson. Of course, the girls had been taught from the time they could talk to say their prayers, but on this particular occasion they were to learn from their father what this relationship really meant.

When my sister and I were still very small we went with Mother and Daddy and several other families on a picnic to hike up to Timpanogos Cave, in American Fork Canyon, near Provo, Utah. We trod our lunch and the plan was to then hike up to the cave. Mother, wisely recognizing the limitations on her physical strength, decided not to try to make the climb with us. Knowing she wouldn't be with us she was full of admonitions and advice, reminding us to stay close to Daddy, not to let go of his hand, not to run, and that we must not get too close to the edge of the trail.

I remember moving up a little closer to Daddy, gripping his hand a bit tighter as I said to Mother when we parted: "Oh, Mommy, you don't have to worry about us. As long as we're with Daddy we'll be just fine. He won't let anything hurt us." My complete confidence in my Daddy's ability to keep us safe must have started him thinking as he realized that there was yet a greater lesson he could teach his little girls as they walked along the trail that day.

He told us that I was right; as long as Daddy was there and was right close by, he would do everything he could to keep us safe from harm. But, he added, there would come a time in our lives when Daddy couldn't be with us, when we'd be away from him, when there would be dangers other than physical dangers that we would encounter. As we grew older we would realize that we needed someone else besides our Daddy to keep us safe. He reminded us about our Heavenly Father, explaining that He loved us every bit as much as did our earthly father, and that He had the power to be with us wherever we were, wherever we went.

Whatever the circumstances, whatever the danger, we could always call upon this unseen Heavenly Father to guide us and to help us. That lesson has never been forgotten and my understanding of my relationship with my Heavenly Father began in that early childhood experience.

On September 16, 1934, President Lee, president of Pioneer Stake, was invited to give the Sunday evening sermon in the Salt Lake Tabernacle. He related this same experience with his girls. He preceded the story by saying, "Obedience and confidence in God, it seems to me, are absolutely necessary to moral safety and spiritual well-being." In conclusion, he added: "If confidence in God is established, love for him and obedience to him will follow. Then, and only then, can the teachings of the scriptures become live symbols to us."

A Practicing Psychologist

This young father practiced a form of modern psychology, known as "the positive reinforcement technique," perhaps with out knowing it as anything other than the promptings of the Spirit and the answers to humble, parental prayers. It fits as a perfect application of the "As If" theory popularized by William James of Harvard University, and it seemed to work successfully in the lives of Maurine and Helen. Helen explains as follows the principle she only came to understand fully in her adult years:

Whatever it was that he wanted us to become he told us that we were already. Because we loved him so much we tried hard to be what he thought we were, what he told us we were, so that we would not disappoint him. We didn't ever want him to find out that we really weren't as good as he thought we were. We always wanted him to be proud of us.

For example, my sister and I started taking music lessons when we were very young. I played the violin and my sister, the piano. He would tell us that there was nothing grander than to have his little girls play for him and that together we made the most beautiful music this side of heaven. In reality, we were squeaking and squawking and playing many wrong notes, but he always made us feel that it was just the loveliest music he'd ever heard. The result was we'd practice when we really didn't want to do so, to perfect our music just for Daddy's sake. Finally, after we had surmounted the initial obstacles, it then became an enjoyable experience for us and we were able to practice for the right reason. But the psychology had worked as he must have known it would. His desire to have musicians in the family was fulfilled, and our lives were made richer because of his wisdom and encouragement.

In our awkward, adolescent years he would tell us often that he was so proud of his beautiful, charming daughters. Well, I knew I was anything but beautiful and charming. My hair was "Dutch" cut, I wore horn-rimmed glasses which I hated, I was pudgy and over weight, and even had to wear corrective shoes. Yet, I reasoned, if Daddy thought I was beautiful, I must try very hard to be what he thought I was, because I just couldn't disappoint him. So every night in my prayers I asked God to help me become what my daddy thought I was already.

Another illustration of his fatherly psychology is the manner in which he resolved the differences of opinion about the seating order at the table. Helen told how she finally was satisfied with her chair for meals:

Daddy used to sit at the end of the table and Mother sat on his right. My sister and I would contend about who was going to sit on his left. Both of us wanted the honor of sitting closest to Daddy, on the other side of him. Maurine had chosen first to sit by Daddy at this particular meal and I said, "Oh, but you sat there last time and now it's my turn." She countered, "But I chose to first."

Then the master teacher resolved the argument. Turning to me he said, "Now Helen, I need you to sit across the table from me for a very special reason. You know I have a terrible time with this soup and sometimes I spill it on my tie or on my shirt. Now, if you sit right there across from me you can watch Daddy to make certain I don't spill anything on this nice new tie." After that I was perfectly happy with my place of honor, sitting facing him, contented with the responsibility of watching him and making certain he didn't get any spots on his tie.

A Close Family

There was never a trace of disappointment that he was not blessed with sons. Helen has often stated:

If he were ever disappointed in not having a son, Maurine and I never knew that. He made us think that having two little girls was just the greatest blessing he could have as a father. I've appreciated that attitude, because, of course, as we grew older we knew that he might have had some regrets. But if he did, we certainly didn't know it at the time we were growing up.

In fact, the subject was never mentioned until two months before his death. At a tribute dinner to honor L. Brent Goates, his first son-in-law, after Brent's twenty-one years of service to the Latter-day Saints Hospital, President Lee said, in his response at the end of the banquet program: "I suppose it is the desire for every father to one day have a son. Daughters, yes, they are wonderful! But to have a son, I suppose, is the hope and desire of every father. When Brent came into my life, I found that son."

Harold B. Lee was blessed to have grandsons and another son-in-law to help fill the void of not having a son of his own. He greatly enjoyed his eight grandsons, as well as his two grand daughters, because of the enrichment and fulfillment they brought to his life.

The Lee family was a close-knit unit. Maurine and Helen were only fifteen months apart in age and grew up as constant companions. They were taught that sisters didn't ever quarrel, but that they just loved each other.

In those days the Church had no family home evening pro gram, but with a small family of four the purposes of family togetherness were addressed in other ways just as effectively. Much of the time when the girls were small, the family could go with Harold as he made his calls as a salesman for Foundation Press. The principal product that Harold was selling was the Master Library, a set of beautiful books about the Bible. Helen recalls, "I still can remember fondly turning those pages, reading those great stories, and loving the beautiful photographs in those books."

In the evening when he was making a sale, conducting his business, or delivering a set of books, the family would quickly leave with him after dinner, waiting in the car while he took care of his business. Helen remembers the fun times on the way home:

There was always an ice cream cone or some other treat when Daddy had finished his business for the evening. We frequently stopped at an A&W Root Beer stand, where Daddy would drive in, roll down his car window, and order, "Two and two." That meant he wanted two large mugs of root beer and two small ones. The half-sized mugs had the same handles on them as the large ones, and we took great delight in drinking from them.

As explained earlier, Harold became the Intermountain Sales Manager of the Foundation Press in 1930, which took him frequently out of state. He never failed to use these trips for family vacation purposes, and in addition to taking his wife and two girls with him, he would often invite his parents to travel with them.

Some of the girls' fondest childhood memories were of these trips. Harold's then unmarried sister Verda would sometimes go with Grandmother and Grandfather Lee, too. The first time the girls ever went to Yellowstone Park, they all went together.

Helen still remembers one particular automobile trip to the Northwest:

Grandfather Lee found it difficult to sit in the back seat for two or three hours at a time. As a night watchman at ZCMI he was accustomed to doing a lot of walking. So, when we stopped at a service station, Grandpa would get out of the car and say, "Which direction will you take out of town, Harold?" Dad would indicate the way we'd be going, and then Grandpa would say: "Well, pick me up along the way." He would then start off down the highway walking rapidly, and we would find Grandpa quite a way down the road.

The first car Harold and Fern owned was a little Model T Ford. That was when the two girls were babies. The first new car the Lees ever owned came many years later, when Harold was a Salt Lake City commissioner. In later years, however, Harold preferred Buicks and traded them in frequently, always driving a late-model car.

Harold's desire to brighten and bless the lives of his parents is also seen in other family activities. Harold's parents were frequent visitors in his home for dinner, especially on holidays and birth days. This established a very close relationship among them. Helen further describes these occasions:

My aunt, my father's youngest sister, Verda, lived with my grand parents for many years after they moved to Salt Lake. My grand father died shortly after Aunt Verda was married, so Grandmother lived with my Aunt Verda and her husband, Charles J. Ross, until the time of her death. All the time I was growing up it was Grandpa and Grandma Lee and Aunt Verda, and eventually Uncle "Chick," who were with us on every special occasion. Every Christmas they would come and stay overnight with us, from the time Maurine and I were born, until we were married. They were with us often in those years, and it was a happy circumstance for all of us.

Teaching from the Scriptures

Everyone who has known Harold B. Lee has been aware of his outstanding comprehension of the scriptures. When asked questions he most often answered from the scriptures. Such a scripturalist would, of course, teach his daughters to love the words from God and the prophets as did he; yet he did it so routinely and consistently that his daughters grew up with these sacred books almost unaware of their father's constant teaching. Helen reflects upon her own scriptural development in these words:

Whenever we had a question as we prepared for a two-and-a-half-minute talk we were to give, or whenever anything was discussed around the dinner table requiring an answer, we'd ask, "What about this, Dad? What do you think?" He would reply, "Get out your scriptures, girls, and let's see what the Lord says about it." He would get his book, too, and have us turn to the right scripture and we'd read together what we needed to know. There were many times when I would think how much easier and quicker it would be if Daddy would just give us the answer. But I came to understand later that he was once again giving us a wonderful opportunity to learn important lessons. In so doing, he taught us that the scriptures were where we turn first for our answers. He didn't go to the intellectual, academic, or philosophical answers of men, or to the beautiful, lofty lines of poets. Those, he told us, were wonderful resources, but they were sought only after we had searched the scriptures and the spiritual essence was understood. These were keys to his profound knowledge of the scriptures, and he wanted us to know and love them, too.

This wise father made certain that his teenage daughters had their own personal sets of the standard works. To make them all the more precious he wrote inscriptions in each book of scripture, which proved to uplift not only his daughters but also others with whom they were shared through the years.

For one of Maurine's books he wrote:

To my dear Maurine: That you may have a constant measure by which to judge between truth and the errors of man's philosophies, and thus grow in spirituality as you increase in knowledge, I give you this sacred book to read frequently and cherish throughout your life. Lovingly, your father, Harold B. Lee.

Maurine's scriptures also contained the most remembered and most frequently quoted of all the inscriptions:

The sermons of your father will be no better than the lives of his daughters.

Musical Talent

Sometimes historical accounts glowingly describe Harold B. Lee's musical ability. One such reference said, "He played musical instruments as a young boy and became an accomplished musician." On one occasion at Brigham Young University, when such a compliment was read he couldn't help but look at his daughter Helen and chuckle while shaking his head. The family alone under stood that while he loved music, he could never be described accurately as an "accomplished musician."

In truth, his humble musical career began as he grew up in Clifton, Idaho. An old piano that someone had given to his parents stood in the parlor of their home. During his adolescent years he became more and more interested in that piano as he found himself gradually withdrawing from his group of friends. While these other boys were going off to make mischief, he felt the necessity of finding his own recreation and diversion. He read considerably, but he kept returning to the piano, fingering it and trying to play tunes on it.

Finally, someone moved into town who could show Harold how to put chords together and how to read music. Soon he was spending hours by himself, playing but not really practicing, because he wasn't taking formal lessons. He played for pleasure and was largely self-taught, yet he became skilled enough to perform with a dance band as he grew older, earning pocket money for school, Sometime during those years he also acquired a slide trombone and taught himself to master it, He played the baritone horn for four years in the high school band. In the dance band Harold would play either wind instrument as needed. and sometimes filled in for the piano player. He was almost devoid of any private tutoring, but he loved music; that, more than anything else, probably qualified him as a "good" musician. He wanted music in his life and strove to master his instruments simply be cause he enjoyed music so much.

Harold frequently played the piano during fun times with the family. His girls loved him to play one of the John Philip Sousa marches, and the louder he banged it out the better they liked it. Another selection, their absolute favorite. was titled "Midnight Fire Alarm," a solo he had learned during his early years in Idaho. These were two of the few numbers he had committed to memory. Of course, he played the hymns as wall, and years later he served as the accompanist in the temple meetings of the Council of the Twelve, acting in that capacity along with Elder Spencer W. Kimball, who, he was quick to admit, was more advanced in musical training than was he.

The performances of the "Midnight Fire Alarm" have special memories for his daughters. Helen describes the scene in this manner:

Maurine and I would dance and prance around the room as Daddy was playing this exciting, loud music. He played with such enthusiasm that the entire house seemed to vibrate, and we loved it! Once he finished a real workout performance with such flourish that he could see he had thoroughly delighted us, as well as some of our little friends who were with us. He felt especially pleased with his exceptional rendition when he overheard Mar's friend say. "Gee. that was really good, wasn't it?" He was quickly deflated. however. when Mar answered honestly, "Uh, huh, and the best part about it is watching the piano shake!"

Harold appreciated fine music, and for that reason he was insistent that his daughters start their musical education at ages seven and eight. He faithfully drove them back and forth from their music teacher's home some distance away. until they could drive themselves. The private music lessons continued until the girls were in college. No doubt it often strained the family's limited

Helen (with violin) and Maurine

Working in the garden

Lee home at 1208 South Eighth West, Salt Lake City

financial resources, but he was most willing to sacrifice for them so that they might obtain tile same love for music which he possessed.

Helen expressed her gratitude for his insistence that they learn to perform musically in these words:

I've always been grateful for his encouragement. Music has added a deep dimension to my life, and it was a wonderful experience to share with my sister. It was one more channel which drew us together. We performed constantly together. We studied with the same teacher, Sister Melba Lindsay Burton. so we'd always go to our lessons together. Each time, after our individual lessons were over, she would teach us to perform together, Maurine at the piano and I playing the violin. By the time we were married we had performed in almost every ward building then existing in the Salt Lake City area. We began responding to such requests when we were still very young and played until 1945. a period of about twelve years. I can remember my father patiently taking us everywhere we had to perform, until we could become more independent. It was a busy man, but never was he too busy to take us where we had to be for our music and come back and pick us up or wait for our performance to end. It was just understood that he would take us anyplace we had to be, and he did so consistently.

Personality and Work Characteristics

Much is revealed about a man's character by the manner in which he conducts his routine responsibilities about the home. Always loaded down with heavy Church and community service burdens, Harold nevertheless worked diligently to improve anti upgrade their home surroundings to make life better for those he loved so much. Helen grew up in his home admiring and loving this industrious, driving father:

My father worked hard to improve each home we lived in and its surroundings, from our smallest home on Eighth South where we were living when I was born, and including the next home at 1208 South Eighth West, where we made so many happy memories.

He was a real "do-it-yourself" man around the house. We have many fond remembrances of him fixing everything that needed his attention. We never knew what it was to hire a carpenter. except for major remodeling projects, or to have any yard work done by others. Only in the last decade of his life did he ever have any gardening help. Of course, without sons that meant that he did all the work himself; he was the entire yard crew. We girls helped Mother in the home; she needed us there to help her care for our large house. So, routinely, Dad was up early in the morning (five o'clock in the summertime or whenever daylight permitted) so that he could get out and work in his yard, where there was always much for him to do.

When we moved to Eighth West the property in back of our home was completely undeveloped, and extended all the way to the Jordan River, west of our home. It was his dream to develop this to such back yard beauty as to make it enjoyable to us and to our friends and family. He reclaimed it from nothing but weeds. When he completed all his projects, we had a beautiful board fence which divided the formal gardens from a vegetable garden. There were also a few fruit trees planted down next to the river.

The same ingenuity was followed when he laid out this back yard for a sprinkling system. This too was a "do-it-yourself" project. Undoubtedly, he had someone advise him how to go about it and maybe help with the technical aspects of the job, but I can remember that essentially my father laid out the plan and installed it himself, and it served him well, all through those years. He was a real handyman and was most resourceful. As I've grown older I've discovered not all men have those qualities and capabilities around a home.

My father also landscaped this section with very little outside assistance. He skillfully planned for a sunken fish pond, when they were considered stylish, and we had a Japanese pagoda, as well as white-painted benches placed at strategic spots around the yard. He developed a beautiful lawn and added shrubs. Later a large patio also was added where we did our entertaining, including dancing.

As we grew older and had many parties at our home in our teen age years, he realized that we needed a barbecue in the back yard. I suppose most men would have had some expert come and build a brick fireplace with a barbecue, but this was never the route Dad took. He made some inquiry and looked at a few barbecue arrangements which other people had installed. Before we knew it Dad had purchased the materials and built it himself, and it suited our purposes very well. It may not have been as fancy as some others we had seen, but it provided what we needed for entertaining our friends.

He didn't end his enjoyment of his handiwork there, for when we had our parties he was out cooking the hamburgers for us. What more could we ask? It was his personality and character to be involved, and he always delighted in playing the role of the genial host.

Another interesting view of my father that I took for granted as I was growing up was that my fattier learned in those early married years that if he was going to accomplish all that he wanted to do, he was going to have to move fast. I mean that literally. He Moved like lightning. His movements always were very quick, and I suppose that as he became busier, and his life became more complicated. he compensated by just running at top speed to accomplish every. thing. This was especially true of the care demanded by the big yard around our home. He could cut a lawn faster than any man I ever knew, including our young, vigorous sons. He'd just tear back and forth, up and down, and if you had to deliver a message to him or say something to him, you would have to run along with him back and forth across the lawn because he never stopped. Even Mother had to do this if it was necessary for her to report a telephone message to him.

When he was so busy as a stake president anti serving in the Salt Lake City commission, and later, when he was heading up the new welfare program of the Church, I have definite memories of him moving quickly through the house, in and out, never wasting a moment. He would come home from work, greet Mother and us girls, then rush upstairs, where he would change his clothes in a miraculously short time. I've often told his grandsons how fast he moved, hoping they could learn to do as he did. He would don his yard-working clothes in second, it seemed, then out he would go to mow the lawn before supper, while Mother was still getting the food ready. Sometimes he would receive a phone call with a request to perform a priesthood administration or make some other unexpected visit. He would race back into the house, put on his suit again, and off he would go to take care of the request. (I asked him once, "Couldn't you just go without changing your clothes to administer to Brother Jensen? They would surely understand, wouldn't they?" He replied, "When I have an appointment with the Lord, I always want to look my very best.") When he would return he would change back into his work clothes, finish cutting the lawn, cat dinner, change again into his suit, and leave for a meeting that would last the remainder of the evening.

I have often reflected that most men wouldn't think they had time to do all that, and if they moved at a normal speed,' they wouldn't. His formula for getting things done was simply to move fast.

In the mornings he would come in after he had worked in the yard and finished watering, shower or bathe very quickly, get dressed, eat breakfast, and leave in what seemed only a few minutes. It was unbelievable. I've realized since, that this work characteristic was unique to my father, but at the time I just assumed every man moved at this pace. Now I know that no one in my experience has matched his determination to use every moment available to serve others with all his strength. These qualities were singular to his personality and character.

Avoiding the Appearance of Evil

This busy Church leader and father and his little family learned together many important lessons of life. Helen recalls that when the girls were perhaps five or six years old, she learned a lesson that lasted a lifetime concerning the example that was necessary for the family of a stake president, whose lives were on constant display and parade before the sometimes harsh judgment of fellow stake members. The internal life of such a family is open for inspection as people routinely come to the home of a stake president to be interviewed for temple recommends or to receive a priesthood blessing, and often these visitors arrive unannounced. It was so on a winter's Sunday night in the 1930s, as Helen remembers, that this learning experience took place:

Just before bedtime we coaxed Daddy to play a game with us. We had received a deck of "Old Maid" cards for Christmas, and Daddy hadn't as yet had an opportunity to play the game with us. So, the four of us, Mother and Daddy and my sister and I, were sitting around a card table playing "Old Maid" when a young couple appeared at the door and wanted to be interviewed and have their temple recommends signed. We stopped playing while Dad took them into another room and interviewed them. In due time they left and we resumed our game.

In the days that followed that experience we soon learned from various sources that this young couple had spread the word around the stake that if President Lee and his family could play cards on a Sunday night, it must be permissible for everyone to do so. Of course, the inference was that we were using face cards, which are used for a far different purpose than our "Old Maid" cards were. I recall thinking, as a little girl, how unfair that was for people to judge us so quickly when they didn't have the true facts. We felt we had done no harm in playing that simple game that night.

From that experience my father taught us a powerful lesson. Through the years that followed he would remind us that it was not sufficient to just avoid evil and wrong-doing itself, but that we must avoid the very appearance of evil. I had many other occasions to appreciate that principle as I was growing up, and later too, as my husband and I reared our own family.

Throughout the dating years of the Lee girls, many situations brought teaching lessons from a father who consistently taught that commandments were to be lived without compromise, regardless of circumstances. One illustration occurred in Maurine's dating experience, the memory of which provided some good chuckles for the family for years to come. Helen recounts:

It was a Sunday afternoon in early June, and Maurine had accepted a date earlier in the week from a young man she had not been dating for long. This fellow called her after our mid-day dinner to make final their plans. The conversation went something like this:

"Hi! What would you like to do today?"

"Well, what did you have in mind?"

"Let's see . . . it's so warm and beautiful today, and since we haven't been out to Black Rock Beach on Great Salt Lake yet this year, how about going there to get some sun?"

"Gee, I'm sorry, but I don't think my father would approve of that. Could we think of something else?"

"Well, there's a new show at the Centre Theatre. Would you like to go there?"

"I'm really sorry, but we've never been allowed to go to shows on Sunday. Maybe there's another possibility."

"Hmmm ... How would it be to go hiking up the canyon? Surely there's nothing wrong with that?"

"I hate to tell you this, but I know Dad wouldn't think that hiking is an acceptable Sunday activity either. I hope you under stand. Is there another alternative?"

(With great disgust and sarcasm): "Oh, sure! Why don't you just ask your Dad if there's a good rousing funeral we could go to some where!"

Thus, it was humorous as well as stressful at times for the teenagers growing up in this home of an Apostle as social events came into conflict with family and Church mores, but the girls met with unyielding but comfortably consistent guidance from their parents. With his policy of no compromise between right and wrong, Harold B. Lee held the reins tightly but lovingly. His daughters knew that they had limits, and they tried to live within them.

Social Involvements of Daughters

In the busy comings and goings in a family of two teenage daughters and a highly involved Church leader father there was little time for family talk except around the dinner table. There, questions were always asked about the events of the day. The girls could count on their Dad being sincerely interested in their friends and those with whom they were keeping company. Regarding this point Helen states:

Many of my girlfriends still recall experiences at parties or just coming to our home and having dinner with us. They remember how gracious and how unusually interested Dad was in what we did. Whenever we had a party, that was not a signal for Mother and Dad to leave. They were always very much a part of our entertaining, and we were glad they were.

Our home was always open at any time of the day or night to our friends. We came to appreciate parents who made that possible. Our home was never so fancy or so grand, nor was it in such a state of fine preservation but what we couldn't come in with our friends and feel welcome and wanted. We were never scolded when we came home late with friends and fixed snacks in the kitchen or played the piano while Mother and Dad were upstairs trying to sleep. Neither did they complain when there would be no milk for breakfast the following morning. Our friends knew that we could always go to our home after a date, or if we wanted to have a party we could always have it at our house. Our home and our yard were maintained for just that purpose. We had numerous parties in those years, always with our parents' complete approval and encouragement.

Now that I am a parent I probably realize fully for the first time that this type of involvement with friends frequently in our home could have been an inconvenience. I'm certain that many times we must have disturbed our parents when we'd sing round the piano and giggle and laugh and talk, but they never complained.

When the date was over, there was the matter of reporting in.

It was the practice of my sister and me after every date, before going to bed, to go into the bedroom of our parents and tell them good-night so they would know we were safely home. But it never ended there. We'd perch on Mother's side of the bed and we'd whisper to her about all the events that had taken place that night. Sometimes we were excited and thrilled with the dates, and sometimes we were disappointed and miserable. Mother was always interested, so we'd talk and giggle and whisper, and I'm certain that it must have been terribly hard on my father, who would be trying to sleep over the conversation. But he good-naturedly tolerated all of it, for he always encouraged us to confide in Mother. He knew this would build a close relationship, which it most certainly did. In fact, he would refer to us, through those teenage years, as "his three girls." Mother indeed was our closest confidante. She was our very special friend. It made every date much more fun to be able to come home and tell Mother all about it.

Teenage Discipline

In most families who have teenagers engaged in social life, conflicts arise over hours to return, use of the car, and quality of friends chosen for companionship. However, the close bond between these two sisters, reared almost as twins, formed a safe and secure protection during those socially dangerous years. They were taught in their earliest childhood that they must always go together to their activities. They grew up playing with the same groups of friends, and in later years double dating was not uncommon for the Lee sisters. But the girls, of course, were not perfect, and there were those inevitable incidents, when they were older and seeking social acceptance, that conflicts arose. Maurine, apparently more independent than Helen, was described by her father as "his little harness-fighter." Helen recalls:

I believe this was on the occasion of a missionary farewell in our home ward, back in the days when they were held on week nights and there was always a dance following the program. At that time, we were in our early teens, interested now in boys and dances, but too young to date. Mother and Dad had left after the farewell program was over and had told us to be home at a certain time, allowing us to stay for a while to watch the dancing. Maurine and I agreed to those arrangements. When the hour came that we were supposed to be home I reminded Mar of the time, and she said, "Why don't you just run on home, and I'll be along in a little while?" She was still having a good time with her friends and wanted to stay longer. When I hesitated she said, "Just go and tell Mother and Dad I'll come home soon; it'll be okay!" Now, that was strictly against the rules of our home-we were never to go any-place alone. We were taught that when we went anywhere, we were to go together, two by two, for there was safety in that rule. But despite my misgivings I went on home alone, for there was no other choice, I thought. I just couldn't talk her into coming with me.

I arrived home alone without Maurine, and I remember the sparks in Dad's eyes when I explained her absence: "Well, Daddy, she said that she didn't want to come right now, but that she'd come a little later." "How much later?" he demanded to know. "Well, I don't really know, Daddy," I replied, "but she'll come soon, I think." This was the beginning of a new era in our lives, and none (If us seethed to know quite how to handle the situation. I remember Dad speaking quite sharply to Mother, saying, "Well, I'll go and make sure she knows when to come home!" I thought it best not to get into that discussion! I can remember Mother saying very quietly, "Well now, dear, let's just wait a little bit longer and see if she will come on her own." So we waited a while longer. I tried to stay on the fringe of that issue, but was becoming anxious myself. When she didn't come, Dad said, "Well, I'm going to go and get her. She must learn that when we tell her to be home at a certain time, she must be here."

Mother, who always met issues quietly and with composure, suggested a better answer. She said to Dad, "Now, dear, don't go in an angry way and insist that she come home. Just think what that would do to her in front of her friends. It would embarrass her. If you feel you must go, then go on the pretense of accomplishing something else, like going to see someone about some unfinished business there at the ward. Make some other reason for going, but don't confront her with the idea that you have come for her." Well, I don't know what happened because I didn't go back with Daddy and I wasn't on the scene, but when he arrived at the dance and found her and brought her back, she apparently came willingly and happily. Mother and I were greatly relieved!

Through the wise handling of tense situations in this manner, discipline in our home never degenerated into the abrasive confrontations that are common today in too many homes.

He Made Mother Our Example

Fern Tanner Lee was an example of everything that a marvelous homemaker and mother ought to be. She taught her two daughters all the homemaking skills which she had perfected. She was an exceptional cook and a most gracious and lovely hostess, serving with charm and warmth the many groups invited to her home. For all these qualities, she was constantly praised and encouraged by her appreciative husband. Helen recalls how her father often called his daughter's attention to the excellence of their mother's skills and service:

All during my growing-up years, whatever Mother did, whether it was arranging furniture or flowers, making a bed or ironing a shirt, Daddy would always say to us, "Now, girls, when you can do that just like your mother, you'll be the best there is." I can remember when she hung her wash on the clothesline outside (this was long before we had heard of automatic dryers), he would watch her work as he was doing his jobs out in the yard, and would say to us as we played about, "Just look at that-your mother even makes the washing on the line look artistic."

It was true. She would hang the white clothes together and then the colored pieces and then the dark items, very carefully and in perfect order. The long pieces were all hung together and the short ones were alongside each other. He reinforced the wisdom of our learning from Mother by this oft-repeated admonition: "You will never find any better example of anything that you will do as women when you grow older than that which is provided by your own mother. She is the perfect example. You just watch the way Mother does it!"

Father Always Available

Reference has been made already to the social conditions under which the Lee girls lived during their college days. Those were World War II years and dating was sporadic, made possible only as the boys would come home on leave from the military. This forced most young ladies to create their own entertainment; therefore, the girls would often gather at "hen parties." Many of these were held in the Lee's large and comfortable home. but others of their group also took their turns. Helen's memories illustrate how her faithful father supported his daughters under such conditions:

Because we didn't have escorts to take the girls home late at night after the parties it was my father who often got that detail. Many of the other girls were reluctant to call their dads that late at night. but Maurine and I knew that we would never be scolded if we asked our father to help us. He would never say, "I'm sorry, I'm too tired." or "I'm ready for bed, so you'll have to find another way home." Nor did he ever come begrudgingly to pick us up and sometimes deliver our friends to their homes, too. Many is the time he would get out of his bed during a snowstorm, get dressed, get out the car, and come for us. Not only would he bring us home, but he would deliver four or five others to their homes as well. We understood this willingness on his part and never questioned it, for it was ever so from the first days that we began to leave our home together for social purposes. He had always told us: "Girls, never hesitate to phone me when you need me, no matter the time, day or night. I will come whenever you need me, wherever you are." We knew he meant that, and I'm afraid there were times when we probably took advantage of his offer. What he really taught us, though, was that he loved us enough to serve our needs, even when it wasn't convenient. This gave us a wonderful sense of security in all our teenage years.

The busy life of a General Authority did not allow much time for the family to be together. A major exception to this was a period of time when Elder Lee was assigned to give a series of radio talks over KSL Radio on the "Sunday Evening from Temple Square" program. For a period of six months the Lee family enjoyed a unique season of togetherness, because Elder Lee's weekend stake conference travel assignments were cancelled while he prepared and delivered his radio talks. This brought about a collaboration which everyone in the family enjoyed, and all were made to feel a part of this stimulating challenge. Helen's memories of those months are choice. Regarding them she has said:

My sister and I were in our late teen years. I was probably about eighteen and Maurine was nineteen at the time. Since Dad had addressed himself to the subject of "Youth and the Church" during those war years, he was most interested in our reactions to every talk. He really was closer to youth than most men because of his involvement with us and our friends all through those years. He knew the problems which youth were facing at that particular time in the history of our country with its enlarged temptations when young people became displaced from home ties, so the subjects he proposed to talk about were discussed freely with the entire family. He always had three talks he was working on simultaneously. He was putting the finishing touches on the one he was about to give on the next Sunday; he was finishing his ideas on the one for the following week, which was in rough draft form; and at the same time was beginning to outline the third one farthest away from presentation. It required much study and work to keep the flow of presentations coming on a weekly basis.

He would bring home the scripts on which he was working, read them to us, and we would discuss them around the dinner table. They were free and open discussions. We would say, "Oh, no, Dad. you can't say that. It just isn't like that!" Or else, "You'll have to phrase that differently." As we would give him our realistic teenage views, he often would incorporate our ideas into his talks.

This series of talks therefore became for us a delightful family experience. Most importantly, it gave us the opportunity for those many months to have our father home with us on Sunday, a most singular blessing, for as a General Authority he had traveled every weekend to stake conferences for years before that. The only exceptions for General Authorities in those years were a few weeks off in July when no stake conferences were scheduled.

We would all go to the broadcast together every Sunday night in the Salt Lake Tabernacle. Often he invited our favorite musicians to perform on the broadcast. We all felt a part of it with him. The association together and our interchange of ideas made it truly an experience which drew us closer together as a family. Those sermons became the basis of my Father's first book, Youth and the Church, which later was republished under the title of Decisions for Successful Living.

Lee family portrait, 1941 (Helen standing)

Husband-Wife Relationship

The partnership of highly spiritual and loving parents was a great blessing to the Lee girls. There was a spirit of peace and love in their home that they later found, much to their amazement, was not typical or even frequently equaled in other homes they visited. To achieve this, certainly there had to be a beautiful relationship between husband and wife, extending to their sacred roles as mother and father. Helen describes them as follows:

Mother was small of stature, quiet and unassuming, but was always a source of great spiritual strength in our home. She sincerely felt that a man's home should be his castle, that it should be an oasis where he could return from the battles of the day and find there a tranquil, quiet atmosphere of peace to rebuild him for future struggles. That was the pattern of our home that Mother established.

There is no doubt but what Mother had a most profound influence on my father's life. When one recalls that he grew up in a very small farming community in Idaho, it is easy to understand that he needed the refining influence of a loving companion to introduce him to gracious, genteel living. She incorporated those values, as well as spiritual dimensions, into their home.

Though she was quiet and unassuming in personality, her inner strength was unquestioned as a powerful influence upon all who knew her. Her mind was filled with wisdom and her heart with empathy as she met my father's needs, as wall as the needs of others around her. She had a remarkable sense of fairness. My father's personality was one of being very quick, moving ahead into a situation, making a decision and taking action promptly, regardless of whether the given situation was in Church work, employment, or in a family setting. He needed the influence of a wife who would say to him, as Mother would, "Now, dear, you need to think about this and you must not fail to look at the other side of the situation." She balanced him in this way.

Mother also was his inspiration. My father has often said, "The loftiest thoughts for which I have been given credit were first expressed to me by my dear wife." That is true. I've heard him use phrases that were originally spoken by Mother, as he would deliver a sermon or counsel others. So, though she was quiet in manner, her influence extended to many lives, and was most keenly felt by my father. He worshipped her.

Mother's health was always a source of concern to us. When my sister was born, Mother had a most difficult time. I was born fifteen months later. From then on she was never really healthy and strong. Although she was always able to carry on her duties as a wife and mother, she was frail in health most of the active years that I can remember. My father was always compensating for this limitation by being solicitous of her and her needs. He was careful to make certain that she had all of the modern, work-saving conveniences that would make life easier for her.

There was a sweet relationship which existed between the two of them. He was always so kind and thoughtful of her needs, and the limited strength she had was always extended for him first, as it should have been. He was at the top of her list of priorities

That has been a great example to me, and I've passed it on to many other young wives and mothers. When women are pulled in so many different directions, as husbands and growing children and finally Church responsibilities make simultaneous demands upon their time and energies, many of us arc in a dilemma about how to handle all those pressures. My mother solved the problem in a most exemplary way. Her husband came first. for he was most important to her, and then whatever else she could do after his needs were met, she was pleased to do also. The priority was never in doubt. My father was foremost in her life.

Our family has always been grateful for the refining influence that she had on this young farm boy. in whom she recognized such unlimited, unique qualities of leadership and greatness. Hers was a refining, polishing, and finishing touch which accelerated his growth and gave him the balance and dimension he needed to accomplish his destiny.

Because Mother was not in good health, there were periods of her life when she was dangerously ill. Gratefully, we would see her recover and we'd have her with us again for many years in fairly good health. On two or three occasions, however. when Mother was very ill, I can still remember the terrible loneliness and insecurity I felt as I thought about losing her in death. I could not imagine what life would be like without her! We were always reluctant to actually talk about that possibility, but one day when my sister and I were in our teen years, we were able to discuss it in a very natural way.

There had been a very fine man in our ward who had lost his wife and he had remarried quite soon after his first wife' had died. I said to Mother: "I think that's just terrible! I think that's being so disrespectful to his first wife. He must not have loved her very much!" My mother then turned quietly to me and said: "Oh. my dear, you don't understand what it is to love someone. If I were to go before Daddy, and I think that we will have to face that probability, I could never rest until I knew that your father was happily married again. I just couldn't bear to think of him being alone." I replied, "Mother, how call you say that? Don't you love him enough so that you just couldn't stand to see another woman taking care of him and living with him and..." She answered. "It's because I do love him so much that I can think of it, and that's what I want for him. I cannot bear the thoughts of him being alone and lonesome and not having his needs cared for by someone who loves him as I do. I would want him to remarry, anal I mean soon, after I go, so that he will not be lonely-don't you see?"

That was one of the most profound lessons of my life. Mother described to us that day what true love really is. My mother possessed it for my father, to a degree seldom achieved.

Tribute to Parents

These wise, inspired parents succeeded in building a near-perfect home life centered in the gospel of Jesus Christ and their love for one another, as is now abundantly certified by the results which have come from their lifetime of faithful service to God and to each other. The lives of their daughters and the thousands of other lives the parents have touched have been blessed by their exemplary models of how to rear a family in the gospel and win the happiness promised for the faithful. To this certification Helen adds her own personal witness and tribute to her spiritually powerful and loving father and her angelic mother:

In retrospect, as I look back upon my childhood home from my present vantage point of maturity, I realize that I had the ideal combination of parents: a father who was gentle beneath his firmness, and a mother who was firm beneath her gentleness. They worked at rearing their two daughters as a team, equally yoked, as my father exercised his priesthood in our behalf, and Mother became a supplement and complement to that priesthood authority in our home. They provided for us an atmosphere of love and peace where we learned to know and to love the Lord and his holy words, and to recognize his supremacy in our lives. On this firm foundation was built an appreciation and acceptance of self, so essential as a stepping-stone to learning the more important and mature concept of loving and serving others, which then followed quite naturally.

My eternal gratitude to these wonderful parents, and my resolve to live a life worthy of their efforts, is all I have to offer in return for their profound influence in my life, but this they shall surely have. (Neal A. Maxwell, That My Children May Partake [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1974], pp. 56-57.)

1935-1936. The Works Progress Administration began to furnish jobs for artists, writers, and others. The Supreme Court declared the National Recovery Administration unconstitutional. John L. Lewis formed the Congress of Industrial Organizations to unionize workers on an industry basis. Congress passed the Social Security Act. The 1935 Plymouth car was the best seller during the Depression. The Spanish Civil War began, which was to take 611,000 lives.
