Brent L. Goates, Harold B. Lee: Prophet and Seer ( 1985)

10 How the Welfare Plan Began

In 1935 Harold B. Lee was a young man of thirty-six, but seasoned beyond his years by having had burdens placed on his broadening shoulders that were far in advance of those placed on his peers. He was serving as the president of Pioneer Stake, located on the west side of Salt Lake City. He also represented those Saints, all other west-side citizens, and the public at large as a Salt Lake City commissioner, assigned to the Department of Streets and Public Improvements.

His ingenious leadership in providing the poor of his stake with the necessities of life-in the "Lord's way," teaching them to resist the dole of government handouts-had already attracted wide attention among Church leaders and government officials alike. He could not have realized it, but he was being prepared for the much larger, worldwide leadership roles he was yet to fulfill.

The true and complete story of how the welfare plan came into existence probably has never been told but it is contained partially in Harold B. Lee's personal journal, written at the time that the drama was being unfolded, From this record one can picture the historic beginnings of this fundamental Church program which since 1936 has been so influential in the lives of all active Latter-day Saints. That he knew in its earliest stages of development that he was inaugurating a lasting work is plainly evident in his inscription on the front page of his journal. Under his name and home address, Harold B. Lee wrote these memorable words:

This program will last as long as this Church exists as a Church.

Early Steps

The welfare story on a Churchwide scale begins in Harold B. Lee's journal history with his first meeting on this subject with the First Presidency of the Church. This meeting took place one year before the official announcement in the Salt Lake Tabernacle which started the welfare plan. The meeting was on a Saturday morning, April 20, 1935. There were no calls on the calendar, and for an entire half-day session they talked about a welfare movement to turn the tide from government, or direct, relief and about the means needed to put the Church into a position from which it could take care of its own needy. President Lee recorded the following impressions of that historic meeting:

On April 20, 1935, I was called into the office of the First Presidency, where with President Heber J. Grant and President David O. McKay (President Clark then being in the East, but they had had some communications with him so that all members of the Presidency were in agreement) I discussed the relief situation in the Church and various methods of handling the same. President Grant said he wanted to take a "leaf out of Pioneer Stake's book" in caring for the people of the Church. He expressed dissatisfaction with the then existent program of social service investigations. He said that there was nothing more important for the Church to do than to take care of its needy people and that so far as he was concerned, every thing else must be sacrificed [so that] proper relief [could be] ex tended to our people. I was astounded to learn that for years there had been before them, as a result of their thinking and planning and as a result of the inspiration of Almighty God, the genius of the very plan that was waiting and in preparation for a time when, in their judgment, the faith of the Latter-day Saints was such that they were willing to follow the counsel of the men who lead and preside in this Church. My humble place in this program at that time was described.

At a later time, Harold B. Lee enlarged upon his feelings of inadequacy at that moment in these words:

There I was, just a young man in my thirties. My experience had been limited. I was born in a little country town in Idaho. I had hardly been outside the boundaries of the states of Utah, Idaho. and Colorado. And now, to put me in a position where I was to reach out to the entire membership of the Church was one of the most staggering contemplations that I could imagine. t low could I do it with my limited understanding?

Returning to his journal entries of that historic day, we read further:

I left the First Presidency's Office about noontime with an assignment to work out a program of relief for the entire Church based upon my experience with the relief problem in the Pioneer Stake, where perhaps the greatest problem of unemployment in the entire Church was to be found.

Almost in a daze with the magnitude of this assignment over powering me, I drove my car up to the head of City Creek Canyon into what was then called Rotary Park, where I could meditate and determine upon a course that would realize the objective that had been set for me by the Presidency. After I had driven my car as far as I could, I got out and walked up through the trees. seeking a secluded spot, where I knelt in prayer and sought the guidance of an all-wise God in this mighty undertaking. I told the Lord to guide me to conclusions dictated by his will, and that, for the safety and blessing of his people, I must have his direction. As I kneeled down, my petition was: "What kind of an organization should be set up in order to accomplish what the Presidency has assigned?"

Having sought my Heavenly Father, I sat down to pore over this matter, wondering about an organization to be perfected to carry on this work. There came to me on that glorious spring afternoon one of the most heavenly realizations of the power of the priesthood of God, that God had already revealed the greatest organization that could ever be given to mankind and that all that was needed now was that that organization be set to work. It was as though some thing were saying to me: "There is no new organization necessary to take care of the needs of this people. All that is necessary is to put the priesthood of God to work. There is nothing else that you need as a substitute, and if you use it the temporal welfare of the Latter-day Saints will be safeguarded."

And so, with much thought, prayer, and understanding born of practical experience, Harold B. Lee put the priesthood organization to work in directing the Church's newborn welfare labors. That he moved rapidly, energetically, and skillfully is attested by his journal history record of the subsequent events.

During the days that followed, I sought the counsel of a number of prominent men, including Brother Reed Smoot, John M. Knight, Stringham Stevens, Lester Hewlett, C. M. Brown, Jr., Paul C. Child, and others. Finally, after several weeks, I had prepared a report and a preliminary program together with a chart showing the various agencies to participate in a Churchwide relief program. This I submitted to the Presidency about June 1, 1935.

President Grant hesitated. He said he lacked faith in the Latter-day Saints and questioned whether or not they had sufficient integrity to carry forward under the leadership of the Church. Some members of the Church in high places demurred when approached with the thought of beginning such a plan. One General Authority questioned my counselor in the stake presidency, Charles S. Hyde, as to whether or not I was trying to get the Presidency to adopt Pioneer Stake's plan. Other specious reports were circulating.

In the face of this indecision and opposition, President McKay felt incapable of taking the initiative without the personal support and backing of at least one other member of the First Presidency. During that first six months President McKay talked with me frequently relative to the relief program, but nothing was done. President Grant had remarked to Joseph Anderson, his secretary, that he had asked the Lord for guidance in this matter, but had received no answer and that he was not going to move until he felt certain of what the Lord wanted.

During general conference in October 1935 a special meeting was called by the General Authorities requiring the attendance of all stake presidencies and ward bishoprics. The First Presidency announced a request for a Churchwide survey to determine the amount of relief extended to Church members by the Church and by each county from federal funds, the number of heads of families and single persons on relief, those who owned farms who received relief. those who didn't need the relief they received, and the physical conditions and family status of those assisted. Harold's journal reported:

The month of September 1935 was taken as an average month and the survey was based on that month. Talks by President J. Reuben Clark, Jr., and President David O. McKay revealed plainly their dissatisfaction with the present relief program and declared a God-given responsibility upon the Church to care for its own.

The results of the survey were compiled slowly, but were finally tabulated at the Presiding Bishop's Office and turned over to the First Presidency.

Specific data for the survey was not quoted by President Lee in his journal history, but from Leonard J. Arrington and Wayne K. Hinton ("Origin of the Welfare Plan of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints," BYU Studies, vol. 5, no. 2, Winter, 1964), the following detail is disclosed:

A survey undertaken in September, 1935, which sought to deter mine relief conditions within the LDS Church, showed that 88,460, or 17.9 percent of the Church population were receiving some form of relief. Some 16.3 percent of the Church population (80, 553) were receiving relief from public sources and another 1.6 percent (or 7,907) received relief from Church funds. Of members on relief, 13,455 were unemployed. Others were working on depression-inspired projects of the federal government. Reports also stated that between 11,500 and 16,500 of the Church members on relief "did not need" such assistance. The 13,455 unemployed Church members who received the "dole" were to be taken care of under the Church program at a cost estimated of $842,000 per year.

Returning to President Lee's journal history, we read of that moment when the time for action finally arrived:

I was called to the office of the First Presidency in February, 1936, along with Campbell M. Brown, and we were instructed by President Clark and President McKay to study the results of the survey and, in light of its findings, submit a revised report for further consideration of the presiding Brethren. Working all the possible time, both day and night, it took about three weeks to study the survey statistics. I prepared a graph to show clearly the findings and, counseled by Brother Brown, revised, simplified, and extended my original report. On March 15, 1936, we read over the program carefully with President McKay. After the conclusion of the reading, he slapped the table with his hand and exclaimed: "Brethren, now we have a program to present to the Church. The Lord has inspired you in your work."

On March 24, 1936, President McKay called to tell me that President Grant requested that I leave the next day for Fresno, California, to attend the western conference of the Farm Chemurgic Council, for a discussion of the findings of scientists in the use of farm products for commercial uses. I attended the conference on March 26-27, where I was programmed to speak on the subject, "Finding Our Own Way Out." I returned home on March 28th.

Harold B. Lee, managing director of the Church welfare program, with secretary, Ted De Bry, 1937

At the general conference of April 6, 1936, another special meeting of stake presidencies and ward bishoprics was called and a statement was read from the First Presidency by President McKay, embodying the recommendations and results of our report following a study of the Churchwide survey. Filled with emotion, Presidents Clark and McKay pleaded with the local authorities to cooper ate with a program they could expect shortly to be given to the Church, they declaring that the Church was under condemnation if it failed to take care of the Lord's people.

Following the general conference announcement, on April 15, 1936, I was called in by the First Presidency and told that I was to begin at once, together with such other help as necessary, to launch the Churchwide program. They thought it advisable that a member of the Council of the Twelve be named as chairman of the central committee to give the committee authority over any objections that might be raised. Accordingly, Elder Melvin J. Ballard was named and I was instructed to confer with him to arrange regional meetings throughout the Church to inaugurate the new program and to acquaint him with the details of the program.

A Revelation

President Lee's account provides a clear case history of the development of a program resulting from a revelation from God to his prophet on the earth. It was not a revelation stimulated by a visitation of angels. The prophet of God had a strong feeling of need to correct a situation that was dangerous to the Saints. The government's attempts to help relieve suffering were proving to be spiritually debilitating to the Saints, sapping their integrity and self-will. An answer must be found.

The prophet prayed about it continually. He and his counselors studied intently all possible alternatives. They finally chose one, based upon the best success story available to them at the time. They didn't have to look far, for over on the west side of Salt Lake City were more people disadvantaged than anywhere else in the Church, and there an inspired stake leadership, under youthful President Harold B. Lee, had found their answers, also by revelation.

Even after early consultation with President Lee, the prayers continued, the opposition had to be weighed, the strength of the Church to endure the challenge must be measured, and the timing had to be right. Statistics were gathered to support the plan so it could be rationalized to those with lesser faith and to vindicate the proposed action. It was one year, lacking five days, from the time Stake President Lee was called to the office of the First Presidency and received the assignment to design a system of welfare relief for the entire Church, until he returned and appeared before the same prophets of God. This time he was asked to resign his political, elected position as a Salt Lake City commissioner and to set up a full-time office and begin implementing the revealed plan of "Church Security," as it was initially called.

Was the welfare plan the product of revelation from God to his prophets? The statements of those founding fathers who were on the scene at the time, and those who have advanced the work since, seem overwhelming to that effect.

With the inspiration of this movement attested to by such witnesses as coming from divine sources, any Latter-day Saint who believes in the principle of continuous revelation cannot fail to heed the call of the prophets "to set up a system where the evils of the dole will be abolished and where independence, thrift, industry, and self-respect can again be established among our people." (Heber J. Grant, October, 1936; "Church Security" by Harold B. Lee, as quoted in The Church Welfare Plan, by Henry D. Taylor, p. 37.)

I never heard President Grant say that he had seen the Master, that he had seen the Father, or that he had heard a voice about the welfare plan. But that does not mean that he did not have a revelation....

But there is still another way in which revelation comes, and that way is through the ministrations of the Holy Ghost.... Now I say unto you, that that kind of revelation, revelation of the Holy Ghost, did come to President Grant. Not only in this case, but in others. And through that revelation, inspiration if you wish to call it, from the Holy Ghost, President Grant launched this great welfare plan. (J. Reuben Clark, Jr., in an address to the Central Utah Welfare Regional Meeting at Brigham Young University, August 3, 1951.)

That Church Security Plan has not come up as a mushroom over night. It is the result of inspiration, and that inspiration has come from the Lord.... Those who have selfishness in their hearts would like to see it fail, but it is not going to fail. (David O. McKay at a meeting of the Salt Lake Region, February, 1937.)

I believe I have heard almost all the objections which have been raised against it, and also the labored arguments in justification for not living it. As I have listened to these objections and arguments, I have been painfully aware of the dull spirit in which they have been urged.... I believe I have made a rather complete study and I now testify to you that I do know beyond any doubt, by the same power that Peter knew that Jesus is the Christ, that the Church Welfare Plan in its inception was and now is inspired of the Lord; and that the great principles implemented by it are eternal truths, which the saints of God must abide if they are to purify and perfect themselves as the Lord has commanded. (Marion G. Romney, Conference Report, October 1945, p. 156.)

The Lord's will had been made known and he had raised up the man to help solve the oppressive problems of the Saints. That Harold B. Lee was a magnificent innovator, a spiritually directed master organizer, is abundantly attested by Church history. But it is especially well illustrated by his part in the development of the Church welfare plan. It was of course at all times a program of the First Presidency, and their unflagging support was the key to its ultimate success.

Plan Implemented. West Regionalized

Once the milestone decision of April 15, 1936. was made to move forward, no time was lost. Two remarkable features characterized this forward thrust. One was the speed with which it was done, and the other was the open support and powerful influence entrusted by the highest authority in the Church. President Heber J. Grant personally attended the first three regional meetings which launched the new program, and he later appeared also at another one as the stakes of Los Angeles were organized into a new region. He obviously was taking no chances that the plan would be lightly received.

Although the approval to proceed with the organization of the Church security program was only given on April 15, 1936, the plans must have been completed earlier and made ready for immediate implementation. Only six days later. on April 21, 1936, the first of many regional meetings was held to establish the organization and teach the principles by which stake leaders could begin to oversee and care for their own needy members. Following this initial meeting, which was held in Ogden, the pace was fast and furious.

Stake President Lee, Elder Melvin J. Ballard, and frequently Bishop Sylvester Q. Cannon, the Presiding Bishop of the Church, were on the road almost every night to hold meetings. This effort was the first regionalization of stakes in Church history, although undistributed writings of President Clark mention the concept as early as 1933. It was a new organizational development that was ultimately expanded in 1967 with the appointment of Regional Representatives of the Council of the Twelve. Such geographic division appears now to be firmly en trenched in Church government. but it had its start with the web fare program in 1936, when there were 115 stakes in the Church. 110 of which were in the United States.

A whirlwind tour around the Church in Utah (excluding Salt Lake City), Idaho, Arizona, and California was accomplished in an amazing fourteen-day period, these areas being organized into thirteen regions. [^1] Accountable leadership was installed, record systems were initiated, and education about the new plan was commenced. Although this was not recorded in Harold B. Lee's welfare journal, the Salt Lake region was also organized in 1936. It consisted of the following stakes: Salt Lake, Ensign, Bonneville, Granite, Wells, Pioneer, Cottonwood, West Jordan, North Davis, South Davis, Tootle, Oquirrh, Liberty, Highland, Grant, and East Jordan.

In 1937, the second year, growth was apparent as three Idaho regions and the Cache Valley region were divided.

Regionalization continued unabated to match the growth of the Church through the years. The organizational structure was mainly used to manage welfare programs and properties, but it was also used in the Church Education System. By 1967 there were 72 regions of the Church. It was then that a major expansion movement took place as the Church expanded the regional territories from 72 to 111, at the same time creating a new Church leadership position: Regional Representatives of the Council of the Twelve. These changes went into effect on January 1, 1968. By February 10, 1972, there were 166 regions in the Church. and by 1984, there were 445.

After accounting for the organizational swing through the Church in 1936 when the first thirteen regions were created, Harold B. Let's welfare journal contains references to his first return visits to selected regions. He first returned to the St. George region and made note of conditions in each stake:

Moapa Stake-Each ward has a storehouse in the nature of a tithing office. The stake committee and executive council is organized. Ira J. Earl of Las Vegas has been chosen as work director. A planting program is contemplated. A surplus of clothing from Las Vegas is to supply the entire stake. There is little unemployment outside of WPA and regular employment. Appointments are: Robert Gibson, Chairman: Ira J. Earl, work director; Bishop Dan J. Ronnow, Panaca, chairman of the executive council; Lois E. Jones, Relief Society president, Overton; and Milton S. Earl, stake clerk. Their plan: Beet seed and increasing of acreage.

Kanah Stake-Fred G. Carrol, Orderville, chairman. Commit tees are: Bishop Quimbly Roundy, chairman bishops' council; Vera L. Schuab, president of Relief Society; Franklin A. Heaton, stake work director; Ed Leo Chamberlain, stake clerk. There are seven teen on relief outside of WPA. In a coal mining venture, owners will share with miners. Storage facilities proferred to Presidents Rust and Odell Jelander, who plan to go into the storage business in the Church program. Hay, grain, and cattle expected from tithing in kind.

Parowan Stake-Lamont E. Tueller, Cedar; Bishop Henry L. Jones, Cedar; Barbara Adams; Bishop Frank B. Wood, work director; Glen Froid, stake clerk. A water shortage prevents farming projects. Clothing and canning will be done by sisters. Cooperative projects are plater making, sawmill, building of homes, brick-making. Will the Church underwrite or provide loans on their projects?

Zion Park Stake-Ira Brads haw and Sister Josephine Sandberg are leaders. Shall there be an affiliation with the stake cooperatives? Canning and preserving of food types such as apples, peaches, pears, and grapes, molasses. Building materials, bricks, lumber, cooperatives for sale or exchange are projects. Beet seed increase desired in this stake.

St. George Stake-Canning of fruits and vegetables surplus being done in seven wards. They want to know where cans can be purchased. A stake center for canning with labor from one ward taking care of produce elsewhere is planned. Ward buildings will be started. Molasses making, beet seed project for quorums and groups will be arranged on two acres each. Fuel projects, wood, adobe making, sawmill project, lumber in kind, flower culture, hatchery, are other projects. Potatoes from Enterprise are expected from tithing and fast offerings.

On May 14, 1936, only sixteen days after his first organizational regional meeting, Harold B. Lee returned to Richfield for a meeting starting at 9:00 A.M. Here he heard a stake-by-stake report, making the following notes on each:

Garfield Stage (Pres. Twitchell): The stake relief organization has been completed. Storehouse with manager and women's director is organized. Antimony-potato project; Boulder-no report; Circleville-canning project; Escalante-community coal mine to furnish coal for the entire stake along with canning, wood, and dairy projects; Widstoe ward is upset because of the resettlement program of the government. Very little direct relief cases exist.

Panguitch Stake (Pres. Hatch): Very little direct relief cases here either. Collection of fast offerings being stressed. The county agent is cooperating in urging every family in raising its own gardens with surplus to be sent to ward or stake depot. Henryville and Tropic wards are planning coal for stake assistance; Hatch Ward is raising seed potatoes under the direction of LeRoy Porter, also a sawmill project is taking all available labor in the ward and some from adjoining wards. There is not a very enthusiastic response from the people generally. A canning project is under the Relief Society in Panguitch wards and it will take care of all surplus fruits and vegetables. Organization is partially made.

North Sevier Stake (Pres. Williams): Bishops met with little response for obtaining land for beets. Redmond has no success since relief people are not willing to work in the Church program; Aurora has ten acres of beets under priesthood quorums; Salina Second Ward is canning and bottling fruits and vegetables. President Williams offered the stake brood sows on a fifty-fifty basis but no one at present has accepted the offer.

Beaver Stake (Pres. Farnsworth): Partial organization of relief program has been set up. Few relief clients are available. There are small gardening projects for those who will work. A potato project is planned if labor can be found. Canneries are planned by the Relief Society to take care of surplus commodities. Some people have preferred donations which may be stored rather than donate land for quorum use. Fast offerings are greatly increased already. On the alert to take up labor that might be available with the cessation of the WPA projects. They are centering their attention for the present on tithing and fast offerings. They will need cans for fall conservation. There is plenty of land here and water, but no labor.

South Sevier Stake (Pres. Ware): All land is under cultivation for this year, but they are planning now for next year. They have out lined three building projects following the counsel of Bishop Wells of the Presiding Bishopric. All available labor is now on WPA projects. They think they will be able to take care of their people. Fast offerings are increasing. They were urged in the planting of gardens.

Wayne Stake (Pres. Webster): The leaders of this stake are pledged to full payment of tithing and fast offerings. Teasdale Ward has little relief but twenty-five acres of produce donated for producing crops. Relief client in Bicknell refused proffer of an acre of garden. Lyman Ward is raising potatoes. Hanksville Ward can furnish tomatoes. They don't believe that relief clients can be depended upon.

Sevier Stake (Poulson): Organization is completed. Offers for land were made but no report of acceptance. Missionary farm owned by Richfield wards. How can men be found? Fertilizer project is pending. They are leasing a coal mine in Salina Canyon. Other projects are pending. Glendow Ward wants a recreational hall

Church Security (Welfare) Committee in April, 1938: (left to right) Ted De Bry, J. Frank Ward, mark Austin, Stringham A. Stevens, Campbell M. Brown, Harold B. Lee, J. Reuben Clark, Jr., Heber J. Grant, David O. McKay, Melvin J. Ballard, John A. Widtsoe, Albert E. Bowen, Sylvester Q. cannon, Henry D. Moyle, Robert L. Judd

and their leaders have talked with Bishop Wells of the Presiding Bishopric about it.

Opposition to the Plan

No work of any true importance, seeking to blaze a new path over traditions and ruts of the past, seems to be free of harassment. The welfare program was no exception. From the beginning, and without cessation for years, opposition was everywhere, even in high places.

On April 29, 1936, Harold B. Lee returned home to Salt Lake City from St. George and was to leave the next day to effect the organization of the first California and Arizona regions. Letters were waiting from Ogden, Lyman, and Heber City asking for further instructions and announcing programs. While attending to this correspondence he was visited by Henry Smith, reporter of the Deseret News, who was checking out a critical story disparaging the storehouse program.

The story had been told that the Pioneer Stake storehouse operation had increased the cost of relief, stating that Pioneer Stake had cost $33,000 for 1935 compared with $20,000 for Salt Lake Stake in a similar locality. Stake President Lee called the reporter's attention to the fact that the September 1935 survey of stakes by the First Presidency showed that Salt Lake Stake had taken care of 106 families with an average of 3.6 persons per family, and 89 single persons, while the Pioneer Stake had taken care of 188 families with an average of 4.1 persons per family, and 59 single persons. The total for Salt Lake Stake was 471 persons, or an average cost per person per month of $4.40, while the total of Pioneer Stake was 830 persons, or $2.71 average cost per person per month. The entire Salt Lake area welfare statistics were then published to show the true facts: StakePersons AssistedWelfare Costs Average per person/per monthSalt Lake471$4.40Pioneer8302.71Wells3052.20Bonneville752.77Ensign2764.66Granite1463.42Highland643.22Liberty3612.82Grant1382.82City Average:2.71

Opposition had reached other places too. Arthur Winter had been told also the same fallacious story and publication of the facts was needed to correct the errors. Some leaders were saying that Elder Ballard and Brother Lee were great proselyters, but that they needed the conservatism of some of the other Brethren.

Another Revelation

Shortly after Elder Lee completed his first swing through the Church to organize the welfare work, he experienced a spiritual manifestation which he retold throughout the Church for many years thereafter. This account comes from his acceptance speech as a newly called member of the Council of the Twelve Apostles, in April 1941:

It was in August of that same year [1936] that. with Brother Mark Austin of the General Committee. I had driven clown to St. George and then back across the mountains to Richfield for an early morning meeting. At that time there was an upturn in business, so much so that some were questioning the wisdom of this kind of activity, and why hadn't the Church done it before now?

There came to me, in that early morning hour. a distinct impression that was as real as though someone had spoken audibly, and this was the impression that came and has staved with me through these years: There is no individual in the Church who knows the real purpose for which the program then launched had been in tended, but hardly before the Church has made sufficient preparation, that reason will be made manifest: and when it comes, it will challenge every resource of the Church to meet it.

I trembled at the feeling that came over me. Since that day that feeling has driven me on, night and okay, hardly resting, knowing that this is God's will, this is his plan. The only thing necessary today is that the Latter-day Saints everywhere recognize these men who sit here on the stand as the fountainheads of truth. through whom God will reveal his will, that his Saints might be preserved through an evil day.

For details. see Appendix

---
Notas:
[^1] © S. Dilworth Young 1976. Used by permission.
