Brent L. Goates, Harold B. Lee: Prophet and Seer ( 1985)

11 Call to the Apostleship

"For five glorious, strenuous years I have labored, under a call from the First Presidency, with a group of select brethren, in the development of and the unfolding of what we have called the Church welfare plan." These were the words used by Harold B. Lee as he marked the end of that intense, struggling inception of the welfare plan and began his broadening labors in the Council of the Twelve.

He had traveled about the Church many times. He had helped to organize the Church into welfare regions. He had stimulated, begged, pleaded, inspired, and wanted to scold at times, the leadership of stakes. some of whom accepted the new program but many of whom were apathetic and skeptical and most of whom were slow to implement.

Harold B. Lee has often told of his stock answer to those who, having identified him so completely with the unfolding of the welfare plan, would casually ask: "Well, Brother Lee, how is the new welfare program going in the Church?" His standard reply was: "Just as good as the individual stake presidents and bishops want it to go!" This always sobered the more flippant inquirers and gave them deeper considerations to ponder.

He had learned from this experience that the innovator walks a ruled path where there arc few immediate friends, and leaders who are mostly content with the status quo. As always the greatest opposition seemed to come from within where change would endanger status and vested interest. That the presiding Brethren were pleased with his labors, however, seems obvious by the events which were to occur in the general conference of April 1941. A vacancy in the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles had been occasioned by the death of Elder Reed Smoot on February 9. 1941.

Record of these milestone events is contained in the personal journal of President Lee. He became a daily-entry diarist coincident with his call to the Quorum of the Twelve. Never before had he maintained a journal accounting for every day's activities, but had written broad sketches of important phases of his life. undoubtedly having in mind the benefit they would be to his later posterity. Now, however, he knew he belonged to Church history and once more disciplined himself accordingly.

The first entry of over three decades of Harold B. Lee's personal daily history as a General Authority was written under the date of Thursday, March 17 1941. ten days before he was called to the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles. It consisted of a brief note that he attended the General Church Welfare Committee meeting. The following day, on Friday. March 28. 1941. he merely reported that he attended the regular meeting of the First Presidency with the Church Welfare Committee and their advisors.

On Sunday, March 30. 1941. he fulfilled an assignment to attend the Lehi (Utah) Stake conference. He then returned to Salt Lake City and spoke at the Sunday evening MIA services in the Twentieth Ward at 6:30 P.M. that night. His entry under that date reads, "Sister J. Reuben Clark. Jr.. and her daughter Marian were there and were very kind in their commendation of my humble efforts."

Then the life-changing events began to unfold. Under the date of Monday, March 31, 1941, he wrote:

President Clark called to ask if I was trying to kill myself by carrying out the kind of schedule I had yesterday in attending the Lehi Stake Conference and then speaking at night in the Twentieth Ward. He commented on Sister Clark's commendation of my talk and said she was insistent that he go right down and urge my appointment as the new Apostle. I thought he was only joking, but I learned later that this was his way of preparing me for the shock that was coming to me the next Sunday at the April Conference.

The next three days were covered by mere mention of meetings attended: on Tuesday, April 1, 1941, he attended the Milk Processing Committee meeting, and on Thursday he met with President G. Chauncy Spilsbury of the Arizona Region and attended the regular weekly meeting of the General Church Welfare Committee.

General Conference Begins

General conference commenced on April 4, 1941, and featured an opening address by President Heber J. Grant. Elder Lee recorded his impression of that sermon in these words: "President Grant bore a most remarkable testimony that undoubtedly raised him to great heights in the affections of the people. He occasion ally was overcome with emotion that moved the entire audience to tears."

The conference continued on Saturday, April 5, and Elder Lee made reference in his journal regarding the progress of the work he loved, noting that "the special welfare meeting was a remark able success as a demonstration of the possibilities of the welfare plan."

As he was later to teach, many times priesthood leaders have a forewarning of their callings through the Holy Ghost prior to the issuance of the call. When Harold B. Lee awoke on Saturday, April 5, 1941, he experienced such a spiritual premonition of his calling to the apostleship. He described his feelings as follows: "Before I arose from my bed I received a definite impression that I would be named a member of the Quorum of the Twelve." His premonition was accurate and was fulfilled that very night:

I was sitting in the audience attending the general priesthood meeting as the managing director of the Church Welfare Program. At the conclusion, President J. Reuben Clark, who was conducting the meeting, called my name out and asked that I come to the stand to meet Bishop Joseph L. Wirthlin. Bishop Wirthlin did have a matter of business to mention to me, but it was really a way to have me meet with President Heber J. Grant.

When I arrived at the stand, Elder Joseph Anderson said that the President was waiting for me in the General Authorities' room. It amazed me and I immediately sensed that there was something more than just a social visit that President Grant had in mind. It was then that he announced to me that I had been named to be elevated to the Quorum of the Twelve to fill the vacancy which had been created by the death of Senator Reed Smoot.

Harold B. Lee often retold to his family the conversation of that precise moment. After learning of his appointment, he said: "Oh, President Grant, do you really think I am worthy of such an exalted calling?" The plain-spoken President replied simply. "If I didn't think so, my boy, you wouldn't be called!"

A Restless Night of Worry

Bowed down with the weight of this lofty calling. Eider Lee went home to share his burden with his little family, then living at 1208 South Eighth West Street in Salt Lake City. As was so typical in the Lee home, and particularly at conference time, their home was filled with house guests. Relatives visited often. as did young women whose parents Elder Lee had met in his travels through the Church and were invited to live with the Lee family while they were obtaining employment on moving to Salt Lake City. So at this time, when a chosen vessel of the Lord needed a moment of privacy with his family to gather spiritual strength from those he loved, Elder Lee found it necessary to seek that family solitude in improvised ways.

The guests in the home were the entire family of William H. Prince (Harold's cousin) of St. George, Utah, and Sister Mabel Hickman, one of two converted maiden sisters whom Elder Lee baptized on his mission in Denver, Colorado. These two sisters remained close to the Lee family and were accorded all the privileges of family membership. The large Lee home was arranged for accommodating these guests and all available extra space was made into sleeping quarters for the night.

Helen remembers well this general conference and the events of that particular Saturday night on April 5, 1941:

My father returned from priesthood meeting quite late, an hour or so after the time when the meeting would have concluded. Mother and I were busy with dinner preparations for the next day. endeavoring to make our company comfortable and happy. My sister had gone to visit a friend for the evening.

When Dad came home Mother explained to him that Maurine had called and that she needed someone to go and pick her up at her friend's house, and asked if he would do so. He agreed to go and then said: "Mother, you and Helen come with me." This seemed unusual for him to request that all three of us go to pick up my sister. It was late and Mother still had much work to do to prepare for the Sunday dinner, but because of his serious manner and insistent voice, we didn't question his desires further. We left what we were doing and went with him in the car.

As soon as we got into the car with him he said, "There is something that I must tell you." Very quietly and obviously more subdued in manner than I ever remember my father being before, he explained to us that following the priesthood meeting, President Grant had detained him and in privacy had informed him that he was to be named the next morning as the new member of the Council of the Twelve. I was then fifteen years old and was fully capable of understanding the impact of this calling and what it would mean in his life, as well as in the life of our family. It was a very sobering but choice moment.

He then said, "Now, we'll go and pick up Maurine, and we'll tell her about it." As could be readily appreciated, with all the guests filling our home, he knew that this was the only place that he could share this momentous news with us without the possibility of interruption by others, and without arousing their curiosity. He then added: "When we return, you girls come up with us to our bedroom and we'll have our prayer together."

We did as he suggested, cherishing those sacred moments together. Of course, no explanations could be made to our house guests, so we tried to go on about our business as usual and make preparations for bed and for the following day. There was a message when we arrived home for Dad to phone President J. Reuben Clark, Jr., and after he made that phone call we had our prayer together.

The next day in conference, the newly appointed Apostle made reference to his sleeplessness of the night before:

Since nine o'clock last night I have lived an entire lifetime in retrospect and in prospect. I spent a sleepless night. I never closed my eyes one moment, and neither would you if you had been in my place. Throughout the night as I thought of this most appalling and soul-stirring assignment, there kept coming to me the words of the Apostle Paul. "Let us therefore come boldly unto the throne of grace, that we may obtain mercy, and find grace to help in time of need." (Hebrews 4:16.)

Helen continues with her recollection of that memorable day when her father was appointed as an Apostle:

We went to conference on Sunday morning, which we had not planned to do because of the crowds, the difficulty in finding seating. and the fact that Mother was not feeling well and was unable to attend the first two days of conference. But, of course, under the new circumstances of Dad's appointment we all went with our house guests, arriving very early to find scats. We sat almost to the rear of the tabernacle near the north wall I remember still what a thrill it was to hear my father's name announced as the new Apostle.

As the meeting was about to begin, a few close friends found Elder Lee looking unusually pale and disquieted. On the stand of the Tabernacle sat the clerk of the conference, Elder Joseph Anderson, a close personal family friend of Elder and Sister Lee. Elder Anderson always had his son Bob sitting with him in those days; Bob turned to his father before the Sunday session of conference began and remarked: "Dad, Brother Lee looks so bad: is something going to happen to him?" Of course, Elder Anderson. who was President Grant's personal secretary. could only concur that Elder Lee did look ill that morning.

Harold B. Lee's diary entry for that most significant day in his life, Sunday, April 6, 1941, is as follows:

I was sustained before the general conference at the ten o'clock session by President J. Reuben Clark, Jr., after which I was invited to a place on the stand "at the foot of the ladder," as he expressed it -"a member of the Twelve." In the afternoon session I was called to address the conference and enjoyed a remarkable peace that overcame all fright and fear that I had anticipated.

Meanwhile, in the Tabernacle congregation. the sustaining of Church officers was a moment to be cherished by the Lee family. According to Mabel Hickman, who sat next to her. as President Clark read the names of the General Authorities Sister Lee leaned forward "with both hands on the back of the bench in front of us, and the knuckles of her hands were white with tension."

A memorable scene was associated with Elder Lee's advancement to a seat as a new quorum member of the Council of the Twelve. His place at "the foot of the ladder" was next to his fellow stake member, Elder Sylvester Q. Cannon. Harold B. Lee was forty-two and didn't have a gray hair in his head at that time. The scene was indelibly impressed on Helen's mind. She recalls:

It created a lasting picture when my father went up and sat by the side of Brother Cannon, who had snowy, white hair. When the audience stood up during the rest break midway in the two-hour session, I remember how startled I was to see all of the members of the Council of the Twelve standing in their places before us. The

Council of the Twelve at the installation of Harold B. Lee, 1941: (from left front, anti-clockwise) Rudger Clawson, George Albert Smith, George F. Richards, Joseph Fielding Smith, Stephen L. Richards, Richard R.. Lyman, John A. Widtsoe, Joseph R. Merrill, Charles A. Callis, Albert E. Bowen, Sylvester Q. Cannon, Harold B. Lee

contrast was graphic. There stood Brother Cannon, tall and stately with his beautiful, white hair, and next to him was my father, who was much shorter, with his black hair, which gave him a youthful appearance. He almost looked like he didn't belong, for he was so much younger than the next youngest of the men who were then members of the Council of the Twelve. It came as a new and rather surprising realization to me to consider how much younger he was than the other Brethren.

Following Elder Lee in appointment to the Council of the Twelve in the next few years were others approximately his own age. It was the beginning of a new era in Church leadership, and Elder Harold B. Lee was the first of many of this new generation. He was followed by Elder Spencer W. Kimball, four years older than Elder Lee; Elder Ezra Taft Benson, who was forty-four years old at the time of his call, and was the same age and once a classmate at the Oneida Academy with Elder Lee; Elder Mark E. Petersen, who was one year younger than Elder Lee and was ordained at age forty-four; and Elder Matthew Cowley, who was two years older than Elder Lee.

In an interview with the Church News when he was President of the Church, Harold B. Lee recalled his entry into the Council of the Twelve and his rapid rise in seniority, saying:

I came to know what it meant to be at the "foot of the ladder," as President Clark called it, but I wasn't there for long. I heard Elder John A. Widtsoe tell about when he was called as a junior member. He sat there for fifteen years before there was a vacancy.

Contrary to that, in thirteen years I had moved from that junior position until I was very near to the president of the Twelve. When called I was twenty years younger than the next youngest member of the quorum, Brother Stephen L Richards.

I recall President Grant would look along the line, and noting my dark hair compared to the gray hair of those older brethren, would say that the color line was well marked. My hair, though, began to change pretty rapidly from that point on.

The days that followed immediately after general conference were filled with visits from well-wishers with their generous congratulations. Elder Lee's diary entry for the next day, Monday, April 7, 1941, explains the situation:

In the days to follow I was able to do little else than to receive telephone calls and letters of congratulations from many friends on my appointment as a member of the Council of the Twelve. It was pleasing that many of these were from those who were not members of the Church, with whom I had associated in politics or in business.

Helen recalls those busy days when telephone calls flooded their home after conference: "I remember that we had never been so busy with people coming to the house and calling on the phone. Those were beautiful, warm memories. It was a tremendous time in our lives. We heard from people that we hadn't heard from for years and years."

The house guest, Mabel Hickman, witnessed this joyful outpouring of love, and wrote of it in these words:

That day was one to remember-the newspapers sent photographers, flowers arrived, telegrams came, with streams of callers, following the Sunday announcement of Elder Lee's appointment. His daughters were scheduled to play their musical instruments that evening, but this was one time when they wanted to "beg off." Their father told them that if they did not go to perform, their reason would be misunderstood, so they went obediently, but reluctantly, to keep their promise.

Ordained an Apostle

President J. Reuben Clark, Jr., continued his watchful supervision over Elder Lee by thoughtful contacts to prepare him for the events leading up to his ordination. Elder Lee recorded in his diary on Tuesday, April 8, 1941:

I went to lunch with President Clark, where he gave me careful and detailed explanation of the procedures on Thursday, where I was to be ordained an Apostle in the temple and accept a charge from the President of the Church as to my duties, obligations, and responsibilities as a member of the Quorum of the Twelve.

Even that contact was followed up with another phone call on Wednesday from President Clark, who wanted to make certain that Elder Lee was ready for the next day's meeting in the temple.

On Thursday, April 10, Elder Harold B. Lee was ordained an Apostle. He described the event as follows:

I attended my first meeting in the Salt Lake Temple with the First Presidency and the Council of the Twelve. I was ordained an Apostle and set apart as a member of the Council of the Twelve by President Heber J. Grant, with his counselors and the eleven members of the Council assisting. Before the ordination I was given a charge by each member of the Presidency in which they stressed important matters pertaining to activities of General Authorities.

The day ended with a dinner in honor of Elder and Sister Lee held in the home of Elder Stephen L Richards and attended by all the First Presidency, the Twelve, and their wives.

Other Appointees

The April 1941 general conference was noteworthy and historic for additional reasons. At this conference President Grant announced a new category of General Authorities and named five brethren to the newly created position of Assistant to the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles: Elders Marion G. Romney, Thomas E. McKay, Clifford E. Young, Alma Sonne, and Nicholas G. Smith. Two of those named were close personal and social friends of Elder and Sister Lee. On the Friday night following general conference (April 11, 1941), the Lees' Church history study group met at the home of Roscoe E. and Irene Hammond in a social intended as a token of respect to the new appointees, Elders Marion G. Romney and Nicholas G. Smith and Elder Lee. Elder Lee's diary entry captures an interesting human relations slant on the talented brethren whom the Lord was priming for leadership in his kingdom:

There was an excellent spirit in the gathering, in no small part due to the splendid attitude manifested by Hugh B. Brown [another member of the group], who had been prominently mentioned for appointment to fill the vacancy in the Quorum of the Twelve.

On this same day, April 11, Elder Lee performed his first temple marriage-for the son of Dr. John P. Gleave and his bride. On the weekend he attended his first stake conference since his ordination as an Apostle, accompanying Elder Charles A. Gallis to the Riverside Stake.

Acceptance as a General Authority

The appointment of Elder Lee to the Quorum of the Twelve pleased the membership of the Church. This feeling is revealed in a personal letter written by President Grant to Mrs. Glendora M. Allred of Burley, Idaho, on April 7, 1941, the day following the close of the general conference. President Grant, so very prompt in his correspondence, thanked her for her expressions of love and devotion and then wrote:

I cannot recall the time since I became President of the Church when filling a vacancy in the Council of the Twelve has seemed to give such universal satisfaction as has been the case with the selection of Brother Harold B. Lee. (File #912, Letters of President Grant.)

Thus began the intensive labors of Elder Harold Bingham Lee as an Apostle of the Lord. It was a work that would take him to all corners of the earth and would cause him to be received and honored before royalty and the illustrious leaders of the world, as well as the poor and humble, of which he always considered himself to be a part. His sacred calling as a "special witness for Christ," which was never out of his mind and always fashioned his behavior, would end only at his death thirty-two years and eight months later.
