Brent L. Goates, Harold B. Lee: Prophet and Seer ( 1985)

First Apostolic Decade

1941-1950

1941—1943. The "Day of Infamy" at Pearl Harbor-Japanese launched surprise attack on Hawaii. Malaya, Hong Kong, and the Philippines. The next day the United States and Britain declared war on Japan. War came to West Coast as a Japanese submarine fired on an oil refinery in Ellwood, California. Rationing of food, clothing, gasoline in the U.S.A. Glenn Miller, Betty Grable, Bob Hope, and war bond rallies. Vaccine developed for pertussis (whooping cough), and the world's first operational atomic reactor was built in Oak Ridge, Tennessee. FDR signed withholding tax law. Allies landed at Naples, Italy. Bogart and Bergman won 1943 Oscars for Casablanca.

12 A Seedling Among Giant Redwoods

As Harold B. Lee assumed his position in the twelfth and last large oak chair in the semicircle surrounding the sacred altar in the upper room of the Salt Lake Temple, a new era in Church leadership commenced. It was 1941. Elder Lee was forty-two years old. and there was not a man in the room who was less than twenty years his senior. The next youngest was Stephen L Richards. exactly twenty years older. Elder Lee was a seedling among the giant redwoods.

Presiding over the Church in 1941 were President Heber J. Grant, President J. Reuben Clark. Jr., and President David O. McKay. Members of tile Quorum of the Twelve were President Rudger Clawson, George Albert Smith. George F. Richards Joseph Fielding Smith, Stephen L Richards. Richard R. Lyman. John A. Widtsoe, Joseph F. Merrill, Charles A. Gallis. Albert E. Bowen. and Sylvester Q. Cannon. The last previously appointed Apostle, Elder Cannon, was also a product of Pioneer Stake and was twenty-two years older than Elder Lee.

The aging leadership of the Church concerned President Heber J. Grant, as his daily journal entries attest during the spring of that year. The need to fill the existing vacancy in the Quorum of the Twelve, and the possibility of creating a new cadre of leaders to assist the Quorum members. were brooding in the mind of the President. On March 10, 1941. President Grant wrote:

I discussed with my counselors as to whether we should continue the discussion of a week ago. but we concluded to not have our secretary read the minutes of the week before at the meeting in the temple, but to wait for the return of Rudger Clawson. who is the President of the Apostles, before deciding on a man to fill the vacancy in the Quorum of the Twelve. It was quite remarkable the names that we had. I had asked the brethren for a first and second choice. There were ten of them and I am sure I had about twenty names. It is quite remarkable how many fine men there arc in the estimation of the Brethren to fill the Quorum of the Twelve.

Five days later President Grant wrote:

During the day I had quite a long talk with Brother Clark and Brother McKay regarding calling some men to help the Quorum of the Twelve, as so many of the quorum are in poor health. We arc all getting along in years and not capable of doing the work we formerly did.

Within three weeks the decisions had been made concerning the vacancy in the Quorum and the creation of the new General Authority position of Assistants to the Twelve. Under the date of April 5, 1941, this entry tells in President Grant's words his invitation to Harold B. Lee to serve with the Quorum of the Twelve:

After the priesthood meeting (at general conference), I had a little talk with Harold B. Lee and told him we had decided that he should fill the vacancy in the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles. He was overwhelmed and shed tears. I feel sure that we shall he very happy with his work.

Five days later Harold B. Lee was ordained an Apostle under the hands of the members of the First Presidency and the Twelve, President Grant acting as voice. He was the sixty-first Apostle of this dispensation. Elder Lee obtained a copy of the blessing and referred to it often in subsequent years, concentrating on these words of President Grant:

I say unto you, avoid the very appearance of evil, seek foremost and at all times for the advancement of the work of the Lord. Give your thoughts not to the ordinary things of life, but to things that are of great importance, and that are concerned with eternity .... We say unto you that above all other things, "obedience is better than sacrifice and to hearken, than the fat of rams." Humility is the key to the guidance of the Spirit of the Lord, and may that spirit of humility that you possess today, that spirit of humility when you had the impression that you might be called to be an Apostle, be ever with you, and the power and spirit of the priesthood of the apostleship shall be yours to withstand the temptations and allurements of life.

A new vision and an increased understanding of the kingdom began to unfold in the days that followed his ordination, but his life-style was unchanged. Harold B. Lee had given his life to the Lord long before he was ordained as an Apostle, by setting aside a promising political career at the call of the First Presidency. The previous five years had been spent in organizing the welfare program and traveling every weekend to the various stakes of the Church. His welfare assignment now seemed to have been an appropriate apprenticeship for his ministry as an Apostle among the Saints he had come to love.

First Experiences as an Apostle

Following the weekly Friday meeting of the Welfare Committee and the First Presidency on June 13, 1941, President Clark took Elder Lee to his office, commended him for his work with the welfare plan, and announced that the First Presidency had approved the appointment of Elder Marion G. Romney, sustained at the recent general conference as one of five new Assistants to the Twelve, to be the Assistant Director of the welfare program. Elder Lee, whose work as the Managing Director of the welfare program would continue to be his primary assignment in the Twelve, felt the appointment was "an excellent move." Until the day Harold B. Lee died, his bond of friendship with Marion G. Romney was among the most meaningful companionships men enjoy in mortality.

Along with the enjoyable assignment to serve as the organist for the weekly meetings in the temple came a weightier calling the following summer. The junior Apostle was given the assignment to prepare and deliver the "Church of the Air" nationwide radio broadcast over the CBS network. On July 6, 1941, he delivered his first major address, entitled "True Patriotism-an Expression of Faith," calling this speaking challenge "a thrilling one." Scarcely had he completed the sermon than the telephone rang in the broadcast booth. It was President Clark calling from his home to congratulate Elder Lee on the content and delivery of his message.

A few weeks later Elder Lee was assigned as the junior companion of Elder Stephen L Richards in the reorganization of the Idaho Stake. There he observed carefully the wise counsel and instruction given by Elder Richards.

Arriving home late one evening from a trip to Arizona with Elder Marion G. Romney to survey the extent of flood damage near Duncan, Elder Lee received a phone call from President Don B. Colton of the Salt Lake Mission Home requesting that he speak to the missionaries the next morning on the subject of the temple endowment. Elder Lee accepted, then spoke with President McKay about the subject, and spent most of the night in preparation. On October 16, 1941, he recorded the events of that day: "Enjoyed greatly my study and discussion with the missionaries in the temple on the significance of the temple endowment. It seems my presentation had the approval of the temple presidency and President Colton of the Missionary Home."

Over the years this subject was a focal point of Elder Lee's ministry as he met weekly with groups of new missionaries who came to the temple as they prepared to leave for their assigned fields of labor.

Prophecies

The trip into Arizona to inspect the flood damage brought him into contact with President Spencer W. Kimball, then serving as president of the afflicted Mount Graham Stake. During their visit Elder Lee promised the Saints that if they would work together and apply the principles of the welfare plan, out of their crisis would come great missionary success with the nonmembers of the Church in that area, and their own prosperity would increase beyond what they had known before the flood.

One year later, traveling through the same region with President J. Reuben Clark, Elder Lee was delighted with their findings:

We drove up to Duncan and Virden to visit with the Saints who had been damaged by the flood a year ago.

They recalled our meeting with them when I promised them that as a result of the flood they would gain more than they lost. It was reported by Brother Payne, the work director, that with the exception of three, all the others were already better off than they were before the flood-also they had been counseled to stay with their farms instead of going to the mines and all had stayed but one, and he had returned after one month.

The gift of prophecy was in evidence early in Elder Lee's apostleship. On a trip to the Young Stake conference in Mancos, Colorado, in May 1941, Elder Lee described an unusual outpouring of the Spirit, as follows:

At this conference I received a rather remarkable demonstration of the power of prophecy in the ordination and setting apart of Elmer Alphonso Taylor, former second counselor in the stake presidency, as the new bishop of the Farmington Ward. He received a blessing that his crippled foot and leg would not hinder his work as bishop and that because of his humility in accepting this new appointment he would be given such influence with his family that not one would go astray, and all would marry in the temple and all would be a credit to any community in which they lived. He had a family of six girls. A remarkable spirit was in the meetings, many people being in tears as they sang the closing song and bid us good-bye.

Seventeen years later this prophecy was literally fulfilled, although it required another miracle to do so when one divorced daughter finally was married in the temple.

Amid all these first and impressionable experiences with the Spirit in his new calling, Elder Lee remained a practical man who practiced in his daily life the counsel he gave to others. On August 19, 1941, he recorded that he worked late into the night preparing the fruit and storage room in his home. On a Saturday afternoon on September 6, 1941, he wrote, "I completed an extra storage bin for coal at home and unloaded a load of wood and coal."

Despite the impressionable experiences that were bursting upon this new Apostle, it was not until after the first summer in his calling had passed that he felt at peace in his stewardship. On August 21, 1941 he recorded:

I met with the Twelve and the Assistants and later on with the Twelve and the First Presidency in the first meeting in the temple after the summer vacation. This was the first time I felt the close bond there should be toward these brethren. The spirit was wonderful and I was happy to be in tune.

In November, Elder Lee acknowledged President Grant's eighty-fifth birthday with a letter of love and appreciation. When he arrived home from California on November 20, 1941, a reply was waiting for him from President Grant. The prophet's sentiments of love and affection, as demonstrated in the following letter, were received by Elder Lee with a deep sense of gratitude:

November 22, 1941

Elder Harold B. Lee

Building

Dear Brother Lee:

It is ten minutes to four o'clock, and I am sitting up talking to my dictaphone, sitting on the side of the bed. I have scores and scores of letters, telegrams, and cards containing birthday greetings.

I appreciate your letter of the 19th as much as any I have received. From the first time I ever met you my heart went out to you with a feeling of love and respect, and I have been very happy indeed to see you grow in the work of the Lord from the day that I first met you.

I pray that you and your good wife and family may be blessed with the substance of this world, so that you shall be comfortable and happy, but above all, may you ever have a love of the Gospel and a desire to work for the cause of Truth. God bless you and yours forever, I ask in the name of His son, Jesus Christ, our Redeemer.

Affectionately, your brother in the Gospel. /s/ Heber J. Grant

In this first year of his calling to the apostleship, Elder and Sister Lee had been married eighteen years. In celebration of that anniversary, on November 14, which was also Sister Lee's birthday, Sister Lee went Relief Society block teaching, served as a guide at the Lion House in the afternoon, assisted the MIA with a ward road show act, and still had time to enjoy a ride through Parley's and Emigration canyons at the invitation of President and Sister Grant.

As he concluded his journal on December 31, 1941, Elder Lee wrote of the impact his first nine months as an Apostle had had on him:

This page closes the greatest and most important year of my life. During the last twelve months, I have seen the prophecies of our present leaders fulfilled regarding war and economic trends, proving again their divine callings. In my call to apostleship I have experienced the most intensive schooling and preparation of any similar period. I have known the terrors of the evil tempter and in contrast the sublime joy of inspiration and the revelations of the Holy Spirit. My wife and family have been a constant source of encouragement and happiness and despite the terrors of World War, the peace of God seems to be with us.

Spiritual Manifestations

One of the signs of the true church is that the gifts of the Spirit will follow "them that believe" (see Mark 16:17). In few lives were these gifts more in evidence than in the life of Harold B. Lee. Many times he was the instrument through whom the Lord granted miraculous restoration of health to the Saints.

Following surgery on Elder Henry D. Moyle's wife, Elder Moyle reported to Elder Lee that her condition was remarkably improved after their administration. This account from his journal is typical of many similar entries:

astounding to the doctors. The next morning when her doctors, Dr. Ralph Richards and Dr. Earl Skidmore, came into her hospital room, one remarked that her condition was "phenomenal" and the other doctor said that it was "miraculous."

Many are the documented instances when not only was the Spirit of the Holy Ghost felt by those in Elder Lee's presence, but some bore witness of seeing visible manifestations. For example:

Last night I spoke at the MIA services and following that to the "fireside" of the M-Men and Gleaners of Nampa, Idaho. Stewart Mason and his wife drove me in their car over to Boise, where I was to board the train for Salt Lake. Sister Mason told me she had witnessed an "aura," as she called it, surrounding me as I spoke. Fern had previously seen the same manifestation about me in the First Ward.

A Brother George McLain Came to see me at home He told me of being at the sunset services at the state capitol last Sunday and of witnessing a spiritual manifestation of my being accompanied in my speaking by other personages who were near me.

I attended the meeting with the Saints at New Haven. Connecticut, where Yale University is located. There were a number of investigators who seemed greatly interested. One woman observed that the faces of the Elders seethed to glow as they discussed the gospel.

The attendance at April general conference in 1942 was reduced because of wartime conditions, so the participants were nearly all stake presidencies and represented virtually every stake in the Church. Elder Lee recorded in his journal yet another witness from an observer at the conference:

An excellent spirit was in each meeting. Brother Ray Haight, a police officer who was present to assist with the crowd, bore testimony to me that during the entire morning session an intense, white light flooded the First Presidency "as though from a huge spotlight above" and made President Grant's clothes to appear to be white. He felt it a testimony from heaven of their divine calling.

The Sunday session of that conference was held in the fourth-floor assembly room of the Salt Lake Temple. These were the impressions Elder Lee recorded:

Today in the upper room of the Salt Lake Temple was held one of the most spiritual meetings of this generation and certainly the most impressive meeting I have ever attended. The meeting commenced at 10:00 a.m. and ended at 4:30 p.m. Tile first part was the regular Tabernacle broadcast of the "Church of the Air" address by Stephen L Richards and radio addresses by President David O. McKay and Elder A. E. Bowen. At 12:30 p.m. the sacrament was administered to all those present by the Twelve Apostles. Many of the brethren wept as the sacrament was passed to them by the Twelve. Our joy was supreme in thus serving this people. In the next four hours, forty-five of the brethren bore testimonies, and in that time there was hardly a moment when tears were not in the eyes of the listeners. Testimonies of miraculous healing, raising the dead, divine guidance, power of cleanliness. and rewards for keeping the commandments of God were borne. President McKay testified that many of our loved ones were present in the meeting.

Following that memorable general conference, Elder Lee was attending stake conferences in Idaho and stopped at the hospital in Grace to administer to Bishop LeGrand Richards, then serving as Presiding Bishop, and recuperating from a heart attack which had occurred one week earlier. Speaking in the general conference at which Elder Richards was sustained as an Apostle ten years later, Elder Lee recalled the blessing he had pronounced on the man who would ultimately serve longer as a General Authority than any other in his day. Elder Lee bore this witness:

In a brief moment, when my hands were on the head of Brother Richards, I knew that the Lord loved him and that he was going to live. The certainty of that was as sure to me then as it is today that he was spared for a great and glorious mission. (Conference Report, April 1952, p. 126.)

Influence of President Clark

From the moment Elder Lee assumed his calling as an Apostle, President J. Reuben Clark, Jr., took a special interest in him. He prepared the new Apostle for each step preceding his ordination and tutored him in advance of each upcoming experience. He then saw to it that Elder Lee performed the same important function for the other new Apostles who were called thereafter. President Clark became a father figure to Elder Lee, and their relationship was characterized by each of them in succeeding years as being as intimate as any father and son would share.

When Elder Lee's daughter Helen had an emergency appendectomy, it was President Clark who called first to see if there was anything he could do, and then he gently scolded Elder Lee for not having told him sooner. Elder Lee interpreted this loving concern in these words: "He has been a real father to me."

Word came to Elder Lee on August 2, 1944, that Sister Clark had passed away. This time it was Elder Lee who reached out to his mentor in a time of need. He wrote: "I went to see President Clark at his home and spent a few minutes with him. He had tried to call me to tell me of her passing. It is a wonderful experience to stand in the presence of a great man bowed in sorrow."

Soon after his wife's passing, President Clark took his turn in presenting the CBS "Church of the Air" address to a nationwide radio audience. Elder Lee, reciprocating President Clark's support of him for his first radio address in 1941. went to the Tabernacle to be with President Clark. "The next day President Clark called and expressed himself as being deeply touched that I had put myself out to go to the Tabernacle to hear his 'Church of the Air' address."

First Presidency from 1934 to 1945: (left to right) J. Reuben Clark, Jr., Heber J. Grant, David O. McKay

On one occasion, while visiting the Duncan flood area the year following the disaster, President Clark was in the company of Elder Lee, who recorded these memorable public comments about the future that President Clark envisioned for his adopted "son":

President Clark related my experience in the welfare plan and in politics and told the people that he was confident that if I had remained in politics I would have been elected to the U. S. Senate. He said he loved me as his own son and that I had returned and reciprocated that love, as a son to a father. He said further that while he was not prophesying, that in the providence of the Lord, because of my age, I would one clay be the President of the Church.

Another first experience as a member of the Council of the Twelve came in the fall of 1942 with the assignment to tour the Texas-Louisiana Mission, presided over by William L. Warner of Richfield, Utah. At Fort Worth, Texas, on November 21, Elder Lee held a conference meeting with 160 Saints present. some traveling from Dallas to attend. His journal entry for the night said, "The talks of three of the Elders were outstanding." Unbeknown then to Elder Lee, one of these missionaries, Elder L. Brent Goates, was to become his son-in-law.

A glimpse into the fascinating character and personality of President Heber J. Grant is seen in his interactions within a one-week period with Elder Lee. On November 30, 1942, Elder and Sister Lee met President Grant as he was leaving the Church Office Building; according to Brother Lee's journal, the President "told me how much he thought of me and that he thought the six members of the Twelve that he had appointed would compare favorably with the six others in the Quorum."

Three days later, after the Council of the Twelve had met in their regular meeting, Elder Lee wrote in his journal:

I attempted to make a somewhat detailed report of my three-week visit to the Texas-Louisana Mission, but was stopped by President Grant, who said if everyone were to take as much time we would be here two days. President Clark and President McKay and Stephen L Richards all expressed regret that I had not been allowed to complete what to them had been a very proper and desired report. I was greatly humiliated.

Elder Lee never forgot that experience and, finally seeing the humor in it, enjoyed retelling the story.

Family Life

The long conference weekends and extended travel away from home were difficult for Harold B. Lee, who longed for the company of his beloved companion and their two daughters, now both students at the University of Utah. He often told his family that the longest days of his life were the ones immediately preceding his return home from his far-flung travels on the Lord's errands.

Harold B. Lee was a gardener and a "do-it-yourselfer." He acquired his skills growing up on the farm where it was impossible to pick up the phone and hire a specialist for repairs. In fact, he actually preferred to do such work himself, and his gardening provided the one outlet he enjoyed from the constant demands of his calling. He describes his labors over the Memorial Day holiday in 1942:

This being declared a holiday I arose early and spent until the early afternoon gardening around the yard and cutting the lawns and trimming up the trees. The rains have made things very pleasant and the warm weather seems to induce a fine growth of shrubs. I did some studying and preparing for my conference tomorrow and rested, although I fancy my family were somewhat chagrined that I did not pay more heed to the celebration of the holiday. In the evening we drove to the cemetery and visited with my mother and sister Verda.

Holidays were always spent at home with the family. a welcome respite and retreat from his daily labors. His journal entry at Christmastime in 1942, reveals his feelings about the manner in which the holiday was being celebrated:

Father and Mother and Verda came down and spent Christmas Eye with us. Verda was lonely without Charlie, who is in the army, but that was largely banished by the many visitors who came throughout the day to bring Christmas cheer and goodwill. This was a lavish Christmas with money in evidence everywhere and the stores much depleted of their stocks, but all this seemed to promise a day when we must pay the penalty of reckless spending, so much needlessly, when sacrifice should be the order.

Soon after the holidays were over Elder Lee made the last payment on his home at 1208 South Eighth West Street in Salt Lake City. Together the family enjoyed the ceremonial burning of the mortgage. He then petitioned the Lord to consecrate and dedicate their home to the end that the Holy Ghost would always dwell therein.

Because January 1 was his mother's birthday, Harold always reserved that holiday for visiting with relatives. For years his home was the focal point for family celebrations on New Year's Day.

In 1945, the health of his family and the burden he always carried concerning the wayward members of his immediate family were of special concern to Elder Lee. His wife, Fern, showed signs of a heart strain that caused rapid beating, exciting an extreme nervousness. Because Sister Lee's health was always fragile at best, he often assisted his daughters with the housework. Many are the diary entries in early 1945, for example, that reflect his evening activities at home: "Spent the evening helping Fern with her house cleaning; ... the girls and I went through the house and cleaned the living room rug and readjusted the furniture."

Two New Apostles Called

A tour of the Northwestern States Mission in June 1943 was interrupted with the news of the passing of President Rudger Clawson, President of the Quorum of the Twelve. Elder Lee immediately returned to be with his beloved Brethren in Salt Lake City.

President Grant sent word that he wanted to visit alone with Elder Lee, so he went to the Grant home and had a delightful hour with the President. They discussed two candidates to fill the vacancies in the Twelve occasioned by the deaths of President Clawson and Elder Sylvester Q. Cannon. Finding himself in complete accord with President Grant, and also having recommended a third possible candidate for appointment, Elder Lee turned to leave. He wrote that night of the tender scene that ensued. "When I started to leave, President Grant pulled me down and kissed me and commended me for the "wonderful work" he said I was doing. I told him that there was nothing more I desired than to please him and my Heavenly Father."

Not waiting for general conference to reorganize, on July 15 the Brethren made the announcement of Elder Spencer W. Kimball's calling to the Council of the Twelve. Many persons were pleased with the appointment of the president of Mount Graham Stake in Arizona. It was somewhat surprising since many had assumed that the automatic elevation of one of the new Assistants to the Twelve would take place. The second appointment in the Quorum of the Twelve was announced twelve days later when Elder Ezra Taft Benson was named.

It was not until the fall that plans were made to release Spencer W. Kimball as president of Mount Graham Stake, Elder Lee being the Apostle who reorganized that stake's presidency.

General conference in October 1943 was highlighted by the sustaining of the two new Apostles in the Quorum of the Twelve. Writing on October 7, Elder Lee made this entry about his two new companions in the Twelve:

Today marked a new chapter in Church history. The two new members of the Council of the Twelve, Spencer W. Kimball and Ezra Taft Benson. were ordained Apostles by President Grant in a special meeting of the Twelve and the First Presidency, held in the office of the First Presidency. President Grant was too weak to stand and had each of the brethren kneel while all the brethren of the Twelve assisted in the ordination. A delightful meeting was held in the temple following the ordination. where the sacrament was administered and each of the new brethren was asked to speak briefly.

Assignments to Serve

President Clark called Elder Lee into his office on July 31, 1942, to inform him that he was being assigned with Elder Albert E. Bowen to accompany Hugh B. Brown, then a servicemen's coordinator, on a tour of all the military service camps along the West Coast. The purpose of their trip was to ascertain if anything might be done by the Church to promote the social and spiritual welfare of LDS servicemen. Elder Lee offered suggestions based on his observations during the three-week tour, and growing out of that experience came his assignment as chairman of the Servicemen's Committee.

Elder Lee's sermons reflected his concern for the young men of the Church who were away from home during the war years. His experiences in the war zones brought forth recurrent inspirational stories about the faith and courage of those who had been called to military duty away from home.

In mid-1943 Elder Lee and Elder Romney received another common assignment which further strengthened their bond of friendship when they commenced a long service as advisers to the general Primary board. The instructions on this calling came from President McKay and illustrate how tightly centralized the Church was in this early period. President McKay counseled at this interview on July 20, 1943, that the Primary officers would come to the Apostles for advice, but that they would take their problems directly to the First Presidency. A new presidency of the Primary Association was also announced, composed of Adele Cannon Howells, LaVern Parmley, and Dessie Grant Boyle.

By 1944, additional duties had been assigned to Elder Lee, including the chairmanship of a committee to study a proposed new hymnbook; and in July of that year he was named as a member of the newly formed publication committee, along with Elders Joseph Fielding Smith, John A. Widtsoe, and Marion G. Romney. This committee was charged with the mission to review and approve everything published by the Church. His major assign-merit in these years, however, was to serve as the chairman of the Melchizedek Priesthood Committee of the Council of the Twelve.

An Apostle Lost and Replaced

In November 1943 an event took place that deeply shocked and saddened many, particularly the First Presidency and the Quorum of the Twelve. Following a Church court that the Twelve held in the temple, Richard R. Lyman, one of their number, was excommunicated from the Church for violation of the Christian law of chastity. Elder Lee recorded, "It was a most saddening experience, with most of the Twelve in tears as Brother Lyman was asked to leave the meeting and shook hands with each brother in parting those sacred premises and that choice companionship for the last time."

The members of the Quorum of the Twelve slowly shuffled out of their council room, still dazed and bearing the deep hurt of the first excommunication of an Apostle in thirty-eight years. They left immediately thereafter to attend their various stake conferences, heavy of heart from their ordeal. Elders Lee and Kimball attended the Parowan Stake conference together, but their otherwise beautiful autumn drive to and from the conference was marred by their occasional conversation about the events of the trial.

It was not until the following general conference in April of 1944 that the vacancy was filled with the call of Mark E. Petersen. Elder Lee was delighted with this appointment and noted it in these words: "His choice was well received and, although he is not well known. the selection of one of his background and his age seemed appreciated by everyone. His initial sermon was delivered in a masterful fashion which left most of the congregation in tears."

1944-1946. Berlin bombed by eight hundred U.S. planes in daylight raids, beginning of round-the-clock bombings. Allies landed in Italy and entered Rome. "D-Day" launched by Gen. Dwight Eisenhower, the greatest amphibious military operation in history. American forces led by Gen. Douglas MacArthur recaptured the Philippines. Band leader Glenn Miller disappeared on routine flight from England to Paris. Germany surrendered, and war in Europe ended. President Harry S. Truman succeeded President Franklin D. Roosevelt, who died in Warm Springs, Georgia, age 63. Truman received Japanese surrender papers that formally ended World War II. He met with Churchill and Stalin at Potsdam to discuss peace plans. League of Nations formally went out of existence.
