Brent L. Goates, Harold B. Lee: Prophet and Seer ( 1985)

13 Politician or Apostle?

At the time of his appointment as director of the Church's welfare program, Eider Lee resigned his post as a Salt Lake City commissioner, closed the political chapter in his life, and never looked back. A little-known fact even to members of his immediate family, however, was the pressure that was exerted on Elder Lee to return to politics in 1944, three years after his call to the apostleship. He was sought after relentlessly by the Republican Party leadership to head their ticket, either as a candidate for governor of the state of Utah, or as a candidate for the United States Senate.

The interest in Elder Lee's possible candidacy first surfaced when he was told by President Clark on March 30, 1944, that a delegation of Republican legislators had urged him to request that the First Presidency give their consent for Elder Lee to run for governor. Elder Lee recalled the conversation with President Clark in these words:

President Clark asked me as to my desires in the matter and I told him that the only terms on which I would even consider such a matter would be that the First Presidency were to call me on a mission to permit myself to become a candidate. President Clark said he had talked to President McKay and they had agreed that I should not run for office because of the need of my services in the Council of the Twelve and with the welfare program and that there was no certainty that I could be elected, due to the strong New Deal sentiment extant at the present time.

In the weeks following, however, a constant stream of visitors kept the speculation alive that perhaps Elder Lee was a potential candidate. George D. Keyser, a prominent Mason in Salt Lake City, offered his support as a taxpayer and citizen, but his advice as "a dear friend" to Elder Lee was to stay out of politics. The next day President Clark had a visit from J. Bracken Lee, then mayor of Price, Utah. urging the candidacy of Elder Lee for the U.S. Senate.

Soon therafter A. V. Watkins, chairman of the Utah County Republican Party, and Harry Clarke, a trusted friend, visited Elder Lee to inform him that a political draft committee, of which Bishop Hunt of the Catholic Church was a member, was proposing to call on President Grant to ask his consent for Elder Lee's candidacy for the Senate.

J. Bracken Lee (no relation) persisted in urging Elder Lee's candidacy a few clays later, calling to ask if Elder Lee would consider a draft if an influential group of non-Mormon citizens of the state were to call upon the First Presidency and ask their consent. His response was consistent to all these requests: "The draft would have to come from the First Presidency themselves before I would consider it."

The question of his potential candidacy surfaced again in 1946, even after all the attempts to lure him back to politics had failed in 1944. On May 29, 1946. Elder Lee described the final attempt to engineer his political comeback:

Following the weekly report meeting with the General Authorities, I was on the fifth floor of the Church Administration Building having my picture taken when I received an urgent message from President McKay's staff to come at once to the office of the First Presidency. When I arrived I found a delegation headed by W. W. Seegmiller who were insistent that I file my candidacy for U.S. Senator to run against Abe Murdock. He had told the Presidency that I would run if they gave consent. I told them that I would not run unless the First Presidency told me to do it. While the counselors seemed to be inclined, yet because President George Albert Smith was in Mexico, they refused to tell me to do it until he could be reached, and that would be too late for filing.

Thus ended forever the secret enticements that were offered to have Elder Lee include politics in his apostolic mission. His answer wins always the same to those who sought him as their candidate, and his records surest neither a preference for nor a disappointment about his aborted political career. After 1946. any possibility that Harold B. Lee would ever again be a political candidate was gone.

The Radio Series: 1945

In late 1944, plans were announced to have Elder Lee deliver the Sunday evening talks on KSL radio for the Church, a series of sermons scheduled to begin in January, 1945, and continue each week thereafter for six months. His concern over this assignment was registered in his journal comments of December 16, 1944:

I spent the day [Saturday] entirely locked up in the office at the Church Office Building trying to get some inspiration to make some preparations for the beginning of the new series of radio talks to start on January 7, 1945. I prepared the first talk to the suggested title of "Choose You This Day," as a sort of preface to the talks that follow, endeavoring to prepare some gauge as to the proper length of each talk. I am certain that up until the present time I have had no assignment that has caused me, or that will cause me, any more excitement than this one, and except for the blessings of the Lord, my efforts will be futile.

Reaction was swift to his first presentation. Some thought he used too many scriptures, some said his applications of the scriptural lessons came too late in the talk, and some said it wasn't entertaining enough. One sentiment, however, was universal. Everyone seemed to feel that Elder Lee had issued a challenge that was going to be difficult for the youth to meet.

In January an incident occurred that briefly depressed Elder Lee: a high Church official asked him to delete a particular quotation from his sermon before it was published. The standard practice for these sermons was to correct the galley proofs following delivery on the radio, but prior to their publication in the following week's edition of the Church News. It was not actually deleting the quotation that bothered Elder Lee nearly as much as the unfriendly manner in which the demand was made.

For his ninth radio sermon, he addressed the topic, "Why the Church?" Later that night he wrote: "When I finished, President Clark called to commend me. He has been very kind and his constant encouragement has been a source of great strength."

Despite his careful preparations, errors did inadvertently occur. One night in March, he referred to the story of Joseph's experience with Potiphar's wife, inadvertently naming her as the wife of the pharaoh. President Clark, ever watchful of his young charge, called it to his attention after the broadcast and comforted him by relating a similar mistake he had made once in a "Church of the Air" address.

The intensity of his preparations and a measure of his devotion to this assignment is seen in this entry:

I came back to the office and worked on a radio talk entitled, "In Holy Temples" until 7:00 p.m., and after supper at home, continued until I had completed it at 2:30 a.m. I enjoyed the spiritual experience of my preparation.

Given the broad spectrum of gospel doctrines the series contemplated. it is natural that there would be disagreement over some issues he raised. Before President Clark left for a trip to the East Coast, he came to Elder Lee's office to inquire about his health, seeking to determine if the radio assignment was weighing too heavily upon him. He told Brother Lee that some of the General Authorities thought he was speaking too plainly about some of the principles of the gospel, but he firmly told his young student Apostle, "If you pleased your critics, you wouldn't please me."

The pressures of the Weekly deadlines for the radio sermons began taxing his strength emotionally, physically, and spiritually, resulting in the very conditions President Clark had sensed over a month earlier. In early May, Elder Lee received the results of a physical examination, and was told that he showed many signs of physical fatigue, evidenced by his rapid pulse and low blood pressure for a man his age. The doctor urged Elder Lee to abandon all Church work for a month, with a stern warning that if he did not heed that counsel he would likely suffer a heart attack. The pain in his neck and shoulders, the doctor explained, was a reflection of the strain on his heart.

As usual, President Clark was at Elder Lee's door the day following the medical report. He told Elder Lee to take his reference books home with him, and urged him to stay away from the office and all meetings except those with the First Presidency and the Twelve. The pressures continued to manifest themselves in his very next sermon as he found it difficult to read the script without several pronunciation errors. Despite these flaws, President Clark sustained him once again, calling to commend him on what he had said in his sermon.

President Grant's Death

Adjustments bringing abrupt and major changes were portending in the spring of 1945. First came word on April 12. 1945, of the sudden death of the President of the United States, Franklin D. Roosevelt, at Warm Springs, Georgia. Meanwhile, a reception was held in Provo, Utah, to introduce the new president of Brigham Young University, Howard S. McDonald.

The biggest adjustment of all, however, came on May 14, 1945, when at 7:00 P.M. it was announced that President Heber J. Grant had died. His death was not unexpected, for he had been in failing health since suffering a stroke on February 5, 1940, while attending to Church business in Southern California. Since that time his general conference sermons had been read by his private secretary, Joseph Anderson, and he had to be carried into the Tabernacle to attend general conference sessions.

Elder Lee, though not in good health at the time, went immediately with his wife to pay his respects to Sister Grant and the family. They invited the Lees to kneel in prayer with them as Elder Lee supplicated the Lord for his blessings upon the family.

Years later Elder Lee recalled these momentous events while teaching important lessons to an audience of youth leaders. asking:

Have you ever thought what a great experience it is to witness the calling home of a prophet of God? I have witnessed several. After the passing of President Heber J. Grant, each of us of the Twelve were called in the late afternoon by President George F. Richards, who was the senior member of the Council of the Twelve in the city. We were told that President Grant had just passed away and that there would be a very important meeting in the Church Office Building at nine o'clock the next morning at which we were all expected to be in attendance. With great expectations and with great heaviness of heart, we were all there. And as I looked around the circle, there was no one standing at the head of the table. President McKay had moved down, standing between President George F. Richards and Joseph Fielding Smith. President Clark had gone way down the row and was standing between Charles A. Callis and Albert E. Bowen. That was his place of seniority. There was no First Presidency, because the prophet had been called home.

We sat around the table and President Richards, with great feeling, said: "Now you understand that in the absence of President George Albert Smith, who is in the East and is now returning home, that we should get things underway for plans for the funeral service. I think none of you will suppose that I am presumptuous in taking the responsibility of calling this meeting. And I suppose that therefore I have the right to conduct it in any way that I see fit. Now it is rather awkward here with Brother McKay and Brother Clark sitting down here in our midst. President Clark and President McKay, get up and come here to the head of the table, and President Clark, you take charge of this meeting."

And as they stood up and walked to the head of the table, I could see the emotion of that moment. We recognized, as we saw a transition taking place, there was no politics after the passing to fill a vacancy. It was the Lord's way and his will, and the smoothness and the ease with which it was done brought about an amazing transformation. (From a tape recording of an unpublished talk at the Institute and Seminary Leadership Conference, 1969.)

Before relinquishing the meeting to President Clark, President Richards asked Elder Lee to prepare a tribute to President Grant from the Twelve, to be published in the Deseret News.

President Grant's body was taken to the foyer of the Church Office Building to lie in state until the time of the funeral services. Over twelve thousand people passed through the building to have their last glimpse of the beloved and respected prophet. Funeral services were held four days following his death, and Elder Lee carefully recorded the details in his diary as follows:

On Friday, May 18, 1945, the funeral for the President of the Church was held in the Salt Lake Tabernacle The procession left the Church Office Building promptly at twelve noon. the General Authorities proceeding ahead of tile hearse on foot with the Twelve leading and tile counselors in tile First Presidency immediately ahead of the hearse, and stake presidencies following the hearse. Thousands of people lined the streets and the temple grounds. The services started promptly at 12:15 p.m., with George Albert Smith presiding and President J. Reuben Clark, Jr., conducting the exercises.

Fourteen truckloads of flowers were taken to the cemetery and were distributed to the graves of each of the past presidents of the Church. The opening and closing prayers were offered by Patriarch Joseph F. Smith and Presiding Bishop LeGrand Richards, and the grave was dedicated by Elder Antoine R. Ivins.

And then Elder Lee added this final note: "I had at least twenty-five requests from bishops to speak at sacrament meetings which are to be in the nature of memorial services for President Grant. Because of my weakened condition, I thought it was wise to decline them all."

On the following Monday, May 21, 1945, the First Presidency was reorganized. Of this first experience with tile succession process, Elder Lee wrote, "It was a day long to be remembered."

The Apostles, which then numbered fourteen, including Presidents McKay and Clark, met in the temple. All were requested to come fasting. After they had dressed in white temple clothing and had engaged in prayer, Brother George Albert Smith opened the meeting with a brief talk and then called upon each of the Brethren to speak, in the order of their seniority. Each declared his feeling that there should be no delay in organizing the First Presidency and the sentiment was unanimous that George Albert Smith, as senior member and President of the Council, should be named as the President of the Church. "There was a rich outpouring of spirit, and love was freely expressed," Elder Lee wrote.

The new Presidency was officially reorganized when George Albert Smith was ordained and set apart by George F. Richards, with all the Twelve assisting. President Smith then chose President Clark and President McKay as his counselors, and set them apart. George F. Richards was sustained and set apart as the new President of the Council of the Twelve. President Smith was seventy-five years of age when he was ordained, having served previously for forty-one years as an Apostle. He felt comfortable in retaining president Grant's former counselors as his own, since they had been leading Grant's Church for the past eleven years.

Because his nervous condition was aggravated by the events of the preceding days, Elder Lee spent a sleepless night following the reorganization of the First Presidency. He awoke the following morning weary and fatigued, and determined that he would stay at home to help Sister Lee with some housework. About three o'clock that afternoon, however, pressing servicemen's work forced him to go to the office, and once there he continued polishing his next radio address.

Elder Charles A. Callis came to visit him and stated that he had expressed to his wife the thought that he had hoped the two former counselors in the First Presidency would be chosen by Brother Smith, but that if there were to be any change he had also hoped Elder Lee would be chosen as a counselor so he could grove up with an inside knowledge of Church matters. Elder Lee quietly appreciated the vote of confidence from his friend who officed next door to him, but he never repeated the conversation.

Trip to Hawaiian Islands

The First Presidency requested Elder Lee to attend meetings in Honolulu during July 1945. He was to be the first General Authority to visit the Islands since the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor on December 7, 1941.

On Sunday, June 24, 1945, Elder Lee gave his last radio talk before going to dinner at his parents' home, located in the lower Avenues area of Salt Lake City. There he received a blessing from his sixty-eight-year-old ailing father in preparation for the journey.

What might seem like a luxurious vacation to us today was in fact an arduous one-week journey by sea in an ancient steam freighter filled with a cargo of milk cows, trucks, tractors, and produce. In addition to the cargo there were twenty-four passengers, comprising as motley an assembly of human beings as the mind could conceive. The accommodations were anything but comfortable, Elder Lee's cabin consisting of a 10x12-foot space he shared with five others. Each had a cot and a small wooden locker. Boxes served as chairs when they could be found, and the toilets and washroom were on the upper deck.

The old freighter Maunaw'ili. built in 1921, lumbered out of the San Francisco harbor at cloven o'clock on the morning on July

First Presidency from 1945 to 1951: (left to right) J. Reuben Clark, Jr., George Albert Smith, David O. McKay

During visit to Hawaiian Islands, July, 1945

6, 1945. Engine trouble developed at about fifty miles out to sea, and the ship limped back to port at seven o'clock that night, thus wasting the entire day. After a two-day delay for repairs, the ship finally cleared the bay at 9:00 P.M. in a heavy fog, requiring the captain to sound the horn every few minutes as a safety precaution. Not surprisingly, Elder Lee recorded in his journal, "I had some peculiar feelings at the thought of the trip away from the Mainland for the first time in my life."

Elder Lee used the time at sea to review his recently completed radio sermons in preparation for their publication as a book. An impromptu Sunday service was arranged for nine of the passengers who accepted the invitation of the captain to use the mess hall for the meeting. Elder Lee's impression of the service described the diverse company he was keeping: "Seldom could one meet a less religious group than those who are on this ship. With vulgarity, profanity, and gambling, they, by every breath they draw, seem to defy the principles of truth, and it seems as though we are casting pearls before swine."

With one exception the voyage itself was uneventful and the seas calm, despite the war-time conditions. Strict rules governing war conditions were posted on the ship's bulletin board forbidding the passengers to write letters or keep diaries in which the movements of the ship were detailed. Sunday, after the Church services, those aboard were given a scare when the head of a steam turbine in the engine room was blown off with a great burst of steam. The ship was in the submarine danger zone, and the thought of lying adrift all night as a perfect target for the enemy gave no one any peace of mind. But within a half-hour the steam had been diverted through the use of an auxiliary turbine and the ship was again underway. War dangers were ever in mind, however. For two days the guns aboard the ship had been uncovered and oiled, ready for momentary combat.

At the Honolulu harbor, friendly faces were most happily recognized as President Ralph E. Wooley and his son-in-law, Jay Quealy, greeted Elder Lee. Afterwards, their travels through the Islands more than compensated for the inconvenience of the voyage.

On Maui Island Elder Lee recalled the early missionary incident of President Lorenzo Snow's miraculous restoration to life after having been underwater for thirty minutes. It was here, also, that George Q. Cannon laid the foundation for missionary work in the Islands after others in his group had failed. when he received the gift of tongues sufficient for him to understand the native Hawaiian language.

Another historical visit was matte to the monument erected at the place where the first branch of the Church in the Hawaiian Islands was established at Pulehu, in 1851. Here, also. in 1921, President David O. McKay and Elder Hugh J. Cannon, in company with E. Wesley Smith and David Kailemai, had a manifestation after a prayer offered by President McKay. Brother Kailemai saw clasped hands and remarked that the veil between them and the spirit world was very thin. Brother Cannon saw the same and said there was no veil.

Flying next to the island of Molokai, the group made a telephone call to President Waddoups at the leper colony. At Kalaupapa President Waddoups insisted the visitors come down to the colony to see them and the Latter-day Saints who were patients there. The trail on the end of this lonely island was covered on mules, three miles down a steep mountain path.

Fifty-two members of the Church were enrolled at the leper colony at Kalaupapa. A meeting was called by Brother Waddoups and twenty members attended. Elder Lee's journal described this not easily forgotten experience:

All of them were in pitiable condition with eyes blinded, fingers eaten away, face and arms and legs mutilated. Yet they are carrying on faithfully every phase of the Church, including priesthood work, Sunday School, M.I.A., Relief Society, ward teaching. genealogical, and missionary work. The branch president made a brief report of their work, and Brother Kailemai, a counselor and chairman of the Genealogical Committee, bore testimony and in behalf of the Saints there expressed appreciation for our visit to them.

When they sang to us, "Come, come ye Saints, no toil nor labor fear," and bore their testimony of what the Church meant to them, one of them turned to us, representing the visitors and the authorities and said: "If we had to choose between having the leprosy and being here with the gospel of Jesus Christ, or being well and whole, off the island, without the gospel of Jesus Christ, we would choose to be here as lepers so we could enjoy the blessings of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints."

I then spoke to them briefly and extended the love of the presiding Brethren, and as an Apostle of the Lord I blessed hem that they might remain true and faithful; and we closed with singing, "We Thank Thee, O God, for a Prophet." The four girls in the colony under twenty years of age arrived just at that point from a picnic excursion to the north of the island. Their faces looked old and terribly disfigured.

After many meetings with the servicemen, Elder Lee came home with abundant evidence of the miracles produced by faithful adherence to the gospel which blessed and strengthened these brethren during their life-threatening experiences in the war-torn South Pacific.

Elder Lee's farewell at the conclusion of his tour prompted this note in his journal: "The genuine love and adoration of these people for a representative of the General Authorities is almost unbelievable."

October Conference, 1945

With the dedication of the Idaho Falls Temple just completed, and the attendant blessings of a temple dedication still fresh in the minds of the members of the Church, it was time for another general conference. This was a significant time, because it marked the sustaining of the new First Presidency in a solemn assembly and the call of Elder Matthew Cowley to the Twelve to fill the vacancy created by the death of President Grant. Elder Lee recalled that "the weather was perfect and a splendid spirit seemed to be present. Someone characterized this as the greatest conference we had held."

The following Thursday morning Elder Cowley was ordained and set apart as a member of the Quorum of the Twelve. Elder Lee was impressed by Elder Cowley's remarks at the end of the meeting, stating, "when he was asked to speak he bore a remarkable testimony, and gave evidence that he will perform a splendid service as an Apostle."

Before the year was over other General Authorities had passed away. Walking arm in arm away from the cemetery after the services for one brother in which the speakers had waxed eloquent in the extreme, President Clark issued one firm and lasting instruction to Elder Lee about what should be said at his own funeral. He told Elder Lee that he wanted the speakers to be kind to his vices, but under no circumstances were they to make his vices his virtues. This instruction stuck vividly in the mind of Elder Lee, who later was a speaker at President Clark's funeral and carried out the counsel he had received.

The Gift of Healing

If there was a "routine" occurrence in Harold B. Lee's life, it may very well have been the frequency with which he was called upon to administer to the sick. The thickest folder in his file cabinet after many years as an Apostle was the one simply labeled "Miracles."

In addition to the growing administrative responsibilities that were accruing, Elder Lee's spiritual ministry among the Saints seemed to increase day by day. For example, the Deseret News published a story in 1946 of an eight-month-old baby named Levine, whose eyesight was miraculously restored through a cornea transplant, a new procedure in those days, by Dr. Castravejo of New York City. Elder Lee read the account more knowingly than anyone else, because he had assisted in giving the baby a blessing when he attended a conference in the area in September 1945.

Elder Henry D. Moyle, who shared many priesthood administrations with Elder Lee, testified that after Elder Lee had blessed him in the LDS Hospital the intense distress and pain he had suffered dissipated.

Following is another example of a typical night:

Last night at the request of Sister Waters I went to the LDS Hospital to administer to Holman's baby, Ricky, and witnessed a wonderful calm come over him while my hands were on his head. I also went to the home of Gabriel Torres, whose little son is suffering from rheumatic fever.

Elder Lee understood the power was not his, but the Lord's, to give, and his to use as his faith increased. The blessing President Grant had given to him, reminding him that he must be humble to have the Spirit of the Holy Ghost with him, was the hallmark of his service. He seemed always to be most at home with the humble Saints, for he came from similar conditions, and his humble nature was a major source of his power. For example, after a stake conference in central Utah he paid tribute to the fine men leading the rural North Sanpete Stake:

I held a very delightful meeting with the stake presidency of the North Sanpete Stake and with the welfare workers and later with the priesthood leaders. These men impress one as being of the fine, old, pioneer stock and solid to the core. I feel I am a stronger and better man for having met with them.

Work of Restoration Demeaned

Fawn Brodie and Maurine Whipple each had a book published in 1946 that drew concern from the General Authorities, sparking considerable attention. As Elder Lee traveled with Elder Spencer W. Kimball to a stake conference in Orangeville, Utah, Elder Kimball read aloud portions of Mrs. Brodie's book; Elder Lee labeled the book "another defilement of sacred things." Elder Lee also read the Whipple book while traveling to San Diego, California, thinking he could help others who might be concerned about its contents, and concluded that it was a "cleverly devised tool to strike at the divinity of the work of the Lord's Church."

In the years that followed, Harold B. Lee often cited statements that were made at the April 1946 general conference condemning those who had sought to gain fame and fortune by demeaning the Prophet Joseph Smith and the work of the Restoration. Elder Lee said the conference climaxed with Elder A. E. Bowen's biting denunciation of apostate writers who had maligned the Prophet Joseph Smith. Then President George Albert Smith furnished the capstone in prophetic words not written out in advance and not even contemplated. His words, thought Elder Lee, came with a crystal clear, glistening rhetoric that could only have been spoken by a prophet of God. Said President Smith:

There have been some who have belittled him, but I would like to say that those who have done so will be forgotten and their remains will go back to mother earth, if they have not already gone, and the odor of their infamy will never die, while the glory and honor and majesty and courage and fidelity manifested by the Prophet Joseph Smith will attach to his name forever. (Conference Report, April 1946, pp. 181-82.)

Elder Benson's European Assignment

The four junior members of the Council of the Twelve enjoyed a close relationship with Elder Lee in many ways. They could relate better socially and administratively to him, their families were the same age, and they tended to look to him for guidance because

Farewell at the airport for Ezra Taft Benson as he departs for European assignments, 1946: (left to right) Fred Babbel, June Babel, Mathew Cowley, Flora Benson, Ezra Taft Benson, Emma Marr Petersen, Harold B. Lee, Camilla Kimball, Elva Cowley, Mark E. Petersen, Fern Lee, Spencer W. Kimball

of his experience. They also had some moments of relaxation together, one of which proved to be highly entertaining to all of the General Authorities and their wives at a Lion House social. Elder Kimball arranged a program of singing and stunts, and Elder Lee accompanied Elders Kimball, Benson, Petersen, and Cowley at the piano while they performed as a male quartet. Elder Lee pronounced the performance a success and said in his journal that their act "went over very well."

Now, as one of their members was leaving for an assignment abroad, the junior members of the Council of the Twelve and their wives were guests at a dinner in President Clark's home, in honor of Elder Benson. The next day, Elder Lee and the four junior members of the Twelve and their wives all went to the airport to bid farewell to Elder Benson, who was leaving for an indefinite period of time to preside over the European Mission.

Elder Benson's administration in Europe was backed up by the welfare plan through which post-war supplies were distributed to needy Saints. Elder Lee met with his welfare staff of Elder Romney and Brother Roscoe Eardley, first with President Clark and then with President George Albert Smith. They decided to accept a proposal worked out by the staff on the basis of a rough estimate of the amount of food necessary for each country according to the Church membership in each until the next harvest, which was seven months distant. They were therefore directed to send thirteen and one-fourth railway cars of food and five and one-fourth cars of clothing, in addition to that which had been sent previously to Europe.

Elder Benson's tour of duty on another continent kept him away from his family from January 29, 1946, until December 17 of that year.

Marriage of Daughters

Elder Lee was on a busy schedule in 1946, attempting to fulfill all the requests that came to have him officiate in temple sealings (live marriages). World War II had ended, the servicemen were home, and wedding bells were ringing wildly. He performed 196 sealings during that year, but none was as significant to him as the sealing of his younger daughter, Helen, to L. Brent Goates on June 24, 1946. He called it "one of the greatest experiences of my life."

After the honeymoon of the newlyweds, Elder and Sister Lee helped them move into a downtown apartment. The natural intimacy of the close family from which she had come produced very sentimental feelings in Helen and emotions were near the surface. It wasn't easy for her dad, either, He wrote: "Helen was reluctant to leave us, but even though she is now a full-grown, married woman, she is still to me just my little girl and will always be so in my affections."

His travel assignments, taking him often away from home on birthdays and other holidays. prompted Elder Lee to write an affectionate letter to Helen on the occasion of her first birthday away from home after her marriage. She was then in Portland, Oregon, with her serviceman husband. The letter was handwritten on motel stationery from Mesa. Arizona, dated November 22, 1946. It has served as an oft-quoted teaching tool of Helen Goates.

This is intended to be something of a birthday letter to my "youngest" from a sentimental old Dad who is lonesome for his lovely daughter. So far as I can recall this is the first time in your life that you will be spending your birthday and Thanksgiving away from us, and, with the exception of the year we were in Mexico. the first time away from your home on those days.

As with every day of your life. you can never relive any part of it except in memory and if any day be wasted or misspent, that day becomes only one of regret or remorse. To live one's life to the fullest then becomes a daily responsibility for which you need the constant guidance of divine powers to avoid the pitfalls that make for long detours back onto the path of safety and truth. Too many adopt the philosophy of the old preacher "unless you are in desperate need, your prayers just ain't got no suction." One who has understanding realizes that we are always in great need of spiritual help. So it was that the Master taught:

"Blessed arc the poor in spirit who come unto

me, for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven."

The "poor in spirit" are the spiritually needy who daily lean on and trust the arm of the Lord.

To me your birthday, always on or about Thanksgiving Day has always seemed most appropriate. I thanked God for my baby when you came twenty-one years ago and I have thanked him for you every day since. From babyhood you have possessed strong opinions and a will. Well do I remember your childhood efforts to make it an obedient will, and my prayer for you today is, as always in the past, that your will be made subservient to that which is right. As the depth of your thinking has been revealed on many occasions when you have furnished us keepsakes of your thinking, I have gloried in the unfolding of the life of my own daughter. When you made the greatest decision of your life thus far, in choosing your life's companion, somehow I had complete assurance that you had chosen well. My own way would have been to have urged greater deliberation, but perhaps the times justified the means and I accepted your decision with thanksgiving.

There lies yet ahead greater joys and, yes, greater anxieties than you have yet known, for remember that great love is built on great sacrifice and that a daily determination in each other to please in things that are right will build a sure foundation for a happy home. That determination for the welfare of each other must be mutual and not one-sided or selfish. Husband and wife must feel equal responsibilities and obligations to each other. Two of the things that today strike at the security of modern homes is that young husbands have never sensed their full obligation in supporting a family and young wives have side-stepped the responsibility of settling down to the serious business of raising a family and making a home.

Your being with Brent now should prove a blessing to both of you. Together you can dream dreams and together you can work and sacrifice to make your dreams come true. With all my love to you and Brent and wishing you much joy on your birthday, I am, Your loving daddy, Harold B. Lee.

It is worth noting that Elder Lee's presence in Arizona was for the purpose of attending two stake conferences, taking "a complete rest" during the week separating the conferences, but as he explained in the following lines to Helen, there is seldom such rest for a General Authority:

I came to Mesa from Thatcher, Arizona, with instructions from the Brethren to hide out and take a complete rest before going on to Tucson next Saturday and Sunday. I fared pretty well until yesterday when I walked out to get something to eat and was "discovered" by President Wright. I escaped last night only after a Rotary Club luncheon, a visit to the welfare farm, to a house of death, to an MIA meeting, and to a welfare stake meeting, and after that a choir party. If all goes well, I should be home next Tuesday night.

By June of the following year, Maurine and her husband-to-be, Ernest J. Wilkins of Prescott, Arizona, were also making marriage plans following their simultaneous graduation from BYU. The date, set a week after graduation on June 11, 1947, excited prospects of another garden wedding reception like the one the family

Helen Lee and L. Brent Goates wedding picture, June 24, 1946

Maurine Lee and Ernest J. Wilkins wedding picture, June 11, 1947

had enjoyed the year before. Two days before the wedding, however, a constant downpour of rain throughout the day and into the morning of the following day threatened their plans. When rain had come the year before on the day of the wedding, Eider Lee "laid the whole matter before the Lord and He tempered the elements and gave us a perfect day for our wedding reception." There was no reason to think the rain would spoil things this year either, but the deluge continued all through the day of the wedding.

That afternoon, following the sealing ceremony in the Salt Lake Temple, Elder Lee in customary fashion worked heroically the remainder of the day constructing a canopy to shelter the patio so that the reception could still be held outdoors. But alas, the weight of the heavy rains collapsed his improvised rescue creation, forcing the guests indoors. Maurine cried briefly in her disappointment, and Elder Lee pondered the Lord's judgment. When the elements needed to be tempered for the two June outdoor wedding receptions for the daughters he loved, he soberly contemplated the lesson that his prayers were granted as he requested, but only once.

With the wedding over, Elder Lee spent the remainder of his summer vacation painting his home. As always, he took delight in laboring with his hands, and frequently engaged in projects around the home. His tools were always neatly arranged in his workroom, and he knew the correct use for each one.

In the fall of 1947 Maurine's husband commenced his studies at Stanford University in Palo Alto, California, his course designed to lead to a doctorate degree in Romantic languages. Maurine's parents, always concerned and helpful, went to be with them as they settled into new housing. While in California, the parents learned of the birth of their first grandchild on September 9, 1947. Helen had given birth to a boy, later named David Brent Goates, but forever afterward known by his Grandfather Lee as "Skipper," meaning, the captain of Elder Lee's kingdom.

1947-1950. Truman and Marshall Plans prostrated. First microwave cooker went on sale in the United States. John Cobb set land speed record of 394.2 miles per hour. Cadillac started tailfin fad First transistor developed at Bell Laboratories Truman surprised Dewey. North Atlantic Treaty ratified. Beginning of Korea "police action." American military involvement in Vietnam Started nation's longest war.
