Brent L. Goates, Harold B. Lee: Prophet and Seer ( 1985)

14 The Passing of Elder Charles A. Callis

Elder Charles A. Callis had presided over the Southern States Mission for over twenty-five years prior to his being called to the Council of the Twelve and was virtually "sainted" in the hearts of Church members living there. The assignment to create the first stake of the Church in the South had been long contemplated in 1946, but was reserved for Elder Callis to perform when his failing health permitted him to travel. At the beginning of 1947 Elder Lee was assigned to accompany this mighty Apostle and on January 11 the Lees departed for Jacksonville, Florida.

Elder Callis arrived in Florida a day ahead of the Lees to clear up a personal matter with a dear friend. Once this was taken care of, Elder Callis told Elder Lee. his junior companion, that he was willing to leave the details of organizing the stake in his hands. In the course of the interviews, however, some difference of opinion arose concerning whether Orlando and some of the other mission branches should be included in the new stake. Differing from Elder Lee and some of the local priesthood leaders, Elder Callis was insisting that Orlando, Florida, ought to be included.

Eleven years later Elder Lee used this experience to teach an important characteristic of prayer to seminary teachers of the Church. He recalled:

When Mission President Heber Meeks and President Douberly from the Orlando Florida Branch and I all disagreed, it worried President Callis. That was always a rather serious situation to me, too, to not be in agreement with Brother Callis. He was a man of strong, vigorous, and powerful thinking.

He said finally, "I will have to sleep on this." With that statement he dismissed me. The next morning he called me into his room, and as he pulled his chair close alongside mine, he said to me with an impressiveness which I shall never forget, "Last night I talked with God, and he has given me to understand that you are right and I am wrong." (From an advanced course in theology at Brigham Young University, July 6, 1956.)

As they concluded their interviews they overheard the choir practicing in the chapel. When the choir began singing the hymn "O My Father," Elder Callis broke into tears, and said to the brethren, "Take care of your wives; I haven't and she's gone." His emotions were close to the surface, and it became apparent to those who were with him that he was preparing for the end of his life. He ordered a room in the church fitted up as a bedroom, and he insisted upon spending two nights alone in that room. He told the brethren that everywhere he went he saw Sister Callis. Elder Lee wrote:

I had the impression, and so expressed myself to Sister Jenkins, that Brother Callis wanted to die and had wished it could take place in that room, by himself. He had us drive him to the old chapel and to the home where his twin sons were born and died. He seemed to be reliving these experiences for the last time.

Members of the Church came to Jacksonville, Florida, from as far away as Miami and Charleston, South Carolina, with 789 in attendance at the morning session and 1,043 present for the afternoon session of the history-making event. The spirit of prophecy

Speaking at creation of Florida stake, 1947 (Charles A. Callis seated to the right of the pulpit)

was upon Elder Callis as he presided at the conference, all the time very near his departed loved ones to whom he made frequent reference.

A Perfect Parting

After the announcement of the new stake presidency in the Sunday morning session, Elder Callis seemed to have suffered a mild heart attack, but grew stronger during the day. He spoke with great emotion to the Saints he loved and paid tribute to Sister Callis, declaring that she and others who had labored as missionaries in the South were in attendance at their meeting that day. He prophesied that there would be other stakes organized in the South, and that eventually a temple would be built there that the younger members of the stake would live to see. The fulfillment of his prophecy came on June 1-4, 1983, with the dedication of the first temple to be constructed in the South-in Atlanta, Georgia.

After setting apart sixty-four ward and stake officers, the visiting authorities were guests for dinner at the home of Brother and Sister O. H. Hawkins. The Lees left at 9:00 P.M. for St. Augustine, where they spent the night. Elder Callis, in excellent spirits that night, requested his host, Brother Hawkins, to retell a famous fight story. Later in the evening he asked Brother Hawkins to arrange for his return trip to Salt Lake City the next day.

The following day, driving toward Miami, Elder and Sister Lee were stopped by a highway patrolman who informed them that he had a death message for them. They learned then that Elder Callis had died suddenly the night before of a heart attack.

Elder Lee reported the death immediately to President David O. McKay in Salt Lake City, advising him that the Saints in the South were desirous of holding services in Jacksonville for their beloved leader, before the Lees left with his body for Utah. Elder Lee cleared the proposal with President George Albert Smith, and memorial services were delayed in Salt Lake City until after funeral services were concluded in Florida.

Twelve years later, while teaching a group of student leaders, Elder Lee drew on an experience he had at Elder Callis's funeral to illustrate the importance of praying for each other:

I was the one to conduct Brother Callis's funeral service in Florida. It was a sorrowful trail that I had followed. I loved Brother Callis. My heart was tender. In the quiet of my hotel room I shed some tears; I tried to prepare. Finally the day came. It was Thursday, January 23, 1947. The funeral was to start at 10:00 a.m. in the Jacksonville Ward Chapel.

Speakers were President D Homer Yarn. President of tile Georgia District; A. E. Jenkins, senior member of the high council and dear friend of Elder Callis; President Heber Meeks, president of the Southern States Mission; and myself.

As the first two speakers concluded it was now about a quarter to eleven, and as the song was being rendered, before the president of the mission and I then were to conclude the service. a Western Union messenger arrived with a telegram for me. When I opened it, it was a message from the First Presidency requesting that I read it at the service. I arose to read it and I suddenly found myself overwhelmed with some kind of a great feeling that I couldn't quite understand. It wasn't sorrow. because I had conquered that in those two days preceding. And then I began to think, "This is Thursday." What was it that I felt? Suddenly when that telegram came it was as though I was just as close to the Council of the Twelve and the Presidency as though they had walked in and taken their seats on the stand behind me. Up to that time I had felt so much alone. with such a heavy responsibility. Twelve o'clock in Florida meant it was 10:00 a.m. in Salt Lake City, and knowing the way the Council meeting is held, at 10:45 a.m. every member of the Twelve and the First Presidency would be dressed in temple clothing surrounding an altar in the place nearest to heaven on earth. And I said. "Now I know what is happening. They have offered a prayer for me. and this is the answer. I am receiving the answer of the prayers of the First Presidency and the Twelve."

When I returned home, my first question to President George F. Richards was: "Brother Richards. in your temple meeting last Thursday do you remember whether or not at the prayer at the altar there was a prayer offered for me particularly?" He thought a moment and said: "Yes, Brother McKay led us. And he prayed that the Lord would bless you down there all alone so that you would feel the strength of the Presidency and the Council of the Twelve to be with you." I said: "I received it in one of the most dramatic experiences of my life."

I was taught by that experience how important it is to receive the prayers of the faithful.

Elder Lee entered this final comment in his journal about a sacred moment at the conclusion of the services for Brother Callis in Jacksonville: "As the services ended and I went to Brother Callis's room in the Church to get my hat, I seemed to hear him say to me, 'Well done, son, well done'-and I felt satisfied."

On January 28, 1947, a funeral service was held in the Salt Lake Tabernacle for this powerful missionary-Apostle so revered in the South. Nearly four thousand persons attended, despite a snowstorm. At the following Thursday meeting with the Quorum of the Twelve, Elder Lee voiced Elder Callis's opinion that other stakes in the mission should be created, rather than further dividing the mission. He then repeated in the presence of the First Presidency the prophecy made by Elder Callis that other stakes, and one day a temple, would grace the Southern States.

At the meeting of the Twelve on April 24, 1947 it was decided to organize two new stakes from the missions, one centering at Columbia, South Carolina, which partially fulfilled the prophecy, and another one at Spokane, Washington.

1947: Conference and Centennial

The highlight of the April 1947 general conference was the sustaining and installation of Elder Henry D. Moyle, longtime chairman of the General Welfare Committee, as the new Apostle. Once more President Clark asked Elder Lee to prepare the new appointee for the experiences and procedures he was about to undergo, as he had done when Elders Kimball, Benson, and Petersen were called. This Elder Lee did by going to the home of Elder Moyle on the Saturday night prior to his sustaining on Sunday. He repeated the preparation at the temple in advance of Elder Moyle's ordination on the following Thursday.

Other General Authorities appointed at this conference were Eldred G. Smith, Patriarch to the Church, and Joseph L. Wirthlin and Thorpe B. Isaacson, counselors to Presiding Bishop LeGrand Richards.

A special feature of this conference was a meeting on Monday, April 7, for all stake presidencies who came to the Salt Lake Temple for instruction from their priesthood leaders. Elder Lee later recorded: "A wonderful meeting was held in the Assembly Room of the Salt Lake Temple, where the General Authorities and two thousand members of stake presidencies and bishoprics partook of the sacrament and heard some plain, direct instructions on chastity, temple recommends, finances, ward teaching, and the welfare program."

One announcement changing mission field organization in the Church was made at this conference. President McKay attended the meeting of the mission presidents with all the General Authorities and announced a new plan of naming two counselors for each mission president, chosen from among the missionaries or from brethren living in the missions.

The year 1947 was observed as Utah's centennial year, and celebration events to last five and one-half months opened officially on May 1, 1947, with a meeting in the Salt Lake Tabernacle and with a special lighting of the Brigham Young Monument. The hoisting of a flag on Ensign Peak also began the celebration.

Tour of Western States Mission

Having served in the Western States Mission as a young missionary, Elder Lee was now filled with anticipation to return to his old territory as an Apostle, twenty-seven years later. It was summer, and the temperatures reached into the hundreds as his party passed by the famed White Sands of New Mexico en route to Alamogordo. High winds stirred up the famous pure white gypsum, which resembled banks of snow drifted into beautiful formations. At the Alamorgordo meeting the winds continued with a fury, bringing the choking desert dust into the hall and finally knocking out the electric lights. The congregation was obliged to hear the last ten or fifteen minutes of Elder Lee's sermon in darkness.

Natural disasters accompanied them wherever they went. For example, floods came as Elder Lee drove all day through devastated areas to meet with the Saints at North Platte, Nebraska.

At Colorado Springs a huge turnout came to hear the Apostle from Salt Lake City. Many investigators were in the congregation, and Elder Lee had these impressions of the meeting:

Although we were very weary and hungry, the Spirit of the Lord picked us up and I felt the greatest freedom I have yet had on this tour in showing the value of a testimony and how, through faith, the work of the Lord has progressed, and bore testimony of it. I learned from the newspapers here that a tornado had visited Spear-fish, South Dakota, just twenty-four hours after we had passed through there last Friday.

Elder Lee was classified by many as being a conservative or a fundamentalist. Certainly one manifestation of this was his contempt for card playing. Once while setting up a new mission in Billings, Montana, he was inspired to preach on this subject and put to flight a nest of bridge-playing sisters. He taught his daughters to totally avoid face cards, which sometimes were used for evil purposes, and to even avoid the appearance thereof. At the beginning of the New Year in 1947, he went with Sister Lee to a dinner party at the home of a dear friend, but left promptly after dinner when he learned that the entertainment for the evening was to play Rook, which he regarded as a substitute for regular playing cards and a complete waste of time.

In 1947 another important person was added to Elder Lee's life when Frances Cardall was recruited from the Welfare Office to become one of the secretaries in the Council of the Twelve Office. Ultimately, as the work grew, she became Elder Lee's private secretary and remained such for twenty-six years, until President Lee's death. She was a quiet, reserved, and efficient worker. Loyalty was her greatest asset, and she became trusted and loved by the entire Lee family.

Samuel Marion Lee Dies

While engaged in his usual calendar of meetings at the Church Office Building, Elder Lee one day learned that his father was seriously ill at home. Cancelling his remaining commitments at the office he went to his father's bedside and arranged for his transportation to the LDS Hospital so that accumulated fluids could be drained from his lungs. Elder Lee felt distressed that he was confronted simultaneously with the daily pressures of his increasing Church responsibilities and with the care of his aging parents. This conflict made it impossible for him to please everyone much of the time.

The strain and shock of the medical treatments proved too much for Harold's father and he began to fail rapidly. For three days and two nights the vigil went around the clock, until Samuel Marion Lee, father of an Apostle who would ultimately become the eleventh President of the Church, died on May 9, 1947. Memorial services were held in the North 20th Ward on May 12, with the prayer given by Elder Mark E. Petersen and the grave dedicated by Elder Henry D. Moyle. President Clark and Harold H. Bennett, Samuel's employer at ZCMI, were the speakers at the services. Brother Bennett praised him for his loyalty and service as the supervisor of night employees at ZCMI. President Clark spoke of his valiant service in Church positions, and referred to a member of the Romney family who had told him that in forty years no ward teacher had visited them as effectively and faithfully as had Samuel Marion Lee. Many relatives from Clifton, Idaho, attended the services.

The Pressures Mount

The strain and demands on Church leaders is heavy. That they live for the most part to such ripe old ages is ample testimony that the Lord sustains them. A typical stake conference schedule indicates the pressures of the weekends away from home. On October 26, 1947, Elder Lee recorded his experiences while attending the Spokane Stake conference: "I was kept constantly on the stand of the chapel from 9:00 AM until 7:15 P.M., interrupted only long enough for a sandwich and salad for lunch and supper. Caught the train for home at 7:40 P.M."

The rigors of his assignments began to take their toll on his health. The day following his forty-eighth birthday, he awoke with pains in his chest, reminding him that he was overworking his heart and that a slower pace was needed.

It is coincidental that he shared the same birthday with Elder Spencer W. Kimball, but Elder Kimball was then fifty-two years of age, four years older than Elder Lee. Harold B. Lee and many of his companions in the work of the kingdom experienced challenges to their health because of the demanding schedules required of them. Six weeks later when Elder Lee finally got to the doctor for an examination, he was happy to learn that his heart showed no weakening.

There seemed to be no rest, however, even on holidays, as this next entry attests. So confident were the Saints in the genuine concern that Elder Lee possessed for them that those in need of spiritual strength and the repentant unhesitantly sought him out. It is clear that he never refused them:

Fortunately we were blessed with a clear day and the office was closed so I worked the entire holiday in the yard to get the leaves cleaned up and the water shut off before freezing weather. I had a call from a young Ryser couple whose baby had swallowed an open safety pin and went with them to the hospital to administer to the baby before they took it by plane to Chicago for an operation. Also, I had a visit from a man who had been dishonest with his employers back in Indiana and a young man from Denver who thought he was under the influence of an evil power. I finished the day almost completely exhausted.

He often found relief from tension produced by the constant travel and office regimen by working in his garden at home, and used it as his therapy. He wrote on October 20, 1947, "I left the office early thinking some work in the yard at home would clear my head and quiet my nerves. Enjoyed my evening with the family."

Temper and Humble Heart

One of Elder Lee's most obvious flaws, behavior he said he observed in his ancestry, was his temper. An interesting anecdote illustrating this weakness comes from his journal. The day after a member of the Welfare Committee had referred to the early practices in the welfare program as the "dark ages," this entry appears:

I met with the Welfare Committee in their weekly meetings, where in answer to a question of Brother Romney as to my discussion with the Welfare Committee member last night, I told him that my. remarks were only a "burst of truth." He replied that he hoped that such would not "burst upon him," which suggested to me that I had been pretty severe with the brother.

Whenever he detected that same tendency in one of his own posterity, he attempted to "nip it in the bud." With one Little League grandson he entered into a pact that if Grandfather provided him with a new fielder's mitt, it could only be worn if he did not allow his temper to take control in the game. When his temper flared, the mitt was to be returned to Grandfather until there was evidence that control had returned. An understanding Elder Lee often had the mitt as much as did his grandson.

More typical of Elder Lee's ministry than his occasional "bursts of truth," however, was the humility that often caused him to doubt his effectiveness even at routine stake conferences. On Saturday, September 27, 1947, after holding the evening welfare and leadership meetings at the beginning of the Park Stake conference in Salt Lake City, Elder Lee wrote in his journal: "I came away from these preliminary meetings somewhat at a loss to know whether or not I had accomplished anything. Perhaps I was not close enough to the Lord."

There were other occasions when there was no doubt, and the Lord worked in him mightily for the edification of the Saints. His former mission president, in attendance at the Hillside Stake conference in March 1946, told him that he had attended stake conferences for over fifty years, and had never witnessed a finer conference in his entire life. With such high praise, Elder Lee's evaluation is interesting:

The high spiritual and emotional tension after Hillside Stake conference kept sleep from me until 3:00 a.m. when I arose to pray for rest and sleep. Bishop Denning of the Mountain View Ward came in Monday to express his appreciation for the instructions at the quarterly conference, and I received a letter from Merrill J. Brockbank speaking in superlative terms of the closing conference session.

Devotion to Duty

The crucible of service through which the General Authorities are called upon to pass daily is an indication of their keen reverence for the sacredness of their callings. The following incident illustrates the focus of duty that often supersedes consideration for their own personal safety.

On Saturday, February 7, 1948, Elder Lee received word that his conference appointment had been changed so that he could attend the funeral of a former stake president in Grace, Idaho. The night before he was to leave, snow and ice made the streets and highways extremely dangerous. The President of the Council of the Twelve, George F. Richards, had cancelled seven conference appointments so dangerous were the roads, and President Clark even cancelled Elder Let's trip to Idaho. Later in the day, however, Elder Lee was called into President Richards's office, who reported on a visit with President George Albert Smith. President Smith, it seemed, had talked to the bishop in Grace, who informed him that they saw no reason why someone could not attend the funeral from Salt Lake City, representing the General Authorities. At that point it was clear that Elder Lee was going to Grace despite the road conditions, even when President Clark called later to say that he had done everything he could to discourage such an ill-advised journey.

Elder Lee left at 8:00 A.M. on Sunday with his wife to attend the funeral. Until he reached Preston, Idaho, he drove the icy roads, at one point narrowly avoiding a serious accident when the car skidded on a sharp turn and slid into a hill. Three men assisted Elder Lee by pushing the vehicle back onto the road. After all his effort to get to the funeral, there were five speakers and six musical numbers listed on the program, leaving him scant time for giving a meaningful sermon.

On Monday, after another harrowing return trip following the funeral, President Smith phoned to inquire of Elder Lee if he had gone to Grace the day before. By his comments he indicated that he thought bad road conditions was not a sufficiently valid reason to excuse filling an assignment.

This was not an isolated instance of such conflicting opinions. Later, in their last temple meeting before the summer vacation, President Clark urged the Brethren to take a concentrated rest and learn to say no to requests for speaking during that period. His comments were then followed by President Smith with a statement that the Brethren interpreted as meaning they should be constantly available throughout the vacation period for speaking engagements upon request.

Often bordering on nervous and physical exhaustion, the Brethren strove on with the never-ending demands of the callings they shared.

Elder Lee was called from his bed in the middle of the night on one occasion "to go to the home of a family threatened with the loss of their business due to a lack of capital and over-expenditures for equipment and buildings, etc." One week later he wrote: "The strenuous meetings all day drove out all possibilities of sleep until after 3:00 A.M." Five days later he recorded a similar entry: "Found myself on an extreme nervous tension last night that forbade several hours of sleep." During these times of stress, he found comfort in his family and often gathered them about him to refresh himself.

During this time, he was also concerned about the impending delivery of his second grandchild. Maurine, small in stature and thought by her doctors unable to have a child by normal delivery, was in his prayers after a long drive home from a conference:

I found myself again very much worn out with the strain of conference and the long drive home from St. George. Because of Maurine's travail and the complications that have been found by the doctors that might make the natural birth difficult, I have fasted throughout the day and went into the temple, where I had prayer for her.

The answer to his petition came at 2:30 A.M. the following day, when Sister Lee called from Orinda. California, to announce the birth of Alan Lee Wilkins, weighing 7 lbs. 12 oz. Maurine had not more than twelve hours of labor, and the baby had been delivered normally with no complications.

Working under pressure and fatigue seemed Harold B. Lee's lot throughout his ministry, almost as if there were not enough time to accomplish his life's mission. He described one Sunday as follows:

I arrived in Los Angeles at 7:15 a.m. and was met by the stake presidency, who drove me to the Huntington Park Chapel. where I met with them until the high council came at 9:00 a.m. and through the general sessions, which were held at 10:00 a.m. and 6:30 p.m., with a priesthood leadership meeting in the afternoon and a fireside after the evening meeting. Ordinations and missionary interviews entirely filled up the day until 10:30 p.m., with hardly time for a sandwich.

Far from complaining about the long hours, constant fatigue, and excessive travel, he was often exhilarated by the Spirit of the Holy Ghost in the conferences. The fruits of his service were in evidence in the lives affected by his teachings. His joy was in his service, and many would say when he passed away at the "young" age of seventy-four that it was only because he had put the demands of his duties ahead of his own regard for his health.

Not the least of his physical problems were his chronic migraine headaches, accentuated by his difficult travel schedules, vastly different than they are today. On Friday. May 21, 1948, he wrote:

I left at 8:30 a.m. on the Western Pacific train for Sacramento, California, to attend the regional meeting of the Northern California Region and the Sacramento Stake conference. I suffered from one of the worst headaches I have had for a long time, but I managed to make some preparation for my meetings and to study the reports. I arrived in Sacramento at 3:45 a.m.

The Church was expanding in 1948. and the travels of the Brethren to meet the needs reflected that fact.

In the midst of these pressures came the assignment to tour the New England States, where another General Authority, President S. Dilworth Young, and his wife were presiding at Cambridge, Massachusetts. It was unusual to see the ever-competent Elder Lee, the leader who always gave the impression of being in total control, rattled as he left for the mission tour with Sister Lee on May 29, 1948. He misplaced his train tickets and dashed to the office, only to find that they were in his briefcase all the time. Then, when they boarded the train, he discovered that he had left his briefcase at home, and wired from Evanston, Wyoming, to have it sent to him in New York by air express. By this time he was exhausted, and he took the opportunity to rest throughout the day.

The mission tour, however, provided a wonderful respite from pressures at home and gave the Lees their first opportunity to see at close hand the many historic sites of the American Revolutionary War period, as well as Plymouth Rock, where the Pilgrims landed in 1620. They also visited the birthplace monument of the Prophet Joseph Smith at Sharon County, Vermont, and on to Nova Scotia. At the end of this tour through quaint and beautiful New England, Elder Lee reported that the most impressive finding was that most of the investigators at each place he visited were located by missionaries while they were working in the country districts tracting without purse or scrip.

The growing church of 170 stakes had increasing financial requirements, and President Clark confided to Elder Lee his worries concerning the growth problems and finances. In 1948, the Church budget was the largest to that time.

Another concern was for the health of the Apostles, who now were traveling farther and longer than ever before. In February, six of the Twelve and President McKay were absent from the weekly temple meeting. President McKay was in Mexico, Stephen L Richards was in South America, John A. Widtsoe was in Canada, Albert E. Bowen and Mark E. Petersen were in the Northwestern States attending to business for the Deseret News, Ezra Taft Benson was attending agricultural meetings in Idaho, and Matthew Cowley was in the South Pacific.

They were all feeling the pressure, and a rash of illness came upon them. By April, three of the Apostles were sidelined because of heart ailments. At their weekly meeting, with only seven assembled, word came that Elder Benson had been diagnosed as having had a heart attack, though not serious. Then the Twelve learned only three weeks later that Spencer W. Kimball had suffered a heart attack in Arizona, and cardiograph tests revealed a marked weakness in his heart. One week later Elder Kimball had another heart attack, anti Elder Lee went to bless him and to take a message to his son who was serving in the New England States Mission. President McKay was in the hospital with a heart attack when Elder Lee returned from the tour of the mission.

Travel was always a risk in those days, as Elder Lee learned when driving his dear friend Marion G. Romney's new DeSoto through Arizona en route to a stake conference. Elder Lee, taking a turn at the wheel, hit a farmer on a small tractor who had pulled into his driveway without any signal and had failed to see the approaching automobile as he crossed in front of them. Elder Lee records that he badly damaged the right front fender of Elder Romney's car, but doesn't comment on whether he was forgiven.

California Mission Tour: 1949

It is clear from Elder Lee's journal that the spiritual highlights of his ministry often came when he was in the mission field. His visit to California in March 1949, accompanied by his host-companion President Oscar W. McConkie, is no exception, but he began the tour reluctantly: "I seem weary and hardly in the mood, but I'm hoping to feel better as the visit progresses." He described his traveling companion in these words two days after their first Sunday meeting:

There was a remarkably fine spirit at the meeting, particularly at the dedicatory service at Blythe, where I enjoyed unusual freedom in offering the dedicatory prayer. President McConkie gave his usual forceful sermons in his strident, senatorial voice, but he displays a kindliness to the people and a marked deference to me that evidences a depth of humility.

At Hemet, en route from Palm Springs, he received a telegram informing him of the birth of Helen's second son, his third grandson, later named Harold Lee Goates after his grandfather.

President George Albert Smith was resting at a home in Laguna Beach, which the Church later purchased for such purposes, and Elder Lee was asked to administer to him, not realizing that he was yet far from them in the Arizona desert country. He had administered to the President three weeks earlier on his way to a conference in Snowflake, Arizona, but couldn't come to him this time.

The trip was filled with inspirational experiences, this one recorded after a meeting in Cottonwood, Arizona:

I had an unusual experience of preaching on the Godhead and the difference between the Holy Ghost and the Light of Christ and afterwards I learned that only within the week they had here a spirited discussion on the subject, because of a sermon from a recent convert in which false doctrine had been taught.

At each stop inspiration accompanied them. In Lancaster they heard stories about visions that investigators had received concerning the coming of the missionaries to teach them and about incidents concerning healings. Again Elder Lee's sermons gave precise direction to the needs of the Saints, some assuming that the visiting General Authority had been instructed in advance about what he should discuss. In Mohave they were entertained at the home of a member for supper. After returning to the chapel the compassionate Elder Lee "had a heartache when [he] learned some of the Elders had had no supper and presumably no money with which to buy food." At Bakersfield a large audience of nearly four hundred people assembled to hear the Apostle speak. Three were baptized after the meeting, including one investigator who had reversed his feelings about the Church during the meeting.

The tour lasted sixteen days. Over 350 investigators had heard him speak, half the mission population of 7,090 had attended the meetings, and he had interviewed 179 missionaries, but the highlight of the entire experience came while traveling with President McConkie over the lonely desert road to Barstow, California. As they exchanged faith-promoting stories and spiritual experiences with each other, President McConkie related the details of a dream in which he had gone to the home of Satan, and later told of an experience when Satan had appeared to him and his son James. Elder Lee suggested a correct interpretation of the dream, and then related an experience with a member of the Pioneer Stake who had been possessed by an evil spirit. This experience, which he had recorded on July 3, 1943, is described in these words:

I spent this Saturday afternoon cleaning up the yard, and while at work I had a visit from a man who came to tell me about the condition of his wife, who about six weeks ago gave birth to her sixth baby. During the last few days she had developed a peculiar attitude in quoting scriptures and repeating messages from spirits, etc. He requested that I go to their home and administer to her. I arrived there and had a most unusual experience. As I sat beside her on the couch, she turned to me with a cynical smile and asked: "Do you know who you are?" I said: "Yes, I know; who do you think I am?" She replied: "You're the great physician; you're the head of the Church." When I tried to counsel with her she said: "Oh, no, you are not going to send me from this world." I had the distinct impression that she was in the power of an evil spirit and was impressed to rebuke the spirit and cast it out by the authority of the Priesthood. I trembled like a leaf and my hair seemed to almost be as pin pricks. I learned that a man who had been excommunicated for plural marriage had come to their home to sell insulation, and that she commenced to become irrational from the time he came to the home. He came to the home while I was there, and she immediately was greatly animated at his appearance. On Sunday evening I went to the home of a brother of the woman on Downington Avenue in Salt Lake City, and with her husband and two brothers I again administered to her as I had done yesterday, and found that she had greatly improved and at times was entirely rational, although she still spoke of her friend as a prophet who had been sent to her.

After Elder Lee had related this encounter, it was President McConkie's turn to provide the inspired interpretation. "President McConkie said he thought that the evil spirit in the woman had spoken of not that which now was, but of that which Satan knew I was ordained to become." Elder Lee pondered the statement of President McConkie, an inspired interpretation given by the Holy Ghost in 1949 of an event that would come to pass in 1972, as foretold in general terms by an evil spirit in 1943.

Inspired Blessings

In those days the departing missionaries were all set apart by the General Authorities, often requiring those who officiated to give upwards of twenty blessings in one afternoon. Many were the days that Elder Lee went home totally exhausted, but soaring in the Spirit. He recorded in January 1949 a singularly inspired blessing he gave to Alene Christenson of Hollywood, California. In the blessing she was told that her choice to serve a mission was the Lord's will, and that the call was a reward for her pure, chaste life. There was a sequel to the blessing he pronounced:

She came back later to tell me that she was a professional dancer with a Hollywood studio and that her choosing to go on a mission meant the giving up of a life's career, and furthermore, that constantly in her professional work she had been faced with temptations to become immoral. This blessing had been a testimony of divine guidance in her life.

A month later another Sister missionary was blessed under his hands, and she was told that out of some of her greatest disappointments would come the Lord's richest blessings. Afterwards she informed Elder Lee that she had just been told that day there was doubt as to whether her visa would be approved to permit her to enter Czechoslovakia, her assigned field of labor, and that she had been extremely distressed over the news.

Starting Over

Now that the nest was empty, offers were received and a sale finally consummated on the family home at 1208 South Eighth West, and 1949 began with the Lees moving to an apartment they subleased until they could arrange for more suitable housing. Their lives were somewhat topsy-turvy during this period, with meals frequently eaten with Helen and Brent's family. Most of their household belongings were in storage, but the inconveniences did not dampen this fifty-year-old grandfather's enthusiasm for his expanding role in the lives of his grandsons.

On March 27, 1949, Elder Lee had the joy of blessing his third grandson, naming him Harold Lee Goates. At the fast and testimony meeting in Helen and Brent's ward, Elder Lee requested that the bishop call on the paternal grandfather, Lesley Goates, to relate the events of his miraculous birth as a three-and-one-half-pound baby who survived and was then blessed in the language of Adam. His story added much inspiration and enjoyment to the meeting.

On one May day that year he tended David, his little "Skipper," at their apartment while Helen went shopping, then took him to ZCMI to buy him a small wheelbarrow. A few nights later he built a sandbox at Helen and Brent's home and had it filled with sand for his grandsons. David's first haircut was superintended by his grandfather on another day while Sister Lee and Helen were away shopping.

A favorite family story tells how Grandfather Harold B. Lee placed the highest priority upon the rearing of children. Helen has retold it many times to teach many lessons:

While I was serving as the chorister in our ward Relief Society when our first two sons were about two and a half and four years of age, I had arranged with Mother to come and tend my little boys while I attended a Friday afternoon stake leadership meeting. Mother called early that morning, however, to say that she had awakened with a bad cold and wouldn't be able to come. She felt badly to disappoint me but I assured her I could arrange with our pianist to excuse me and to bring me the information that would be given at the meeting. Sometime mid-morning, the phone rang again. This time it was my father, calling from his office in the Quorum of the Twelve. He said, "Dear, you plan to go to your meeting and I'll come tend the boys." I was appalled at such an idea and strongly protested. But he persisted and asked, teasingly, "Don't you think I'd be an acceptable babysitter? "Of course," I replied, "but-well-I just couldn't have you do that! I'd feel like I was thwarting the work of the Lord to have you leave your important work at the office just to come and tend my babies!" His reply was sobering and taught me important lessons: "Why, my dear, who is to say which is the most important work of the Lord-to stay at my desk at the Church Office Building, or to tend two choice little grandsons while their mommy goes to her Relief Society meeting?" He came; I went to my meeting, and two little boys were blessed that day by the full attention of a loving, devoted grandfather.

Some order returned to the Lees' lives on July 4, 1949, when they moved to a new apartment at 107 First Avenue in Salt Lake City. They then shared a few days together as a family at a friend's summer cabin located on the Weber River, as they had done in many summers past.

Despite this improved order, the inconveniences at home began to tell in other areas of Elder Lee's life. Even in his close relationship with President Clark, there were evidences of strain. Words between these two strong-willed men had been misunderstood; these unintentional wounds were then enlarged as the two delayed their reconciliation. Indicative of the depth of President Clark's soul, he took the initiative to repair the damages by inviting Elder Lee to come to his office after a Thursday temple meeting. He pleaded that there be no coolness between them, and told Elder Lee again that he felt it would not be long before the younger members of the Twelve would rise to leadership in the Church, admonishing Elder Lee to see to it that the First Presidency members were always united and that they counseled together frequently. Elder Lee appreciated this additional counsel from his tutor, and reported in his journal: "He expressed his love for me, and I for him."

Reading to grandsons David and Hal

The Inspiration Is There

Having just concluded another address at Brigham Young University, where the audiences continued to grow [this year 2,500 students], Elder Lee was assigned with Elder Kimball to create the California Glendale Stake on December 3, 1949, from a division of the San Fernando Stake, After a long weekend of calling and setting the new leaders apart, Eiders Lee and Kimball were trying to relax in the home of Hugh C. Smith, who had been chosen to preside over the San Fernando Stake. After 10:00 P.M. President Smith was still asking questions, forestalling any respite the Apostles might have realized before their return trip to Salt Lake City. The answer to his inquiry, "To whom shall I take my questions after you brethren have gone home?" finally put an end to his interrogation of the two weary Apostles, for Elder Kimball replied with a deep and tired sigh, "Suppose, President Smith, you just ask the Lord." Elder Lee was fond of retelling that story for many years.

In mid-November of 1949, Elder Lee and Elder Clifford E. Young spent the Saturday in interviews with the leaders of Ensign Stake in Salt Lake City in preparation for a reorganization of that stake presidency the next day. At the conclusion of the Saturday evening priesthood meeting, they selected Bishop Alldridge N. Evans of the South Eighteenth Ward as the new stake president, with Bishop A. Palmer Holt and a young law student, Britton R. McConkie, as counselors. President Evans told the General Authorities of an unusual spiritual experience he had had earlier when he had been forewarned by an impression from the Holy Spirit that he might be asked to name the leading men of the stake for his counselors.

On January 4, 1950, only six weeks later, came word of the sudden death of President Alldridge N. Evans. The Saints of Ensign Stake were shocked and asked themselves the logical question: "Where is the inspiration in such a call, if the man is to be so soon taken in death?"

At the funeral on January 7, 1950, held in the Eighteenth Ward, so many friends and Saints came that scores were turned away, unable to enter the chapel. Elders Winslow Fart Smith, Henry D. Moyle, and Harold B. Lee were the speakers. Elder Lee came directly to the point and later used this episode to explain the principle-as years later he would do also in speaking at the funeral of President Joseph Fielding Smith, who served but a short time as President of the Church-that the positions a worthy priesthood leader achieves in mortality were often chosen in the premortal life and have a significant relationship to the callings, work, and blessings to be enjoyed in the world to come, regardless of the length of service in those positions.

President Joseph Fielding Smith sat on the stand with Elder Lee at the funeral that day and listened to his attempt to satisfy the Saints. He said to Elder Lee, "Don't you allow that to bother you. If you have called a man to a position in this Church and he dies the next day, that position will have a bearing on what he will be called to do when he leaves this earth."

Elder Lee later returned to Ensign Stake and named Bishop David Edward Judd, an experienced Church leader, as the new president.

Elder Lee's influence in Utah politics was still felt; when the Republican Party came to him for advice on candidates for the U.S. Senate, he turned them around in their thinking as he suggested Wallace F. Bennett to head their ticket, stating that he was the most logical candidate with fewer political handicaps. His judgment was proven wise nine months later when, after a spirited election, Senator Elbert D. Thomas was defeated by Wallace F. Bennett by a margin of 20,000 votes. Elder Lee rejoiced in the general results of this election of 1950 because he felt dangerous legislative candidates of both tickets in the counties throughout Utah were eliminated by an alert people who apparently had followed wise counsel in being selective in their voting.

Welfare Program Progresses

The welfare program of the Church moved rapidly ahead despite several threats from the United States government, which at first seemed to be extremely adverse challenges. The following stories will illustrate.

In 1946 a presidential order designed to gather up excess grain storage in the nation produced a threat that the government might seize the Relief Society's wheat. Because this order would cripple the Church's wheat storage program, if obeyed, Elder Lee conferred with President George Albert Smith, who advised him to leave at once for the nation's capital with Elders Marion G. Romney and William L. Lawrence. The successful resolution of this question, after a surprising turn of events in Washington, D.C., was recorded in Elder Lee's journal:

At 2:30 p.m., by appointment, together with Brother [Ernest L.] Wilkinson, we arrived at the office of Assistant Secretary J. B. Hutson, but he was detained for nearly an hour, during which time, Mr. J. B. King, the alternate administrator of the Wheat Order, waited with us. This gave us an opportunity to explain the entire welfare operation to him. We discovered that he had discussed this matter with our Earl Corey, head of the Commodity Credit Corporation at Portland, a former Salt Laker, of unfriendly background to the Church, and from him he had obtained the fixed opinion that our wheat must be sold to him. When we at last were given an audience with Mr. Hutson, Mr. King proceeded to explain our procedure and in answer to Mr. Hutson's questions as to what he thought about it, replied that he doubted if we were under the order. Hutson's remark was to the effect that in our program we apparently are doing now just exactly what the government is proposing to do under this order. He furthermore endeavored to help open the way for us to can our own meat for shipment to Europe by broadly interpreting the meaning of the word formal in the present law.

With President George Albert Smith, 1946

Steps were taken after their return to Salt Lake City to ensure thereafter that the entire wheat production in the Church's budget was actually produced on welfare projects. Through the Lord's intervention, the storage program continued uninterrupted until 1978, when Relief Society President Barbara B. Smith, at the welfare session of general conference, presented the long-protected Relief Society wheat storage for consolidation with the grain stores of the welfare services of the Church. At the time of the transfer it amounted to 266,291 bushels of wheat.

Another trip to Washington, D.C., this time in May of 1950, was successful in winning for the Church a tax exemption for the Deseret Industries arm of the welfare program. After a brief consultation with Calder Mackay and Logan Morris, both attorneys, Elder Henry D. Moyle and Elder Lee met with the chief of the Bureau of Internal Revenue to press the Church's petition for an exemption from taxation in behalf of the Deseret Industries of California. The exemption was granted after only twenty minutes of discussion, and set the precedent for all other Deseret Industries and related projects.

The Church was growing in 1950. Elders Stephen L Richards and Harold B. Lee had organized in June of that year the 180th stake of the Church at Yakima, Washington. Now came a time for expansion of welfare properties, and large investments were made.

Land procurement began in earnest with the purchase of the Mayer Horse Ranch in Perris, California, which was tied to the expectation that reciprocal gifts would return to the Church every year from the Statler Trust. The farms consisted of 530 acres, and the purchase from Ellsworth Statler was for 504 acres.

A regional welfare farm project was organized on this beautiful property on July 1, 1950, when Elders Lee, Moyle, and Romney and Presiding Bishop LeGrand Richards arrived for a morning meeting with the ten stake presidencies of the region. The General Authorities outlined the broad guidelines governing the operation of the farm, the principal point being that each stake would be given some project on which to produce its budget, and any surplus would be placed in the common storehouse to be purchased by the General Welfare Committee, or disposed of through sales to build up other projects as required. Their immediate objective was to raise $100,000 in fifteen days for start-up costs, and the 807 people who attended the meeting in the Quonset hay barn went forward unitedly under the direction of their ten stake presidents.

A few months earlier Elder Lee had accompanied Elder Stephen L Richards on an assignment to divide the Pasadena California Stake and create the East Los Angeles Stake. They chose as stake president a man whose name was later to be known throughout the Church, Elder Howard W. Hunter. He distinguished himself in his first major assignment by raising the Pasadena Stake's assessment on the Perris Regional Welfare Project so quickly that the story was never forgotten. Through a series of inspirational circumstances arising out of the immense faith of the Saints, President Hunter wired the full amount of his stake's assessment so quickly that it was on Elder Moyle's desk when he returned to Salt Lake City two days later.

Other major expenditures included the Florida Ranch property. This bold venture envisioned the development of about 180,000 acres of the best ranch land in Florida, and was to be used for cattle raising and citrus production. It was while he was visiting the property in May 1950 that the oft-reprinted photograph was taken of Elder Lee while he was deep-sea fishing off the coast of West Palm Beach, Florida. He never tired of telling about the "one that got away from him" that day.

In the mid-1950s, with President Clark, Marion G. Romney, and Henry D. Moyle, Elder Lee spent two weekends at President Clark's Grantsville home rewriting and reducing the text of the Welfare Handbook until there was nothing left but sheer pearls and power. These Brethren often referred to these scholarly sessions when they sermonized on the basic principles of providing for the poor among us.

Then, as today, a popular stop for dignitaries visiting Salt Lake City was Welfare Square. At the request of President David O. McKay, Elder Lee escorted Mr. Guy Gabrielson, chairman of the National Republican Committee, through the facilities. The famous guest later gave a familiar summarization: "The attitude of those at the Square working for the aid they receive at the storehouse was to me the most impressive part of the tour."

President George F. Richards Dies

Bessie Hollings was a special friend of Fern Lee's, and the two women had spent many enjoyable hours together as temple workers. Bessie had received a marriage proposal from the President of the Quorum of the Twelve, George F. Richards, following the death of his wife. For six months she pondered this proposal without coming to a decision. Finally, in July of 1947 she came to Elder Lee for counsel. Following a blessing from Elder Lee she received the spiritual guidance she had sought and gave her consent to President Richards, and one week later the Lees went to the temple to witness the sealing ceremony on July 20, 1947.

Brother Richards was a loved and admired Church leader and was uniformly respected and revered by the members of the Quorum over which he presided. His earliest pronouncements following the death of President Grant in 1945 were uncommonly wise and visionary. He recommended more ardent missionary effort throughout the nations of the earth, even if it meant reduced effort among the stakes by the Apostles. He advocated increased temple activity, and even though eighty-six years of age at the time of his marriage to Bessie Hollings, he was still seeking to broaden his celestial family.

Three years later Elder Lee had occasion to visit on an early August morning with President Richards, to see if his stake conference assignment could be changed to permit his attendance at the Southern California regional welfare meeting. He found President Richards complaining that he was so tired that all he wanted to do was rest. That night President Richards went to sleep for the last time. The Richards family asked Elder Lee to speak at his funeral.

The Salt Lake Tabernacle was filled to bid farewell to this inspiring Church leader with a gentle heart and the vision of a prophet of God. President J. Reuben Clark and Elder Joseph Fielding Smith joined Elder Lee as speakers. Elder Lee made preparations for his funeral sermon while erecting a picket fence around Helen and Brent's home. About this he wrote: "This work away from the office likewise gave me an opportunity to collect my thoughts in preparation for the funeral services tomorrow for President George F. Richards."

The death of President Richards occasioned the appointment of Elder Delbert L. Stapley during the October 1950 general conference to fill the vacancy in the Quorum of the Twelve. Elder Stapley had been serving as president of the Phoenix Stake. Since President McKay, the oldest of the Apostles in seniority among the Twelve, was already serving in the First Presidency, Joseph Fielding Smith was appointed Acting President of the Twelve. Elder Lee had introduced Brother Stapley to President Clark several years before, as he had written in his journal, "for future references."

In his sermon at that general conference Elder Lee was obliged to improvise his talk due to a shortage of time. He was the concluding speaker at the Sunday morning session, but the clock read 11:45 A.M. when he stood to speak. Elder Lee recorded his successful adjustment in these words:

I made some improvisations and bore my testimony and the Spirit was wonderful. I found myself so much under its influence that I had difficulty controlling my feelings. The Brethren were very kind and I was again indebted to my Heavenly Father for sustaining me.

Ten Years as an Apostle

The events of the remaining months of 1950, concluding his first decade in the Quorum of the Twelve, continued to reaffirm the divine nature of his calling, while at the same time new medical disclosures threatened his effectiveness. He had developed a major digestive disorder, ultimately leading to severe ulcers in the years ahead. This problem forced him to cancel three speaking engagements during the Christmas holidays. Compounding his own physical problems were his wife's frailties. He had spent his fifty-first birthday in the hospital with her, she having suffered a bowel hemorrhage three days earlier.

The evidence that the Lord was with him, however, continued to surface as the Saints poured out their love for his service. Sister Nemelka, from a faithful German convert family in the Pioneer Stake, wrote to Elder Lee telling how her son, Nephi, has been reclaimed from inactivity. His first ray of hope had come, she said, when he read in Elder Lee's book Youth and the Church the chapter on repentance titled "The 'Successful' Sinners."

Elder Lee enjoyed an interview with F. L. Cook, formerly a Methodist minister and a recent convert from Cosmopolis, Washington, with whom he discussed the gospel while riding the train going east from Denver to Kansas City. Brother Cook bore a strong testimony of the power of the Holy Ghost, which had enlightened his soul with a certainty which before had been but a mere belief.

Elder Lee attended a stake conference in California in August of 1950, and wrote in his journal, "there is great evidence that conditions in this stake are not right and that the president will not take counsel." He didn't at the time know the cause, but the Holy Spirit told him there was disharmony. He returned to reorganize the stake in November and learned the day after the reorganization the cause that sustained his first impressions. This time he wrote: "Today I was told about the sad conditions in this stake, socially, involving the former stake president's wife, which had threatened a break between her and her husband. What I was told today confirmed my feelings after my conference three months ago."

A man who had protested his innocence for eighteen years since President Lee's high council in Pioneer Stake had excommunicated him, came to him in 1950 and confessed his sins. After being malicious and vindictive toward Elder Lee all these years, falsely blaming him, he came on this occasion and said that "he had the assurance at the last general conference of the Church that Elder Lee was an authorized servant of the Lord."

Elder Lee continued to use his unquenchable faith to bless his family. When his son-in-law Ernest Wilkins faced his Ph.D. examinations at Stanford University, Elder Lee fasted for his success. Visiting soon thereafter in Palo Alto, he learned that Ernest had faced his five professors with great composure and had correctly answered questions on subjects in which he was not well prepared.

Returning with Ernest and Maurine's family as they moved from California to Utah, they visited in Arizona while the Wilkins family celebrated Thanksgiving and Elder Lee was involved in releasing Elder Delbert L. Stapley at his local Phoenix Stake conference. En route home later, baby Alan, just one year of age, awoke from his sleep with a high fever. Maurine awakened her mother and father at 6:00 A.M. and Elder Lee administered to the baby. His fever immediately began to subside.

The character of this growing and blossoming prophet was becoming increasingly refined. Still asserting itself, however, was an occasional unruly temper. Like his mother, whom Elder Lee described as having a "fierce loyalty to her family," Elder Lee was known to defend his loved ones and his loyalties, sometimes to the extreme. Once in Elder Lee's earliest years as a member of the Council of Twelve, one of the senior Apostles minimized the Pioneer Stake's development of the religion classes organized when Elder Lee was stake president, attempting to show that the more affluent stakes on the East Bench of Salt Lake City had better statistics. This produced a swift and stirring defense by Elder Lee of his people and their faith.

This weakness appeared again as he defended his children in their attempts to locate their growing families in new homes in Utah. In 1949, Elder Lee vigorously protested the placement of telephone poles in front of Brent and Helen's new home. He telephoned the developer and strongly urged eliminating the unsightliness and the hazard caused by the utility pole. The next week he met with Brent's father, Brent, and the engineer from the telephone company, now insisting that the poles be moved to a spot less objectionable. Under an embarrassing verbal barrage, the engineer yielded the point.

At home with Fern, 1950

The following year, when the Wilkins family moved from California, Elder and Sister Lee were much concerned in finding a house for them. The real estate agent had failed to hold out homes for Elder Lee's family to inspect as he had promised. A sharp exchange followed when they met, and Elder Lee later wrote in his journal, "My family thought my sharp rebukes to him had antagonized their cause, and in their eyes I think I had failed them."

He was forever a family man, and if any weakness might be detected it was in defending and supporting his loved ones. While touring the Northwestern States Mission in 1950, he tried to telephone from Whitefish, Montana, to Maurine on her twenty-sixth birthday; from Spokane he wrote his eldest grandson, David Goates, a letter for his third birthday. On another occasion, he proudly took this little grandson and Fern to Preston, Idaho, where he participated in the ground-breaking ceremonies for the ward and stake building there.

Now it was Christmastime, the first in many years that his family were all together in reasonable proximity to one another. His digestive disorder and the complete rest ordered by his doctor conspired to make it a relaxing holiday season for him, basking as he did in the joy of having his family close to him once again. As they did nearly every year thereafter, he and Fern and the families of his two daughters spent Christmas day together, alternating between Provo and Salt Lake City. The highlight, wrote Elder Lee in his journal after one such lively afternoon and evening, "was the singing and musical playing of our girls with their husbands."
