Brent L. Goates, Harold B. Lee: Prophet and Seer ( 1985)

Second Apostolic Decade

1951-1960

15 New Era Begins for Church Growth

As Harold B. Lee's second decade of service as an Apostle began, it was once more time, in the provident wisdom of God, for another era of Church leadership.

On February 15, 1951, in the Council of the Twelve meeting in the temple, a letter was read from President George Albert Smith indicating that he felt his end was drawing near and that he was arranging his affairs accordingly. One week later he was a patient in the LDS Hospital. President Clark sent Harold B. Lee to visit with the President on some business matters.

By March 1, 1951, it was apparent that the President's health was now in precarious condition. Two of the Twelve took the sacrament to President Smith at his home, where he had relocated because he preferred to die in his own house. The Brethren returned pessimistic about his condition. By March 22, paralysis had set in, and by March 30, all hope for his recovery had been abandoned. On April 2, 1951, as final preparations were being made for general conference, President Smith's son Albert arrived from Boston to be with his father, now in critical condition.

President George Albert Smith Dies

President Smith's actual passing was recorded in Elder Lee's diary as follows, under the date of Thursday, April 5, 1951: "Last night at 7:27 P.M. President George Albert Smith died at his home on 10th East and Yale Avenue. When word came I called Brother Albert Bowen and he and I went to the home to join others of the family and the General Authorities."

The regular temple meeting of the Brethren the next day was largely a discussion of details for the funeral services and a decision on how to integrate the honor to be given the President of the Church with the general conference soon to open. They decided to adjourn the conference only on Saturday, when the funeral would be held, and then hold a special session on Monday as the Solemn Assembly, in which the First Presidency would be reorganized. At this meeting the chairs of the First Presidency had been vacated, President McKay and President Clark taking their places in the Council of the Twelve in the order of their seniority.

Elder Lee wrote of his emotions at this time in these words:

It is a great experience to witness the calling home of a prophet of God. My mind has reflected back at the mantle of leadership that was upon President George Albert Smith just a year previous, when he closed the April general conference of 1950 with this prophecy:

"Brethren and Sisters: Let us go to our homes now. If our houses are not in order let us set them in order. Let us renew our determination to honor God and keep his commandments and love one another, to make our homes the abiding place of peace. Each of us can contribute to that in the homes in which we live. It will not be long until calamities will overtake the human family unless there is a speedy repentance. It will not be long before those who are scattered over the face of the Earth by millions will die like flies because of that which is to come. Our Heavenly Father has told us how it could be avoided, and that is our mission, in part, to go in to the world and explain to the world how it can be avoided."

Elder Lee called these words prophetic. Years later he still quoted them and noted some of the most horrifying stories of the devastations of whole peoples and nations, and stated that "the end is not yet."

The general conference of the Church opened on April 6, 1951, without a living President, but the senior Apostle, President David O. McKay, presided. He generously called President Clark from his place in the Twelve to occupy his usual seat on the stand of the Salt Lake Tabernacle.

On Saturday, the next day, the cortege for President Smith formed at the Church Office Building at 47 East South Temple Street at 1:25 P.M. and was led by the General Authorities, who walked ahead onto the Temple Square grounds for the services. Addresses were given by Elder Matthew Cowley, John F. Fitzpatrick, nonmember publisher of the Salt Lake Tribune, Elder Spencer W. Kimball, Elbert R. Curtis, and the former counselors in the First Presidency. The complete service rounded out the life of this "man of love" and each contribution was in remarkable harmony with the spirit of President Smith's life.

David O. McKay Administration Begins

General conference continued with the general priesthood meeting being held that night. On Sunday, April 8, 1951, following the conference sessions, the Council of the Twelve convened at 4:30 P.M. in a solemn and sacred meeting in their council room of the temple, at which time President David O. McKay was named as the new President of the Church. President McKay then startled the Twelve with his announcement that Elder Stephen L Richards would be his first counselor and that President J. Reuben Clark, Jr., would be his second counselor.

There was a numbing silence. The Brethren were unprepared for this announcement, although all recognized that nothing incorrect was being done, for the President always has the right to nominate counselors of his choice. There was just overwhelming sympathy for President Clark, who had served as first counselor to two previous Presidents for over sixteen years.

Elder Lee wrote:

Sunday night, after a dinner at the home of Elder Henry D. Moyle, Brother Moyle and I went to visit President Clark and found him humble, yet loyal to President McKay. He assured us that he would . . . try his best to be a good counselor, despite the humiliation that was inescapable, as his family and others would seek for an explanation as to why a change in the order of counselors.

Elder Lee's recital of events stated that the solemn assembly held on Monday, April 9, 1951, which concluded the conference, was just that for many-a very solemn assembly. Yet, wrote Elder Lee, "a wonderful spirit was in evidence, highlighted by the majestic conduct of President Clark who won love and honor to himself, and to the Lord's work, seldom equalled and perhaps never excelled," when he exemplified a classic lesson to the Saints regarding the subjection of the individual to the work of the Lord. In words now immortalized President Clark said:

In the service of the Lord, it is not where you serve but how. In The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, one takes the place to which one is duly called, which place one neither seeks nor declines."

A Different, Larger Church Emerges

The beginning of the decade in 1951 saw a continuation of the same, small intimate church known for decades previous, but change was inevitable. The General Authorities went out every weekend to attend stake conferences and stayed in the homes of the local stake leaders. They knew the children in the homes by their first names and remembered them when they came to Church headquarters or went to college. Travel was to the outer perimeter in the East to attend conferences in Washington, D.C., and New York City, but predominately the weekend trips were to California and the Intermountain West, where the stakes of the Church were strong.

General conferences were also more intimate then in some respects than in more recent years. They are recalled now with some nostalgia. There were no television cameras to make the speakers feel they were "on stage." When the First Presidency spoke, their words were not beyond recall or correction, if later desired, before being distributed in Church publications. The informality of that day is gone now in today's different world and Church. Microphones and cameras follow the President of the Church wherever he goes. Conference has become a media spectacular along with all that it has ever been as an outlet of spiritual guidance for a wayward world.

While there is an obvious gain from the media coverage, which permits Saints in distant places to actually see their President address them, there is sometimes a loss in his opportunity to speak freely. When words once spoken are irretrievable he must now live in constant fear of a slip-of-tongue and be tempted at times to say no more than could be well put in a press release. The Brethren now read their sermons, in deference to permanency and split-second broadcast timing. This loss of freedom due to the media coverage may have produced a loss in effect to General Authorities, the Saints and perhaps ultimately to the world's listeners.

Much of this change was unavoidable. The sheer size of the Church today carries its own imperatives. Gone are the days when conversations with General Authorities could be held in your living room, or on the street at a chance meeting. Now, in this unstable world, the General Authorities must be more isolated. The type of intimacy between the Church leaders and the people known in the early 1950s seems forever lost. It is not possible to go backwards, to shrink the size of the Church and banish the microphones and cameras. The television era is here to stay. The earlier years of informal sociality with Church leaders have passed. The world and the Lord's Church were changing as the second decade of Harold B. Lee's apostleship began in 1951.

Membership of the Church in the United States was announced in 1950 as 926,700. In those days only 34,251 Saints were in all of Europe; 23,965 in the South Pacific; 2,089 in Australia; only 283 in Asia, with no Saints living in the Philippines, and only 1,936 in all of Latin America, not including the 5,915 Saints in Mexico. These figures show the infancy of the missionary effort outside the United States and Canada, where only 8.7 percent of the Church's population resided. Of course, migration to Zion helped to account for keeping these figures uncommonly low. (See Church Almanac, 1975, Section E.)

Beginnings of International Church

President David O. McKay's administration ushered in a long, continuous growth period marked by the international expansion of the Church. President McKay, while serving as a counselor to President Heber J. Grant in the First Presidency, made a historic worldwide tour of the Church in 1922, accompanied by Elder Hugh J. Cannon. No doubt the experiences of that trip left indelible impressions on President McKay and influenced his interest in the international Church growth.

President McKay was again a world traveler after becoming the prophet of the Church. He went to Europe and chose two temple sites, and then returned there in 1955 to dedicate the Swiss Temple and in 1958 for the London Temple, In 1954 President McKay travelled 37,000 mikes on a six-week trip to South Africa and South and Central America. In 1955 President McKay left in early January for a trip into the South Pacific, where for six weeks he visited the missions in those countries.

Fresh from his trip to the South Pacific, President McKay made a far-reaching policy announcement from the podium of the Salt Lake Tabernacle at general conference on April 5, 1955. He declared publicly that the First Presidency had decided to have all missions visited by a General Authority once each year, with the foreign missions to be visited by the members of the Quorum of the Twelve.

Even before this date visits to the foreign missions had been made, but the regularity had not been set previously by policy. In 1953 Elder LeGrand Richards toured the South Sea Islands and Elder Henry D. Moyle spent four and one-half months in Europe.

Apostles abroad in 1955 included Elder Joseph Fielding Smith in the Orient, Elder Spencer W. Kimball and Elder Henry D. Moyle in Europe, and Elder Marion G. Romney in Australia, where he had served his first mission.

By 1956 the population of the Church had reached 3.1 million. Elder Harold B. Lee had officiated at the creation of the 199th stake of the Church earlier in the decade. It took place on November 23, 1952, when the East Ogden Stake was created out of the Mt. Ogden Stake. By the end of the decade one hundred more stakes had been created. The first stake organized outside North America and Hawaii was the New Zealand Auckland Stake in May 1958, just as jet airplane travel was being introduced. Elder Lee divided the Washington Tacoma Stake, the 299th in the Church, on June 17, 1960.

The travel of Apostles abroad continued with Elder Adam S. Bennion touring Europe in 1957 and Elder Romney returning to Polynesia in 1958 and touring five missions in Europe in 1959. Elder Joseph Fielding Smith traveled to New Zealand in 1959. The First Presidency held tightly its control over Church units abroad and personally dictated every assignment of the Twelve to work with the Church leadership in these developing nations. In 1960 Joseph Fielding Smith, President of the Council of the Twelve, toured South America, and Elder Spencer W. Kimball visited New Zealand and Australia that same year.

Elder Harold B. Lee was among the Apostles traveling abroad to the fledgling missions of the world during the 1951-1960 decade. He had personally taken the stand that unless general board members were allowed to visit these overseas missions, to accelerate the training of new leaders, he felt the divisions and creations of new missions should be slowed down. Thus, the training of new leaders was even then a major concern.

Elder Lee's travel assignments from the First Presidency included a 1954 trip to the Orient, a 1956 assignment to divide the Mexican mission, a 1958 tour of South Africa with a return via the Holy Land and Europe, a three-month tour of South American and Central American missions in 1959 when he divided the Brazilian Mission and created the new Andes Mission, and in 1960 an assignment to create the Manchester England Stake, the first stake of the Church in that country.

These travels will be detailed on the following pages and serve to exemplify those taken by the Quorum of the Twelve during this decade to set in motion the Church's international expansion in the years to come.

Elder Lee Visits the Orient

Elder and Sister Lee arrived home from a long trip to the Orient on Saturday night, October 2, 1954, and attended their first session of general conference, then under way, the following morning. Elder Lee was assigned to be the closing speaker of the conference. There was some additional time left in that session, so in introducing Elder Lee, President McKay urged that he take time to include a report on his eventful journey to the Far East.

In his thirty-minute sermon he testified to the power of healing that has come to Fern, his dear wife, in being able to travel twenty thousand miles without a single day's illness within just six short months' time following a fractured hip. He also told of the unfolding of the Lord's work in the Orient and cited evidence of an awakening of those peoples following centuries of religious bondage and oppression. He also stressed the wonderful labors of military men who were members of the Church and explained that through them the way was paved for the reopening of the Japanese Mission.

The drama for this journey can only be understood by turning back the calendar six months. Shortly after Elder Lee's fifty-fifth birthday the Brethren came hurrying into his office one morning to inform him that Fern had suffered an accident at home. Elder Romney drove him home, where he found that his wife had fallen on the steps and had fractured her left hip bone. Surgery was performed later that day and the hip was pinned using a metal plate.

Four days later, while Elder Lee was sitting in the Tabernacle in the closing session of general conference on April 6, 1954, he felt as if he were bathed in a heavenly peace that assured him that the Lord would preserve his beloved Fern for him. He went immediately to the hospital after the meeting and found her in a much improved condition.

When Sister Lee was able to return from the hospital on April 17, 1954, Brother Lee brought in a single bed and placed it in the television room on the main floor of their home. Her spirits were lifted by the smell of spring in the yard and the feel of being in her home again. Tenderly, Elder Lee brought his mattress downstairs and placed it alongside her bed so he could attend to her during the nights.

Sister Lee's convalescence was speeded after an interview on May 21, 1954, which Elder Lee had with President McKay in which he announced that the Presidency had decided to have one of the Twelve visit the Orient, including Japan, Korea, and probably Hong Kong, as well as the Hawaiian Islands. They had decided, President McKay said, to send Elder Lee and he wanted Sister Lee to accompany him. He asked Elder Lee to obtain a medical opinion as to how long it would be before Sister Lee could walk without crutches. After additional X-ray studies, which proved that the bone was knitting properly and that the steel plate splicing the break was in proper place, they informed President McKay that Sister Lee could safely be off her crutches within two months or any time after June 15. Progress in Sister Lee's recovery came rapidly after this goal was set.

On July 26, President McKay gave blessings to Elder and Sister Lee for the visit they were assigned to make into the Orient. He blessed them with good health, with safety in their travels, with an awareness of the problems of their mission, with an ability to interpret the conditions in each country, and with the power to impress government officials as they met them. To Fern he gave a blessing and promise that she would return greatly strengthened in her body.

A glimpse into the tenderness of Elder Lee as a grandfather is seen in his diary note describing their departure from the Salt Lake railroad station on August 3, 1954: "Dr. LeRoy Kimball has been most considerate and attentive in providing us with medicines and our last 'shots.' Maurine prepared dinner for all our family but I didn't get to see Helen's little ones. They didn't seem to realize just how much I wanted to see all my little ones before I left. After family prayer we found many friends at the depot waiting to say 'good-bye' to us."

Just prior to his departure Elder Lee administered to Presiding Bishop Joseph B. Wirthlin, who had suffered a stroke, and paid his respects to his friend and tutor, President J. Reuben Clark, Jr. President Clark expressed concern at his being gone for so long. He said that while he had no premonition, he felt to remind him that his "four seniors" were all "old men" and that anything could happen in that length of time.

Before landing in Hawaii Sister Lee's general strength had already increased steadily, but she was troubled by a persistent pain in her left foot and her eyesight seemed greatly impaired. From that time forward, however, she gained strength consistently and the blessing given to her by President McKay became increasingly evident.

Report on Oriental Visit

Elder Lee's general conference summary of his journey provides an immediate reaction and review, since it was delivered only one day after his arrival home. His text follows:

It seems incredible to me, as I think about it today, that six months ago yesterday my dear companion lay critically ill in the LDS Hospital, her body cruelly broken in an unfortunate accident. For someone to have told me and the doctors six months ago that before another six months should pass, that she would travel 20,000 miles and visit six countries and peoples, it would seem to me to have been such an impossibility as to have been wholly unthinkable.

But when our beloved leader, the President of the Church, took us into his office and gave us blessings for this mission, little did I realize how the Lord could even then, beyond the skill of doctors or human minds and skill, bless that dear companion and fulfill to the letter the words of the President when he said to her: "You will come back from this trip increased in strength and healed in body." It has been one of the greatest testimonies that has come to me, and I stand today humbly and bear witness to the effectiveness of the prayers and blessings of, not only our President, but also of the faithful Saints everywhere.

If I could take as something of a text, then, perhaps my feelings today could be best expressed in the words of the Master. John the Baptist had sent his disciples to Jesus, after John had received reports about the work of the Master, and they came asking him, "Art thou he that should come? or look we for another?" The answer that Jesus gave for them to carry back to John the Baptist was this:

"Go your way, and tell John what things ye have seen and heard; how that the blind see, the lame walk, the lepers are cleansed, the deaf hear, the dead arc raised, to the poor the gospel is preached." (Luke 7:20, 22.)

To you, President McKay, before the body of the Church today, as a humble servant whom you sent out into the Far East to check on affairs there, to visit our boys in military service, our scattered Saints in that far-off land, I come back to you testifying. as the Master told the disciples to testify to John, the miraculous power of divine intervention is out there, which is one of the signs of the divinity of the work of the Lord.

We have seen one "nigh unto death" raised miraculously during this visit. We have seen the hand of the Almighty stay the storms and the winds, and overcome obstacles that otherwise would have made impossible the fulfillment of our mission. We have passed through danger-ridden country only a few hundred miles from where a war is brewing. We have seen the humble and the poor having the gospel preached to them. The signs of divinity are in the Far East. The work of the Almighty is increasing, with a tremendous surge.

I do not know whether it was just a coincidence, or whether President McKay had some thought about it, but one of the commanding generals, when I was introduced to him in Korea. said, "Well, you have a lot of relatives in this country." The five most prominent names in Korea are Yi, Chang, Kim. Pak. and Lee. I discovered that there were over 500,000 Chinese who have the surname of Li (Lee), and actually, some of the immigration authorities, when I signed my name on my passport, would ask: "Chinese?" And I answered, "No, American." Then the comment. "You look Chinese."

So, I was accepted, President McKay, as almost a native. My coloring as to hair and eyes and skin seem to fit the general terrain.

Fulfillment of Parley P. Pratt Prophecy

Some years ago I read a statement contained in Parley P. Pratt's The Key, to Theology, I wondered then at the meaning of this statement, and I come back to you today testifying that it was a prophecy that is today being fulfilled. I read from that inspired statement:

"Physically speaking, there seems to need but the consummation of two great enterprises more, in order to complete the preparations necessary for the fulfillment of Isaiah and other prophets, in regard to the restoration of Israel to Palestine, from the four quarters of the Earth . . . under the auspices of that great, universal, and permanent theocracy which is to succeed the long reign of mystery."

Then he names those two great enterprises: one, the Europe-to-Asia railroad which was then in the process of being consummated, and the other, the Great Western Railway from the Atlantic to the Pacific in this country. Then he said this:

"Politically speaking, some barriers yet remain to be removed, and some conquests to be achieved, such as the subjugation of Japan, and the triumph of constitutional liberty among certain nations where mind, and thought, and religion are still prescribed by law." (The Key to Theology, pp. 75-76.)

Subjugation means conquering by force. I want to say to you that one of the most significant things that I have seen in the Far East is the fulfillment of what Elder Parley P. Pratt testified would be one of the significant developments necessary to the consummation of God's purposes, "the subjugation of Japan and the triumph of constitutional liberty among certain nations where mind, and thought, and religion are still prescribed by law."

High Caliber of LDS Servicemen

I traveled on this assignment with Sister Lee and President Hilton A. Robertson and Sister Robertson. We had visited our native Saints and servicemen in all the districts of the mainland of Japan, from Hokkaido on the north, to Kyushu on the south, and representatives from the great cities. I then went across with President Robertson to Korea and then to Okinawa, Hong Kong, the Philippines, and Guam. I want to say to the parents, who are anxiously inquiring about their boys, something that I hope will calm your feelings, and will encourage you in your faith.

From the time that the First Presidency announced this appointment our telephones were ringing at home and at the office from anxious parents, and the substance of their anxiety was summed up in what one father said: "Will you see my boy over there, and take him the love from a lonesome dad?"

We met with a total of 1,563 Latter-day Saint boys in military service, in our conferences in Japan, Korea, Okinawa, the Philippines, and Guam. They had arranged district conferences which simulated our stake conferences, and it was like holding a stake conference every other day all through this trip, because of the thoroughness with which they had organized their work.

I have never listened to better sermons that I heard preached by our five Latter-day Saint chaplains and our group leaders over there. They are studying the gospel. The excellence of their organization and the orderliness of their procedures under a mission committee comprising three lieutenant colonels, answerable of course to the mission president, and they, in turn, supervised by chaplains and by group leaders, is worthy of note. In every camp where we went, under military orders, we were accorded every privilege that could be accorded one going into those areas, and the first procedure was invariably an introduction to the commanding general of the camp, and a brief interview, during which he extended to us all the courtesies of the camp, and bade us welcome, and in a number of instances, came to our meeting.

They know our boys. They know of the work of the Latter-day Saints, and perhaps their attitude towards our boys is best summed up in what General Richard S. Whitcomb said to us down at Pusan, Korea, after we had been at the general's mess the night before, and he had indicated he would like to come to our meeting the next morning.

With 109 of our boys present, General Whitcomb rose to speak to them, and after a word of greeting, he said this, and I asked him if I might repeat it to you, President McKay, and to the fathers and mothers back home. (General Whibcomb is characterized by our boys there as one of the toughest disciplinarians in the United States Army.)

"I have always known the members of your Church to be a substantial people. Here in the Pusan area I have the largest court-martial responsibility of any command in the United States Army, but I never have had one of your faith brought before me for a court martial or disciplinary action, in this command. Wherever I have been, I have never known of a Latter-day Saint ever to be brought up for any disciplinary action."

On Guam I was furnished with a little paper from the camp which indicated that for the month of August one of our boys there, a Brother Douglas K. Eager, had been designated as the "Airman of the Month of August," and the citation read: "He won the award on the basis of his devotion to duty, character, appearance, industry, and military bearing."

One of the supervising chaplains, to take another example, from Clark Field in the Philippines, said this to me as we walked out of a meeting with the Protestant chaplains on the base: "I have never known any group of men in my military experience who have greater devotion to their country, and to their God, and to the Church-no finer characters than are to be found among the boys of the Latter-day Saints."

All through our visits, they had arranged their own programs-they sang three songs over and over again without anybody suggesting it. They sang first, "We Thank Thee, O God, for a Prophet," and in every district conference they sustained the General Authorities of the Church. It was one of the highlights of their conference.

Greeting Brigadier General Richard S. Whitcomb, commanding general, at chapel in communications zone compound, Pusan, Korea, 1954

The other that seems to have become their theme song while in military service is "Come, Come Ye Saints."

Why should we mourn or think our lot is hard? 'Tis not so, all is right ... And should we die before our journey's through Happy day, all is well. We then are free from toil and sorrow, too, With the just we shall dwell.

And then, finally, you must know what they were singing otherwise. They were singing about the hills of home: "O ye mountains high, where the clear blue sky arches over the vales of the free." And time anti again I heard the wives of our few men, who are permitted to be with them in some places. anti our boys everywhere, as they would shake hands, say, as tears would fill their eyes: "I wasn't homesick until I shook hands with you. Brother Lee." Someone from home!

Then they would say something like this: "Tell the folks back home not to worry about us. We are all right, but we worry sometimes about the folks back home."

I think my appraisal of what I saw among the boys there might be expressed in what Ralph Waldo Emerson is quoted as having said: "It is easy in the world to live after the world's opinion. It is easy in solitude to live after one's own, but the great man is he, who in the midst of the crowd, keeps with perfect sweetness the independence of solitude ...." Such is the way I found our boys, with the marks of true greatness upon their brows, keeping "with perfect sweetness the independence of solitude."

Servicemen's Missionary Efforts

From the contributions of our military men in the Far East, sufficient money is being raised each month to sustain 21 full-time missionaries from Japan, who otherwise could not fill missions as full-time missionaries in the Japanese Mission. That amounts to forty dollars a month for each missionary, or a total of between eight and nine hundred dollars each month. This is the second group of missionaries which, when completed, will mean that our boys over there have contributed from out of their meager military allowances a total of over forty thousand dollars for sending local missionaries to do the work that otherwise could not be done.

Directly as a result of the work of the Latter-day Saint servicemen there were 47 converts last year, while another 103 have been baptized so far this year by the missionaries of the Japanese Mission. It was on the first Sunday of last month at 6:30 in the morning, just at the break of the day, in Seoul. Korea, that we baptized a native Korean student and a young serviceman. At Clark Field last Sunday morning at 7:30 we baptized four, one a young native Filipino mother, who later bore her testimony in the conference session. What this means to servicemen as they come into the Church is perhaps best expressed in a humble testimony from a young seaman who came to Tokyo off the aircraft carrier, Hornet, which had docked at Yokohama. Later we met him down at Manila Bay. He came up at the close of the meeting in Tokyo, his arm in a sling, and explained that he had a badly infected arm. As he shook hands with me he said, "I am getting ready to be baptized a member of the Church, and if you are down at Manila and I meet you there, I hope to tell you I have been baptized."

At Manila he came, his arm now was perfectly healed, and said: "I was baptized on August 27. Something happened to me after I left that conference in Tokyo. My arm was swollen and was painful all through the meeting, but after I had shaken hands with you, I got on the train going back to the boat. Suddenly the pain ceased, my arm was healed, and now I am going back to that lovely wife who has been praying that I would straighten my life. I smoked, and I drank, and I did a lot of things to cause her sorrow, and I am going back to that sweetheart of mine, and I am going to spend the rest of my life trying to prove myself worthy of her love." His faith had brought healing to his body and his soul. That is what the gospel meant to this seaman, who became a convert to the gospel of Jesus Christ.

Over there we have boys who are homesick for home. How they are thinking about their mothers and their wives and sweethearts is suggested by the fact that when Sister Lee would speak, they would ofttimes come up at the close of services, and they would say to me some words of appreciation, but then they would say: "We really appreciated Sister Lee's talk," and they gathered around her because she was a touch of Mother. They would tell her how she reminded them of their mothers. She was the symbol of the home to which they one-time hoped to come, and I think they almost filled a notebook for her of the names and addresses and telephone numbers of the folks back home they wanted her to call and talk to.

The Church in Japan

Perhaps what our boys are doing over there can best be illustrated in what Elder Aki, a young Japanese missionary up at beautiful Nikko, a recipient of the missionary contributions of our servicemen, who is just completing a two-year mission, said as he bore his testimony in English: "As terrible as was war in Japan, it proved a great blessing, because as a result, it brought the Latter-day Saint servicemen back to Japan who paved the way for the reopening of the Japanese Mission."

President McKay, one of the things that is startling to me and significant pertains to the language there. Difficult as it is, because of the peculiar characters as well as the difficult language, the Lord is seemingly helping us even to solve that problem. Since the troops came in, every school in Japan and in Korea is teaching English, and most of those young students, who are being attracted by the gospel, can speak some English. They are helping to break down the language barrier and making easier the work of the missionaries.

Down at Osaka where we had 179 in attendance, as I looked over that audience and tried to estimate the ages of those in attendance, I would say that out of 179 in attendance, there were fewer than 16 who were over 30 years of age. What these young people will do in aiding in that conversion is best illustrated by two incidents.

With latter-day Saint children in Osaka, Japan, 1954

A year ago last April while I was in the Hawaiian Islands I interviewed and set apart under instructions from the First Presidency six lovely young girls to go over to Japan as missionaries. One of them, a young Japanese sister, was a bit hesitant to go because she had come of a Buddhist family. Her mother had opposed her going. Her brother had beaten her rather cruelly because of her insistence on Church activity. She was almost a nervous wreck, but she had the faith that somehow the Lord would help her through her problems, and we sent her on her way.

I met her at one of these conferences, and she whispered to me her story. She said: "Twenty-three people, Brother Lee, are being attracted to the gospel partly by my efforts," and then she introduced me to an elderly grandmother, whose husband is an Episcopal minister, and the little girl, the granddaughter of this elderly grandmother, was the one who played for our singing during the conference. This little girl came home after she had joined the Church and said to her grandmother: "Grandma, your church is not true because you do not understand God, and you do not understand about the Godhead," and then she proceeded to teach her the missionary lesson about the Godhead.

This elderly grandmother said, "Any Church that can teach a child like that must have something." Our young Japanese missionary sister from the Hawaiian Islands now reports: "That grandmother is now preparing to become baptized a member of the Church through the missionary efforts of her little granddaughter, perhaps not more than 11 or 12 years of age."

There is another evidence of an awakening in Japan. Representatives of some of the leading newspapers in Japan, many of them, interviewed us, and wrote articles, both in English and Japanese. Our Japanese Saints were a bit amused about one of these articles where the heading was "Mormon Polygamist Visits Japan." Fortunately the misleading statement was corrected in the body of the article. Following that announcement we received an invitation from a group who styled themselves, "The League of New Japan's Religious Organizations," who claim to have a following of 10 million people. For the first time Japan is enjoying religious freedom. They asked that I meet with 15 leaders of these 15 religious organizations, comprising the league, and there discuss with them Mormonism, and then submit to a discussion following that time. Their invitation is a bit interesting!

"Invitation to the friendly talk meeting with one of the leaders of the 'Mormon' Church. As Rev. Harold B. Lee, who is one of the highest leaders of 'Mormon Church' (The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints) which is one of the most influential churches in America, is visiting Japan on his journey to fulfill his mission in the Pacific Ocean area. In order to promote goodwill we would like to hold a friendly talk meeting. ... Also, paying respect to the laws of Mormonism no refreshment of tea or cake will be served at that meeting."

For that hour, with Brother Tatsui Sato from the mission office translating my words, they listened. Of these men, none claimed to be Christians, and yet in the discussion that followed I learned that they were in truth more Christian than many of the so-called Christians who neither accept the divinity of the mission of Jesus nor of his reality as the Son of the living God.

They recorded my talk on a tape recorder, and when the half-hour was finished for discussion, they were still asking questions, so that our interview extended into two hours and a half, and that recording they promised later would be presented in the quarterly paper where they proposed to give it publicity. I told them that if they were interested and would send me their names and addresses, I would see that each got a copy of the Book of Mormon for them to study.

A few days later I received a letter in Japanese. which Brother Sato translated and wherein the president in charge gave me the names and addresses. His letter reads: "We have no words to express our thanks for your very instructive address. which you gave us the other day. Although you were very busy and must have been tired on your way to preach the gospel in the Oriental area, yet you shared your very precious time for us, for which we have to be very grateful."

Then he said: "May, we take advantage of your words that you would present us the Book of Mormon, that we may understand better? We send you the list of names who attended the meeting." Copies of the Book of Mormon have been sent to these leaders.

In Korea and Hong Kong

There is one thing more I should like to tell you about. At Pusan we have only three members on record, but when we arrived at our meeting, it was something of a surprise party for us. We found to our astonishment that we had in attendance not just three members, but besides our more than 100 servicemen we had 103 Koreans, mostly all young people of about high school age. As a part of the proceedings they presented to me this scroll, written on silk parchment, both in Korean and in English, in which they had written these words-mind you, this was written and presented by a group most all of whom were nonmembers:

"We sincerely welcome Apostle Harold B. Lee who come to Korea. The mission of his visiting Korea is very important and we are thankful to our Father in Heaven from our heart deeply for the great support you have given us for the people of Korea.

"Here we would like to express our gratitude to the soldiers who stayed in Korea and preached the true gospel to us and also the chance we have had of gathering together with them under the name of our Heavenly Father; therefore we are under a vow to repay their kindness. With thanks with all of our eulogy to you for your distinguished service of the faithfulness which will perform your important mission to come to our Korea, and visiting our Korea in spite of its long distance. We humbly pray in the name of Jesus Christ, Amen.

"From: Korean Group in Pusan of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints."

Well, that is significant because for the first time they too are enjoying religious freedom.

I must tell you, President McKay, about the meeting with our lovely Chinese folks down in Hong Kong. We had no meeting place. They have not had much opportunity since they were baptized. It has now been nearly a year since they received the sacrament. But in our hotel room overlooking the harbor from Kowloon to Hong Kong we held a sacrament meeting.

Holding silk scroll presented by members in Pusan, 1954

We bore testimony to them. We had gone up to that high point overlooking Hong Kong, where Brother Cowley, in company with President Robertson, President Aki, and their wives, had dedicated that land to the opening of a mission, July 14, 1949. There, too, we bowed our heads and thanked the Lord for the degree of Brother Cowley's blessing that had been received, and asked the Lord for a further outpouring of his blessing. Then, after we had visited briefly with these young Chinese students, we talked with one of them, a young girl-little Yook Sin Yuen-they call her Nora, a beautiful little girl who speaks good English, as taught her by the missionaries. As our bus pulled out from the hotel the next day to take us to the airport, she reached up her hand through the window and said to me as a parting word: "Brother Lee, tell President McKay to send the Church back to China." I said to her, as the tears were in my eyes also, "My dear, sweet girl, as long as we have a faithful, devoted little girl like you who, without a shepherd, is remaining true, the Church is in China."

Well, I say, President McKay, as I commenced, I have gone now at your appointment to the Far East and I have seen the miracles of God's intervention. We have seen that the gospel has been preached to the nations as an evidence of its divinity. God grant that the time shall not be far distant until the death grip of Communism shall be unloosed, and those worthy shall be free to receive the fulness of the gospel of Jesus Christ, for I am convinced that there are hundreds of thousands of souls who are begging for the truth.

I bear you my solemn testimony that I know these things are true, that he lives, and that this is his work, and I bear it humbly in the name of Jesus Christ, amen.

Humor Amid War

There were, of course, some very human and even humorous circumstances on this memorable assignment, which Elder Lee didn't express in his conference report. One of these occurred on August 24, 1954, when his party was leaving to catch a plane from Tokyo to Sapporo on Hokkaido. Through Chaplain Gilmore, senior chaplain, a staff car had been provided for Elder Lee's transportation. The chaplain asked Captain Forsythe, the LDS Group Leader from Florida, how many stars they should show on the side of the staff car. He answered: "Sir, you don't have stars enough for this car!"

The Japanese Emperor and his party boarded a plane at Chitose that same day, within a two-block area of where the servicemen were having their meeting with Elder Lee, but not one of our boys left the meeting.

Another amusing journal entry appeared on September 3, 1954. The Lee party took a short thirty-minute flight to "Abel 2," the headquarters of the Ninth Corps, commanded by General Canham, with whom they had a brief visit and with whom they later had lunch, along with his entire staff. There were between 230 and 240 young men in attendance at the LDS servicemen's meeting and the spirit was excellent. Mission President Robertson became ill from something he ate at the lunch and through the night was challenged by the night guard each time he went from their tent to the rest room and was forced to give the secret password; ironically, the word was ache, after which the guard's salutation answer was green. Elder Lee thought that under the circumstances the military chose most appropriate passwords.

It was here that Elder Lee referred to coming within a few hundred miles of where war was brewing, as he flew within sight o enemy lines at the demilitarized zone on September 4, 1954. A large six-foot two-inch Captain Leives, whom Elder Lee had last seen as one of his fifth grade students at the Woodrow Wilson School in Salt Lake County, was his pilot. He requested permission of his commanding officer to fly Elder Lee over to "Abel 143" in an F19, a single-motor, four-passenger plane. The pilot took Elder Lee up the Chun Huan Valley where an entire division of ROK troops had been annihilated. Then they flew over the DMZ (Demilitarized Zone), where they could see the smoke from the Chinese camps and the PoppaSan Mountain, which marked the highly fortified area where the enemy set up their defenses.

Lessons and Recommendations

Many audiences have heard Elder Lee tell a famous servicemen's story which occurred on this trip, concerning the boast of a soldier concerning his virtue, which Elder Lee knew had been heard by Satan. At a meeting with the servicemen at Camp Crawford on August 25, 1954, a serviceman brother delivered a spirited talk on chastity and declared that he "would rather have his 'dog tags' sent home ahead of his body in a pine box," that lose his chastity. As he closed his talk he collapsed on the stand and then fainted a second time after he was taken to his seat.

When Elder Lee spoke to the servicemen's audience he told this brother and the men that the devil, who had heard his pledge would confront him with every possible evil temptation to force him to break that pledge. The next day, Captain Forsythe took Elder Lee aside to tell him of the struggle he and others had in keeping this soldier away from the bars in Chitose and had almost had to force him to break a date a few days before with a prostitute.

As an evidence of the temptations with which the servicemen were faced Elder Lee recorded in his diary this description:

The town of Chitose, which reputedly has 4,000 prostitutes and purveyors of all kinds of vice to entice the servicemen, is known as the most wicked town in the world. One of our boys, Elder Thomas, however, shows how he resisted the evil. He makes only $70 per month and was sending $50 a month to keep a brother in the mission field. He saved $12 each month by laundering and pressing his own uniforms, a fee which they would otherwise be charged.

The visit to Korea was the first ever made to that country by a General Authority, and Elder Lee felt he was well received because of the familiarity the people of that country had with his surname. His diary entry of September 2, 1954, emphasizes these points:

Two general sessions were held in the Seoul Post Chapel at 10 a.m. and 2 p.m. at which we had an attendance of 325 and 338 from surrounding camps under the supervision of Chaplain Richard Henstrom. Two chaplains and two group leaders spoke at each session, along with Dr. H. J. Kim, a native Korean. who is a graduate of Cornell University. In their talks the brethren were impressed with the fact that my visit is the first of any General Authority to visit Korea. An interesting coincidence was that of the 298 family and over 2,000 Korean clan names, the four most predominating were Kim, Yi, Chang, and Lee. Dr. Kiln said that Korea is greatly in need of spiritual rehabilitation and is hoping for a building (chapel) soon in which the Church here can be developed. The boys were loathe to leave for their camps and kept us for an hour having their pictures taken individually with us.

Elder Lee closed his Japanese tour with the concluding meeting at the all-missionary conference at Nikko, the beauty spot of all Japan in its mountain resort setting, where 103 baptisms were reported as of September 15, 1954, for the year. In the meeting lasting from 6:00 A.M. until 12:30 P.M., missionaries testified of many miracles. Elder Let's thoughts were also of the one missionary absent. As he closed the meeting Elder Lee remembered Elder Ben Oniki, who was confined in a Tokyo hospital. Following his return to Tokyo the presidency of the mission and Elder Lee visited Elder Oniki at the hospital and gave him a blessing. Two days later his fever and blood count were normal and the scheduled operation was cancelled as unnecessary.

The vast lessons learned through personal experiences in the Orient were not forgotten by Elder Lee. He followed up on the impressions of the Spirit, but it was early in 1955 before his recommendations were being considered. Specifically, he recommended plans to divide the Japanese Mission and to get missionary work started in Korea to take advantage of the work done by the Latterday Saint servicemen, Dr. He Jik Kim, and others.

The action on Elder Lee's recommendation came in the temple meeting of the First Presidency and Quorum of the Twelve on Thursday, April 7, 1955, when it was decided to divide both the Australian and the Japanese missions. In this decision the Northern Far East Mission and the Southern Far East Mission were created from the former Japanese Mission. Korea, Japan, and Okinawa were placed in the Northern Far East Mission, with headquarters at Tokyo, Japan; and Hong Kong, Kowloon, Macao, the Philippines, and Guam were to comprise the Southern Far East Mission, with headquarters at Hong Kong.

This announcement was made public on May 5, 1955, and Elder Joseph Fielding Smith was assigned to visit the Japanese Mission and make the division as outlined. As this action was being taken, Chaplain Spencer Palmer, just home from Korea, reported to Elder Lee that there were then thirty-six members of the Church in Pusan, after the withdrawal of the servicemen.

1956-1958. Desk-top computer developed in the United States by Burroughs. Packard car, the last of the breed. Egyptians seized Suez Canal. Jack Kilby of Texas Instruments combined silicon transistors, resistors, and capacitors in a single chip. Thunderbird restyled from the 1955 T-Bird.
