Brent L. Goates, Harold B. Lee: Prophet and Seer ( 1985)

16 To Mexico, South Africa, and the Holy Land

On June 7, 1956, Elder Lee, with Elder Spencer W. Kimball, his wife Camilla, and mission leaders, drove from El Paso, Texas, to Monterrey, Mexico, then left Monterrey at 6:15 A.M. for Mexico City the next day. Fully half of the more than six hundred miles of highway wound through rugged mountain passes. It was a delightful trip because of the magnificent scenery, but the party arrived exhausted after sixteen hours of mountain travel over incredibly poor roads.

Mexican Mission Divided

Sunday, June 10, 1956, saw the division of the Mexican Mission, which had been originally created from the Spanish-American Mission in 1936, and later was divided from the Central American Mission in 1952. Now the mission was ready again for division because in ten years the Church membership had grown from 3,400 Saints to a population of over 9,000.

The missionwide conference was held at Ermita on Sunday, with representation from as far away as Pugra Nugras and Tampico, and Puebla and Vera Cruz. Elders Lee and Kimball divided the Mexican Mission and officially created the new Northern Mexican Mission, the forty-fifth mission of the Church, with President Joseph T. Bentley as the mission president.

Elder Lee was pleased and thrilled to see many of the former "dissenters" now safely back in the fold. He renewed his acquaintance with these friends since his last visit to Mexico twelve years before, and rejoiced in meeting with many of the old faithfuls like Brothers Isaias, Juarey, Zarroga, and Parra.

After the division of the mission the two Apostles separated, with Elder Lee taking the Mexican Mission and Elder Kimball traveling through the new Northern Mission. Elder Lee's first meeting was a ten-and-a-half-hour testimony meeting with the seventy-nine missionaries remaining in the southern portion of the mission. With few exceptions all came fasting, and there was a rich outpouring of the Spirit. Elder Lee saw and appreciated the excellent manner in which President Bowman directed and inspired his young missionaries in the work.

The two mission presidents each coveted the services of one particularly outstanding potential leader, Elder Rex Edwin Lee, a great-grandson of famed pioneer, John D. Lee. President Bowman was fortunate to have Elder Lee become his counselor. He was later to distinguish himself as the first dean of the Brigham Young University law school, and went on to become Solicitor General for the United States.

At the several stops along the mission tour Elder Lee compared his impressions with those he remembered when he was last in Mexico, twelve years before. He was particularly impressed with the progress of the Mexican Saints in San Marcos, Puebla, and Cuernavaca. At the Hidalgo District of San Marcos the people were better dressed, now wore shoes, and their entertainment was much more polished. They also had a new chapel and a new school.

Travel difficulties were frequent. On their return trip from San Marcos they experienced a freak accident when a broken bolt fell into the carburetor of the president's car, causing it to stick and

With Elder Rex E. lee (right) and mexican Mission president, Claudius Bowman

Mexican Mission Home, 1956

damage the starter. Providentially, they were still able to drive the car home, arriving at 1:30 A.M.

The next day, June 16, 1956, the party left the mission home for Cuernavaca where Elder Lee dedicated a small chapel which had been neatly remodeled for the small congregation there. Here Eider Lee saw the most promising group yet in terms of intelligence and refinement. This was partly due to a young trained nurse who had been schooled at Brigham Young University. While there they met a Judge Gonzales, about sixty-five years of age, who seemed most interested in the Church and at his request was granted the privilege of speaking at the conference.

Early the next morning they left the mission home for Puebla, nearly one hundred miles over the mountains, for a Sunday conference. "Here," wrote Elder Lee,

I was privileged to enjoy one of the biggest surprises yet to observe the impressive progress made here since my visit to this same group twelve years ago. They are housed in a fine, new meetinghouse. Approximately 50 percent (or 552) of their district membership attended. With but few exceptions they were well dressed. They sang well, the local speakers spoke well, the chapel was sumptuously decorated with flowers, and the leadership of the local brethren performed with confidence. All this is in marked contrast to the crude little groups we met on my last visit.

The next night a meeting was held at Vera Cruz on the Gulf of Mexico. Although only twenty-two members resided there, the attendance at the meeting reached ninety-two, all crowded into the two small rooms where the four Elders had living quarters. This, Elder Lee reported, "was one of the most promising groups we have yet met. They seem intelligent and enthusiastic and from all indications there should be a harvest here soon." At Tierra Blanca, twelve baptisms were reported that week.

The mission tour took Elder Lee's party to historic locations where they could view the archaeological ruins of Mexico's past. From Villahermosa they transferred to a single-engine Cessna airplane for Palenque, the place some Latter-day Saint archaeologists claim was the Land Bountiful and therefore near the alleged center where the Savior made his appearance to the Nephites. This was an interesting but most primitive area tucked away in the jungles, the ruins being about twenty kilometers (twelve to fifteen miles) from the town. The ruins here and at Chichen Itza were then regarded as the most famed yet discovered. Here Elder Lee found evidences of Christianity followed by pagan or mystic corruptions which all but obliterated the simple Christian doctrines or Mosaic observances which probably were once practiced here. As the party made their way back to Palenque and Villahermosa and thence to Merida, via Carmen and Comeche, Elder Lee was convinced the area possessed good possibilities for future missionary work and determined to encourage it as an expansion of the Mexican Mission.

Elder Lee was especially impressed with the possibilities at Merida, which he described as "a city of 160,000, which is to my thinking one of the cleanest-looking cities and its people the best dressed of any we have visited yet, including Mexico City." More archaeological ruins at Chichen Itza, eighty miles away, were also seen. This famous area showed but little of Christianity, but more of the superstitions of the Aztecs and the Toltecs, who followed the Mayans.

At Monte Alban, in the vicinity of Oaxaco, Elder Lee saw some of the most artistically decorated ruins he had yet observed. Monte Alban was apparently a burial ground for kings or priests of high station. In some of the tombs have been found fabulous wealth in ornaments with which the dead were buried. Here were found symbols of three and twelve, and Elder Lee noted that the cross was seen in the tombs and on the stelas. Some scholars told Elder Lee that this location is thought to have been the land of the Mulekites, who probably followed and overlapped the Jaredite civilization.

In his last day in Mexico, June 26, 1956, Elder Lee went shopping and bought some trinkets for his "little ones." He found himself, however, becoming very ill with chills and severe abdominal pains. He arrived home weak and most uncomfortable. He learned four days later that Elder Kimball had similar symptoms on his return. Both reported for physical examinations by Dr. LeRoy Kimball, who thought they might have picked up some infection at about the same time which had matured in both of them as they returned home.

Tour of South Africa

On Thursday, August 15, 1958, President McKay called Elder Lee to his office and announced that the First Presidency had assigned him, with Fern to accompany him, to tour the South African Mission as soon as arrangements could be made.

While Elder Lee was conducting the quarterly meeting of the Council of the Twelve in the absence of President Joseph Fielding Smith on September 11, 1958, he received the prayers and blessings of his Brethren for the South African Mission to which he was assigned.

On the night of September 15, 1958, Harold and Fern went to President Clark's home where their aging friend gave each of them a blessing for their assignment. In each blessing he counseled them to use wisdom in dealing with the racial questions and to avoid extravagance in any promise of temples and similar blessings. He also blessed them with protection, health, and discernment.

Before leaving the next day Elder Lee talked with President McKay by telephone. The latter had just returned the previous night from the dedication of the London Temple and his voice sounded very tired as he asked Elder Lee to give the Saints in South Africa his blessings. President Clark's final farewell was a somewhat pessimistic statement that he hoped to be around when the Lees returned, to which Elder Lee stated, "The Lord bless you, President." President Clark replied: "Well, he always has. My legs are shaky, but I'm glad I don't have to think with my legs."

Through friends and connections with Elder Lee's acquaintances in the banking, railroading, and insurance industries, and government officials in Washington, D.C., they were able to obtain many letters of introduction which secured them favors and opportunities for their travel abroad.

After a one-day visit to Rome, Italy, Elder and Sister Lee left on October 3, 1958, for South Africa, arriving in Johannesburg only one hour late the next day. The long trip plus immediate involvements in a Church social after their arrival completely exhausted Sister Lee, and she came down with a severe sinus infection. However, after being administered to by President Fisher, Brother Smith, and her husband, she showed a remarkable recovery.

At the first Sunday conference meeting, on October 5, 1958, Elder Lee dedicated a new chapel completed a year previous at a cost of about $100,000. The local architect, a Mr. Sayce, spoke at the services and made this astute and interesting comment: "I and my associates have given you a structure of brick and mortar, but you alone can make it a house of God." At this first meeting with leading African Saints, Elder Lee learned that much greater progress could be made if some literature might be printed in their native Afrikaans language. It was a recommendation he was to remember and act on.

Elder Lee went to Pretoria, the administrative capital of the Union of South Africa, where his attempt to increase the missionary quota for the Church was not accepted. From such contacts he learned how similar the early Dutch history resembled our Church pioneer story from Nauvoo to the Salt Lake Valley. The party made a memorable visit to Kruger Park, where the people, not the wild animals, are locked up for safety.

The visit to Durban was a particularly interesting and moving experience. The Lees were still tired from their hard ride of the day before but left early for Durban and their next conference. The trip took them through surprisingly fertile country and small but modernized villages, all of which seemed to have splendid missionary possibilities, most of it untouched, thought Elder Lee. The major problem was the great distances and inadequate transportation facilities for the missionaries. The mission president had therefore urged the moving of mission headquarters to Johannesburg from Capetown to provide for better administration and centralized supervision. Elder Lee could see evidence now to support that recommendation. The weather in Durban, which is located on the east coast, was unusually cool for October, contrasted with the 107 degrees the travelers experienced the previous Sunday. Under overcast skies they visited the "Indian Market," where imported goods from India and Malaya can be purchased.

The Saints in Durban expressed concern at the possibility of the black population, which far outnumbered the white people, one day becoming united under Communism and taking over the control of the country. Emigration to Canada and the United States was on their minds. They were also asking Elder Lee as to the possibility of patriarchal blessings and the obtaining of temple recommends to the far-distant London Temple. A lovely social was held in their fine seaport branch of the Natal District, of which Durban is the capital city.

The spiritual highlight of Elder Let's visit to South Africa may have occurred on Sunday, October 12, 1958. That busy and memorable day is described in Elder Lee's diary as follows:

I held meetings from 9:00 a.m. until 9:00 p.m. with from 200 to 250 in attendance, some coming from Bloomfintein over 300 miles away. Their new chapel, erected at a cost of $90,000, was dedicated at the afternoon session. The Spirit seemed to direct our remarks, which were said to have been as well suited to the specific needs of those present as though we had known beforehand their problems. After I had finished speaking in the evening session and the meeting was closed, the people remained seated. Their branch president came forward and asked them what they were waiting for and if they wanted to hear more. There was a chorus reply of "Yes." I arose again and bore my testimony and gave them my blessing. It was a most impressive demonstration of a people seemingly overcome by the Spirit. Some came afterwards to confess their sins and to declare their determination to live more perfectly.

As Elder Lee traveled through this fascinating country he studied their racial ways of segregation. The native Bantu throughout the country were in great majority, numbering ten million to the three million whites in the Union who politically and socially dominate them. They lived literally on the ground, eating, sleeping, working, playing, and caring for personal needs in primitive ways. They performed most of the menial work for the Afrikaans and the English, and at a price which discouraged any other than the natives from performing the work.

Traveling toward East London on the southeast coast their fifty-mile trip took them through Basutoland, one of the three huge areas of South Africa where the native Bantus had been colonized. For hundreds of miles along the hillsides were seen their "rondovals," or adobe huts, all cone-shaped in appearance. The history of South Africa was further described to Elder Lee when a fellow automobile passenger, a Brother Helm who was a college professor at Rhodes University, detailed the past and present conditions in that interesting country.

At Capetown Elder Lee visited on a Saturday afternoon a diamond cutting and polishing plant. There they met Mr. Jacob Coopman, the foreman, who had become most friendly with our Saints. Through him Elder Lee arranged to purchase for his wife, Fern, a beautifully polished diamond in a new setting and had the small stone from her original engagement ring made into an earring, buying another stone to match for an earring set.

This was the story which became famous among family members and answered the question Fern often asked of her husband, "What ever happened to your slide trombone?" The trombone of his first married years had been sold to purchase the small stone, which Fern treasured far more than Elder Lee realized. She was visibly and emotionally moved with the new treasures from the South African diamond industry, but Elder Lee never knew how sentimental she had grown toward the ring she had worn all her life until it had almost become a part of her. How could she tell him now? She accepted her new gifts with the love intended from her sweetheart, and cried within at the loss of her irreplaceable engagement ring.

This same manager at the diamond company, Mr. Coopman, came to the missionaries at the close of the Sunday Capetown conference and said that although he was 99 percent converted before he talked with Elder Lee, he was now closer than ever. He said to Elder Lee when he shook his hand: "I was so filled when you spoke that I could hardly keep from crying." The Capetown conference drew 185 at the morning meeting and 263 in the evening, from a branch membership of 325.

The tour continued with a dedication of a meetinghouse in Port Elizabeth where the Saints again showered the Lee party with gifts. The young Church members sought the advice of this, the first Apostle to visit their land since President David O. McKay. Elder Lee turned to the Lord in counseling three girls who had mixed blood on what the Lord would have them do about marriage and having children. After giving them priesthood blessings he wrote in his journal: "The Spirit seemed to indicate that they should seek for a husband who likewise has mixed blood. I gave them assurances of their eternal blessings if they would live up to all they are permitted to do in their present state." This was typical of many members of mixed blood who came to discuss this problem with the touring General Authority.

Turning northward, the party moved into beautiful Rhodesia, which in October was a country ablaze with the brilliantly colored jacaranda and flamboyant bougainvillea vines, making this famed "copperbelt" a scene of splendor. While in this area Elder Lee witnessed and photographed the famed Victoria Falls, a spectacular sight as the mile-wide, powerful Zambezi River drops into a three-hundred-foot crevice. His rainbow photograph later was honored with placement on the cover of the Church's Ensign magazine.

On October 24, 1958, at Springs, Elder Lee held a concluding meeting with 261 persons in attendance. The following day he made his final interview of missionaries and the South African tour was closed with many unforgettable memories to ponder.

First Visit to the Holy Land

The highlight of the 35,000-mile trip came at the conclusion of their three-week mission to South Africa. Passing through Egypt, they came to the Holy Land for their first visit.

First, there were many evidences on this journey that God was with them, guarding them and opening doors for the accomplishment of the Lord's business. Upon his return home Elder Lee, as he spoke before an appreciative audience of Brigham Young University students, recounted in these words the blessings they had experienced:

We had his healing powers from sinus infections, from head colds and congestion. He tempered the elements in places where extremes of heat and humidity could have hindered our travel and our work. He gave us a safe landing in Nairobi, the center of the great Kenya hunting area when one of the engines of the plane quit on us. He gave us a pleasant night and safe passage through Khartoum, the capitol of Sudan, a scant two weeks before a bloodless revolution of the military took over the government of that unhappy African state. He helped us time our arrival in Arab countries of Lebanon and Jordan one day after the departure of the United States Marines from Beirut in answer to our prayers that somehow the way might be opened up for a visit to the Holy Land which we could not have had, had we been there a few days earlier. He raised up friends among American embassies, travel agents, and world news agencies, except for whom we could have been stranded in strange lands.

Surviving the airplane engine failure, Elder and Sister Lee visited Cairo, Egypt, and saw the famed pyramid and the Sphinx, located twelve kilometers out of the city.

Then, for three glorious days, on October 28-30, 1958, they "walked on sacred ground and felt the influence of the greatest character who ever lived upon this earth, Jesus the Christ, the very Son of the living God." Elder Lee entitled his recap of this unforgettable experience, "I Walked Today Where Jesus Walked," after the popular and lovely, sacred song.

Explaining the approach Elder and Sister Lee used in seeking truth in the Holy Land, Elder Lee wrote:

As we approached the Holy Land we read together the harmony of the four gospel narratives so beautifully authored by President Clark and then, as we would leave our room each time, we prayed that the Lord would deafen our ears to what the guide said about historical places, but would make us keenly sensitive to the spiritual feeling so that we would know by impressions from the Holy Spirit, rather than by hearing, where the sacred spots were located. Although many changes have taken place in this sacred land since Jesus was there, we felt that in certain places there would still linger a spiritual essence that will last forever.

The Lees hired a car with an Arab guide, Hashem, who spoke excellent English and possessed a good knowledge of the Bible narrative and history. The first test of their spiritual discernment came as they rode with their guide along the seven miles from the walled city of Jerusalem to the town of Bethlehem. The words and strains of that sweet Christmas hymn, "O Little Town of Bethlehem," were on their minds and they presently were, as it seemed, with the shepherds at the mouth of the cave hewn out of rock now found in the basement of the Church of the Nativity. Elder Lee wrote of this visit: "There seemed to be in this place a kind of spiritual assurance that this was, indeed, a hallowed spot although marred by centuries of 'unhallowed embellishment.' It marks a sacred place."

Out beyond Jericho, the city of palms, the Lees again found a "wonderful spirit on the banks of the Jordan River, for here was the same river, the same locality, running as it had down through the centuries. It was here that the courageous John the Baptist had baptized the Son of Man, not ... [by] pouring water on his head, as we saw pictured in the great painting in the St. Peter's Cathedral in Rome, but by immersion in the River Jordan 'because there was much water there.'"

The cottage of Martha and Mary and Lazarus, three miles out of the walled city of Jerusalem, and the Mount of Olives were also described as "sacred ground."

One of the most deeply spiritual places seen by Elder Lee and his companion was on the west slope of a mountain, near the Brook Cedron. Here in the Garden of Gethsemane are eight old gnarled olive trees showing evidence of great antiquity. They could have been just sprouts from trees that could have been there hundreds of years before, reasoned the Lees. It was here Jesus came after the Last Supper with his disciples, when he knew his hour of suffering was close at hand. He asked Peter, James, and John to stay with him in the Garden, and to watch for his enemies, lest he be disturbed while he was praying. Then Jesus prayed. When he returned to the disciples he found them sleeping and showed his disappointment in them. Elder Lee said of this powerful experience: "It was here where he kneeled, in the vicinity of the very spot where we were standing. We fancied we could hear again the agonized words of his intense suffering which he has given us in his revelations."

Time now was running out on the Lees' visit to Jerusalem. They had followed their guide through the traditional hall of judgment, where the Master was beaten and sentenced to death by a tribunal which made mockery of justice. They followed the way of the cross, supposedly to the place of crucifixion and the place of the holy sepulchre. Of this, however, Elder Lee wrote:

But all of this, according to tradition, we felt is in the wrong place. We felt none of the spiritual significance which we had felt at other places, for had not the Apostle Paul said, speaking of the crucifixion: "Wherefore Jesus also, that he might sanctify the people with his own blood, suffered without the gate." (Hebrews 13:12.) To us, we felt this meant he suffered to his death upon the cross for the sins of mankind, not within the gates of Jerusalem, but outside the gates, and yet the guides were trying to make us think that his crucifixion took place inside the walls. Again, what we were seeing there did not square with John's description of the place where the crucifixion and burial took place, as John described it in John 19:41-42.

There was yet another place to visit where the Lees felt that they were on holy ground: the place called the Garden Tomb. It is owned by the Church of the United Brethren. Elder Lee remembered that moment in these words:

Here our woman guide and her little son took us, as though it were an afterthought, through the garden to the hill outside the "gate" of the walled city of Jerusalem. It was just a short way from where the hall of judgment had been inside the city walls. The garden was right close by or "in the hill" as John had said, and in it was a sepulchre hewn out of a rock, evidently done by someone who could afford the expense of excellent workmanship. There was something that seemed to impress us as we stood there, that this was the holiest place of all, and we fancied we could have witnessed the dramatic scene which took place there. That tomb has a mouth which could be sealed by a rolling stone in the shape of a huge millstone and there was a channel at its mouth that had been built to guide the stone as it had been rolled across the opening to close the tomb. Although the rolling stone door had been taken away by those seeking sacred relics, the stone channel was still there. Within the tomb there is a room large enough to accommodate a half-dozen people; and across one end is a slab raised about a foot and a half from the floor beautifully carved out to fit a human body, with a place at the foot and the head where one might sit.

In the beautiful garden, the holiest place of all, we looked at the hill nearby and gazed into the empty tomb. The sun was setting and the soft shadows fell around us, shutting out the whole world as it seemed. The peace of those few moments we shall never forget. Yes, at the Garden Tomb, outside the walls, we had the feeling that it, and the Mount of Golgotha, or the skull, seemed right. They were the holiest of all.

Following these days in Old Jerusalem on the Jordan side, the Lees passed through the Mandelbaum Gate, which in those days was the only means of communication between the Jordan side, where Old Jerusalem was located, and the Israel side, beleagured by intense and bitter fighting. They were entertained that night in the King David Hotel in the New City of Jerusalem on the Israel side.

As we looked out that night from the veranda of our hotel room, there, silhouetted against the sky, was Mount Zion, and there was King David's tower, marking, as they told us, the place where they say the Last Supper was held just before He went down to the Brook Cedron and to His betrayal and judgment and finally to death. Here on this Mount Zion, or in America's New Jerusalem (our students of the scriptures are not in agreement as to which), is to be commenced the greatest drama of the whole history of the world to usher in the Second Coming of the Lord. (See D&C 133:18, 22.)

Then the Lees were taken the next morning in a car which government officials from Israel had graciously provided, and they went over the rocky slopes along the Jaffa Road to Tel Aviv and to the airport. They noted the back-breaking work of the returning Jews to make the "desert blossom as a rose," as the prophets had foretold. Fern summarized this never-to-be-forgotten experience as follows:

Here closed our wonderful opportunity to come to this great land. As I have thought about it since that time, I know that our prayers had been answered and the glorious truths of the mission of our Lord and Savior were anchored deep in our hearts. My heart sings out with love and gratitude for him who has done so much for us; and the wonder and the glory of it all was beyond understanding.

Elder Lee's conclusion was a personal testimony:

As we stood before the empty tomb in Jerusalem we too knew that because of this sacrifice, we too can have our sins remitted and be made worthy to stand in his holy presence in the days to come. I came away from these experiences never to feel the same again about the mission of the Lord and Savior and to have impressed upon me, as I have never had it impressed before, what it means to be a special witness. I say to you with all the conviction of my soul, I know that Jesus lives. I know that he was the very Son of God and I know that in this Church and in the Gospel of Jesus Christ entrusted to this Church is to be found the way to salvation.

The Homeward Journey

The travel homeward was rich also in its experiences and opportunities. The Lees first visited Athens, Greece, for a brief tour of the Greek Parthenon, the Acropolis, Mars Hill, and the Market Place where the Apostle Paul preached. Elder Lee was discouraged about opening up missionary work in this country after a visit with the American ambassador.

A visit to Vatican City outside Rome canoe as the Catholics were making preparations for the coronation of their new pope. Although they marvelled at the works of art found at St. Peter's Cathedral, Elder Lee observed in his diary: "There was in all this not one semblance of the sacredness we experienced in the Garden near Golgotha where our Savior was laid."

Next the Lees saw for the first time the new Swiss Temple and were greatly impressed by the beauty of that sacred building, its decoration, and the dignity and spirituality evidenced by temple president Walter Trauffer. President Trauffer also took the Lees on a tour of the Swiss Alps, of which Elder Lee wrote: "Never have we seen more beautiful and picturesque scenery."

After meeting with and speaking to three hundred servicemen and their wives in the Heidelberg post chapel, the Lees moved on to Paris and finally to London via Edinburgh, Scotland, where they spent two days searching for Sister Lee's family connections with the famous Coats posterity.

A visit to the new London Temple closed out this memorable tour. After enjoying a three-hour drive through the beautiful Southern English countryside the party came to Southhampton, where they boarded the Queen Elizabeth for an ocean voyage to America. As they departed on November 15, 1958, they celebrated Sister Lee's birthday and their thirty-fifth wedding anniversary. To mark the occasion Elder Lee gave his wife the diamond earrings he had brought from South Africa, one of which was the precious stone taken from her old diamond engagement ring.

At sea Elder Lee complained at the forced idleness and wrote: "The hardest work I do, I have discovered, is to loaf for a few days with nothing to do." He did, however, busy himself the first day at sea, spending most of the afternoon and the next day writing: "I recorded our report of the South African Mission and the other countries where I inquired as to the possibilities of missionary work being established."

On November 19, 1958, the fog lifted as the massive Queen Elizabeth arrived in New York harbor, giving Elder and Sister Lee a thrilling view of the Statue of Liberty, the symbol "of all we hold dear so far as political freedom is concerned."

The safe arrival in Salt Lake City after a long, three-month, 35,000-mile journey provided a joyous reunion: all the family members, some of the Quorum of the Twelve, and a few other friends were on hand to greet the weary travelers. The family retreated to Helen's home for supper and a belated birthday celebration for Fern. The Lees' grandchildren were almost as excited as at Christmas as they opened presents of gidget knives for the boys, jewelry for the girls, and toys for the little ones, and sweaters and cuff links for the fathers.
