Brent L. Goates, Harold B. Lee: Prophet and Seer ( 1985)

17 Tour of South America

On July 30, 1959, President McKay phoned Elder Lee to announce that the First Presidency had appointed Sister Lee and him to visit the South American missions, beginning the latter part of October, and to open two new missions in Brazil and Chile-Peru. J. Vernon Sharp had been named as the president of the new mission in the Andes, and Asael T. Sorenson, who recently had presided over the Brazilian Mission, was now being asked to return as the president of the new South Brazilian Mission.

When Elder Lee investigated with travel agents his tentative schedule, he found it would be impossible to leave in late October and be home by Christmas, and reservations by ship could not be obtained. As a result, President Moyle urged that they leave earlier to escape the intense heat which occurs in South American countries toward the last of the year, even though it would result in their absence from general conference.

In mid-August President Clark phoned Elder Lee several times to arrange for a private meeting before he left for South America. Urging that Elder Lee come alone, President Clark again reiterated counsel and conditions he had previously told him concerning matters he felt needed attention, apparently feeling that at his age he might not live long enough to see them carried out.

Having told his family farewell, Elder Lee arrived at the Salt Lake City airport for departure (Sister Lee was scheduled to join him later in New York City), and just before the plane left, President David O. McKay and his counselor, President Henry D. Moyle, arrived to see him off. In a few minutes of counsel together President McKay stated: "Your main mission is primarily to organize the two new missions-the Brazilian South Mission and the Andes Mission. The decision of where the headquarters for each new mission would be is left to your judgment, but I hope you get the inspiration of the Spirit to have Lima, Peru, as the headquarters for that mission." To this suggestion Elder Lee replied, "So far as I am concerned the Spirit has already spoken."

President McKay then instructed Elder Lee further as to the presentation of the new mission presidencies for each new mission. He asked that Elder Lee meet with all the missionaries, but that he not be concerned about a full mission tour to all branches. He then spoke with some emotion of his concern about Sister McKay's physical condition and expressed appreciation for Sister Lee's sweet note to his wife during her illness. It was an unexpected thrill, reported Elder Lee, to have the President of the Church come to the airport for the farewell instruction and blessing.

After a safe landing at Idlewild Airport in New York City, despite having the plane's number one engine quit and another one catch on fire, Elder Lee attended his monthly corporation board meetings in the East before leaving for South America. Gradually he was becoming better known to business tycoons in America, and he used his popularity to explain the gospel whenever possible at such meetings.

One such typical opportunity came at the August 20, 1959 meeting of the Equitable Life Assurance of America meeting when the directors met for dinner at a private club. Bob Hogg, vice chairman of the board, asked Elder Lee to tell the board about the welfare plan of the Church, which he did for about an hour. This provoked a number of questions from Judge John C. Knox about the Church's missionary work. Manley Fleishman asked about the effect of the Church's efforts on the public relief load of the state of Utah, and Grant Keehn asked about the efficiency of the Church's storage program, as against savings in a bank. The interest in the group was so high that Elder Lee was requested to repeat his discussion when all the board members were present.

Brent and Helen brought Sister Lee to New York City by airplane to join Elder Lee. It was a memorable time of family togetherness in joint rooms at the Waldorf Astoria Hotel. And Elder Lee delighted in showing the big city to his family. Brent had been invited to receive a recognition, about which Elder Lee recorded the following in his diary: "After the New York Stake conference on Sunday, August 23, 1959, in the afternoon we went to the Metropolitan Opera House where Brent was accepted as a fellow of the American College of Hospital Administrators, which is comparable professionally to a master's degree in that field." The following day they proudly watched the winning LDS Hospital's slide show sponsored by the Hospital Volunteer-Auxiliary at the American Hospital Association's national convention, which featured Helen and Brent's son Drew as a child actor.

Elder and Sister Lee sailed from New York for South America on the S.S. Brazil on the afternoon of Saturday, August 29, 1959. "The weather was very hot and muggy and we were grateful for the cool sea breezes as we cleared the port," wrote Elder Lee.

A glimpse into Fern's thoughtful kindness and sensitivity is found as she responded to the birthday celebration about to be observed by eleven-year-old Kristine Sorensen, a daughter of President Asael T. Sorensen, who with his wife and young family of six children was returning on the same ship to preside over the new Brazil South Mission. They had only been home from their first mission to Brazil eight months when they were called again.

When the ship dropped anchor in the bay off the town of Georgetown, in the Barbados, the most easterly of the West Indies, Sister Lee wrote her grandson David, who was celebrating his twelfth birthday, and also shopped for a gift for Kristine Sorensen. But Fern had the foresight to also bring small gifts for each of the Sorensen children, besides Kristine. This proved to be most satisfying to all, especially to little nine-year-old Colleen, who felt left out by all the big birthday celebration aboard ship as the crew sang "Happy Birthday" to Kristine.

At the special "tea" for grandmothers, Fern won the prize for the largest number of grandchildren and for the best saying of one of their grandchildren. She quoted twelve-year-old David's statement when his mother wanted him to bathe his younger brother Jonathan. David said, "Mom, I'd rather bulldog a steer."

President Sorensen, in recording his oral history at the Church Historical Department, recalled: "Elder Harold B. Lee, who at that time was one of the Twelve, was on the same boat, and he had been assigned to go to Brazil to divide the mission and to install us. So we enjoyed a wonderful trip down by boat and had many choice experiences with Brother and Sister Lee going to Brazil. Sister Lee endeared herself to our daughters and referred to them as her "little women."

After a week at sea Brother and Sister Lee found their physical strength returning. Elder Lee wrote: "I'm feeling a return to normal health and vigor and hopefully believe that my physical difficulties are greatly lessened. Fern seems to have enjoyed this voyage."

The diary entry concerning their health had reference to the stressful conditions Elder Lee faced only two months previously. On July 7, 1959, Elder Lee was rushed to the LDS Hospital at 1:00 A.M., where doctors determined he had suffered from an internal hemorrhage. A bleeding ulcer in the duodenal canal detected one year previous had erupted and caused Elder Lee to faint at the end of a family dinner party at their home. Weeks of careful diet and rest had restored him sufficiently for this journey to South America.

In the same month he had the strain of his mother dying-on July 28-of a heart attack. As was so often the case, Elder Lee was traveling on Church business. He was paged to an emergency call at the Madison Square Garden in New York City and informed that his mother had been taken to the hospital with a coronary occlusion. Before he could leave New York by airplane to return home, he received notice of her death.

The funeral for Louisa Bingham Lee was held on July 30, 1959, in Salt Lake City. Speakers were President Henry D. Moyle and Lee Palmer, her home teacher. President Moyle quoted verbatim from Elder Lee's last testimony in the temple sacrament meeting, which talk he gave at the request of President McKay. Elder Lee summarized the life of his mother by the comment: "Everything seemed to be in perfect harmony with Mother's life, whose last days were, as the patriarch had promised years ago, 'her best days.' She was ready to go home. She had saved the entire cost of her burial and last illness."

These pressures were now in the past as Brother and Sister Lee were about to commence their tour of South America. In blessing Elder Lee on July 7 during the ulcer bout, President Moyle had three times stated, "your ministry will not be interrupted." Elder Lee had recorded, "I had an immediate sense of strength come over me."

Brazil

Rested from the voyage, the Lees docked at Rio de Janeiro on September 7 and were met by President Wm. Grant Bangerter, his wife, the missionaries of the local district, and about fifty faithful members who were awaiting the arrival, Elder Lee thought, more particularly to welcome the return of President and Sister Sorensen, who still had the affections of the Brazilians.

When President Sorensen returned after one day's delay, due to a national holiday, to reclaim the large bags of the Lees, be told them that the customs official was very curt about their bags; however, after learning that Elder Lee was an Apostle of the Church of Jesus Christ, he came early to the boat to expedite the baggage clearance through customs and refused the usual tip, as did the porters who carried the bags. He said that he would accept no tip from an Apostle of the Church of Jesus Christ.

The first encounter with the Brazilian Saints was highly impressive and favorable. On September 9, a midweek meeting was held in a downtown Rio hotel lounge room and was a surprising delight. There were about 250 present from the district, including investigators and four of the five couples from the United States who lived in Rio. Elder Lee was pleased and wrote: "They were a brilliant and intelligent congregation and wholly responsive to all that was said. Here surely is the seed-bed for great future possibilities of the president if he will begin to give the leadership now in the branches and districts into local hands instead of the missionaries."

In 1959 the Church in São Paulo was in its infancy. There were fifty missionaries at the opening meeting. A total of six branches were located in the city of Silo Paulo, housed in rented buildings, ranging from 50 to 376 in membership. Seventeen new converts were baptized during the busy day of meetings held in the Center Branch building with 117 in attendance. Just previously, three Methodist ministers had joined the Church.

The mission tour moved on with visits to Campinar, Poracicabia, Rio Claro, and Bauru. Elder Lee's journal describes his initial impressions:

We went by "air-taxi" from Claro to Bauru in a small one-engine Stinson plane. The missionaries and Sister Bangerter came by train. Here we were to see one of the surprises, a black woman president of the branch Relief Society with her husband and children all members, and a young girl with black blood in charge of the Primary. Both, they tell me, are well received by the whites. We enjoyed here the most spiritual missionary meeting of any in our tour so far. The spirit of the Elders seemed characterized by one Elder who said: "We found ourselves by losing ourselves in the red dirt of Maringa." A pair of Elders told of traveling five hours in a hot, dusty bus to a new town and of bearing testimony to each other that entire distance.

Young boy in Brazil who had never walked: Elder Lee wrote: "We administered to him, and after my return home [I received] this picture of him-now able to stand and to walk."

At Curitiba, on Sunday, September 20, 1959, the conference was held where the official organization of the South Brazilian Mission was effected. The Saints from Curitiba and Joinville districts and some from Ponta Grossa, numbering 339 in attendance, accepted President Asael T. Sorensen and two full-time missionaries, Elders Ross Leroy Broadbent and Robert T. Owens as counselors. This mission thus became the forty-ninth in the Church, with four districts, located at Curitiba, Joinville, Porto Alegre, and Londrina, and a population of four hundred members and about forty missionaries to serve them. Elder Lee's feelings were uplifted by the session in which a third of the total membership participated.

The Joinville Saints provided reminiscence that it was in that city that Elder Reinhold Stoof came in 1939 to commence missionary work in all of Brazil. When Elder Lee visited in 1959 the Saints were still largely German immigrants. Here again, without knowledge of their problems in this branch, Elder Lee addressed the membership on the importance of unity and willingness to accept their present leaders even though they may have held the same high positions in the past. He later learned that he had been inspired to touch on the very situations which this branch most needed to hear, a not uncommon experience in the ministry of Elder Lee. He needed no briefing by the mission president but discerned by the Holy Spirit the yearnings and needs of his audiences.

Spiritual experiences abounded as the tour moved on to Porto Alegre where the missionaries met in perhaps the most outstanding meeting in Brazil. A young Brazilian sister missionary was having her companion, Sister Gatenby, translate Elder Lee's English when suddenly she discovered she was understanding without the translation. This sister later told of a miraculous escape from the grasp of a man who accosted her and her companion in Curitiba.

At the same meeting a remarkable young missionary leader, Elder Ross Leroy Broadbent, who was called as the first counselor to the mission president a week earlier, related an inspiring experience of when he was hopelessly lost in Petropolis. unable to speak the native language and with no address for the chapel or the missionaries. After a fervent prayer in which he pleaded with the Lord that be must have help to fill his mission. he heard a voice which told him twice to follow the man on the corner. Obediently he followed the man as directed and was led directly to the chapel without further difficulty.

Paraguay and Uruguay

The tour through a small portion of Brazil was now ended, and the Lees boarded a plane for Fiz de Eqyaocym and a meeting with their next hosts, President and Sister Arthur Jensen from Asuncion, Paraguay. After arriving at Iguaçu there was vet an hour's ride over extremely rough unimproved roads. When the Lees settled into their hotel room, Fern suffered a hemorrhage in her eyes. Elder Lee blessed her and implored the Lord to be mindful of their immense need of his healing power, even to a miraculous intervention if needed. Fern stayed in her room while Elder Lee left with the group to photograph the famed Iguaçu Falls. When he returned to the hotel he found his wife greatly improved. The Lord had once more answered their prayers with a miracle.

The visit to Uruguay was notable because of a blessing given by Elder Lee to the head of the government and a continuation of spiritual girls on the travelers. After explaining the gospel for an hour to the ambassador, and after conducting a huge press conference, Elder Lee went to meet the president of the government council of nine, the man who directed the affairs of Uruguay. President Echogoyen was in his late sixties. Elder Lee recorded in his diary this interesting account of their visit:

President Echogoyen took about 10 minutes to welcome me as a representative of the North Americans and the Church, which he said was not merely a Sunday religion, and then spoke of my humble beginnings as an educator, as he had been, and added that he felt we were kindred spirits. I then had a strong feeling to give him and his country my blessing as an Apostle of the Lord Jesus Christ. He seemed to have been spiritually moved by the incident.

At Montevideo, the gift of tongues continued to help the local Saints understand Elder Lee's message in English. The meeting held on Sunday, October 4, 1959, was the first conference session of the Capitol District of Montevideo held in their newly constructed chapel, and over six hundred persons attended. Elder Lee recorded this unusual experience in his diary, recalling this meeting:

In the morning session it was evident that as I spoke the audience was understanding and reacting to what I said before the interpreter had repeated it, even though they knew no English. it was a veritable evidence of the gift of tongues to many there. The music was excellent, the talks by native brethren were remarkable, and the spirit was superb. The audience seemed loathe to leave. They presented us with many gifts as a token of their love to the leaders of the Church.

Throughout their travels the Lees often experienced situations in which the elements were tempered to provide safe passage through storms so that they might keep their appointments with the Church leaders and Saints. Examples come from Eider Lee's diary:

At Salto, after a four-hour missionary meeting yesterday, a sudden thunderstorm came up about 7:30 a.m. and made questionable whether or not our plane would leave as scheduled for Artigas and Rivera. We again sought the power of the Lord to intervene in tempering the elements, and before our breakfast was finished we had word that the plane would fly, on schedule. While it was still raining, the plane would fly despite the lightning and wind, and we took off from the grassy runway at Salto. At Artigas we were scheduled to have four or five hours delay, hut found that a previously disabled plane was just being readied to leave and that it would likely be the only flight, so we had a hurried meeting with 25 of our humble Saints, including a former rough-looking gaucho who is now a faithful refined Elder in the Church. Word came that the plane was leaving immediately and there was doubt that we could make it to the airport. To add to our woes our taxi had a fiat tire, which required my helping the driver change, while the president went for our hags. We arrived to find one of the two planes had tried to take off, but was delayed by a strong cross-wind and slippery grass, so that our plane was still waiting as though being prevented from leaving with our four Elders from Artigas. That "Someone" is He in whose service we are laboring. By the time we were all together, the rain ceased and the wind stopped, and both planes took off, including ours which took us to Rivera where we arrived hours ahead of schedule with the skies almost entirely cleared. How gratefully we give our thanks to a watchful Heavenly Father.

From Montevideo the tour moved to Paraguay, over extremely rough roads entailing a six- to seven-hour ride in a bus without shock absorbers. Yet at the three-hour meeting Elder Lee found the Spirit richly directing his concluding remarks.

On Sunday, October 11, 1959. members from Melo and Triente y Tres and one from the nearby Isla Petrulla, where a new chapel has been built, came to the conference. In this meeting three faithful sisters came up excitedly at the close of the meeting to declare that they had understood what Elder Lee had said before it had been translated, although they knew no English.

Argentina

Next the tour moved to Buenos Aires, where a meeting was held with one hundred members of the Caseros Branch, which would be the site for the first Church building to be constructed in Argentina and was just getting underway. The next Sunday conference was at Rosario, the second largest city in Argentina, with a population in 1959 at 800,000. It was located some six or seven driving hours from Buenos Aires. Here Elder Lee noted that the district leadership was in the hands of local members who were growing rapidly in ability and numbers. President Lorin Pace said that eighteen months earlier there had been a total attendance in these two branches of only 76, but at the conference on October 18, 1959, a record attendance of 331 in the morning and 371 in the evening came to hear Elder Lee. "This was a most satisfying experience," Elder Lee wrote.

Elder Lee met with forty-three missionaries in an all-day missionary conference at Buenos Aires and again heard of the miracles of the latter-day work in Argentina. Elder Ravsten told of obtaining a working knowledge of Spanish in forty-five days by reading the Spanish edition of the Book of Mormon, most of which he could only pronounce the words without knowing their meaning. Some bore testimonies of individuals becoming converts after they had given to them their first memorized lessons, even though the missionaries didn't understand all they were saying. The power of the devil had tested some missionaries; others reported their missions had brought unity and even some conversions to their family members at home. The meeting brought a spirit of repentance, too, as several missionaries confessed to certain previously undisclosed transgressions. The long, strenuous, but satisfying day ended at 8:00 P.M. when Elder Lee finally finished interviewing the missionaries.

The largest attendance in Argentina came at the concluding Sunday conference in Buenos Aires with five hundred present for the morning meeting and over six hundred in attendance in the evening.

Chile and Peru

Next came a visit to Concepción, Chile, the southernmost branch in Chile, where in two years Church population had gone from zero to a membership of ninety in 1959. About 130 persons came to the meeting to hear Elder Lee, and he noted that the members here were distinctly of Indian extraction, "faithful, but not demonstrative."

Elder Lee organized the new Andes Mission at Santiago on October 30, 1959, at a conference held on the grounds of the Providencia Branch. Members came from all seven branches in Chile and the audience totalled 318 persons or 63 percent of the membership. Here it was announced that Lima, Peru, would be the headquarters of the mission, a motion which drew a few negative votes, despite reference to Santiago, Chile, as the "southern headquarters of the mission." President J. Vernon Sharp was presented as the president of the mission, with Joseph Robert Quayle as his first counselor and Elder Wallace Baker as the second counselor.

There were, on this historic occasion, seven branches in Chile with a total membership of about five hundred, and five branches in Peru with a total of about three hundred, making a grand total of eight hundred members in twelve branches. With such a modest Church membership the population of the mission increased by 10 percent when forty-five converts were baptized the day following the conference. Elder Lee met for eight hours with the thirty-five missionaries serving in Santiago.

The organization of the new Andes Mission was repeated on Sunday, November 1, 1959, at Lima, Peru, when Elder Lee declared the mission officially in existence. Two sessions of conference were held with about two hundred persons attending, over 60 percent of the total Church membership at that time.

Through communications with the First Presidency, Elder Lee's recommendations had been approved to have President Jensen, who had had considerable construction experience, consult with the two Brazilian mission presidents incident to the building of chapels in Latin America. Also, some mission boundary changes were made so that cities on the Brazilian side could be worked from the Uruguay Mission.

The route homeward took the Lees to Cuzco, Peru, and a visit to the famed ruins of Machu Picchu. Flying over the Andes at a height of 20,000 feet Elder and Sister Lee landed at Cuzco, which has an elevation of 11,600 feet. This was the capital city, Elder Lee was told, of the great Inca Empire, one of the greatest socialistic empires ever known, and which was destroyed by the Spaniards in 1535 and years following under Pizzaro and others in their greedy search for gold. Visiting with a Mr. Cohen, a wealthy cotton producer, the Lees saw a magnificent array of gold ornaments and even gold children's playthings, and wondered if the plentiful supply of gold even then meant that the early settlers probably had abundant access to gold for plates or sheets of gold materials on which to write the records of the people of Lehi and Nephi. They regarded it as another evidence that this land was probably the first Nephite center in the Western Hemisphere.

In company with about twenty other visitors the Lees went to Machu Picchu, where the last Inca stronghold was discovered by Dr. Hiram Bingham in 1911. They were told that from here the high Inca lord probably fled with his "chosen" women, personal attendants, and guards. Elder and Sister Lee enjoyed this learning experience at one of the most famed archaeological finds in the Americas.

Among the Incan ruins of Machu Picchu, 1959

Two Presidents' Impressions

In retrospect both President Wm. Grant Bangerter, of the divided Brazilian Mission, and President J. Vernon Sharp, newly installed as the first president of the Andes Mission in Chile and Peru, wrote into their personal histories and the oral histories they prepared with the Church Historical Department their vivid impressions of being with President and Sister Lee in this mission tour. President Bangerter's account follows:

Brother and Sister Harold B. Lee ... came (to Brazil) with the purpose of effecting the division [of the mission]. In the process Brother Lee and his wife toured the mission, and we were with them for ... a period of nearly three weeks, which was about the term of a mission tour by a General Authority in those days. Those occasions with ... [our touring General Authorities] ... were outstanding in their personal effect upon us. To be able to associate from day to day for that prolonged period with these men and their wives was an unusual and very treasured opportunity.

President Lee, of course, in his visit did similar [work] to what President Kimball [had done the year before], in that he strengthened the missionary work and encouraged us. He taught us constantly about the spirit with which we should work, gave instructions about leadership and Church government, and projected us to move in the organization of districts with local leadership and branches under local presidencies.

As we would walk along the street with President Lee he told us many stories [and I appreciated so much my association with him]. Brother Lee had a habit, I think, with his companions, whoever they happened to be, of tending to confide in them. And many of the things that he talked about were personal stories of an inspirational nature. One of the things we did discuss that is vivid with me was his relationship with President J. Reuben Clark, Jr. President Lee had been trained as a member of the Twelve under the tutelage of President Clark, working with him closely in the welfare program. As I commented to him about this relationship, he said, "I suppose that no father was ever closer to a son than President Clark has been to me."

Other incidents-and they were too numerous to mention in full or even to recall-would include some like his personal stories of the testimony of various members of the General Authorities. One that is vivid was his recounting of the time when Heber J. Grant was supposedly on his death bed ... [and the concern that was registered about his successor]. President Lee told us that story as an indication of how the Lord is in complete control and directs the succession to the Presidency of the Church. I think this subject was always of great importance to President Lee. He was assured as to the manner in which the Lord selects the Presidents of the Church.

President Lee made no particular reference to a readjustment in Church order at that time, but of course he had, years before, fixed his mind on attitudes that indicated that the Church already had the structure to give it proper leadership and that we should not expect to form new patterns of leadership and organization. He always understood that the priesthood was the proper organization and governing agency and that the structure was established by the Lord. I heard him say that in those days and before and since.

But I would like to say that to have experiences of this kind, walking and living personally by the side of men of this nature, was an opportunity very rare to people on earth. We prized it very much.

We had another experience that I recall of having family home evening with Brother and Sister Lee in our home. To have them sit and visit with our children and talk with them and to hear him bear his testimony about how he knew that he had been called of God when he was named one of the Twelve Apostles was a very inspiring experience.

President J. Vernon Sharp recapped his visit with Elder and Sister Lee in these words, taken from his oral history with the Church Historical Department:

In Santiago, Chile, ... we proceeded with the details for the formation of the Andes Mission. In the Hotel Carrera on the mezzanine floor, toward the front, we had a huge flag of Chile and a huge flag of Peru. Under the two flags with the masts crossed, we held our planning meeting for the formation of the mission and took care of the details. Later on we met at the rear of the property at El Bosque and held the organization meeting under the direction of President Harold B. Lee.

At that time he announced that the Andes Mission was to be formed, or was being formed, that there would be two cities that would hold the offices for the mission, but that the main records of the mission were to be kept in Lima, Peru, under the direction of President David O. McKay. We held a very inspirational meeting. We toured with President and Sister Lee the branches of the Church that were at that time in Santiago. When we went down to Concepcion, we took them out to a whaling station and President and Sister Lee watched them process some whales.

We gave advance publicity to the newspaper, and this is not in the mission history so I think I should tell it to you. There were good press releases-and some not so good-and in an article that came out in the leading paper in Santiago was a picture of a man on a burro surrounded by many women. It said, "Mormon leader arrives in Chile to organize missionary work in Chile. We asked where his other wives were, but he said he only brought one." When we showed that to Brother Lee, he laughed. I still have it in my possession. But, it wasn't very long until we received very good publicity there.

Now when the mission was organized President Lee told the audience before Sister Sharp and I had even heard of it, that the mission was to include Bolivia as well as Peru and Chile, and at our discretion, as we got the work moving in the other countries, we were to proceed in Bolivia. So towards the end of this year, 1959, we began making plans for that which we should do in the coming year. Going to Bolivia in January 1960 had a great bearing on the activities of the Andes Mission.

Northward and Home

Saying farewell to South America the Lee tour moved northward to visit the Panama Canal Zone. On November 9, 1959, the Lees were guests on a government boat trip through the canal channel into the Pacific Ocean and then to the Miraflores Locks, where they saw larger vessels taken up over an eighty-five-foot elevation and then lowered again down to sea level. After speaking at a priesthood and Relief Society conference Elder Lee wrote, "My talk seemed to the mission president to have especially been well-timed for the solution of internal problems of the Saints here."

Continuing on, Elder Lee observed the failure of early attempts at local leadership in San Jose, Costa Rica, and tried to meet the situation by speaking of the power of the devil which overtakes those who fail in keeping the Lord's commandments. In Honduras an American educator who served as branch president was challenged by Elder Lee to make substantial contributions and to raise funds for a branch chapel at Tegucigalpa, and then Elder Lee blessed President Nathan J. and Allie Rogers Barlow so that their unselfish plans would succeed.

Elder Lee heard a report in San Salvador that the Coffee Growers Association was protesting against the Church because our missionaries were preaching against coffee drinking, thus opposing their financial interests. It was a signal that caution must be observed to avoid statements against political governments, as President McKay had warned, and although Elder Lee taught him the Church President's counsel, the mission president found it difficult to accept.

Some of the greatest spiritual experiences of the entire trip came in Guatemala, a country which greatly impressed Elder Lee. He wrote in his diary on Sunday, November 15, 1959, these significant words:

Today we had a most thrilling experience in meeting with over 1600 members of the Church from the five districts of Guatemala. This is among the most distinctive Lamanite people I have yet been among. Somehow I had a strong feeling that this place is without question the Lamanite capital of North America and that a temple for the Latin American people should be built here. President Alfredo Mosso Amada told of the town of Kumen in Northern Guatemala which has the same name as one of the twelve disciples Jesus chose on the western continent, and there were other remarkable indicators.

Brother Daniel Mich, a full-blooded Indian of the Patzicia Branch, told of a dream where seven men were beckoning him to follow, each one taking a different road. He had just been visited by the missionaries and despite the vicious stories being told, he was praying to know the truth of their message. In his dream he saw a tall, stately, white-headed man who introduced himself as David O. McKay, a prophet of God, who told him the way to the right road. When later his Elders showed him a photograph of President McKay, he immediately recognized him as the prophet of his dream. He has now been a member for the last three years.

The spiritual stories continued as the Lees moved north ward, arriving by plane in Mexico City on November 17, 1959. There they were met by President Harvey H. Taylor, his wife, and the mission staff. President Taylor told this interesting story to Elder Lee, which came from Elder Hall, who was a member of the mission office staff. Elder Hall's words were recorded in Elder Lee's journal:

When I was working in Southern Mexico, I met a 75-year-old woman, who, when the first missionaries came to that area, told them she knew that their message was true because three elderly men had come to their community some time before, and had taught these same doctrines and had gone from there south into Central America. This story agrees with the report of natives in Guatemala, when the first Elders opened the work there.

The inspirational direction of a divine providence in choosing the right areas for the missionaries to work was demonstrated in a story told to Elder Lee by President Taylor. Elder Lee's diary recorded it as follows:

President Taylor related the experience he and Jose Davila and four Elders had in opening the work in Yucatan. They drove to the town of Motul and parked in front of a hotel, where they planned to stay while they started the work. He had a very depressed feeling, and when he consulted Elder Carter, who was in another car, he found that Elder Carter likewise had a depressed feeling. The president then decided to leave immediately and go to another town, where they stayed for the night. The next morning again he and Elder Carter conferred and both had an exultant feeling and they knew they should start the missionary work there. Two or three months later Motul had a revolution during which several were killed and many wounded, thus attesting to the providential warning which came to him.

Exchanging hugs with Marion G. Romney upon return from South America, 1959

A midweek conference at the Industrial Branch was hastily arranged by President Taylor so that the Saints could meet Elder and Sister Lee; 425 members were in attendance. Elder Lee again reflected about his favorable impression of the progress of the Saints in Mexico in these words: "The remarkable improvement in the appearance and performance of our Mexican Saints never ceases to amaze me."

The long, three-month journey on the Lord's errand finally came to a close when the Lees' plane landed in Salt Lake City on November 18, 1959. Sister Lee, whose health was always frail, came home fatigued and suffering from a cold and sinus infection, but rejoiced greatly to be reunited with the family and General Authorities who gathered at the airport to welcome them home. They went immediately to the home of their daughter Helen for a joyous visit with the family.

The next day was Thursday, November 19, 1959, and Elder Lee joined his Brethren in the customary meeting of the First Presidency and Council of the Twelve in the temple. There President McKay requested that he report on a number of spiritual experiences connected with his three-month tour of the missions in Latin America, and on hearing many of the stories mentioned above, the President seemed to be most pleased with the report.

Following the counsel of President J. Reuben Clark, given in his pretour blessing, Elder Lee had made no public mention of his prophetic insight that a temple was someday to be built for the Latin American Saints in Guatemala, "Lamanite capital of North America." That nonpublished prophecy was fulfilled in 1981 when President Spencer W. Kimball announced temple construction plans in Guatemala on the day prior to the opening of the April general conference.
