Brent L. Goates, Harold B. Lee: Prophet and Seer ( 1985)

18 Saving the Voice of a Prophet

On February 12, 1960, Elder Harold B. Lee received an assignment from President McKay to join with Alvin R. Dyer, president of the European Mission, and President Bowring T. Woodbury, president of the British Mission, to organize a new stake of the Church centering at Manchester, England, the first stake in Great Britain. The assignment also entailed creating the new North British Mission.

At the temple meeting on Thursday, March 3, 1960, Bernard T. Brockbank, president of the Salt Lake Cottonwood Stake, was approved to become the president of the new mission in Great Britain, and he immediately reported to Elder Lee with the assurance that he would be ready to fly from New York to London with him on March 17. In those two short weeks President Brockbank arranged for his final preparations and the transfer of his business to other hands.

Organizing the First British Stake

Elder Lee fulfilled this assignment and returned home just in time to participate in the April 1960 general conference of the Church. He learned from President Henry D. Moyle the night before Elder Lee was to speak at general conference that President McKay would be disappointed if he didn't report on his assignment in Great Britain, so he prepared notes to do as President Moyle had suggested. He explained this at conference the next day:

Because of the desire expressed by the Brethren that I say something about the history-making events of the past week in the British Mission, I have put aside the text of that which I might have prepared otherwise to say on this occasion. I have determined long since that the expressed desire of my presiding Brethren is to me as a command. Therefore, I trust that I might in some measure give you a picture of some of the events which have transpired of a momentous nature in Great Britain.

It was on March 18, 1960, that Elder and Sister Lee flew for the first time in a jet aircraft. Leaving from the Idlewild Airport in New York for London with President Brockbank, they soared at a height of 37,000 feet and traveled at an air speed of six hundred miles per hour. They described the sensation aboard as hearing "a noise like rushing wind, but experiencing practically no vibration."

The assignment from the First Presidency took the Lees to the scenes of some of the most soul-stirring incidents and experiences in the history of missionary work in this dispensation. After arriving at Manchester the Church leaders drove to Liverpool, thirty-seven miles distant, where they searched for a suitable building for the headquarters of the new North British Mission. Elder Lee later recorded other visits to historic sites: "We went from here to Preston, where our first missionaries started their work in 1837. We went to the Pier Head, where their ship docked, to their living quarters on Wil-Vauxhal, Temperance Hall, the Cockpit, where they preached, the Obelisk on the market place, and the River Ribble, where the first baptisms were performed."

Recalling the miracles of the first missionary work in the midlands of Great Britain near Preston, Elder Lee rehearsed in brief the tremendous manifestation of the power of evil spirits to those early missionaries, and the almost incredible harvest of over 1800 baptisms in just eight months by Elder Wilford Woodruff about three years later.

Elder Lee quoted from the Documentary History of the Church to describe the early days of missionary work in England, and stated that times were not much different now in opposition and disinterest. The early record stated: "It seemed that it almost required a horn to be blown from the highest heavens in order to awaken the attention of the people."

The parallel came in the 1960 press notice from the Manchester Guardian newspaper, which announced the creation of this stake and the organization of the new mission with this tiny story hidden in an obscure place:

Mormons Hold a Mass Meeting

British Mormons formed their first diocese in Europe yesterday at a mass meeting of more than 2,000 members of the Church of the Latter-day Saints in Manchester, the new center to be built without delay at Wythenshawe, Manchester, at a cost of about 100,000 pounds. The diocese, or stake, covers Manchester. Halifax. Huddersfield, Dewsbury and Leeds.

In his diary Elder Lee recorded the events accompanying the organization of the Manchester Stake and the new North British Mission as follows:

Today (March 26, 1960) we spent the day interviewing those called to various positions. I had an unusual experience. when after consenting to the ordination of the three members of the district presidency in the new Preston District, I was impressed to instruct the priesthood not to be ambitious to have offices in the priesthood after that of elder, explaining that these other offices come after being called to positions required by further ordinations. I found only one or two men unworthy to hold the positions to which they had been called.

The conference sessions were held in the Manchester Hippodrome Theatre, on Sunday, March 27, 1960. There were nearly 1.700 in the morning session and 2,026 attending in the afternoon. In the morning session we presented the organization of the new Manchester Stake, with nine wards and two branches, and a total population of 2,400. Our new presidency of Robert G. Larsen, Dennis Livesy, and William Bates gave a good account of themselves and were well accepted. The organization of the North British Mission was presented also at this meeting, with President Bernard P. Brockbank as president and Fredrick W. Oates and Elder John Evans as his counselors. We also announced the organization of the Preston District of the North British Mission. After the closing session we went to the Manchester Ward chapel and set apart 65 new stake and ward officers. Following this we met until 9:30 p.m. with Presidents Woodbury and Brockbank and over 200 missionaries.

Elder Lee described his mission of organization in England, as well as his observations and feelings, in his public general conference address:

It was interesting to discover that the leadership of the stake and wards and the branches had to be largely composed of brethren who were baptized converts to the Church of less than five years. Fortunately, and it seemed as though almost by the hand of Providence, we found a few "anchor" men who had been trained in the stakes here at home, who will become the trainers of these new able but inexperienced leaders. This stake becomes now a training ground for leaders of organizations yet to come.

This new stake brings the full Church program into action, so that such an organization will be a demonstration to the world "to shine forth as a standard unto the nations," showing the work of the Church at full flower. Zion, which the Lord declared is "the pure in heart," in that land now will "increase in holiness and beauty." Zion will now begin "to arise and put on her beautiful garments." (See D&C 82:14, 97, 21.) This first stake will provide a pattern for stakes yet to come from these great missions. We think we have set it up in such a way that new leaders, so trained, will shortly be able to take over still other stakes in that same vicinity, and become a pattern for leaders of stakes in that and the other European missions.

In truth, then, it now begins to build "a defense, a refuge from the storm, and wrath when it is poured out without mixture, upon the whole earth" (see D&C 115:6), which, as the Lord declared, was the purpose of a stake being organized.

We now have organized in the North British Mission eight missionary districts, with nine missionary districts still remaining in the British Mission, which will continue to have headquarters in London. The new mission will have headquarters at Manchester, England.

The power of God is resting again in the missions of Europe today, as in the century which has passed. During the month of March alone, the British Mission has baptized 360 converts. In the French Mission there were another 114 new converts baptized, which seems for the first time in our day to give evidence that the work is beginning to take root in France, after a shocking demonstration of the power of evil in that mission only two short years ago. And from the North German Mission, to use another example, which we have usually thought of as being behind the Iron Curtain in part, they baptized in the month of March alone 85 new converts.

So it was, likewise, during the three months of last fall, when we toured the Latin American missions of South America and in Mexico, we saw evidences of the giant of God's eternal power, if I might speak of it that way, awakening among those wonderful people, where in some of those missions they are having 600 to 700 convert baptisms each year, as compared with only 50 to 75 in previous years.

Indeed, in the language of Mark's testimony of the early missionaries of the apostolic period, who received the divine commission of the Lord: "Go ye into all the world, and preach the gospel to every creature. He that believeth and is baptized shall be saved; but he that believeth not shall be damned. And these signs shall follow them that believe; In my name shall they cast out devils; they shall speak with new tongues; They shall take up serpents; and if they drink any deadly thing, it shall not hurt them: they shall lay hands on the sick, and they shall recover." (Mark 16:15-18.)

And then Mark records this significant fulfillment: "And they went forth, and preached every where, the Lord working with them, and confirming the word with signs following" (Mark 16:20).

President McKay, I have been a personal witness in these last six months that, as the Apostles of old found, we are finding today that the servants of the living God are going forth, the Lord is working with them confirming the work, with the same signs following.

I bear personal witness that the gift of tongues to a whole congregation, which I witnessed, as in the day of Pentecost, was observed down in one of the Latin American missions, by which this congregation understood what I said although what was being spoken to them was in a strange tongue. I have witnessed the healing of an impotent and crippled child from birth in the Brazilian Mission. I have witnessed the healing of a blind child in the Central American Mission.

And so, enumerating all of these, more important than any of these signs, I have witnessed the reformation in the personal lives of individuals who accept the gospel and are true to its principles, which results from a true conversion to the gospel of Jesus Christ. I bear you my solemn witness to the onrolling of the work of the Lord. The work is awakening everywhere.

Elder Lee seemed pleased with his report in general conference of his historic organizational trip to England; he also felt President McKay was pleased with his summary: "The President seemed pleased with what I had to say, and as he closed the conference he was very emotional and declared this conference to have been the greatest, and an evidence of the apostolic power resting upon the Twelve."

The organization of the first stake in Great Britain accompanied by the first division of the British Mission was indeed a milestone which signaled a rapid Church expansion in the British Isles. By the time Elder Lee became President of the Church in 1973, twelve other stakes had been organized and all were operating under local leadership. The Church membership in Great Britain in 1972 was 74,000, with membership in the nine stakes reaching 32,000 and membership in the seven missions recorded as another 42,000. There were at that time 300 wards and branches of the Church in Great Britain. Of these, about 120 were then in chapels that the Church had constructed and dedicated for worship services and instruction. Indeed, the British Isles, to which President Joseph Smith sent missionaries when the Church was but seven years old, produced for a second time a rich harvest of dedicated new converts.

A Prophet's Voice Preserved

One of the most inspiring and significant experiences in terms of its long-range ramifications was Elder Lee's close involvement with the cancer throat surgery that threatened the life of Elder Spencer W. Kimball in 1957. Had not the Lord been kind to the Brethren in their fervent appeals for guidance and healing, the magnificent leadership of President Spencer W. Kimball, as Elder Lee's successor as prophet, seer, and revelator, might have been lost.

Elder Kimball first suspected difficulty with his voice in 1950. For many years he had feared that cancer might be developing, but it was not until Christmastime of 1956 that a renewed threat became apparent. After awakening one morning with blood in the back of his throat and a weakened voice, he sought medical assistance. Dr. Leland Cowan, a cancer specialist in Salt Lake City, urged consultation in New York City with the world's leading medical specialists.

After attending a stake conference in New York City in February 1957, Elder Kimball submitted himself to examination by Dr. Hayes Martin. He performed an immediate biopsy of the throat, but the results proved inconclusive. Elder Kimball was sent back home to be watched by Dr. Cowan and to rest his voice in silence for thirty days.

Elder Lee's involvement first came one month later, on March 16, 1957, when he and Sister Lee went to the train depot to welcome Spencer and Camilla Kimball back home from New York City, where, according to Elder Lee's records, "Spencer had undergone a serious operation on his throat, supposedly for a cancerous growth which, if it was fully removed, could destroy his voice permanently."

Five days later Elder Kimball attended the temple meeting with the Brethren; he had dutifully written out his reports but asked Elder Lee to read them for him. Of his medical treatment in New York he said that his surgeon called his throat growth "benign" and yet had written on his medical report "in situe carcinoma," indicating a malignant tumor. The contradiction gave no peace of mind to anyone.

In early April Elder Kimball's throat was mending from the surgery, and he reported to Elder and Sister Lee at a social that "after you and the Brethren blessed me last night, this morning my voice was strong enough to seem almost nearing normal." Yet in early May it was still necessary for Elder Kimball to use Elder Lee as his spokesman in their weekly temple meeting as he whispered or wrote notes to his seat companion. Elder Lee noted it in his journal because he felt President McKay had thought him to be too active in the meeting speaking for both Spencer and himself.

In July of 1957 Elder Lee was in New York City attending some corporate board meetings when he received a letter from Elder Kimball. He and Camilla would be arriving the next day to be reexamined by the cancer specialist at the Cancer Memorial Hospital to determine whether further surgery would be needed.

This course had been recommended by President McKay after Elder Kimball had placed his future in the hands of the prophet. President McKay was emotional about his responsibility of giving advice and asked for time to ponder and pray overnight concerning the problem. The next day he advised Elder Kimball to go to New York and follow the advice of his physicians; he also advised him to consult with Elder Lee in New York City in making the final decision. With uncertainty as to what the future would hold, Brother and Sister Kimball left for New York City.

On July 26, 1957, Brother and Sister Lee went to Grand Central Station early in the morning to meet the Kimballs on their arrival. Elder Lee suggested that the Kimballs accept President Theodore Jacobsen's invitation to stay at the Eastern States Mission home, which they did.

At Elder Kimball's request, Elder Lee accompanied him to the interview with Dr. Hayes Martin, the cancer surgery specialist who had stripped his vocal cords of the growth on them four and one-half months earlier. After a careful examination, Dr. Martin told Elder Kimball that further surgery was imperative immediately to check the cancerous growth, which had advanced considerably since the previous stage.

This was a crucial moment of decision and persuasion. The entire effectiveness in useful service of a future prophet of God swayed in the balance.

Deliberately and forcefully Elder Lee implored: "Dr. Martin, this patient of yours is no ordinary man!" Then, both Elder Lee and Elder Kimball impressed on him the necessity of preserving the Apostle's voice, if at all possible, because his voice, in his present position, was his very life. Dr. Martin responded with a quotation to indicate that he understood the importance of his delicate decision. Quoting from Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes, who was answering the inquiry as to when he would retire, he said: "There is not time to retire; to live is to serve."

Then Dr. Martin said that it seemed to him likely that by an immediate operation he might be able to save one vocal cord, although he insisted on an understanding that he be left free to make that decision when he operated, and by actual examination determine how much the entire voice box was involved. He was hopeful that he might be able to perform a partial laryngectomy, which would leave Elder Kimball with some voice, but probably not even as good as he presently possessed.

With such a grim outlook, at best, but fearing the even more ominous alternative, the two Apostles concluded that the only course open was to go forward with the surgery. Arrangements were made to admit Elder Kimball to the Cancer Memorial Hospital on Sunday afternoon. The Lees took the Kimballs to lunch and suggested that they take an excursion boat ride around the island of Manhattan to relieve their anxieties. Elder Kimball took the surgeon's decision calmly, according to Elder Lee but Camilla was considerably shaken by the conclusion to operate again.

After Elder Lee had concluded his Sunday sermon at the famed Cathedral of the Pines in Ringde, New Hampshire, he returned to New York City by automobile, thinking as he rode down the beautiful Merritt Parkway through Connecticut of the spiritual challenge that awaited his return to the bedside of his beloved associate. With Elder Roy Fugal, his driver, he went directly to the Memorial Hospital, where they administered to Elder Kimball before he went to the operating room. After Elder Lee's blessing, Elder Kimball found peace and relief from fear. Elder Lee returned shortly thereafter to stay at Camilla's side until she had word of the extent to which the surgeons had to go in removing the malignant tissues from Spencer's throat.

Courtesy service was extended to Sister Kimball and Elder Lee by Dr. Rulon Rawson, a member of the Church and chief of the Department of Medicine at Memorial Hospital, who came twice during the operation to report results and answer questions regarding the extent of the operation. Finally the doctors reported that they were required to remove completely the left vocal cord and to trim the right one, taking off a portion on the right side where the two join. They also removed an afflicted portion of the larynx that was determined to be malignant. They explained that there would necessarily be a "significant" change in his voice, but with sufficient mechanics Elder Kimball would be able to converse and speak audibly. They also opened his throat from the front and inserted a silver tube through which he could breathe.

The day after surgery, on July 30, 1957, Elder Lee returned to the hospital and found Elder Kimball fully recovered from the anesthetic and able to take nourishment by mouth and to move about. Elder Kimball asked Elder Lee to phone President McKay and report all that had happened. President McKay was greatly relieved at the report. On the following day Elder Kimball was able to breathe freely, so they removed the silver tube from his windpipe and changed his dressings, telling him he could leave the hospital in two days and could return to his home in Utah after ten more. Actually it became four weeks before they arrived home.

Before the Lees left their vigil for their return home, they went late Wednesday night to see Spencer and Camilla at the hospital, presenting them with a bouquet of beautiful flowers and extending their love and faith that all would go well during Elder Kimball's convalescence.

Three weeks after leaving Elder Kimball in New York City, Elder Lee and the Quorum of the Twelve devoted their quarterly meeting in the temple to a special fast for Spencer Kimball's return to health, and specifically that he would regain the use of his voice to continue his work. Elder Lee read to the Brethren, after they had prayed, an optimistic progress report from President Jacobsen of the Eastern States Mission where Elder Kimball was convalescing, stating that he now had possession of a "working" voice.

Working with the New Voice

Finally, in December, Spencer declared himself healed. The doctors at first had not released him to fulfill appointments with the stakes and missions, but before the end of the year he was told to use his voice in public speaking and the First Presidency consented to his plaintive appeals to return to routine travel assignments.

These renewed travel appointments included an assignment with Elder Harold B. Lee to divide the Dallas Texas Stake and to organize a new stake at Shreveport, Louisiana. These brethren left on January 15, 1958, by train for a strenuous two weeks. Concerning that trip Elder Lee wrote in his journal: "It is remarkable how diligently Brother Kimball struggles to use his remaining voice, which effort is greatly hampered by noise interference on the train."

After the hard work of reorganizing the Houston Stake was taken care of on Saturday, the Brethren tried to sleep, but Elder Kimball twisted and turned and was in such pain that sleep was impossible. Finally he revealed to Elder Lee his suffering, announcing that he had a severe pain in his back and was coughing greatly. He did so reluctantly for fear that Elder Lee might curtail his activities at the conference. Elder Lee gave him some medicinals and then administered to him. At last Spencer slept, and on the next morning he declared that he had had no return of the pain from which he had suffered. Gratefully, he thanked the Lord for his goodness to him.

At the Sunday morning session of stake conference, after the reorganization had been accomplished, Elder Lee called Elder Kimball to speak. Twice he tried but was quite unintelligible. About to quit in despair, the courageous Elder Kimball made a final attempt to speak and this time succeeded. He ended up doing his share of the preaching, although his voice, according to Elder Lee's description, was "little more than a hoarse whisper. He was helped, however, by a sensitive microphone fastened around his neck, which device gave him the needed volume for all to hear."

With Spencer W. Kimball in Dallas, 1958'

The two companions pressed on through Texas, holding a meeting on January 29, 1958, at Many, Louisiana, with the Saints of the surrounding branches which were being brought into the new stake at Shreveport. Here Brother Kimball excused himself from speaking because of a soreness in his throat, which gave him some anxiety lest it be the result of overtaxing his voice so soon after his operation. However, in Texarkana, one week later, where the Brethren had a four-hour layover between trains, a meeting was held in a huge, long and narrow Methodist chapel. Earlier Elder Kimball had asked to be excused from speaking, but responded when called on by Elder Lee. Although there was no loudspeaker available, Brother Kimball addressed for thirty minutes the 184 rapidly assembled Saints. Every person present had heard him and was uplifted by his message. Elder Lee comforted his companion and assured him that he was finding favor with God.

From this appointment in Louisiana, Elder Lee was traveling on to New York City for corporate board meetings. Elder Kimball, after checking with his office and finding he had no assignment for the next Sunday, decided to go to New York City with Elder Lee. He felt that if he could obtain some clinical voice training he might be able to avoid some bad habits which he felt were developing. After arriving in New York City, Elder Lee stayed at the side of his worried companion, accompanying him to the speech clinic and making certain that arrangements were made for a series of lessons or training periods.

This was the beginning of better days for Elder Spencer W. Kimball. He gained control over his new voice and passed through the medical and emotional trials that could have rendered him impotent of communicative skills for his later ministry as the prophet of God. What was the measured value of this victory? Millions of people on all continents of the earth were later to hear him speak as the mouthpiece of God, using a unique, damaged, but mended voice.

As one young sister, Carmen Nunez of Cebu City, Philippines, expressed it for millions of others at the 1980 Far East Area Conference of the Church in that land, "I'll never forget this conference and the words of the prophet. It's such a blessing to see the prophet and to hear his voice."

Elder Lee's Rise in Seniority and Influence

Elder Lee became an Apostle on April 6, 1941, as the newest and by far the youngest member of the Quorum of the Twelve. After ten years, he had moved from being twelfth in seniority to fourth.

When Elder LeGrand Richards was sustained as a new member of the Quorum of the Twelve on April 6, 1952, Elder Lee welcomed him into the ranks of the Apostles and recounted in these words his own movement in seniority in the Quorum: "Eleven years ago this morning, I climbed the steps and took my place on the stand where Brother Richards is today. In eleven years to the day, I have moved from the arm rest to my left, to the arm rest to my right. That call was an overpowering experience, as only these, my brethren, know."

The ordination of Elder Richards to the apostleship was the eighth such experience Elder Lee had witnessed since his arrival in that circle in 1941.

Two of his initial fellow quorum members, George Albert Smith and Joseph Fielding Smith, rose to preside over the Church as its President. Two became President of the Council of Twelve Apostles, Elders Rudger A. Clawson and George F. Richards. Another member served in the First Presidency (Stephen L Richards). Death took Elders John A. Widtsoe, Joseph F. Merrill, Charles A. Callis, Albert E. Bowen, and Sylvester Q. Cannon, and tragically, excommunication claimed another, Richard R. Lyman. Most of these changes occurred during the first ten years of Elder Lee's apostleship.

The second decade of Elder Lee's service as an Apostle saw him advance from being fourth in seniority to being second only to Elder Joseph Fielding Smith.

The first Apostle to pass away in that second decade was Elder Joseph F. Merrill. He died in his sleep early on Sunday morning, February 3, 1952, while on a stake conference visit.

Elder A. E. Bowen had a stroke while attending a temple meeting of the Council of the Twelve on June 25, 1952. The Apostles were gathered in their quarterly meeting; while Elder Henry Moyle was speaking, Elder Bowen became ill. When his brethren rushed to his aid they found him unable to stand on his feet and surmised that he had suffered a stroke, crippling his left hand and impairing his speech. They laid him on a couch and after administering to him called for his physician and then for his son, Albert. He was rushed to the hospital. One year later, on July 15, 1953, Eider Albert E. Bowen, Elder Lee's esteemed friend, died.

Elder Lee wrote in his journal on October 7, 1952, that he was grieved by a discouraging report on the health of Elder Widtsoe. The entry read: "I was saddened by the report that a Dr. Crowley, who had waited on Brother Widtsoe in California, had reported to friends that Brother Widtsoe's intestines were 'filled with cancer.' I am hoping the report is exaggerated." The report, however, was accurate, and on November 29, 1952, Elder John A. Widtsoe died. When the funeral was held on December 2, 1952, a terrific snowstorm prevented thousands from attending the memorial services in the Tabernacle on Temple Square, and the hearse had to be pushed up the hill to the cemetery.

By 1960, at the end of the second apostolic decade of Elder Lee's service, he stood next in seniority to his revered friend and much more senior associate Elder Joseph Fielding Smith, whom he was destined to follow into the First Presidency after the death of President David O. McKay. Not only had he risen quickly due to the passing of the older Brethren, but also his talents were being increasingly called on and his leadership abilities increasingly expanded with new and larger responsibilities.

1951-1960. This was the "Space Age," Peace brought moon flights and McCarthy extremism. Bomb shelters were built and paradise was sought in the suburbs. Elvis Presley and television rocked the country.
