Brent L. Goates, Harold B. Lee: Prophet and Seer ( 1985)

19 Vignettes from the Second Apostolic Decade

A period of restless nervousness came over Elder Lee as he faced unusual pressures in the fall of 1951. He returned home late on a Sunday night from a conference in Smithfield, Utah, highly nervous and tense. He considered that this may have been "induced by a combination of Maurine's illness, the pending purchase of a home, and a general feeling of unrest that runs as an undercurrent among the Brethren."

The first week of October saw another restless period with the worries of plans for completing the transaction for their new home weighing on his mind. With Fern, he cashed bonds and savings deposits to obtain sufficient money to purchase their new home at 849 Connor Street in Salt Lake City. His attorney friends were most accommodating in examining the necessary papers. "For some reason," he wrote, "I find myself in a highly nervous state of mind with extreme difficulty in concentrating upon a subject which I could prepare for general conference."

In front of home at 849 Connor Street, Salt Lake City

A week later the condition still prevailed; he wrote on October 7, 1951, "I am still oppressed by feelings I seem unable to overcome or explain."

Moving day came on October 19, 1951, compounding his worries. Describing his pressures Elder Lee wrote: "This was one of the most hectic days of my life as we moved from the apartment at 107 First Avenue to our new home at 849 Connor Street. Ralph and Beth Davey brought our dinner over and served it to us last night, as a neighborly gesture, the first night we had slept in our home."

Marion G. Romney Ordained an Apostle

The general conference of October 1951 brought with it significant changes. With Elder Stephen L Richards now serving in the First Presidency a vacancy in the Twelve was to be filled. The Brethren were growing older, with President J. Reuben Clark, Jr., now age eighty and Joseph Fielding Smith, the President of the Quorum of the Twelve, age seventy-five.

Earlier, Elder Lee had a delightful visit with President Clark en route to Cedar City where he was a guest at the Cedar City Centennial. As they traveled, President Clark told Elder Lee about some of the financial problems confronting succeeding Church administrations and said that he wanted to explain some of these problems to Elder Lee, in the event he should succeed as a member of the Twelve to some greater responsibility. President Clark said that he was not saying this because he thought his own life was coming to an end, because the doctor had assured him that his health was excellent, but he had to admit that he was over eighty years old and anything could happen to him or to others now in authority.

Just prior to the opening of general conference President McKay invited all the General Authorities to the temple for a prayer circle and to partake of the sacrament, following which there was a brief testimony meeting and short remarks from each member of the First Presidency. For the first time in Church history, President McKay told the Brethren in advance at which session each would be expected to speak. Also at this meeting Marion G. Romney was sustained as the new Apostle and the following were named as new Assistants to the Twelve: George Q. Morris, Stayner Richards, ElRay L. Christiansen, and John Longden. Elder Lee wrote in his diary that after the meeting "President Clark came to my office to share with me my joy in Brother Romney's appointment."

The opening of general conference on Friday, October 5, 1951, brought the usual conference rains but this did not diminish the size of the audiences which crowded the Tabernacle and adjacent buildings to overflowing. Elder Lee spoke in the Friday afternoon session. Still suffering from his nervous condition, Elder Lee wrote in his diary: "I was able to shake off the weariness and nervous tension under which t have been laboring, although it returned after the session. Apparently I have been suffering a sort of nervous exhaustion. Brother Moyle and Brother Stapley administered to me in the evening."

At the Saturday morning session the names of Marion Romney and the other Brethren were presented publicly. "Everyone seemed delighted with Brother Romney's call," Elder Lee wrote. "Needless to say, my joy is unbounded at his coming into the Council of the Twelve."

This call further solidified a relationship begun in 1941 when Brother Romney was appointed as Elder Lee's assistant in the welfare work, at the time Elder Lee was appointed to the Council of the Twelve. Elder Lee thought it significant that President McKay's first appointment to the apostleship was drawn from the ranks of the pioneers of Church welfare administration.

After general conference, Elder Lee turned to a function that had been routine with almost every new appointee to the Quorum of the Twelve since President Clark performed the service for him -orientation of the new Apostle in advance of his ordination. This time he was the teacher for Marion G. Romney, preparing him for his first meeting with the Twelve on the following Thursday, and explaining the procedure that was generally followed in those meetings.

When his restlessness returned, just prior to moving to his new residence, Elder Lee found seclusion in the temple for prayer and meditation. His diary entry states: "After performing a temple marriage I went to an upper room of the temple for some spiritual strength, which I sorely need."

The final chapter in Marion G. Romney's call to the Quorum of the Twelve was to tell the entire Church of his superb qualifications. This Elder Lee did in an article requested by the Relief Society Magazine. His diary reference tells of Elder Romney's approval: "Marion Romney seemed pleased with the article I had written about him and his new appointment."

A Rescue Mission Brings Elder Lee Almost Within the Veil-1952

In 1952 Elder Lee was fifty-three years of age and his wife, Fern, was fifty-six. They had celebrated their twenty-ninth wedding anniversary, and their youngest daughter, Helen, was by this time age twenty-seven and raising a wonderful family in the shadow of illustrious parents.

The dominant influence in Elder Lee's life continued to be his tutor, friend and "foster father," President J. Reuben Clark, Jr. An incident which occurred on the last weekend of January 1952 indicates the closeness of their relationship, when Elder Lee was assigned to conduct a stake conference in Grantsville, Utah, where President Clark maintained a second family home as a rural retreat and ranch.

President Clark phoned, as did his daughter Louise, also, to invite Elder and Sister Lee to stay with them at President Clark's home during this conference weekend. On Saturday, after the welfare and leadership sessions were held, they had an enjoyable visit until near midnight with President Clark, his daughter, Louise, and his son, Reuben, and his wife, Emily.

Early on Sunday morning Elder Lee arose to accompany President Clark on an inspection of his barnyard and fine Hereford animals. Then they went to stake conference, where nearly 25 percent, or 588 attended, and in the afternoon 539 Saints returned, the largest attendance in their stake history of six years. President Clark attended and spoke in the afternoon session. Then the Lee diary records a statement which describes the uniquely close bond between these two magnificent Church leaders. Concerning his comments at the stake conference, Elder Lee wrote: "President Clark thought my public remark, 'that I esteemed him above any other man,' might have some repercussions, as well it might, if repeated by those wishing to make trouble." Between the two of them, the statesman-like mentor and the now maturing, most apt protegé, there was a complete understanding that most resembled an ideal father-son relationship, which was quite uncommon for Church leadership circles.

Totally unassociated with his Church relationships came a sudden, severe challenge. In August 1952 Elder Lee received a telephone call which greatly surprised him and his wife. The call concerned a close friend who had committed a tragic mistake and, in the aftermath, lost his job. Elder Lee and his wife sat up until midnight talking about these serious matters, and then Elder Lee spent most of the remainder of the night praying and pondering the proper course to take to help out in this regrettable situation which had devastated the family of his friend. Going to the aid of the stricken family the next day, at his destination Elder Lee met and talked with a number of people to obtain all the available facts. After almost an entire day and night of fasting and prayer he was prompted to seek the aid of two Latter-day Saint attorneys. He reviewed the case at length with his attorney friends, and as evening came on he had a feeling of peace and assurance for which he could find no rational reason.

Although the next day was Sunday, Elder Lee awoke with everything as dark and forbidding as if his task were "the most impossible thing in the world," as he described his circumstances. He contacted the bishop of the family, who promised every aid in extending love and sympathy under this trying situation. Elder Lee spent the remainder of the Sabbath afternoon in prayerful meditation and fasting to find the best method of resolving this crisis.

Then the miracle of a heaven-provided solution broke through the gloomy maze. In the middle of the night, after Elder Lee had prayed several times, a direct communication from God enlightened his mind and soul. Elder Lee's own words in his diary describe this powerful spiritual event: "I was startled by a realization that I was being shown from a divine source the procedure to be followed ..., which completely changed what I had planned yesterday."

The next day Elder Lee met with the attorneys and proceeded to present the case as he had been shown the night before. With this information in hand, the attorneys were able to bring the matter to an immediate and favorable conclusion. Elder Lee records that the family "was overjoyed when we reported our results, and felt they had been participants in a human experience which was a miracle." The cloud of doubt and suspicion which had surrounded the friend dissipated, and he was rehired.

Later that week Elder Lee wrote from Salt Lake City to the two attorneys who had assisted him in his remarkable rescue of his close friend. Elder Lee wrote:

Since leaving you . . . , I have pondered over and over again in my mind the resulting actions in which you two brethren have played such a vital part with such soul-stirring and unusual results. . . . I have learned as never before the power by which the Almighty opened the prison door to Peter and by which the angel of God stood by Paul when shipwreck threatened. So He stood by me and us, and I knew the power by which we moved. So thin was the veil that I knew the nearness of powers of divine direction, even as I know now that Joseph knew as he made his moves which protected and directed him in his early service towards the setting up of the kingdom.

May the Lord bless you always and bring you to me if I likewise might on another occasion . . . [assist] you as you [assisted] me. As ever your brother, Harold B. Lee.

Two days later Elder Lee met his long-time friend and former counselor in the Pioneer Stake presidency, a most spiritual man, Paul C. Child. He told Elder Lee that he had had some terrible dreams concerning his safety. Elder Lee's reply was: "Your dreams were describing actual dangers, Paul, and I have been through hell during the last few days."

Years later Elder Lee made statements from the Tabernacle podium concerning a moment of pure revelation, following wrestling with the powers of Satan. His words were: "And had I prevailed for a moment longer, there would have been no veil." He likely was describing this remarkable experience when he dropped everything and rushed to the aid of a stricken family, using his unmatched spiritual powers to overcome the evil one and rescue a grateful family from disaster.

Many-Sided Service-1953

In 1953, Elder Lee's aging mother reached her seventy-fourth birthday, President Clark became eighty-two, and Elder Lee's younger brother Clyde suffered a heart attack and died.

Despite all else occurring in his life, Elder Lee never forgot his grandfather role, a relationship he dearly loved. On June 11, 1953, he took "Skipper" (David), age five, and "Hal" (Harold Lee), age four, to attend the Mutual Improvement Association Dance Festival in the University of Utah stadium. His official diary entry stated that "they were tired boys, but seemingly very happy."

The inside story, however, was a contest of wills from which this General Authority grandfather learned a lesson he often used in his sermons. As the long evening wore on, it became obvious that four-year-old Hal was not able to sit still that long, nor have his interest sustained in the panorama going on some distance away on the stadium floor. Grandfather Lee, not wishing to disturb his General Authority friends who surrounded him, tried in vain to quietly direct him to sit still as Hal taxed his patience by running up and down the aisle. Finally, in exasperation he caught the restless youngster with a firm grasp, sat him down very hard on his own lap, and held him tightly. A second later he felt the impact of a little doubled-up fist against his cheek, accompanied by Hal's indignant response, audible to all, "Grandfather, don't shove me!"

Embarrassed and realizing too late his mistake in handling the matter, he relaxed his hold on his young grandson, and reassuringly and lovingly cuddled him in his arms. It was not long until Hal submitted to the warmth and security of Grandfather's arms and drifted off into a contented sleep.

Receiving honorary doctorate from University of Utah, with President A. Ray Olpin (left) and Dr. Henry Eyring (right)

The title of Elder Lee's next sermon to Primary leaders? "Love-Don't Shove!"

The first of Harold B. Lee's honorary degrees from Utah colleges came on June 1, 1953, when he traveled to Logan to participate in the graduation exercises at Utah State University. He was awarded an honorary doctor's degree in Humanities; also receiving honorary degrees were Mrs. Ella V. Reeder and the former chief of the United States Forestry Service, Lyle Watts.

On the previous day Elder Lee delivered the Baccalaureate sermon, which he entitled "I Dare You to Believe." In this address he discussed the fundamental concepts of true religion. Evidently it was a successful mental and spiritual probe because the next day Elder Lee overheard a Dr. Farrell of Kansas State College telling President Emeritus E. C. Peterson that the services on Sunday were "the finest he had attended."

Elder Lee carried a huge load as an officiator at temple marriages, a service to the Saints which he enjoyed but which represented a relentless drain on his time and energies. Despite his efforts to please, sometimes he failed. There was one such instance in June of 1953.

At the regular Thursday meeting in the temple a letter addressed to the Council of the Twelve was read. In this letter a mother attacked an unnamed member of the Twelve who had been asked to perform a marriage for her son at 8:00 A.M. one morning. After changing the hour to suit his convenience, and after waiting for this Apostle until 10:30 A.M., the family were told that he could not come. The writer bitterly assailed such discourtesy.

When Elder Lee returned to his office, he checked his calendar and found that he was the guilty party. He immediately sent for the young couple to come to the office to make amends for his forgetfulness, although it was his understanding that all such appointments made by his secretary were tentative and subject to cancellation at the last minute.

To put this rare communications breakdown in proper perspective and to understand the immense volume involved, it is well to note that Elder Lee performed 122 temple marriages in 1952, and was maintaining that pace with 42 performed up to June 18 in 1953. A more careful appointment procedure was thereafter instituted, but Elder Lee's personal service to the families of the Church continued unabated.

A Fundamental Doctrine Taught at BYU Institute Course-1954

The year 1954 found Elder Lee concerned by many family illnesses. On January he recorded: "Fern is down with a very distressing cold, as is also our baby Marlee [his first granddaughter] in Provo. Helen is also sick. We need the blessings of health. I went to my quarterly meeting with the Twelve, fasting and praying for improved health."

Elder Lee celebrated his fifty-fifth birthday this year. Three days before this anniversary he was honored, along with all other former Pioneer Stake presidents, at the Golden Jubilee of Pioneer Stake, where they presented him with a scroll. In it was the notification that from that time forward the name of the Pioneer Stake gymnasium would be changed to Harold B. Lee Hall, and that a plaque would soon be placed on the building documenting this fact.

Through the years much inspiration had come to Elder Lee in dreams. On February 24, 1954, he recorded in his journal a dream which predicted President David O. McKay's physical condition during his last years as President of the Church. The entry stated, "I had an ugly dream last night about President McKay, whom I saw very thin and emaciated, so much so that I carried him in my arms."

This became fact as President McKay was unable to walk in his last years of life. Many times Elder Lee and the other General Authorities carried him into the Tabernacle at general conference and other meetings which he desired to attend.

In April 1954, Elder Lee conferred with President Joseph Fielding Smith after he had thought through his teaching assignment at Brigham Young University, which was a summer course designed for seminary and institute instructors. Together they decided that other members of the Executive Committee of BYU and President Clark should be invited to deliver some of the lectures to enrich the course.

The course was fraught with some anxiety because Elder Lee had already been labeled an extreme conservative by some of the more liberal BYU faculty members. These members knew Brother Lee for his "narrow-minded" attitude on fundamental Church doctrine.

On June 15, 1954, Elder Lee commenced teaching his morning classes at BYU for seminary teachers of the Church. He began his doctrinal discussion on the Godhead and attempted to feel out his audience. The first negative reaction soon came as Roy A. West told him some senior faculty members of the Religion Department were objecting to giving credit for the class, because Elder Lee didn't have a Ph.D. degree.

His final lecture was on "The Church and Divine Revelation," in which he discussed by whom in the Church the gift of prophecy might be exercised.

Brother Lee brought his work at BYU to a close with a final examination. His diary entry reveals appreciation for his efforts, both in jest and in earnest: "My final examination was termed by President Clark and Brother Moyle, before a banquet of the seminary and institute teachers and their wives, as 'unconstitutional and inhumane.' At the banquet the teachers presented me with a German 'Retina' camera as a token of their esteem and appreciation for my work with them this summer."

As assigned by Elder Lee, Elder Moyle gave the closing address and lecture to the teachers on "The Value of Witnesses." According to Elder Lee, Elder Moyle made a masterful presentation of this subject, evaluating, as a lawyer might do, the witnesses who have testified of the divinity of the latter-day work of the gospel, and closing with a powerful, personal testimony. After a hymn, the teachers bore testimony to each other for three hours in a glorious spiritual experience.

Elder Lee's final summation of his five-week effort among the student-teachers was recorded in his journal in these words:

The testimonies of those enrolled in the course were inspirational. They bore testimony of a seventeen-year-old boy who asked for a blessing to help him in the experience of death, which came only moments thereafter, and of the value of the gospel in combating error, etc. The testimonies of the teachers also concerned their struggles to overcome the false teaching of so-called "higher" education. If I have made any enemies by my teaching this summer, I have not known it. All seemed to have been impressed by little things that evidence my sincere interest in my assignment, such as coming with the Brethren who came to give special lectures and to come, personally, to administer the final test. Even Brother Moyle confessed that he thought I was unduly attentive in my regularity in following this assignment.

The highlight story of this interesting summer experience was an incident which went into Elder Lee's famous "miracle" file. He frequently shared it with youth leaders whom he was attempting to inspire. It illustrates a true Harold B. Lee characteristic-he always sought first the miracle and believed with a pure heart, never doubting. To youthful seminary leaders assembled on campus at BYU in 1979 and 1980 he related this story:

In 1954 I came on this campus each day for five or six weeks for a class with all the seminary and some of the institute teachers. It was a grueling summer, but I learned, along with them. We had a glorious time together.

At the conclusion we had a banquet, something like the one we had tonight, only President Clark and Brother Moyle had come down to be with us. We were seated at the front and the tables before us were fixed so that all of them could get a side view of the speaker's stand. At the conclusion of the banquet one of these seminary teachers took me aside. He came with glistening tears in his eyes and was almost trembling. He said: "Come over here in this corner, Brother Lee. I have got to tell you something. My wife and I were sitting over there at that table. We were looking over into this corner. Suddenly there appeared the faces of the Prophet Joseph Smith and Brigham Young. I thought, Isn't that marvelous to see the pictures of those two men together? As I watched, that picture faded; it wasn't there anymore. I turned to my wife and said, 'Did you see that picture?' She replied, 'I didn't see anything.' But, even though there is no picture there now, Brother Lee, it was there. I saw it. I wasn't dreaming."

"I'm not surprised," I said. "Aren't you aware of the fact that all through our summer course we have been quoting from the words of the Prophet Joseph Smith and President Brigham Young? Why wouldn't they want to be here? Where else would they rather be on such an occasion than to be permitted to come here at the conclusion of this great seminar where you are going out to influence 150,000 youth from all over this Church? I wouldn't be surprised that they are very close, to let their spirits attend such a gathering. Perhaps most haven't seen them, but have no doubt that they were here. Heaven isn't a million miles away. It's here."

Then Elder Lee concluded with a larger lesson from this seminar story for the benefit of the young student leaders in his audience. His moral was:

Yes, the Savior, too, is in our midst. His eyes are upon us, but we can't always see him. But the day can come when we could see him. It isn't the Lord who withholds himself from us; it is we who withhold ourselves from him. And if we were living completely worthy, we could see him and have a personal visitation and we would have the assurance, even though we couldn't see him, that he was there, walking, talking, listening, aiding, directing. Make no mistake-this is his work.

Inspirational Welfare Stories-1955

In 1955, at age fifty-six, thirty-six years had passed since Elder Harold B. Lee was serving as young missionary in the Western States Mission. His oldest daughter, Maurine, was now thirty-one and expecting her fourth child. Sister Lee spent some time during this year with Maurine while her husband, Ernest, conducted a travel tour of South American countries. And the family received its first baptized grandchild as David Goates turned eight.

It was a time of trial still for the family. Some were ill and others were beset with personal problems. In May, Elder Lee was so intent on seeking a blessing from the Lord that he remained in the Salt Lake Temple after performing a marriage there. Dressed in his temple clothes, and at the altar in the Council of Twelve Room Elder Lee pleaded for the Lord to protect his family from any unfortunate circumstances. This prayer was answered in part within five months.

While touring the Central States Mission in April 1955, Elder Lee returned to Independence, Missouri and there found a letter from Fern telling of a providential safeguarding of her eyesight. When he arrived back home, however, on the first day of May, he was much disturbed at his wife's condition and wrote in his journal:

Returning from my tour of the Central States Mission, I found Fern in rather precarious health with her blood pressure out of control somewhere between 200 and 300. She had suffered a hemorrhage in one of her eyes that made a red blotch before her vision. As usual, her faith and courage were great, but my heart almost melted as I contemplated the possibility of her failing health. I stayed home with her all day Sunday as she decided against making any calls.

President McKay was then eighty-two years of age, serving, as were all members of the First Presidency, under some limitations of health. President Stephen L Richards missed many meetings because of his periodic low blood pressure and President J. Reuben Clark had a nerve ailment in his back.

Through the years Harold B. Lee's relationship with Walter Stover was intimate and prized. Elder Lee never failed to praise highly the sweet spirit of Brother Stover, a most valued member of the Church General Welfare committee. At stake conferences Brother Stover always stimulated a high spiritual atmosphere and never failed to inspire Church members with his sermons of faith. He often illustrated his appeals for welfare preparation by referring to his personal experiences in Europe. The following notes from Elder Lee's journal entry of April 10, 1955, record a few of these inspirational stories and illustrate how welfare commodities from the storehouses in Utah, Church headquarters, and the gardens of European Saints were used to save the starving German Saints during the Berlin blockade:

I held the welfare and leadership meetings where Brother Stover related an experience in Germany where a little twelve-year-old girl was possessed of an evil spirit (or spirits). She had counted one hundred of them. He told how he first prayed for a forgiveness of his sins and waited for peace to come so that he could rebuke the spirits.

In the Sunday sessions, Sister Marls from the Finnish Mission told of an experience in making a quilt in the Chicago Ward Relief Society, which she brightened by a patching from her little daughter's pink, plaid skirt. Then, later in Finland, she unpacked a box of quilts sent from the General Welfare Committee of the Church to warm the freezing Saints, only to find on the top of the box the same quilt she had helped to make in Chicago.

Brother Stover told also of President Zappey, who at this time was suffering a slow death from cancer, by whose cooperation the Saints in Holland planted potatoes in their flower beds for the German Saints threatened by starvation because of the Russian blockade in Berlin. In donated amounts from five pounds to a half a sack, the total amount came to nine truckloads. He obtained permits to get them out of Holland and into Germany by calling them the "Lord's Potatoes," and explaining the welfare program to the authorities and the Saints. He told me of getting eighty barrels of herring from Holland also via Switzerland and Czechoslovakia and East Germany. Because of his military permit from the Russian government, he was able to haul these barrels, two at a time, all through the night, across the line into West Berlin to deliver to the starving Saints. He had women riding with him as a blind, suggesting to the police that he was just another man "out with his women."

Dream-Revelation Precedes Los Angeles Temple Dedication

Harold B. Lee was fifty-seven in 1956, his mother was seventy-seven, and he and Fern had been married thirty-three years.

The travels of General Authorities, often thought by many Saints to be glamorous and exciting, arc frequently both physically and emotionally exhausting. These long and tiring separations from family and loved ones mark one of the greatest sacrifices made by the Lord's anointed. In 1956 Elder Lee returned sick from both major trips he took. On May 2, 1956, he went to his physician for an examination. A congestion in his lower left lung was discovered, which apparently stemmed from his early childhood bout with pneumonia. This current infection was an aftermath from an illness suffered while Elder Lee was touring the Hawaiian Islands. The physician gave him immediate treatment to overcome the infection and cautioned him against too much activity until the infection was under control.

Another examination on June 30, 1956, after Elder Lee had returned from a trip to Mexico, disclosed that both he and Elder Spencer W. Kimball, his traveling companion, had acquired infections which had matured in both Apostles after they had returned home.

Continuous sacrifice for the sake of their daughters' young growing families marked these years as the Lees proved to be ideal grandparents to the young children and ideal parents to the men who had married their daughters.

In July 1956, Elder Lee donated his car to his son-in-law Ernest to increase safety on a Brigham Young University-sponsored travel tour he was conducting through Mexico and Central America. Then the Lees and Helen took care of the Wilkins children while their parents were out of the country.

Elder Lee's journal entry of July 23, 1956, explains how Maurine's boys came to stay with their grandparents:

Maurine's boys, Alan and Larry, came up to stay with us until Ernie and Maurine return. They seem to have gotten somewhat out of hand with the young couple assigned to watch over them in Provo. Possibly we won't fare much better, but at least our minds will be at ease and they will feel of the genuine love and care of a devoted grandmother. We hear from Maurine, but each card or letter indicates she is lonesome for her babies and is having a pretty rugged time of it.

Helen's husband, Brent, tried to help out by arranging an outing for their two families of boys at the summer cabin home of Lewis Fart on the south fork of the Weber Canyon. There Grandfather Lee took his exuberant young grandsons to play: "I left early with Brent and our five boys to take them to the Farr mountain cabin where they have a large outdoor swimming pool with plenty of playground. They came back tired and sunburned, but hardly less than their grandfather. Helen had prepared a fine lunch, so with eating and baseball and swimming, the boys were happy."

After another week of tending, Grandfather and "Nana" Lee were glad to welcome home the parents. On the final, grand effort on July 30, 1956, Elder Lee wrote in his diary of giving his all to the boy-caring project: "I took Helen's and Maurine's older boys with me to a cowboy show, which took much of the afternoon. That was preceded by some shopping and was followed by some refreshments at Keeley's, and it was about all the energy and patience I had. Ernie and Maurine arrived home at about 7:30 p.m. It was a joyous reunion with their children and a pleasant evening relating travel experiences."

The dedication of the splendorous Los Angeles Temple in 1956 was a highlight for the Church and also the labors of Elder Lee. He was asked by President David O. McKay to serve as the chairman of arrangements for that grand event, and as such was busily engaged in all the details for the transportation, housing, feeding, invitations, and similar arrangements.

On Saturday, March 11, the entire party of General Authorities, their wives and families, after lunch were taken through the temple to view the paintings and the facilities. They, like the thousands of visitors before them at the open house, were impressed by the spaciousness and beauty of the building.

The opening dedicatory service was a memorable event with nearly six thousand Saints in attendance. The First Presidency spoke, as did President Noble Waite, chairman of the temple committee, under whose direction a total of $1.6 million had been contributed by the Saints in Southern California. The music was furnished by the Mormon Choir of Southern California under the direction of Frederick Davis. Sister Ewan Harbrecht sang the beautiful hymn "Bless This House" preceding the dedicatory prayer by President McKay. After that, the Hosanna Shout was led by President Richards.

Some persons have heard of an alleged dream or revelation which Elder Lee was supposed to have received during the Los Angeles Temple dedicatory services. The truth of this story is told simply in Elder Lee's diary entry of Sunday, March 11, 1956: "I was deeply moved as the dedicatory prayer was read because of a dream I had two weeks ago, in which President McKay was impressing me with the meaning of the love of God, as it relates to the love of our fellow men and of His service. The dedicatory prayer closed with similar instructions to those I had heard in my dream two weeks before."

After the dedicatory service, Elder Lee was taken Sunday night to the Adams Ward of Los Angeles; following that he spoke at the Institute building on the University of Southern California campus where about five hundred persons had assembled. He recorded this spiritual experience in his diary on March 13:

There was a wonderful spirit present at the fireside and seldom have I talked to a group who gave more rapt attention. When I returned home I received a letter from a young girl from Redondo Beach, who had been present, who told how, as a convert of three months, she had begun to doubt that there were prophets and that this Church was true. She testified that as I spoke (and I will use her own language)-"I wish I could explain to you how I felt at that moment. I seemed to glow inside and had no trouble in praying to my Father in Heaven. . . . I thought that this must all be my imagination, but I know that it couldn't be just that. Elder Lee, I want to thank you so much for helping me so very much in that thirty minutes last night. I know now that this is the true Church and I'm so proud to be a part of it."

Appointments to National Corporation Boards-1957

On a flight (unusual for him) home from New York City, Elder Lee wrote, "I note my fifty-eighth birthday with a realization that advancing years bring increased problems and anxieties." His mother was now seventy-eight years of age, and changes were inevitable for the Lee family. This year, 1957, however, brought the bigger changes in Elder Lee's professional life, rather than in his service as an Apostle, for in this year he was introduced to the inside operation of large national business corporations.

The year opened with notification from E. Roland Harriman, chairman of the Union Pacific Railroad Board of Directors, that Elder Lee had been accepted in their meeting on December 27 and that he would be officially elected to membership on the board at the January 24 meeting in New York City. Elder Lee immediately wrote his acceptance of the appointment and inquired as to the first meeting he would be expected to attend.

The president of the Union Pacific, A. E. Stoddard, phoned nine days later inviting Elder Lee to the January meeting of the Union Pacific Board of Directors in New York City. He was most gracious in urging that Elder Lee attend that first meeting. Already Elder Lee was thinking of and planning a reception and luncheon with a number of the leading Church Brethren, including the First Presidency, when Mr. Harriman and other Union Pacific officials would next be in Salt Lake City.

Reaction to Elder Lee's appointment among the Brethren was mixed. At the temple meeting on January 17, Elder Lee told Joseph Fielding Smith, President of the Quorum of the Twelve, about his forthcoming appointment to the Union Pacific Board of Directors, and he seemed most pleased. However, when he mentioned to President McKay that he had been invited to be in New York City on the next Thursday and would miss the temple meeting if he went, he offered no congratulations and brushed aside the conversation quite impatiently. President McKay earlier had given a reluctant and slow approval for Elder Lee to serve on the Union Pacific Board of Directors.

En route to New York, Elder Lee stopped for a layover in Chicago during the severe cold and stormy January weather. He visited with David Kennedy, who as the new president of the Continental Illinois Bank, was learning quickly about the problems of serving in that executive capacity. After Brother Kennedy left for a meeting, Brother Lee stayed in his office to learn about the men with whom he would be associating on the Union Pacific board, finding abundant information from a directory of corporations and a volume of Who's Who in America.

A pattern of hospitality by the management of the famous Waldorf-Astoria Hotel commenced with Elder Lee's first business trip. Frank Wangeman, son-in-law of Henry D. Moyle and executive of the Waldorf-Astoria Hotel, made his reservations in New York. Because of this connection, the assistant manager, Mr. Murphy, and the manager, Mr. Wallace Lee, graciously greeted Elder Lee on his arrival. For years later the hotel's "VIP" treatment was accorded Elder Lee each month as he returned for corporation meetings.

Upon arrival in New York, Elder Lee was suffering from severe distress in his digestive system and had little sleep the first night. He therefore rested for the first day in his hotel room.

A glimpse into the humility with which Elder Lee approached his new association with the Union Pacific Railroad is contained in his diary entry of January 24, 1957:

I came to the experiences of this day with a humble feeling that in my appointment to the U.P. Railroad I was there as a representative of the Church, and for no other reason. I decided to fast in preparation for my first meeting at 10:30 a.m., to which I had been invited by E. Roland Harriman. I arrived a few minutes early at the railroad headquarters, at 120 Broadway, where I was met by Mr. Harriman and was introduced to the other members of the board. Four new board members were elected, including George S. Eccles of Salt Lake, Elbridge Geary of New York, and Oscar J. Lawler of Los Angeles. Following the board meeting we and other members of the board were guests of Mr. Harriman at a lunch served in his office at 59 Wall Street. After the lunch President Ted Jacobsen of the Eastern States Mission met me and we visited briefly at the New York Stock Exchange and the Federal Court Building, observing a tax evasion trial.

At the temple meeting the next week Elder Lee intentionally avoided reporting his election to the Union Pacific Railroad Board of Directors, since he had not received a very enthusiastic response earlier. However, President Stephen L Richards commented on the subject and said he thought the minutes should show that Elder Lee had been elected to the leadership of one of the great corporations of the world.

Elder Lee's second appointment to high station in the national business world came through an apparent unintentional introduction by President J. Reuben Clark to the officers of the Equitable Life Assurance Society of New York. Elder Lee had accompanied President Clark to his Equitable meeting, going early to his own Union Pacific meetings to ensure President Clark's safety and convenience. On June 20, 1957, President Clark took Elder Lee with him to the executive offices of Equitable Life for an appointment he had made so that Elder Lee could meet Ray D. Murphy, chairman of the board, and Mr. James F. Oates, Jr., the new president of the company. Elder Lee recorded his impressions of this first meeting in these words: "It was a pleasant meeting and for a purpose which at the present does not seem clear, but may later have meaning. Later, after President Clark had met in their board meeting, he told me that I have made a 'wonderful' impression on these two men."

The next day, June 21, he wrote:

Today, before we left New York City, President Clark was invited to meet with the new president of the Equitable and with Ray D. Murphy, chairman of the board. When he came back he said they wanted to talk with him about his retirement as a member of the board of directors, a subject which he had mentioned to the two presidents. They told him that they thought he should stay on until the annual meeting near the first of the year, and then tender his resignation shortly thereafter. Then they surprised him by saying that they wanted to appoint me to fill the vacancy at that time. President Clark declared that he had never mentioned to them the idea of my becoming a member of the board. He wondered what the reaction of the President of the Church would be. Before this he had talked about coming back to the December meeting, but with this decision, he thought he would reconsider the whole question and requested that I keep the matter confidential until Equitable announced it.

According to the plan, President Clark and Elder Lee did attend their respective board meetings in New York in December, 1957, at which time President Clark announced that it was his intention to return to the New York meetings of Equitable Life in February and resign at that time. It was the intention, President Clark said, for the president of Equitable to nominate Elder Lee to fill his vacancy at that time.

This schedule actually was delayed some at the request of President Clark, so that it was July of 1958 when Elder Lee was notified by a long-distance telephone call from President James F. Oates, Jr., that he had been elected at a meeting of the board as a director to fill a vacancy caused by the resignation of President Clark. Elder Lee attended his first Equitable board meeting on August 20, 1958, when plans were made for a testimonial dinner honoring President Clark. This formal dinner was delayed until December of 1958 to allow Elder Lee time to return from a trip to South Africa.

Welfare Plan Modifications

The concern over the acceptance and weakening support for the welfare program's founding principles began as early as 1952, when a feeling of stiffening opposition was felt. As individual proposals were brought to the First Presidency for welfare project investment, it often seemed as though the entire welfare program was undergoing testing and was on trial. in 1953 President Clark was urging a slow, cautious path by the leaders of the welfare program, for fear of losing past gains.

As 1957 arrived the climate was tense. At the first meeting of the Brethren in the temple, two references to welfare brought critical responses from the First Presidency. By March of that year it was learned that a complete investigation was being launched at the request of the First Presidency. When Elder Lee saw the report it was evident to him that it contained "the same antagonisms against the program which were common back in 1936 when the program began."

It was while this debate was going on over the welfare program that general conference convened. President McKay opened the conference on April 3, and Elder Lee captured the dramatic situation in his diary:

President McKay's opening address on the text "Be Ye Doers of the Word, and Not Hearers Only" was a remarkable keynote sermon. In his talk he told of the hours of prayer in preparation for his address. For the first time during his presidency, he made reference to the welfare program, extolling its leaders and declaring that "its methods had been tested and proved sound." I told him afterwards I felt as though the welfare program had gained a reprieve and that I had relived the feelings I had in the beginning when I was almost daily in his office as he directed me.

Thus, probably the most severe testing the welfare program had undergone had come and passed, but while the plan was saved, it was not to remain unchanged by President McKay and his colleagues. Elder Lee was grateful the program was retained, but he groaned inwardly at what he saw as modernization and liberalization of its original concepts.

By August the growing issue of Federal Social Security Insurance coverage for Church employees was being raised. At the Welfare Finance Committee meeting, Brother Lee refused to go along with a motion to provide Social Security for the Deseret Clothing Factory employees. He thought it was moving a step away from original welfare program principles.

His opposition soon became ineffective, however, because in September 1957 the First Presidency instructed the Presiding Bishopric to inaugurate government Social Security for all Church employees, in addition to the Church's own insurance program. This step caused sober reflection by the welfare plan pioneers.

The pressures to conform were mounting in those days, but even after Elder Henry D. Moyle lined up and supported having the regional welfare coordinators and storehouse employees covered by government Social Security, Elder Lee wouldn't yield. This attitude is disclosed in a reference in his diary made on December 11, 1957:

This morning Henry Moyle chided me because I was unwilling to join with him in recommending that our welfare workers be covered by government Social Security. He said he considered that we would be "in rebellion should we refrain from doing so." I took sharp disagreement with him and further information confirmed my feelings as being correct.

Keeping up with his heavy load of office appointments, 1957 (Courtesy of Ensign Magazine)

Elder Lee persisted in his conservative views, and late in the year, when he was inspecting the welfare farm of the New Jersey Stake, the stake president argued the necessity of putting their farm manager under government Social Security. Elder Lee, being very consistent and determined, suggested to President Mortimer that they instead consider increasing the salary of the farm manager so that he could buy his own insurance.

The ups and downs of the debate during 1957 regarding welfare plan principles ended with President Clark urging on the last day of the year that his associates not press for important decisions at that time for fear such action would bring an impasse and perhaps threaten gains already achieved.

One welfare-related issue on which the presiding Brethren did not at that time see eye-to-eye was that of the federal social security program. Among both leaders and other members of the Church there were those who argued that as individuals they were paying out of their income the same tax dollars as other citizens, but were receiving less benefits. Just as the federal government's action had forced a change on the Church in the early days of plural marriage, now the movement of government to adopt a more liberal social philosophy brought its powerful influences into Church leadership circles. Modification of conservative welfare practices was inevitable, but it was nonetheless painful.

Elder Adam S. Bennion Passes-1958

Many valuable and historic experiences filled the life of Elder Harold B. Lee during 1958. His mentor, President J. Reuben Clark, Jr., had reached eighty-seven years of age. Elder Lee's family also was growing older: his eldest daughter, Maurine, became thirty-four and his eldest grandson. David Goates, reached eleven years old.

Elder and Sister Lee celebrated their thirty-fifth wedding anniversary as they left England to return to the United States aboard the giant ocean liner, the Queen Elizabeth.

Discovery of an ulcer in Elder Lee's duodenal canal didn't prevent his usual arduous travel schedule; in fact, this is the year he completed a memorable trip to South Africa.

One interesting sidelight on the sensitive nature of Elder Lee is seen in Elder Lee's decision not to accompany Elder and Sister Moyle on a trip to Europe. Henry and Alberta Moyle had generously extended an invitation for Fern and Harold to accompany them to Europe during the summer of 1958, with all expenses being paid by the Moyles. After thinking it over Elder Lee declined because as a part of the itinerary the Moyles wanted to attend the dedication of the temple in England during the first part of September. Elder Lee explained his position in his diary: "I felt certain that my going uninvited would be construed as my trying to become something I was not. I told Brother Moyle that some other time would be appreciated, but urged that they make their plans and go anyway."

A footnote is offered regarding the previously mentioned election of Elder Lee to serve on the board of directors of the Equitable Life Assurance Society. One week after the announcement, on July 23, 1958, Elder and Sister Lee were guests at the home of President Clark along with Mark and Emma Petersen and their good friends from Heber City, the Cummings and the Probsts, who brought the dinner. Still showing his weakness from a recent illness, President Clark took occasion this night to explain how it happened that Elder Lee was appointed to the Equitable Life board of directors by the request of Ray D. Murphy, former chairman, and Mr. James Oates, Jr., president, and not by President Clark's nomination.

Typical of Elder Lee's spiritual experiences of this period was an incident in the Salt Lake Temple on April 10, 1958. On this day he performed a temple marriage for David James Thomas and Betty Joan Holt, daughter of Harry Holt, deceased. When Elder Lee walked into the sealing room he felt an overpowering influence that made it difficult for him to control his emotions. "I felt certain the father of the bride was not far away," he wrote later.

Elder Adam S. Bennion had been appointed a member of the Quorum of the Twelve in 1953. His choice might have been more expected some fifteen years previous, so popular was he as a teacher of the gospel when he was Commissioner of Education for the Church. Nonetheless, on April 5, 1953, he was sustained to fill the vacancy occasioned by the death of Elder John A. Widtsoe. President Clark told Elder Lee that some twenty-eight names had been recommended as worthy of the calling, but stressed that the right of nominational selection always rests with the President of the Church.

At the request of Elder Bennion, Elder Lee went with him to an upper room of the Salt Lake Temple and spent a delightful hour reviewing temple ordinances and acquainting him with the procedures that would follow the next Thursday morning when he would be ordained. When the hour came Elder Bennion was perfect in performance and was "magnificent" in answering the charge, according to Elder Lee's proud diary entries.

Thus began a close and rewarding relationship between these two mighty men of God, both of whom were among the Church's greatest teachers. In 1955 Elder Lee characterized Elder Bennion: "He is so enthusiastic and so able in meeting human problems that it is always refreshing and stimulating to be with him." Tragically, however, it was to last but five short years, for on February 6, 1958, Elder Lee had a phone call from Dick Bennion, who informed him that his father had suffered a stroke and was hospitalized. He asked that Elder Lee come to give him a blessing. Elder Bennion was paralyzed on the left side and the physicians reported that the right side was involved also. While the situation didn't look good, the Brethren were hopeful as they united in pleading with the Lord for Elder Bennion's life in their weekly temple meeting.

At 2:00 A.M. on Sunday, February 9, 1958, Elder Lee received word from the hospital that Elder Bennion was dying. He dressed, went to the hospital, and stayed until 4:00 A.M., when Elder Bennion's condition improved. At the hospital Elder Lee blessed both Elder Bennion and his wife, Minerva.

After a busy stake conference and a weekend with little sleep, Elder Lee went to the hospital early on Monday and found his friend in a deep coma. With the family now resigned to his passing, and at his son Dick's request, Elder Lee blessed him that he might be released soon if he were not to recover to normal health.

Very weary from lack of sleep Elder Lee went to Provo to speak at a Brigham Young University assembly; before the meeting was adjourned, word came that Elder Adam S. Bennion had died at 8:35 A.M. President Joseph Fielding Smith informed Elder Lee that the Bennion family had requested that President McKay and he speak at the funeral on Friday.

The Council of the Twelve met the day before the funeral, saddened by the untimely death of their beloved brother. President McKay had felt encouraged when he had last seen him, and thought that his life might be extended.

The funeral service was held in the Salt Lake Tabernacle; President Clark conducted and President McKay and Elder Lee served as speakers. Elder Lee's journal tells of the most remarkable aspect of this funeral in these words:

There was a wonderful, peaceful spirit at this service. I was amazed by the number of people who afterwards told me that at times during my speaking, my voice sounded as though it were Adam, himself, speaking. Possibly this was because I had taken lessons from his sermons, or because his influence was very near. Adam's wife, Minerva, said: "Strangely, yesterday, at the services, was the greatest experience of my life." Ned, Adam's son, stated, "I wouldn't have missed this experience for all the world."

Having been asked to write an article on the deceased Apostle, Elder Lee summarized Adam S. Bennion's superb life and labors while traveling on a Union Pacific train through a wet snowstorm. He was able to finish writing his tribute in memoriam to Elder Bennion's life by the time the train arrived at Cheyenne, Wyoming, and from there mailed it back to Salt Lake City in time to meet the printing deadline of the Relief Society Magazine in which the article was published.

Henry D. Moyle Appointed to First Presidency-1959

When Elder Harold B. Lee reached his sixtieth year in life, others in his family were passing from mortality. A grand open house was given by Elder and Sister Lee in honor of his mother on her eightieth birthday, but six months later she was taken in death while Elder Lee was in New York City. He was also in New York City when word came that his younger brother Waldo died from a ruptured appendix on February 25, 1959.

An interesting phenomenon with respect to the passing of time is noted in Elder Lee's journal on November 28, 1959. Apparently unaware of the inroads time was making on himself, he wrote concerning his visit to his old Pioneer Stake: "I marvel at the way many of our faithful Saints in my old stake have aged considerably since I left them."

Nostalgia not only set in when returning to Pioneer Stake, but every visit to Cache Valley also brought back memories of his youth. When assigned to a conference in Logan in December 1959, Elder Lee wrote in his journal, "It always seems like going back home for me to go to Logan." When he was called to speak at the funeral of John J. Croshaw, one of his loyal friends at Oxford, he had reason to recall his days at Oxford and Clifton, Idaho, and his first job as a seventeen-year-old principal of the school there.

Remarkable spiritual experiences, so consistent in Elder Lee's life, continued in 1959. One of the most significant occurred in April after Elder Lee had conducted interviews with men of the New York Stake to select a patriarch. On Saturday. April 25, 1959, Elder Lee interviewed Brother DeWitt Paul and described the experience in his journal as a "comforting, spiritual experience." The sequel setting apart, however, is where the miracle occurred. In his own words he retold the story to the LDSSA Youth Conference on Leadership held on December 5, 1969, when he said:

Let me bring the lesson [of conveying holy authority] to a modern day and read you the testimony of Sister Mortimer. the wife of the president of the New York Stake.

"I went into the room where Brother DeWitt Paul was to be ordained a patriarch of the Church. There were Brother and Sister Paul, some new bishoprics and their wives, and the stake presidency of the New York Stake. A chair was set in the center of the bishop's office in the Manhattan Ward building. It is not a large room-very full with eighteen to twenty people in it. It is situated in the basement floor of the building. It has no windows, the only ventilation for the room coming from a ventilator fan. The door is the only opening in the room. The chapel is on the floor above.

"Brother Paul sat in the chair in the center of the room with his back toward the door. The door was closed. You. Elder Lee, stood behind Brother Paul and gave him the ordination and blessing.

"Just as Elder Lee lifted his hands to place them on Brother Paul's head, a shaft of bright light came onto the back and top of Elder Lee's head. It was like bright sunshine suddenly coming through a square window-eight to ten inches square-and shining down on a forty-five-degree angle on the back and top of his head. It was as if a shade had suddenly been drawn to let in the bright sun. I saw the light just before I bowed my head. I thought what a coincidence that that shaft of light should shine on Elder Lee just at this particular instant-as he was putting his hands on Brother Paul's head.

"Just as quickly as I thought this I realized that there were no windows, therefore this was not sunlight. I knew in the same instant that it was a stream of light from Heaven that needed no physical window to come through. I opened my eyes and looked up to see and again the shaft of light was visible. Finally, my eyes could no longer see the light, but I knew it was still there for Brother Paul was receiving information and advice that could only come from the Lord, and then I knew the source from which Brother Paul could declare lineage and project blessings that would come to the individuals he would bless in the years that lie ahead."

Elder Lee concluded the lesson to the youth conference leaders by summarizing:

In other words, I was laying my hands upon the head of Brother DeWitt Paul and the Lord was laying his hands upon Brother Paul's head by a humble servant who bore the Holy Priesthood. So it is with you who exercise your priestly responsibility in whatever you do-when you baptize, when you administer the sacrament, when you bless the sick, or when you confirm membership. Whatever priesthood rites-it is as though the Lord was putting his hands upon you or upon that one whom you bless by your own act. That's priesthood power.

On May 19, 1959, President Stephen L Richards was stricken early in the morning with a heart attack and died shortly after arriving at the hospital. Again Elder Lee was in New York City attending his Equitable meetings. He was advised to return home immediately and did so despite great difficulty with plane connections, arriving home at 2:00 A.M.

The funeral was held on Friday, May 22, 1959, with President Clark, President Joseph Fielding Smith, and Elder Gordon B. Hinckley serving as the speakers. President McKay conducted and wisely refrained from speaking, except briefly, because of the genuinely deep sorrow he felt at the loss of his companion and counselor.

In early June President McKay spent a week in seclusion in California contemplating issues, communing with heaven, and planning for the Church. He returned to announce the reorganization of the First Presidency with President Clark to serve as first counselor and Elder Henry D. Moyle as second counselor. Under date of June 12, Elder Lee confided to his diary his reaction to the reorganization and related issues. Included in that entry was this remark: "It seemed to me almost too good to be true. President McKay announced that he wanted to discuss with me the reorganization of the General Welfare Committee and indicated that he might call me later in the day."

In the temple meeting of June 18, President McKay set apart President Clark and President Moyle as his counselors and reiterated again the evidence of divine direction in the reorganization of the First Presidency. Again Elder Lee wrote in his diary: "There seemed to be a remarkable spirit of acceptance although only six of the Twelve were present. At about 10:30 p.m. Henry and Alberta Moyle came to see us and visited until near midnight. They wanted to share the joy of their new appointment in the First Presidency."

Eider Lee's intimate friendship with Elder Moyle permitted Elder Lee to have an added insight on activities as they would unfold in the newly structured First Presidency. After watching President Moyle assume his new role, he wrote of these developments as follows on July 14, 1959: "Henry Moyle has indicated some pending changes in mission presidents and has adopted a suggestion that the Brethren visiting the European Missions call all the presidents of those missions together for some roundtable discussions. It is becoming increasingly clear that Brother Moyle is going to become an aggressive mover of plans representing the First Presidency."

The relationship between Elder Lee and Elder Moyle is a fascinating history of dear, trusting friends, whose bonds became strained at times over the years as power and responsibility moved upon these two strong-willed, but extremely talented leaders. Elder Henry D. Taylor was closely associated with both Elder Lee and President Moyle in the welfare work of the Church. His observations about their relationship are revealing.

Elder Henry D. Moyle, who was the chairman of the Church Welfare Committee, and Elder Harold B. Lee, who was the managing director, worked well together. They were both vigorous, forceful, and progressive, but extremely considerate of one another's feelings.

Their offices were adjacent on the second floor, in the northeast corner of the Church Administration Building at 47 East South Temple Street. They had a sincere love and appreciation for each other, although they often differed in their opinion of a problem.

When Brother Moyle had a sensitive matter to discuss with Brother Lee, he would inquire of Frances Cardall, Brother Lee's secretary, as to his mood; and vice versa, Brother Lee would ask the same question of Liliu Peery, Brother Moyle's secretary, and if the climate seemed right, he would then present his problem. (The Church Welfare Plan, p. 97.)

Early in October 1951, these two dynamic leaders were sent to Washington, D.C., to confer with John L. Lewis of the United Mine Workers Union regarding the Church's welfare coal operations. They were a powerful negotiating team and could dissolve any opposition, it seemed. Elder Lee spoke of working on this trip with Elder Moyle in these words: "I enjoyed visiting through the day with Brother Moyle, who with his great faith and loyalty is a constant support and strength."

Concern for His Wife's Health at End of 1960

An interesting observation on the constant safeguarding of the General Authorities while "on the Lord's errand" was seen in two diary entries within a four-month period of 1960.

On June 14, 1960, Elder Lee and President Franklin Richards of the Northwestern States Mission arrived in Seattle after a tour into Alaska. The next day they learned that on the same airline, a plane exactly like the one they had flown on had crashed between Cardova and Anchorage; all fourteen passengers and crew were killed. "We thanked the Lord again for our safe journey," wrote Elder Lee.

Just four months later, on Sunday, October 30, 1960, Elder Richard L. Evans told Elder Lee that he was waiting to board a Northwest Airlines plane at Missoula on the previous Friday night when word came that it was lost; he heard later that it had crashed twenty-two miles from the landing airfield at Missoula, Montana.

With the Brethren of the General Authorities so frequently traveling in the air to and from their weekend assignments and mission tours, it is indeed faith-promoting and inspirational to observe that not one life has been lost in an airplane mishap. The prayers of the Saints for their Church leaders and the love of the Lord for his chosen ones is abundantly manifest in their safety during their arduous travel schedules.

As the second decade of apostolic service drew to an end, Elder Lee's youngest daughter, Helen, was now thirty-five years of age. On Christmas of 1960, Elder Lee was worried about his wife's health and began to make plans to do what he could to help Fern improve in strength and enjoyment of life. He summarized his Christmas holidays in this way:

This was a delightful Christmas with all our family together, and well and happy. We have facing us Fern's operation, and her hearing is becoming increasingly more difficult. If the Lord is willing, we hope with the coming year to correct some of these difficulties.
