Brent L. Goates, Harold B. Lee: Prophet and Seer ( 1985)

21 The Correlation Program

Some historians may well argue that President Harold B. Lee's most significant lifetime work for the Church, though not generally understood by the membership, was the reorganization of the kingdom under the direction of President David O. McKay during the 1960s. What is little comprehended about that magnificent achievement was that it resembled so many of his other accomplishments in that it was born out of heartbreaking failures in the 1940s and 1950s. Undoubtedly the Church could have profited by a correlated program even then, but although the principles were right, the timing was not.

In reference to those frustrating years, Elder Lee would often reflect on how he was obliged to learn patience. The decade of the forties was a time of valiant striving and waiting. Close friends and family members have heard Elder Lee remark often that in those years he found it necessary to fold away his charts of reorganization, changing job descriptions, and dreams of an integrated Church program led by the priesthood, and wait out the delay. He filed his papers in his rolltop desk where they remained for twenty years, awaiting a more propitious and receptive time.

Simply stated, the correlation program is the placement of the priesthood of God where the Lord by revelation has set it-at the center and core of the Church organizations, with all auxiliary organizations affixed appropriately as a support to the priesthood. Also, correlation emphasizes priesthood in the home, through the father (or parents), by priesthood home teaching and the family home evening program to encourage the teaching of children in the home.

The title "correlation" came from an official letter from the First Presidency which defined areas of responsibility that must be aligned if every part of the kingdom of God was to fit into its proper place. The heart of the priesthood correlation program was the home and family.

The 1960s mark what might well be considered the most significant development in this century pertaining to the responsibilities of the priesthood, especially as they relate to the home. Procedures were redefined and intensified and some new approaches were inaugurated. To accomplish the fundamental objective of the Church, which is the saving of the living and the dead, a priesthood correlation program was established, with emphasis on four basic thrusts: the priesthood missionary program, the priesthood welfare program, the priesthood genealogical program, and the all-encompassing priesthood home teaching program. All Church auxiliaries were then related to these four functions as directed through priesthood correlation.

The key statement of instruction to Elder Lee and his associates in developing the correlation program came in a letter from the First Presidency in which they called attention to the fact that

the home was the basis of a righteous life and that no other instrumentality can take its place or fulfill its essential functions, and that the utmost the auxiliaries can do is to aid the home in its problems, giving special aid and succor where such is necessary; that in aiding the home the auxiliaries may well consider thinking of home-life of the people as having three periods-the first, from birth to twelve years of age or the childhood period; then the youth period from twelve years up to the early twenties; and then adulthood, from the early twenties on to the end of life.

These were the developmental objectives of the correlation program seen clearly now from hindsight vision. Yet in the earliest years the concepts were blurred and needed the refining development of intensive, prayerful, arduous work by scores of dedicated pioneers to produce the current definitions which now are commonly accepted.

The roots of the priesthood correlation program certainly began early in the 1940s, but no fruits came then. The true genesis of the priesthood correlation program in the 1960s may have come much earlier from the personal, visionary philosophy of President J. Reuben Clark, Jr. After only three months of service as a new member of the Quorum of the Twelve, Elder Lee, Elder Marion G. Romney, and their wives were invited to the home of President and Sister Clark. That evening, on July 10, 1941, President Clark unfolded some of his ideas relative to what he called then a simplification of the present Church programs. The concepts sunk deep into the fertile mind of Harold B. Lee, whose destiny it was to persevere and to finally see them implemented twenty years later.

In order to attend a quarterly meeting of the Council of the Twelve in 1948, Elder Lee returned from a weekend conference and went directly from the train to the meeting, where as a special order of business the subject of ward teaching was to be discussed. Elder Lee again presented some of his ideas which had emerged from his studies of priesthood responsibility and simplification, made in association with Elders Stephen L Richards and Albert E. Bowen. No decisions were made and no action taken on this presentation. (It wasn't until fourteen years later that these basic concepts were finally adopted as the home teaching program of the Church.) Elder Lee ended his journal for 1948 with this doleful note: "Not much progress has been made."

The quarterly meeting of the Council of the Twelve in March 1949 was another scene of discussion on redesigning the ward teaching program of the Church. On this occasion, Elder Lee spent four hours in an "outstanding" temple meeting. Most of the time was spent in a discussion of a new approach to ward teaching, where the responsibility for laboring with inactive members would be placed on priesthood quorum officers. When it came time to report these deliberations the next day to the First Presidency at the weekly temple meeting, the proposed plan was taken under advisement.

The correlation of Aaronic Priesthood work, then directed by the Presiding Bishopric, and the Melchizedek Priesthood activities, as supervised by the General Priesthood Committee headed by Elder Lee, from the Council of the Twelve, was itself a monumental task.

The first apostolic decade of Harold B. Lee thus passed, with his ideas of priesthood correlation, then known as "simplification of Church programs," just beginning to germinate in the minds of future senior leaders.

With the appointment of Elder Stephen L Richards to the First Presidency in 1951, after President George Albert Smith had died during the April 1951 general conference, Elder Lee hoped that a renewed interest could be taken in the long-awaited revisions elevating priesthood work to its rightful place. Elder Richards had served with Elder Lee in the preparation of earlier plans which were presented to the First Presidency.

Elder Richards began his service in the First Presidency by attending for the last time the quarterly meeting of the Council of the Twelve on April 11, 1951, for the purpose of having brought to his mind the various communications and recommendations of the Twelve which had not yet been moved forward by the First Presidency. It was recalled for him that the Twelve had recommended a simplification program to give more emphasis to the priesthood, a revised priesthood-ward teaching program, recommendations relative to the ordaining and setting apart of high councilors and bishoprics by local stake presidents, and a priesthood insurance plan. In his new role in the First Presidency, President Richards promised to expedite these matters and obtain decisions. Again Elder Lee was asked to review for the Twelve the proposals on the priesthood simplification program submitted in January 1948.

After four months had passed, however, it was apparent that Elder Lee could not yet achieve the correlation needed with the Aaronic Priesthood and the Presiding Bishopric-controlled ward teaching program. A second decade of personal frustration on this issue passed by for Elder Lee.

The concept of a comprehensive study of Churchwide curriculum first surfaced in 1951, but it was several long years before positive action was taken. The first directive for the study of the entire Church curriculum came in May of 1960. Elder Lee captured this important breakthrough in these words: "I conducted a lengthy meeting of the General Priesthood Committee, whose membership is now instructed to undertake a study of the whole curriculum of the Church organizations and to recommend some correlation."

As the 1951-60 decade closed there was renewed hope that the time was approaching when the First Presidency would decide to proceed with the reorganization of priesthood and auxiliary organization functions, since it now appeared that the proposals were gaining the support of President David O. McKay. In November 1960, the Presiding Bishopric was directed to involve the Council of the Twelve in developing a vigorous ward teaching program. Gratefully, Elder Lee wrote in his journal on November 3, 1960: "In our temple meeting with six of the Twelve present, there was a very pointed discussion of the advisability of the Twelve having more to do in working with the Presiding Bishopric in directing the ward teaching, as well as other programs, which have been withheld from the Twelve."

This time it appeared that the forward movement would be sustained. Two weeks later Elder Lee wrote these hopeful words: "We had two lengthy sessions with the General Authorities in a discussion of two important matters, one of which was reviewing proposals to upgrade ward teaching to make it more effective in meeting our growing problems, which require constant 'watching over the Church' in the way the Lord has directed."

In 1960, the climate finally turned favorable for the sweeping reorganization. It appeared now that all of Elder Lee's painful labor and careful preparation would not be wasted. He could act now, instead of merely recommending and planning. The first actual movement came on March 22, 1961. On that day Elder Lee wrote in his journal: "I conducted a meeting of the Priesthood Committee where the principal item of business was to consider the final draft of a proposed overhauling of the ward teaching program of the past, under the new title of 'Priesthood Correlation Program,' with those participating as 'Priesthood Watchmen.' Twelve or 14 stakes will be selected for the experiment before launching as a Church-wide operation."

During that first year fourteen stakes did pilot the upgraded ward teaching program, with Elder Marion G. Romney prominent in the experiment's leadership, which involved redefining priest-hood-auxiliary relationships. Elder Lee discussed the inspiration of the correlation program with President McKay as the plan moved to the First Presidency for approval. President McKay told Elder Lee that he had awakened one morning at 6:30 A.M. with a clear impression as to the proper theme for the general priesthood meeting of general conference in October 1961. He was impressed that the newly approved correlation program should be that theme and asked Elder Lee and Elder Richard L. Evans to speak on this subject.

It was then that Elder Lee first explained publicly the function of the proposed All-Church Coordinating Council, with associated correlation committees for adults, youth, and children age groupings, each headed by a member of the Twelve Apostles. This group, composed of Elders Marion G. Romney, Richard L. Evans, and Gordon B. Hinckley, was led by Elder Lee as the chairman. They first met on October 4, 1961.

From this organization came the impetus to reach out over the next ten years to almost every program and organization in the Church for refining and restructuring. At the October 1971 general conference President Lee provided the Regional Representatives of the Twelve with a partial list of accomplishments and change, saying:

Even as I repeat them now it seems unbelievable that we have been able to do what we have done in this time: priesthood home teaching; family home evening; unified social services; the expansion and clarification of the missionary responsibilities of the seventies quorums; expansion of the home-study seminary course; bishops' training course; priesthood teacher development; libraries and how to use them; definition of a closer relationship between the Aaronic Priesthood and the MIA; improving and making more effective preparation, editing, translating, and distributing of teaching materials, and the distribution to meet the deadlines at seasonal beginnings; introduction of a Church-wide library program; the experimental study of the Church membership all over the world to achieve a feeling of closer relationship with the full Church program; the correlation and clarification of the LDS Student Association role to meet the unmet youth needs using the existing structure rather than a separate professional staff; and the correlation of military relations programs using existing Church structure instead of professionals. So we go on and on, and all of this under the direction of the Twelve, as I have already explained, acting under the responsibility given by the First Presidency; and you, their brethren, are to carry this to the ends of the earth so that these things might be implemented in every part of the world-a tremendous responsibility.

His list also might well have included such programs as Church athletics and a correlated music program. Basic ward and stake leadership meetings were changed, with the high council meetings becoming the stake priesthood correlation committee meeting, and, on the ward level, a priesthood executive committee meeting was introduced, along with a ward council meeting. A new executive secretary position was created to support ward and stake presiding officers. Work with the inactive male members was changed to the prospective elder program. Church magazines were consolidated and the Relief Society was included for the first time in the general Church budget.

Those changes took many years to develop and implement. It was in June of 1962 that the correlation program first approved a Church curriculum for each age level, thus achieving a spirit of acceptance for the general principles of correlation. Even then some leaders whose organizations were squeezed by change mounted opposition to the new movement.

On August 3, 1962, President David O. McKay called President Joseph Fielding Smith and Elder Lee, the two senior Apostles in the Quorum of the Twelve, to confer with him and to "consider some matters which are giving me much concern." The discussion developed into an assignment from President McKay to find an alternative to the General Authorities going into stakes and missions as assigned teaching visitors. They were given also a specific charge to eliminate the area supervision plan set up by the Missionary Department. They were also assigned to find an alternative to the general auxiliary board's annual conventions with the stakes, which then were scheduled during vacation months and involved midweek meetings.

Elder Lee worked day and night on this assignment; four days later he presented to President McKay an outline that called for General Authorities to cover quarterly stake conferences two of the four times during the year, with teams from the auxiliary organizations alternating on the other two occasions. A worldwide missionary responsibility program under the direction of the Quorum of the Twelve was recommended to replace the old program then being led by the First Presidency and the Missionary Department.

President McKay was pleased with the report, but at the same time he recognized how sensitive were the feelings of those Brethren responsible for the programs Being replaced, and chose to wait for a season Before implementation. The stake conference schedule was adopted and inaugurated during 1963. The missionary program was deferred for another six months to give President McKay more time to work out the details.

The place of the auxiliaries in the Church in relationship to the priesthood was finally being defined. Elder Lee's organization chart showed the proposed relationship between the correlation program and the general Boards of the auxiliaries. The auxiliaries

In the tabernacle with president David O. McKay prior to general conference session, October, 1963

would now attend two of the four stake quarterly conferences of all stakes to conduct leadership training, but the correlation program assumed their former responsibilities of preparing the courses of study.

Regarding his correlation associates and the progress of their work, Elder Lee reported:

They were all certain that the Lord had now given us the "light" we had all been seeking to see the place of the general boards. Now we were shown how we could present the old traditions of the auxiliaries and at the same time give the much-needed correlation to courses of study and activities. We thought it prudent to preview our presentation with President McKay privately before giving it to the Twelve. We found him intensely interested. We received the approval of the Presidency and the Twelve in our Thursday meeting on August 30, 1962.

When this correlation plan, thus far developed, was finally presented, President McKay made this statement: "This is not only a wonderful step forward But a bound forward. My soul rejoices! I think the whole thing is glorious! We can all see opportunities for the priesthood to become active and as quorums also: I think this is growth. It warms my soul!" (Improvement Era, June 1963, p. 505.)

Organizational changes are always painful for those persons involved, and implementation of innovations is never easy. As late as November 9, 1962, Elder Lee called general auxiliary organization executives to his office to deal with their unwillingness to accept the program adjustments.

On February 8, 1963, Eider Lee asked his associate, Elder Marion G. Romney, to present to the Council of the Twelve the complete priesthood correlation program which was to be introduced at the April 1963 general conference and thereafter taught at all stake conferences, and finally to be put into operation on January 1, 1964. These recommendations proposed a General Priesthood Board consisting of four subcommittees of about twenty-five members each, including the Missionary Committee, with President Joseph Fielding Smith then nominated as chairman, and incorporating most of the former missionary field representatives. Also proposed was a Priesthood Correlation Committee (later to be called the Home Teaching Committee), headed by Elder Romney, with field representatives yet to be chosen; the Genealogical Committee, with newly appointed Apostle N. Eldon Tanner as chairman, with staff and part-time field representatives to teach at stake conferences; and finally, the Welfare Committee, with Presiding Bishop John H. Vandenberg as chairman, replacing Elder Romney. This marked the first time that the welfare program had not been headed by a member of the Council of the Twelve, and fulfilled a thirty-year-old vision by welfare pioneers that the Presiding Bishop should direct that program.

These one hundred men were to be part-time, unpaid, full-Church-service representatives, subject to appointment and releases as were members of the auxiliary general boards.

Although the plan had been unanimously approved by the Council of the Twelve and the First Presidency, it was under constant questioning and review as the April 1963 general conference approached. Two days before the conference convened Elder Lee was called to the office of the First Presidency to explain what he was going to say in his sermon at the general priesthood meeting, where President McKay had requested him to speak on correlation-organizational subjects. Elder Lee, sensing the difficulty, suggested that the entire plan be presented again to the Council of the Twelve and the First Presidency to see if they wished to rescind their former action of approval. Elder Romney made the presentation to review the entire correlation plan. Only one change was made when Elder Lee agreed to show on his charts that the General Authorities be constituted as the General Priesthood Board, with the four subcommittees under them.

With unity established, Elder Lee presented an outline of priesthood correlation at the general priesthood session of the April 1963 general conference. It was a major forty-five-minute address. He introduced the concept of the new General Priesthood Board with the four priesthood committees (welfare, genealogical, missionary, and home teaching). He used eight charts to clarify his message and introduced the new home teaching program to the Church for the first time.

Although the correlation program now had been launched, the changes in the missionary program proved to be the most difficult to execute. These changes, although requested by President McKay, gained acceptance slowly. A system of worldwide area supervision was finally adopted with Elder Gordon B. Hinckley as the chairman of the Priesthood Missionary Committee, and Elder Boyd K. Packer serving as the managing director. Several times, even as late as September 1965, it was necessary for President McKay to clarify that the entire Council of the Twelve were in reality the Church Missionary Committee and not just the few Quorum members who served as the Missionary Executive Committee.

New Church Leadership Level: Regional Representatives of the Twelve

From 1963 through 1966 the Church membership received a thorough education with respect to priesthood dominance and the new focus of correlation centering on the importance of the home. The four priesthood subcommittees traveled throughout the Church on stake conference assignments to teach fundamental correlation principles. With this foundation established, Elder Lee could look for a more basic organizational change which would take the Church into its future of unprecedented growth.

Still recovering from stomach surgery, Elder Lee spent Sunday, May 7, 1967, at home and took advantage of the opportunity to think through the many problems confronting a growing Church numbering 2.5 million members, most of them living in 434 stakes. Elder Lee focused on the seventy already constituted regions of the Church. He wrote his musings in his journal:

If we could have in each region three "Church-service-time" assistants to the Twelve, answerable to the Twelve, to conduct the regional meetings twice a year, and between times work with individual stakes needing their attention in all phases of priesthood activities, in correlation with Church auxiliaries within each such region to which such part-time assistants are assigned, then the Church could meet the growth now taking place.

On May 16 Elder Lee spent some time at his office dictating a memorandum relative to the future role of priesthood committee representatives and the desirability of vesting them with a designated priesthood authority by naming "regional coordinators" in the seventy regions of the Church. He began to envision the auxiliaries coming to the regional meetings, two at each semiannual meeting, to hold training sessions with their stake and ward auxiliary leaders. This would mean that only General Authorities would attend stake quarterly conferences in 1968. The plan was jelling in his mind.

Rapid progress followed. After approval of the First Presidency and the Council of the Twelve was obtained at a special meeting called on May 30, 1967, the details were quickly added and presented to other leadership groups. The entry in Elder Lee's journal for June 1, 1967, describes the activity:

In the afternoon we met with all our correlation "team" and outlined the new procedure in supervising tile priesthood of the Church by "Regional Priesthood Representatives of the Twelve," the new 1968 plan to have general board auxiliary representatives go only to regional meetings to be presided over by the Regional Priesthood Representatives of the Twelve, also the new plan to hold stake quarterly conferences. This was repeated and in more detail given to the General Authorities, priesthood heads, and auxiliary general board leaders. Almost all seemed favorable and some were very enthusiastic. One was not.

Now it was time to consider manpower to breathe life into the new priesthood leadership plan, which would have the inherent hazard of introducing an entirely new level of leaders above the stake presidents and below the General Authorities of the Church. Quite naturally, that would be unpopular with both existing levels of leadership because of widening the space between them.

Elder Lee spent the entire day of July 7, 1967, at home studying the proposed assignments of the brethren nominated by the Apostles of the Church for consideration as Regional Representatives of the Twelve. Though it was a laborious task, Elder Lee was delighted as he became aware of the splendid nonpaid leadership available for pioneering this work. He felt it was vitally important to see that only the most qualified men be placed in these positions.

In the meantime, under the direction of Elder Thomas S. Monson, the leadership team of Neal A. Maxwell and Wendell J. Ashton was busy preparing the leadership training program for General Authorities and for the first seminar for newly appointed Regional Representatives of the Twelve, which was to be held in conjunction with the forthcoming October 1967 general conference of the Church.

Finally all was in readiness for this historic action of installing a new level of Church leadership. Elder Lee arrived home late on Sunday, September 24, having just created at Fort Worth, Texas, the 443rd stake in the Church. He immediately began to make preparations for an intensive week preceding and during the October general conference of the Church. With his responsibility to supervise the first two-day seminar for the newly called Regional Representatives, there were many last-minute details to attend to and many questions to answer. Elder Lee praised the outstanding preparations made by the Leadership Committee, composed of Elder Monson, Neal Maxwell, and Wendell Ashton.

Elder Lee's journal entry for Thursday, September 28, 1967, provides a summary of the first seminar:

We began the day with an hour's devotional in the Salt Lake Temple with the General Authorities and the Regional Representatives of the Twelve. The meeting was held under the direction of the First Presidency and lasted one hour. With the exception of President McKay and Elder Antoine Ivins, all were in attendance. Our meetings in the Seventeenth Ward were wonderfully developed according to an outlined plan. I was particularly blessed in a closing instruction on the subject, "How to Use the Scriptures in Our Teaching." In the evening, all the General Authorities, Regional Representatives of the Twelve, and their wives, with all our correlation workers, attended a dinner in the Lafayette Ballroom of the Hotel Utah.

The new strata of Church leadership had been prepared. As yet, however, they did not know where they would be called to serve. On Friday night, September 29, 1967, all stake presidents in the Church were invited to attend a special meeting in the Assembly Hall on Temple Square with the Regional Representatives of the Twelve. There the entire new regionalized program for 1968 was presented by the Correlation Executive Committee, composed of members of the Council of the Twelve.

Then came the climax. The historic, long-awaited moment arrived for assigning priesthood leadership to the entire world. The breathless silence was broken as President N. Eldon Tanner began reading the assignments of Regional Representatives to stakes and regions across the globe. Following this two-hour meeting the stake presidents went to the Church Office Building to meet in small designated rooms with their new Regional Representatives.

At the Saturday night general priesthood meeting Elder Lee again was assigned to present the new regionalized program to an estimated audience of 100,000 priesthood holders who were gathered in the Tabernacle on Temple Square and in 475 different chapels throughout the world. His expansive explanation required forty-five minutes of prime time, but with history unfolding it was justified and it fulfilled the request of President McKay.

At subsequent annual conferences of the Church, the seminars for Regional Representatives of the Twelve were held for two days preceding the conferences. Beginning with the first seminar in October 1967 a tradition was established which lasted many years: as chairman of the Correlation Committee and encouraged by President McKay, Elder Lee set the stage and the spirit with a major address at the beginning of each seminar.

As Elder Lee ripened in leadership and spoke for the First Presidency, and finally as President of the Church, he presented the confidential "State of the Church" addresses as the keynote speaker at each seminar. Because of the exclusive audience and the absence of pressures brought on by reporters, television cameras, and time limitations-which characterize the general sessions of conference in the Tabernacle-these sermons have emerged as being among the most significant addresses to the priesthood leaders attending general conferences since 1967.

Evaluation of Results

How well was the fundamental lesson of priesthood correlation taught and learned? One measurement might be demonstrated by focusing on what members and nonmembers alike have come to recognize as the hallmark of the Church-the importance of families.

In the early 1970s, ten years after the correlation program was introduced to the Church, a major survey was conducted for the Church by an outside consulting firm. In this study Frank N. Magid Associates, Inc., reported what nonmembers first thought about when the "Mormon" religion was mentioned. In this image association series the nonmembers reported that after obvious geographical links with the state of Utah and Salt Lake City, as well as the strictness of our code of living, they thought that Mormons were "closely united," and "help one another." These were family-related traits inaugurated as the heart of the correlation program in 1962.

Ten years later, in 1981, this same professional research group studied nonmember attitudes and opinions specifically in the cities of Phoenix, Arizona, and Denver, Colorado, with abundant interviews in many other American cities. These findings were reported under the title of "Comparative Evaluations" as follows:

Without question, the strong, close family relationships among LDS Church members is its strongest selling point. It is with this criterion that the Church is most associated-and that is significant since it also is considered the most important of the five criteria tested. Scores given the Mormon Church, in general, increase with socioeconomic standing, as well as with knowledge of the Church. Although the Mormons are best rated on this criterion, they are not the only religion to score well. Baptists, Catholics, and Jews also get high grades on this trait, although none of them do quite as well as the Mormons. [^1]

This emphasis on strengthening the family, which came into prominence in the early 1960s before today's extreme challenges were obvious, is one of the most powerful evidences that modern revelation flows from true prophets to prepare the Saints of God for the adversary's attacks. Certainly none too soon were the Saints warned to get their houses in order before the true concept of family life was attacked anew and became one of the most bitter battlegrounds between the forces of good and evil. The correlation pioneers were prophetic in their warnings and the Church gained a lasting trademark of family strength, internally and in the world, through the reorganizations of the 1960s led by Elder Harold B. Lee.

A Study of the Denver and Phoenix Markets" (May, 1980, Message Dissemination Phase II Study, Frank N. Magid Associates, Inc.).

---
Notas:
[^1] © S. Dilworth Young 1976. Used by permission.
