Brent L. Goates, Harold B. Lee: Prophet and Seer ( 1985)

22 Racial and Financial Challenges to the Church

The United States underwent severe racial disruption during the 1960s, and the Church was pointedly singled out for charges of discrimination against blacks. This caused many tense moments, tremendous debate, and unrest among the membership, particularly in the Church leadership ranks.

The most memorable events to typify this stressful period were the racial riots at Los Angeles in 1965. On August 14 there were massive black riots in South Los Angeles: four hundred or more fires were started, scores of stores were looted, and numerous whites were attacked.

Elder Lee had been scheduled to hold a conference in Los Angeles that weekend, but after the explosive situation was explained he conferred with President Hugh B. Brown of the First Presidency and they decided to adjourn the conference after only the leadership meeting had been conducted. The days that followed showed the wisdom of that decision as rioting continued and the situation remained tense. The National Guard was in "ready combat" at every block within a forty-two-mile radius.

Before that, on Sunday, March 7, a group of three hundred protesters marched to the Church Office Building in Salt Lake City, demanding that the Church speak out in favor of civil rights for blacks. The march was repeated also the next day.

There were rumors of blacks invading Salt Lake City to take vengeance upon the Saints and the Church. In 1962 the Salt Lake Temple east doors were bombed. The vandalism was never totally ascribed to racial problems, although it appeared a possible act of racism.

The peak of the challenge on racial issues came in 1969. Late in October Elder Gordon B. Hinckley came to Elder Lee to express his concerns about current issues and struggles. Prominent among his worries were the difficulties facing Brigham Young University because of the protests blacks made against their athletic teams. Of course, the problem had its roots in the long-standing doctrine relative to restricting the priesthood from those of black descent. Now there were strong pressures being placed on the Church Board of Education to permit the recruiting of black athletes to appease those who were protesting against the university.

Three days later the Brethren assembled for their weekly meeting in the Salt Lake Temple. Elder Lee described this temple meeting as characterized by an unusually deep spiritual atmosphere. Elder Lee was called on to pronounce the opening prayer at the temple altar. He was strongly impressed to pray for a oneness such as the Master prayed for with his disciples long ago in Jerusalem. He prayed that God would safeguard the portals of the temple and, if necessary, send the protective agency of those personages translated, but not yet resurrected, who were reserved to protect the Lord's work on earth. He pleaded for direct intervention to give the leadership of the Church divine guidance in decisions that must be made within the week and would determine the course of action the Church would take to meet the racial issue. The ramifications of such an important decision could stay with them as long as they lived.

In the first week of November a spirited Church Board of Education meeting was held. The Brethren met under the backdrop of a recent meeting of the athletic directors of the Western Athletic Conference universities, which ended in a brawl when a delegation of blacks forced themselves into the meeting. At that meeting, the BYU representative had read a policy statement rebutting the charge of racial discrimination at the Church school. Now at the Church Board of Education meeting the subject of prime concern was the adoption of a policy permitting recruiting of black athletes at BYU. Obviously, only the Church Board of Education could discuss the real issue, the long-standing prohibition of black male members from holding the priesthood.

Knowing that a policy statement would be necessary from Church headquarters, Elder Lee had spent several days documenting his own thinking on this weighty subject. He then asked G. Homer Durham and Neal A. Maxwell, prominent educators, to do likewise. Placing their texts with his own he delivered the three approaches to Elder Gordon B. Hinckley and asked him to formulate out of their combined thinking the most satisfactory statement that could be read by the critics of the Church, as well as the Church members, to make the Church's position clear.

The background to that position, which President McKay had always reaffirmed, was that the priesthood restriction was not merely a practice or a policy but was based upon a principle handed down by divine order; and that therefore a change could be made only by a revelation from the Lord through his prophet. After two or three drafts and revisions, the statement on the Church and the blacks was ready.

Although misleading announcements in the media caused much confusion during the Christmas holidays of 1969, the statement, which earlier had been circulated to Church leaders in missions, stakes, and wards, was released nationally. It appeared in print for the Latter-day Saints to read in the Church News, on Saturday, January 10, 1970, signed by all members of the First Presidency.

The Church tried to take some positive steps to give black baptized members an improved status in the Church as a social organization. Under date of June 10, 1971, President Lee recorded in his diary his concerns and action: "I spent considerable time in the temple meeting of the First Presidency and the Quorum of the Twelve considering what could be done with our black members locally who want to be more fully fellowshipped. More meetings will be held with these members."

A study was made by three members of the Quorum of the Twelve, Elders Howard W. Hunter, Thomas S. Monson, and Boyd K. Packer, which resulted in the organization of a social group of black members known as Genesis. In deciding how to implement this organization, which met in addition to the customary involvement in local wards, where they participated in Primary Association, Relief Society and social activities, President Lee, according to the recollection of Elder Monson, gave this counsel, after deep and solemn pondering and prayer: "I can see where we should not have Sunday School included in the program, but my feelings are, however, that we should extend to our black brethren every blessing up to the holding of the priesthood, and then the Lord will show us the next step."

The subject was not easily put to rest, however. But when it was finally handled and resolved, eight years later, it was done so as a divine principle requiring a revelation from God to his prophet on earth. President Spencer W. Kimball's historic announcement [^1] on June 8, 1978, declaring that all worthy male members of the Church, regardless of race, may be ordained to the priesthood brought joy and happiness to almost everyone and ended a social issue which had been a divisive and burdensome trial to many people in and outside the Church.

Opposing Deficit Financing in the Church

Elder Harold B. Lee was an avowed conservative in his political and social programming and organizational perspectives, which bias probably derived from the molding influence of his tutor, President J. Reuben Clark, Jr.

The political philosophy of the 1960s encouraged deficit financing, and some of this thinking infiltrated into the Church. Perhaps this was the reason for Elder Lee's calling to return on July 11, 1961, for a second term of service on the Church Expenditure Committee. This committee became the scene of many situations in which Elder Lee cast his vote in favor of avoiding debt, as he had taught so long in shaping the welfare program.

As 1961 ended, the 1962 budget was being prepared in the Committee on the Disposition of Tithes. Elder Lee's account indicates his opposition to deficit spending as based upon the financial facts available to him at the time.

I led the discussion in what proved to be a debate when there was proposed a budget of 11 percent more than the anticipated revenues for 1962. My stubborn resistance to the principle of "deficit spending," supposedly justified in the hope of increasing the tithing of the Church to cover the deficit, . . . resulted in the meeting ending with a call for the Twelve to come up with suggestions a week hence as to where cuts should be made to stay within the anticipated income for 1962.

The propensity for spending persisted into 1962, however, and by May of that year there was considerable apprehension caused by a suggestion to finance such spending by selling Church securities for the next fifty years.

On May 17, Elder Lee received a telegram while in New York City asking him to accompany President Henry D. Moyle and Leland Flint, the president of Zions First National Bank, on a visit to the First National City Bank of New York City to seek counsel on the proposed multi-million-dollar bonding of the Church, for what Elder Lee called the "lavish" building expenditures now anticipated. They were strongly advised against a long-term bond issue and encouraged instead to engage in long-term mortgage borrowings at more favorable rates. The counsel was helpful because when Leland Flint presented his proposals for the financing of huge buildings then being planned (the Kennecott Copper Building, the ZCMI building, the Hotel Utah expansion and underground garage on the Church Office grounds), at an estimated total cost of $30 million, it pleased Elder Lee to note that his proposal had changed. Now it was proposed to proceed to build these projects until completion, when a long-time mortgage at the most favorable rates could be obtained, and to build the tax-exempt buildings on the Administration block in stages to make possible the financing out of current income.

Typical of the routine business before the Expenditures Committee was a discussion on May 23, 1962, to purchase a building lot in a small Peruvian city for $24,000 where only fifteen members of the Church were located. During the discussion period Elder Lee vigorously opposed the purchase plan. He was not afraid or uncomfortable in standing alone. Courage of his convictions was always a Harold B. Lee character trademark.

Elder Lee noted that a movement toward conservatism was coming into the Church financial planning, but he saw a strange paradox in the thinking of some leaders. While all vigorously gave voice to resisting a Church "indebtedness," they felt these projects were exempt because the borrowing was in the name of Zions Securities Corporation, and therefore it was still possible to say "the Church is out of debt." Elder Lee felt his banking associates would surely construe such borrowings as a lien against the Church.

Elder Lee's conservative spending campaign continued through June 1962 as he blocked attempts to give more generous percentages of Church participation on new buildings to which institutes of religion were attached. A rental program was substituted instead. At Expenditures Committee meetings Elder Lee always impressed the idea of economy and staying within the budget. In one instance this led to a decision to deny a recommendation to build a new three-stake tabernacle in Arizona and to air-condition their present three-stake center, which was already owned and free from debt.

The Expenditure Committee meetings continued to be the focal point of conflicting views during this period. One particular issue in August of 1962 was the question, which was hotly debated, as to whether or not the new Genealogical Building should be built, as publicized, on 2100 South and Redwood Road or on the northeast corner of Main Street and North Temple Street. Each location had its strong and vocal advocates. When the Genealogical Society leaders, in arguing for the North Temple site, indicated they were happy in their present quarters in the old Montgomery Ward Building at First South and Main Street, Elder Lee moved that that location become their permanent quarters and save the cost of a new building. After the debate on the new, costly building, President McKay seemed much impressed with the Harold B. Lee idea that could save $6 million.

Sometimes the spending pressures called for a tactical retreat by Elder Lee, however. In August 1962, he intentionally stayed away from a missionary meeting because of the proposed discussion on the budget for missionary automobiles, which was already overspent. "I have already voiced my opposition to deficit spending," said Elder Lee.

On the other hand, in that same month Elder Lee stayed home from his New York directorship meetings because of the importance of some business with the Building Committee's overspending its budget. The same arguments for free spending were heard, that the First Presidency would take care of the "non-budget" items beyond spending limits, that there had been a "lag" of some fifty years of deferred building and neglect in keeping pace with growth, that with the appreciation of Church holdings such as its ranches in Florida and Georgia there were more reserves now than ever before, and that borrowing by wholly owned subsidiaries of the Church did not constitute an indebtedness against the Church, etc. Elder Lee argued strongly against all arguments for free spending, and later described his feelings in his journal:

I was very blunt in challenging these assertions and brought forth a very blunt and frank discussion which resulted in an action to postpone all future buildings beyond the budget, with the exception of the anticipated increase of tithing for this year. Several in the meeting continued to display the fallacious reasoning used by the federal government with reference to deficit spending to "increase the economy," and urged also that we should overspend the budget to "keep faith with the people."

One year later, in December of 1963, the annual budget again was presented to the Committee on the Disposition of Tithes, composed of the First Presidency, the Council of the Twelve, and the Presiding Bishopric. Elder Lee called this a "tame meeting" in comparison with the vigorous sessions of the past. Yet, he recorded in his journal: "There is still some cloudiness as to where the money is to come from to finance so-called 'non-budget' items, which we have come gradually to know means 'deficit-spending,' with a philosophy of spending ourselves into prosperity."

Elder Lee remained always the fiscal conservative, whose energies and counsel were always directed towards safeguarding the Lord's sacred tithes.

New York World's Fair Mormon Pavilion

When the exhibitry planned for the Mormon Pavilion at the New York World's Fair seemed to lack budgetary controls, Elder Lee was made chairman of the committee preparing for the Church's full-scale public relations involvement. During the 1964-65 project he became a moving influence, mainly in the area of making the pavilion an effective missionary project.

Two themes were originally considered for presentation. One was to portray the history and growth of the Church from its humble origin in New York state to its worldwide importance. The other was to teach the message of the restored gospel. Elder Lee pointed out that the result of the first theme would be to make friends for the Church. The second theme would bring converts into the Church.

The gospel theme was chosen. Exhibits and displays centered around the message of the restored gospel. Bertel Thorvaldsen's magnificent marble sculpture of the Christus became the focal point, signifying that Mormons are Christians and follow the Savior's teachings. The motion picture film Man's Search for Happiness was created to depict the Latter-day Saint belief in the Resurrection and our eternal family relationships.

During the two-summer-month World's Fair period, 360 full-time missionaries, working under Eastern States Mission President Wilburn C. West, and more than a hundred volunteers presented the restored gospel message to 5,767,835 visitors. They sold 97,385 copies of the Book of Mormon and distributed more than five million tracts and pamphlets. Thousands of visitors investigated the Church, and many were baptized as a result. Said Elder Lee at the conclusion of the Fair: "The impact of our success at the Mormon Pavilion will be felt in missionary work from this time forward."

Threats to Health

Under the seniority system the health of a future prophet of God is always of major concern to all the Church membership. Survival to the years of leadership is necessary, yet the path is strewn with trials and many potential dangers.

As Elder Lee matured into greater leadership responsibility during the 1961-70 decade, aging began to take its toll along with the unrelenting pressures from his work as an Apostle.

Early in the decade Elder Lee underwent minor surgery for a hernia repair. On the fourth postoperative day he wrote in his journal, dated March 10, 1963: "After the intensive visiting of the Brethren and their wives for the last three days, I found myself becoming very nervous inside and decided that since there was no need for treatments or medications that I would be better off at home, although it has been but four days since my surgery. Many came with problems and anxieties until I felt like I was swimming against an impossible current."

One year later, just before his sixty-fifth birthday, Elder Lee contracted a serious virus infection while on a trip to Washington, D.C., New York City, and Cincinnati. He barely made it through the Cincinnati Stake conference, and then only after receiving a priesthood blessing from the stake presidency, but he was hospitalized immediately upon his return home. After a thorough physical examination, doctors concluded that he had a touch of pneumonia. Tests also discovered some loss of blood from two ulcers, only one of which had healed. Elders Marion G. Romney and Spencer W. Kimball came to the hospital to administer to Elder Lee, at his request. There they received instructions for carrying on the Priesthood Correlation Committee's two-day seminar, which now Elder Lee was forced to miss. On March 6, 1964, Elder Lee wrote: "I had reports from Richard Evans, Harry Brooks and Brent [Goates] as to the success of the priesthood representatives seminar. They were all certain that much good had resulted, but were kind to me in the thought that I might have added something to it."

The year 1966 commenced with Elder Lee undergoing another complete physical examination, which revealed that his blood level was only 56 percent of normal. A series of blood transfusions eliminated his pallid coloring and gave him renewed energy. While still wobbly and not completely back to full strength, Elder Lee underwent other tests to determine the possible causes of his persistent headaches, a malady he suffered all of his adult life. No help was found.

In March 1967, Joan Lee again observed that her husband's face was unusually pale. Subsequent blood tests indicated that Elder Lee's blood count was dangerously low and he was taken to the LDS Hospital for blood transfusions and iron shots, hoping to build him up before his departure to tour the Florida Mission.

After an exhausting pace including three chapel dedications, many interviews, studies on chapels, and much travel through Florida, the Lees went north where Elder Lee was scheduled to divide the New Jersey Stake. With Elder Franklin D. Richards they interviewed throughout Saturday, March 26, but on Sunday morning Elder Lee became so faint that he was forced to lie down to clear his head. Sister Lee called President W. Jay Eldredge of the Eastern States Mission, who came with two missionaries and administered to the Apostle. Elder Lee was then able to limp through the remaining conference schedule.

When he awoke on Monday morning, after a full ten hours of sleep, he became conscious that he should leave immediately for home although he had planned to stay in New York for other meetings. His weakness of Sunday morning was returning, and he was certain that he was again losing blood and should reach his physician, Dr. James F. Orme, as quickly as possible. Concerning this trip, President Lee related the following incident in the Salt Lake Tabernacle at the general conference on April 8, 1973:

On the way across the country, we were sitting in the forward section of the airplane. Some of our Church members were in the next section. As we approached a certain point en route, someone laid his hand upon my head. I looked up; I could see no one. That happened again before we arrived home, again with the same experience. Who it was, by what means or what medium, I may never know, except I knew that I was receiving a blessing that I came a few hours later to know I needed most desperately.

As soon as we arrived home, my wife very anxiously called the doctor. It was now about eleven o'clock at night. He called me to come to the telephone, and he asked me how I was. I said, "Well, I am very tired; I think I will be all right." But shortly thereafter, there came massive hemorrhages, which had they occurred while we were in flight, I wouldn't be here today talking about it.

I know that there are powers divine that reach out when all other help is not available. . . . Yes, I know that there are such powers.

Elder Lee was hospitalized immediately on his return to Salt Lake City. Extensive testing finally concluded that the outlet from his stomach was so nearly closed that foods and liquids could not pass through properly, causing the severe pain and nausea which he had been experiencing. Scar tissue from previous bleedings had further aggravated the problem. All agreed that stomach surgery was required following conference. Dr. V. L. Rees was chosen as the surgeon. Physicians also ruled out Elder Lee's participation in the April 1967 general conference; his ordeal in the hospital already had dropped his weight seven pounds down to 158 pounds.

Harold B. Lee became a spectator watching general conference from home over television. He noted in his private journal the names of the Brethren who came to see him, but more especially, the names of some who did not come nor even telephone their interest. For his own purposes, in his journal he wrote his impressions of the sermons: "I spent the day of Sunday conference listening and watching the proceedings by television. Outstanding addresses were given by Hugh B. Brown, Mark E. Petersen, and Marion G. Romney. Boyd Packer did an unusual job in speaking to sectarian ministers as to why we cannot accept ecumenical Christian unity as the solutions of the problems of the Church. Ezra Taft Benson gave his usual eloquent oration on an old theme."

On April 12, 1967, Harold B. Lee survived a three-and-one-half-hour operation during which over half of his stomach was removed because of a large perforated ulcer. The resident surgeon on his case told Elder Lee after the surgery that the same surgical team had operated on another man with almost an identical problem, but that this other case proved to be cancerous. A sobered Elder Lee wrote in his journal his innermost thoughts: "One can only suppose that the Almighty has it in his hand to give or to take and he alone keeps the timetable. To the thoroughness and the skill of the doctors I owe much, but I'm not unmindful of the spiritual power which has been in evidence in the events leading up to the operation as well as circumstances resulting therefrom. When I was released to come home I found I weighed but 150 pounds, a loss of 15 pounds."

The parting injunction of Dr. Orme to his patient, as Elder Lee left the hospital, was to now do only half a man's work rather than the work of ten men as in the past. He told Elder Lee that over the years as he had been treating him, he had known that the Apostle had stamina and courage, but since discovering the true conditions found at surgery, the medical team was astounded that he had been able to endure the pain which he must have experienced.

One year later an old chronic weakness which had started in boyhood, lung difficulties, arose again. A lung infection called pleuropneumonia forced Elder Lee to cancel his involvement in dividing the Boston Stake on April 13, 1968. He missed several weekend appointments before returning to the circuit again.

In October 1969, Elder Lee again was forced to the sidelines and was unable to participate in the general conference of the Church. Unexplained exhaustion started on September 7, 1969, when Elder Lee was told by his doctors, after they had studied a blood sample, that he must cancel his conference appointment in California. Instead of traveling he was hospitalized for tests and then ordered home for a rest. He met the Leadership Committee at his home as they planned for the forthcoming seminar for Regional Representatives to be held two days preceding general conference. After this planning meeting, his secretary, D. Arthur Haycock, anointed and Elder Thomas S. Monson scaled a priesthood blessing on Elder Lee.

Quietly awaiting the diagnosis while studying for sermons he was assigned to give at conference, Elder Lee wrote in his journal on September 10, 1969, concerning his attitude toward this illness: "I spent considerable time working on talks I am to give at the seminar, to the Relief Society conference, and for the general conference. My mind seems to be clearing and I awoke in the early morning hours feeling that somehow I was being 'cleansed,' as nearly as I could describe the feeling."

When the medical reports were summarized after an intensive day of hospital tests and X-ray studies, doctors concluded that Elder Lee's left kidney was not functioning properly because of a large kidney stone blockage. Surgery was planned immediately. The pre-surgical diagnostic testing was the most vigorous he had ever experienced.

After Elder Lee entered the hospital he wrote in his journal: "Despite it all there was a peaceful feeling come over me, especially after a blessing by President N. Eldon Tanner and Gordon B. Hinckley, assisted by my family members, Perry, Brent, David, and Charlie. My faithful Joan was a great comfort as I prepared for what seemed a fateful experience."

A large kidney stone was removed in surgery at the LDS Hospital on September 22, 1969. After two days in the intensive care ward, Elder Lee's convalescence was uneventful. He was, however, again ruled out of general conference activity.

Elder Lee's operation transferred an additional sudden burden to President Tanner and Elders Spencer Kimball and Thomas Monson, all of whom came to the hospital as soon as Elder Lee was in a private room to obtain instructions for carrying on without him. Elder Lee did his best in his weakened condition to give them counsel and direction. Others, too, sought counsel. Elder Marion D. Hanks asked about the LDS student organizations now moving under priesthood correlation. Elder Marion G. Romney, substituting for Elder Lee in counseling patriarchs at the conference, wanted advice. President Tanner asked for suggestions about sustaining the new Unified Social Services organization at general conference.

One important decision made concerned who should take charge of the Regional Representatives seminar meetings which would be held for the first time without Elder Lee. Brother Lee asked Elder Kimball to conduct the meetings, thereby deciding that seniority should prevail over the Leadership Committee, which had made all the preparations. Following the morning session of the seminar, President Tanner, Richard Evans, Neal Maxwell, and Brent Goates were among those who called to commend Elder Lee on his message, which was read to the Regional Representatives by Neal Maxwell, using several charts Elder Lee had prepared based upon recent surveys of the Church membership. Many gifts and flowers arrived and all indicated they had missed Elder Lee's participation.

As if this latest surgery weren't enough, Elder Lee's convalescence was complicated by a new ailment, a sciatic nerve pain in his right leg.

Elder Lee patiently and philosophically accepted these various physical ailments. His viewpoint, as always, was that he was ready to leave this earthly existence whenever his Heavenly Father wanted or needed him, and his future role in the Church was entirely in the hands of Almighty God. His concern only was to live worthy of the Holy Spirit in the conduct of his sacred calling and to eventually await divine judgment from an all-wise Providence, which he was convinced ever was watching over the Church and his personal career of service.

Teaching in the Temple

Early in the 1960s Elder Lee had commenced a routine teaching role that became precious to him and all whom he taught. He was asked to meet in the Salt Lake Temple with all departing missionaries for a ninety-minute question-and-answer period between two endowment sessions. This represented the first exposure to the temple for such missionaries and this person-to-person education by a senior theologian of the Church was a highly valued experience. Thousands of young ambassadors of the Lord thus came under Elder Lee's profound spiritual wisdom.

In August 1962, while the Salt Lake Temple was closed for vacation, Elder Lee drove to the Logan Temple for a session with a company of missionaries. He wrote of this occasion: "This was an unusually alert and well-schooled group and the discussions raised by their questions were most interesting and challenging."

Elder Lee considered these experiences a personal challenge to his own encyclopedic knowledge of the scriptures and Church doctrine. He always welcomed this opportunity to search for more and more knowledge through the scriptures.

Elder Lee had one standard rule in meeting the onslaught of questions from these eager minds. He went to the temple with only the standard works under his arm and told his attentive audience that if their questions could not be answered from the approved scriptures of the Church, he would give no answer. His personal copies of the scriptures, however, were slightly augmented with choice quotations from the Presidents of the Church which he had inserted into the binding of his standard works. Many of his General Authority colleagues came to the temple to monitor what this master teacher was giving in these unusual teaching moments under such sublime spiritual conditions.

Whenever Elder Lee couldn't attend the teaching sessions he would ask Elder ElRay L. Christiansen, head of the Church's Temple Department, to take his place. In October 1962, when Elder Lee was grieving over the passing of his wife, Fern, he thought it best that he not go to the temple with the missionaries and asked Elder Christiansen to substitute for him. He noted quizzically in his journal, "for some reason he seems to be somewhat reluctant to go." A logical question might be, "Who wouldn't be reluctant to take his place?"

He always approached such an assignment with reverence for the sacred subjects under discussion. On August 11, 1967, he noted in his journal: "This temple session of outgoing missionaries was large, about three hundred in the group, and the communication was not too easy. This is always a soul-searching assignment, to answer their questions on the temple ceremonies and the doctrines underlying each."

On rare occasions Elder Lee made note of unusual questions that were asked in his temple sessions. He wrote of one such case in his diary entry of Tuesday, February 11, 1969: "I found again that I must be very careful not to leave answers not fully explained, so as to avoid false conclusions. This was apparent in my first answer to the question today: 'Is Satan the god of this world?' The Master called him the prince of this world. In its most precise sense, Jesus is the 'God' of this world."

Elder Lee felt that by 1969 he could see that the questions from the missionaries were showing evidence of greater maturity. In March he wrote, "On today's temple session with about 250 outgoing missionaries the questions were unusually well thought-out and meaningful."

Reflecting on this interesting assignment while speaking to youth leaders in 1969 Elder Lee stated:

I have an interesting session with every missionary company in the temple on the fifth floor, in the big assembly room, where they are invited to ask any questions they may wish to ask about the temple ordinances. If you would like to have an interesting experience sometime, you try to stand and be bombarded by 350 missionaries, and accept the responsibility of covering the whole gamut of the gospel from the creation to exaltation.

In one of these missionary sessions a missionary asked the other day, "Can you tell us a place in this temple where the Lord has appeared?" I suppose he was referring to a testimony that some have born about someone who had appeared in the temple.

I said, "Now don't look for a [single] place. This is the House of the Lord. This is where the Lord comes when he comes to see us on the earth. I imagine he has walked all the halls and every room. He is looking at us; maybe he is here today. I can't imagine a place where he would rather be than right here. Here are 300 or so of you going out on missions to preach his gospel. Maybe he is here with you."

"Behold," the Lord said, "verily, verily, I say unto you that mine eyes are upon you. I am in your midst and ye cannot see me; But the day soon cometh that ye shall see me, and know that I am; for the veil of darkness shall soon be rent, and he that is not purified shall not abide the day." (D&C 38:7-8.)

While the value of these temple sessions with the missionaries was obvious to those young men leaving for service throughout the world as teachers of the gospel, it is interesting to note the personal reward that returned to Elder Let for such service. He wrote in 1969, "It is always a great spiritual uplift to be in the temple with the missionaries."

Even after Harold B. Lee became President of the Church he continued to teach the missionaries in the temple. It seemed to bring him immense challenge and increased spirituality, and the thrill of being personally instructed by the prophet of God in the temple fortified the missionaries as no other experience could.

Thousands of missionaries treasure their personal experiences in the temple with this man of God, and they will likely always remember Elder Lee standing before them dressed in his white temple suit and unfolding the hidden meanings of the ordinances and the scriptures, teaching "as one having authority."

A Pentecostal Outpouring of the Spirit

Spiritual experiences were often interspersed into crowded historical happenings during the expanding 1961-70 decade of Harold B. Lee's apostolic ministry. Characteristically, Elder Lee's high spiritual moments came amid some of the greatest stress periods; the following example occurred during the major controversy regarding blacks and the priesthood in 1969.

On December 5, 1969, a large body of young people and their leaders gathered expectantly for a most unique meeting in the Institute of Religion building on the University of Utah campus. The occasion was the LDS Student Association's International Convention. Every one of the three hundred invited attendees was hand-picked from college campuses in the United States and Canada.

Speaking at the Institute of Religion, University of Utah

It was a time of intense college unrest and these campuses were not like the Brigham Young University, with its steadying influence from a dominant church orientation. Church leaders had determined that these young students needed spiritual strength to become the beacon lights that many could follow to safety and peace in a darkened world.

After a banquet in the East Institute Building the congregation filled to overflowing the large institute chapel and cultural hall areas, including the stage. There was a special air of excitement and expectation permeating the building. Elder Marion D. Hanks, then responsible for the Student Association program of the Church, conducted the meeting. Harold B. Lee of the Quorum of the Twelve was to be the featured speaker. The early part of the meeting laid an appropriate foundation for that which was to follow.

Prior to the meeting, in two separate conversations, Elder Lee had received suggestions for his sermon text from Elder Hanks and from Sister Elaine A. Cannon, founder and adviser for Women's Affairs for the Lambda Delta Sigma, the Church sorority. He was told that the youth of the Church needed to know that God indeed was not dead. They explained to Elder Lee that the young people were generally grateful to belong to the Church with its fine programs, but they were searching for a defense of its truthfulness, its leaders, its system, and its practices. He had been urged to bear testimony of personal experiences in an effort to spiritualize these student leaders who had been brought from many distant places for this week-long seminar.

Elder Lee responded to these suggestions with a powerful sermon in a defense of the kingdom, taking his text from Doctrine and Covenants 115:4-5, "Shine forth, that thy light may be a standard for the nations." He related personal experiences of true modern miracles which had occurred to him, attesting to the power of the priesthood; illustrating inspired callings, relevant practices, and eternal principles; and exemplifying the effectiveness of prayer in the lives of the Saints. He supported this with scriptural references throughout. His counsel was good, and the personal experiences were interesting.

Then, considerably more than midway in his sermon of one hour and fifteen minutes, the mood changed. Elder Lee paused. His voice became quiet. He bowed his head over the pulpit, grasping it tightly with both hands. He took a step back and then looked up.

Then it happened! The spirit of the meeting suddenly changed as Elder Lee concluded his sermon with considerable emotion, firmly and fervently witnessing to the truth of his convictions as they had been expressed, and bearing personal, heartfelt testimony that God lives. He told of how he had come to know this truth as one of His special witnesses on the earth. Everyone there knew that he knew! The windows of heaven seemed to open, and the Savior's spirit flowed over the entire congregation.

The concluding song was sung by Brother Marvin Higbee, then a professional worker with the Student Association and employed by the Church Education Department. He later became president of both Snow College at Ephraim, Utah, and the Utah Technical College at Orem, Utah. Brother Higbee sang in his beautiful tenor voice the well-known song, "I Walked Today Where Jesus Walked." Sung with simple and stirring beauty, it was inspiring. Many in the audience wept.

Then Tom Schwartz gave the benediction. This gifted young man, a bright, converted atheist, an intellectual trained in journalism in the Midwest, was battling for his own faith as he made his way through what Elder Hanks called the "academic catacombs."

His prayer was similar to Elder Let's talk in that it was divided into two parts. The first was sincere and fervent, but not unusual. In the second part, Tom abandoned the formal language of prayer as the intensity of his feelings mounted. In spiritual anguish he pleaded with the Lord to allow President David O. McKay, who was listening by direct wire in his Hotel Utah apartment, to feel the fervor, sincerity, and faith of the youth gathered in that building, to feel the love they felt for him, and to know that they yearned to have him lifted up as their prophet to lead them back into God's presence. He then made an earnest, powerful, and compelling appeal to the congregation to live worthy of such a spiritual adventure. It was an uncommon prayer in phrasing, feeling, and subject, but was most appropriate for this rare spiritual atmosphere.

This remarkable and unusual prayer had followed a remarkable and unusual song, and a remarkable and unusual sermon. Now the meeting was over. Over? How could it end so abruptly?

No one moved after the prayer. Elder Hanks went back to the pulpit and stood there in silence as waves of spiritual power swept through the audience. Still no one stirred to leave. There was no sound or movement of any kind. Elder Hanks stood with head bowed and silently permitted the spiritual cleansing of that vast congregation. These were long, full minutes of quiet meditation, wet with tears. Elaine Cannon described this unforgettable moment in these words:

A sense of being one of God's own and being known to him came over us. It was as if all those you've loved and worshipped, or owe something to, were hovering about in a marvelous spiritual reunion. Brother Hanks stook there in his special poised way, allowing the moment to happen. Someone less sensitive might have just dismissed the meeting. Still no one moved. Elder Hanks stood for long minutes, alone, up front, head bowed. Finally he turned to look at Elder Lee, eyes brimming with tears, who then stood with his wife, as did Elder and Sister Richard L. Evans. Along with Elder Hanks, they, too, were silent, weeping. No one moved as we drank in the precious reality that this was "An Experience!" It was a silent communion and a flooding witness. I covered my tears and was alone with God. Each person there must have felt the same.

Elder Hanks recalls what happened next:

After a long period of utter motionless silence, I nodded to the audience, turned and invited Elder and Sister Lee to walk with me, and led them to the front foyer area of the institute building, where Elder and Sister Lee shook hands with an absolutely mute and generally tearful group of young people as they filed by. Interestingly, during the long silence, which lasted about twenty minutes or even longer, punctuated only by sobs and sniffling, someone started to sing "The Spirit of God Like a Fire Is Burning." Only a few joined in. After one verse they quit, and the silence continued. Even that sacred song was an intrusion on the sublime Spirit.

With great reluctance the other leaders on the stand moved from their seats to congregate by the sacrament table, where they stood as the young people filed out two at a time in the most reverent exit ever witnessed from a Church building.

An unprecedented decision then was made by the students following that amazing experience. Although an orchestra had been hired for the dance which was to end the week-long schedule, they chose to cancel the social, which to them now seemed entirely inappropriate.

Meanwhile, Elder and Sister Lee left the building and did not speak until they knelt in prayer at home in thanksgiving for a most remarkable witness of God's presence. Later, Elder Lee described it as one of the most spiritual experiences he had ever enjoyed outside of the temple.

When Elder Lee wrote of the event in his journal he quoted a comment made to him by Elder Marion D. Hanks concerning that night: "Marion D. Hanks expressed what many of those present felt. He said: 'This is a night those present will never forget, nor will L It has been the greatest spiritual experience I have ever had, also.'"

Asked to recall and reflect on this spiritual experience thirteen years later, Elder Hanks reiterated his previous appraisal in these words: "The total effect was not like any other experience of my lifetime. It is still the most powerful spiritual experience of my life."

Greeting members of the audience following one of his many talks to youth, this one to seminary students at the Assembly Hall on Tempe Square

Over the years Church leaders have had many wonderful, enriching experiences. All can recall meetings where the Spirit was present. Only rarely there is an occasion where it is evident in such power. Sister Cannon remembers three such glorious events in her experience, but reflects: "As I review these three, none compare with the Friday night, December 5, 1969, meeting at the East Institute Building with Elders Harold B. Lee, Richard L. Evans, and Marion D. Hanks, who were so moved they were weeping and unable to stir from their places. We all knew, even felt, the presence of the Lord. We were incapable of resisting it."

As in the original day of Pentecost where "many wonders and signs were done by the apostles" of Jesus, spiritual outpourings come as a gift from God. They are not easily staged, no matter how diligently one prays or prepares. The way to obtain such an experience, Elder Lee once explained, is to look to your "spiritual housekeeping" and leave the rest to the Lord's will. As the Master said, "The wind bloweth where it listeth, and thou hearest the sound thereof, but canst not tell whence it cometh, and whither it goeth; so is every one that is born of the Spirit" (John 3:8).

Official Declaration-2, Doctrine and Covenants, pp. 293-94.

---
Notas:
[^1] © S. Dilworth Young 1976. Used by permission.
