Brent L. Goates, Harold B. Lee: Prophet and Seer ( 1985)

First Presidency Years

1970-1972

1970-1972. GNP reached $1 trillion and voting age was lowered to eighteen years. Microprocessor computer chip introduced by Intel of California. Church construction under way with new twenty-eight-story general office building on same Salt Lake City block as the Administration Building; and two new temples-in Ogden and Provo, Utah.

23 First Presidency Years with President Smith

In the wisdom of God and by precedent throughout most of this last dispensation of the Church, the President and prophet has been by design a venerable and most often an aged, proven leader. In the seniority system we may always expect that the Church President will be an older man whose stability and wisdom, born of years of experience, qualifies him uniquely for his role to commune with God in behalf of his Saints on earth.

A review of Church history since the restoration of the gospel sustains this observation. The Presidents of the Church from John Taylor to David O. McKay became President at ages ranging from sixty-two (Joseph F. Smith), to eighty-four (Lorenzo Snow). They died at ages ranging from John Taylor at seventy-eight to David O. McKay's ninety-six years of age. On the average, these eight Church Presidents were seventy-three years of age in assuming the Presidency, and at death averaged eighty-six years of age, having served slightly less than twelve years each in office.

In such a system it is not unlikely that the President of the Church will grow old in office, and such has been the actual fact more often than not. How does the Church function so well with aged leadership? Much of the resiliency of the Church's leadership lies in the support system that the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles provides. The Apostles are usually younger men with tremendous leadership skills and energies, and their ordinations carry with them the latent powers to preside over the Church when called to do so by proper authority and sustained before the membership.

Still, questions of succession arise and provide interesting and necessary study, especially under unusual but predictable circumstances. Such was the case in the last days of President David O. McKay, who was again unable to attend general conference-in this case October 1969-because of illness.

In this situation of the President's disabilities and the evident nearness of his death-at which time the Quorum of the Twelve would immediately assume the governance of the Church-the Quorum of the Twelve asked Harold B. Lee to represent them in meeting regularly with President McKay's counselors in all First Presidency meetings. It is interesting that this call came to Elder Lee even though President Joseph Fielding Smith, the President of the Quorum of the Twelve, was already a counselor to President McKay in the First Presidency. But President Smith was then ninety-three, just three years younger than President McKay.

At 6:00 A.M. on Sunday, January 18, 1970, Elder Lee received a telephone call from Joseph Fielding Smith's wife informing him that the President had just passed away and that President Smith wanted to meet Elder Lee immediately at President McKay's Hotel Utah apartment. When Elder Lee arrived, he found all the McKay family present except a son, Llewelyn, who had suffered a stroke, and a daughter, Jean, who lived in Chicago. There they developed preliminary family plans for funeral arrangements.

After further consultation with a committee consisting of the three senior members of the Quorum of the Twelve, other than President Smith and President Tanner, it was decided that the services would be conducted by President Hugh B. Brown, with President Smith giving a tribute and President Tanner and Elder Lee serving as additional speakers. President Alvin R. Dyer and Elders Ezra Taft Benson and Richard L. Evans would offer the prayers at the service and at the graveside.

On the day prior to President McKay's funeral, President and Sister Joseph Fielding Smith came to Elder Lee's office and seemed most nervous about the rumors which were abounding that an effort might be made to bypass the traditional appointment of the senior Apostle to be the next President, due to his age and poor health. The Smiths indicated that if Joseph Fielding Smith were sustained as President, he wanted Elder Lee to be "by his side," which Elder Lee interpreted to mean that he wanted him to serve as a counselor in the First Presidency. Elder Lee sensed then that if this were to happen he would likely be simultaneously both a counselor and the President of the Twelve for a period of time.

These speculations before the decisions induced in Elder Lee an overwhelming sense of obligation and responsibility. He wrote, "I could not assume such burdens without the Lord's help." He pondered the portending responsibility and his immense need for guidance as he looked out of his Church Office Building window to see thousands of people lined up on Main Street, moving slowly towards North Temple and all the way around the block for a final glimpse of President McKay's body lying in state in the foyer of the Church Office Building. It was natural that this outpouring of grief would be extreme: more than a million members of the Church had never known any other President in their lifetime than President McKay.

Early on the morning following the funeral, Friday, January 23, the Twelve, and including Presidents Brown and Tanner, met in the temple to consider the question of reorganizing the Church's leadership. According to the Prophet Joseph Smith's teachings, there was now no First Presidency in the absence of the President. This meant that the counselors who had been members of the Quorum of the Twelve took their places in the order of their seniority among the Twelve. Before this meeting, President Smith had confirmed his desire to Elder Lee that he serve as his First Counselor, assuming he was appointed. He also chose N. Eldon Tanner to continue in the First Presidency as Second Counselor.

There was an air of expectancy and some tension as the meeting in the temple began. Each Apostle, starting with the junior member of the Twelve, spoke his true convictions. When it was Elder Lee's turn, he read a letter written by President Wilford Woodruff to Elder Heber J. Grant, then a member of the Twelve, in which he answered the question as to whether an Apostle other than the President of the Twelve could become the President of the Church. Elder Lee later quoted this same letter, dated March 28, 1887, in his general conference address on April 6, 1970:

"When the President of the Church dies, who then is the Presiding Authority of the Church? It is the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles (ordained and organized by the revelations of God and none else). Then while these Twelve Apostles preside over the Church, who is the President of the Church? It is the President of the Twelve Apostles. And he is virtually as much the President of the Church while presiding over twelve men as he is when organized as the Presidency of the Church, and presiding over two men."

Elder Lee commented: "This principle has been carried out now for 140 years-ever since the organization of the Church. Then President Woodruff's words continued":

"As far as I am concerned it would require . . . a revelation from the same God who had organized the Church and guided it by inspiration in the channel in which it has traveled for 57 years, before I could give my vote or influence to depart from the paths followed by the Apostles, since the organization of the Church and followed by inspiration of Almighty God, for the past 57 years by the Apostles, as recorded in the history of the Church."

With President Woodruff's convincing testimony setting forth God's order to have the current President of the Twelve automatically ascend as the "Acting President" of the Church until a new President has been duly called and ordained by the Twelve, the Church had its leader. Now it remained only to decide if the First Presidency should be reorganized.

Following Elder Lee's remarks in the temple, he made the motion that the Church leadership be reorganized and that President Joseph Fielding Smith be named President of the Church. Elder Spencer W. Kimball seconded the motion, which was unanimously sustained. This action put to flight the rumors that President Smith would not be named as the President because of his age and poor health.

President Smith then took the chair of the President at the head of the altar in the temple council room. He proposed that Harold B. Lee and N. Eldon Tanner become his first and second counselors, respectively; that Elder Lee be designated as the President of the Twelve because of his seniority in the Twelve; and that Spencer W. Kimball be named as Acting President of the Twelve.

First Presidency from 1970 to 1972: President Joseph Fielding Smith, Harold B. Lee, N. Eldon Tanner

Then came the confirming of priesthood authority, the ordination and setting apart by the laying on of hands by the Apostles, who held that authority. President Smith requested that Elder Lee be voice in setting apart and ordaining him the President of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints and confirming on him all the powers of leadership earlier received, which are inherent in this awesome calling. He then set apart his two counselors, and President Lee also as President of the Twelve. At President Smith's request, Elder Lee then set apart Spencer W. Kimball to become the Acting President of the Twelve.

Immediately thereafter, Elder Mark E. Petersen was directed to release this information to the press and the electronic media so that the waiting world, and the members of the Church in particular, would no longer be in suspense and would know that the Lord's usual and orderly manner for reorganizing his earthly kingdom had once more been followed. Elder Lee wrote of the inspired protocol: "This procedure thereby nullifies any political lobbying which, if we didn't follow precedent, could be a very dangerous threat to the unity of the Church."

On Saturday, January 24, 1970, a press conference was conducted at the Church Office Building. About twenty men and one woman, representing all the news-gathering agencies, including national radio and television networks, were permitted to record the answers to written questions which had been submitted to the new First Presidency. The questioning barrage lasted for over an hour.

Despite his new role as a member of the First Presidency, President Lee kept an earlier appointment on this momentous weekend to divide the South Davis Stake and create the new Val Verda Stake in Bountiful, Utah. Accompanied by Regional Representatives L. Brent Goates and D. Arthur Haycock, President Lee went to the last such assignment in his lifetime to appoint new stake leaders. That day Robert J. Martin was named the new president of the South Davis Stake, and Milton W. Russon became the president of the new stake, the 501st stake in the Church.

New First Presidency Commences Work

The first meeting of the new First Presidency was held on the morning of Tuesday, January 27, 1970. There a division of responsibilities was discussed. Of necessity President Tanner had been carrying most of the load himself in the former First Presidency. Now Elder Lee, at age seventy-one, dynamic, energetic, capable, and with thirty years of apostolic experience behind him, could assume much of the burden.

They decided to give to Elder Lee the leadership of the temple work knowing that President Smith must be kept close to the conferring of the sealing powers. Genealogical work is a close companion to temple work, so it too was assigned to President Lee. Elder Lee also asked that he be kept as close as possible to the finances of the Church, long managed by President Tanner. The new Presidency further decided to defer the appointment of a new member of the Quorum of the Twelve until the April 1970 general conference.

Elder Lee commenced his seemingly endless meetings of corporations owned by the Church, which duty now claimed much of his daily schedule. He divested himself of assignments long held as chairman of the Executive Committee of the Church Board of Education and the BYU Board of Trustees (to Elder Kimball); the chairman of the Military Relations Committee (to Elder Petersen); and chairman of the Beehive Clothing Mills (to Elder Stapley). After thirty years as a substitute, Elder Kimball succeeded Elder Lee as the regular organist to accompany the singing in the temple meetings of the Quorum of the Twelve and the First Presidency.

Elder Lee also was faced with the serious consideration of how to move forward the entire correlation program to which he had been giving his utmost attention and energy since 1962. Now that he could no longer devote daily effort to this responsibility, he became engaged in prayerful thought to redesign his involvement in the program.

The answer came, and subsequently he proposed that the first Thursday of each month, when at his urging all the General Authorities had been meeting together in the temple with the First Presidency, be hereafter used to discuss Correlation Executive Committee business, thus allowing the work to be directed and controlled by the First Presidency. This would permit the continuation of all correlation subcommittees as before, with their work peaking to this monthly report meeting to the General Authorities. As a result the First Presidency and all other General Authorities would have a full knowledge of continuing efforts to bring all Church activities into complete correlation under the priesthood. Elder Lee saw this procedure as strengthening the other General Authorities in their role as area supervisors under the direction of the Twelve, so that they would be as well prepared at stake conferences and in the supervision of missions to teach more effectively the priesthood-led programs as were the seventy-five Regional Representatives who benefited from their continual training program. This arrangement was discussed with Elder Thomas S. Monson and Antone Romney, on whom President Lee would continue to depend for the many details of the total correlation effort.

With his mind relieved of this major workload, President Lee felt that he should next tackle challenges in the field of communications, an area in which he felt the Church was only loosely organized and in much need of correlation.

Effect of New Leadership Role

Following the first general conference of the new First Presidency, in April 1970, Elder Lee found that he was buried with speaking invitations. His emergence as the new member of the First Presidency undoubtedly stimulated this avalanche of speaking requests. He found it necessary to work late into the nights to prepare for these appointments. Requests had come from the University of Utah, Ricks College, Dixie College, College of Southern Utah, a Denver convocation, an organization of LDS students at Harvard University, and others. Of necessity, he was forced to decline many such invitations to preserve his strength for the "must" requirements of his new office.

Another curtailment came in the number of temple marriages he could perform. He was now being asked to perform marriages for the children of couples he had married twenty or more years previously. Had he not drastically cut back his marriage ordinance work in the temple, he would have had time for little else. Thereafter, only family, relatives, and close friends could expect to enjoy his personal service for weddings in the temple.

Shortly after the April 1970 general conference, President Lee was approached for his cooperation in preparing a documentary film, for use when and if there would come another change in the First Presidency. His reply demonstrates his consistent reserve and humility, forbidding him to ever assume any ambitions for the future. He abruptly brushed aside the suggestion by saying: "No one but the Lord knows what the next change will be, and I will have no part in such a documentary, as though I were anticipating any changes in the future, as it might involve me personally."

After almost a year in his new assignment in the First Presidency, President Lee closed out his 1970 personal journal with these significant words: "This past year has been, of course, the most demanding of any year of my life because of my call to the First Presidency, bringing never-ending responsibilities and problems. Through it all there has been a continual awareness of the influence of spiritual guidance and heavenly direction."

The quickened pace and unceasing responsibilities in the First Presidency are demonstrated by this brief profile of a typical, meeting-filled and demanding day in July 1971, as recorded in President Lee's diary:

Besides meeting with President Smith and the Expenditures Committee, I was kept fully occupied with many problems. A complaint came relative to the proposed demolition of the mission home in Hong Kong; the decision to go forward with plans for the new 18th Ward and the demolition of the old historical building on that site; complaints about the proposed water fountain on the plaza of the new Church Office Building; the lack of security at the temple. Then word came that President By Woodbury, famous mission president, had been told by his doctor that he didn't have long to live.

The next day's schedule was similarly packed with business. According to President Lee's notes it included "a special meeting to consider some matters needing attention, principally to approve nine members of the Executive Committee for the new General Sunday School Board. We also made plans for the solemn assembly at the St. George Temple on November 13, 1971, and the opening of the Ogden and Provo temples."

With such a relentless schedule, President Lee found he had little time except on weekends to prepare his general conference talks or perform any matters of personal business.

On a Saturday in September 1971, he wrote of this problem: "The continual round of meetings and interviews left me no time to tend to my personal affairs, much less to give some thought to my preparation for the forthcoming conference sessions. I came to the office and spent the entire day so that I could be undisturbed in trying to get the needed spiritual direction for a conference address."

Aged President Smith Makes His Unique Contribution

At ninety-three years of age President Joseph Fielding Smith assumed the mantle of leadership over the kingdom of God on the earth. For sixty years he had worked incessantly to build up the Church. He had been sustained as a prophet for six decades. Now that he was the singular prophet, venerable and bowed with age, he needed the help of strong, loyal counselors, which he received when the First Presidency was reorganized at the solemn assembly, April 6, 1970. On that occasion President Smith described his counselors with these tributes of gratitude:

President Harold B. Lee is a pillar of truth and righteousness, a true seer, who has great spiritual strength and insight and wisdom, and whose knowledge and understanding of the Church and its needs is not surpassed by any man.

President N. Eldon Tanner is a man of like caliber, of perfect integrity, of devotion to the truth, who is endowed with that administrative ability and spiritual capacity which enables him to lead and counsel and direct aright.

A tender moment with the prophet

At times the aged President was unable to perform duties that he would have liked to do, such as officiating at the marriage of his granddaughter, Susan Smith. President Lee performed this marriage in May 1970.

On other occasions, however, his contributions were invaluable. He was a bridge to the bygone generations. a link to still hold the Church close to the Prophet Joseph Smith and his brother Hyrum, who was Joseph Fielding Smith's grandfather. For decades he had served as Church historian and had sequestered priceless articles dating back to the beginning of the Church which now he alone knew about and whose invaluable information he could pass on to the new generation of leadership through his counselors.

President Smith courageously carried out his duties despite his age limitations. He spoke with difficulty at the funeral of Sister David O. McKay on November 18, 1970.

Whenever the opportunity presented itself President Lee never failed to build up and magnify the venerable President. At a memorable meeting of all the General Authorities in the temple, just prior to the October 1970 general conference, President Smith asked President Lee to take the lead and conduct the testimony and sacrament service. As he introduced President Smith to speak, President Lee took the occasion to commend his ability to rise to the challenge when the need required his decision, and cited in particular the calling of a new Apostle (Boyd K. Packer) as an example. As President Smith arose to speak, he was emotionally moved by President Lee's introduction and he spoke well for fifteen minutes.

At the October general conference in 1970 President Lee again upheld the ninety-four-year-old President Smith before the Saints. He introduced President Smith as the concluding speaker of the conference and, at the urging of President Tanner, took this occasion to parallel the role of President Smith's counselors with the service rendered by Hut and Aaron as they upheld Moses' hands so that Israel would triumph over its enemies.

On Sunday, November 8, 1970, President and Sister Smith were driven to St. George, Utah, in a snowstorm by his personal secretary, D. Arthur Haycock, for the purpose of installing a new temple presidency. What was thought would be a small reception following the meeting turned out to be a massive congregation of three thousand Saints gathered from the entire temple district. At first Sister Smith advised the President not to attempt to speak at this meeting, but President Lee urged that he at least leave his blessing with the large congregation. This he did, requesting that President Lee stand at his side while he spoke. The President stated, "I don't know how I could get along without Brother Lee, my strong right arm, who supports and defends me."

President Smith's administration suffered a severe setback in July 1971, when his wife, Jessie Evans Smith, was hospitalized for a fatal illness. She died on August 3, 1971, from heart failure.

Her funeral was held on August 5, 1971, in the Salt Lake Tabernacle and featured the Tabernacle Choir, with which she had sung for over fifty years. The choir sang many of Sister Smith's favorite hymns that she had performed as a Tabernacle Choir soloist. Elders Richard L. Evans and President Lee were the funeral speakers, with President Tanner conducting. Prayers were offered by Elder Robert L. Simpson, a relative, allot by Elder Sterling W. Sill, the Smiths' former bishop.

Elder Lee had made some hasty notes for his funeral address, but when he came to the office early on the clay of the funeral he had a distinct impression to refer to the words spoken by President Smith's father, President Joseph F. Smith, at the services for Aunt Rachel Grant, mother Of President Heber J. Grant. These words, which were forcibly impressed upon him, were added to his other notes. The quotations of his father immediately caught President Smith's attention; he nodded approval as President Lee spoke and then uttered a strong, audible "Amen," as President Lee concluded his sermon.

President Smith continued to attend the weekly temple meetings but was still in a state of shock over the passing of his dear wife, Jessie. After conferring with President Lee, he decided that he should now accept the invitation to live in the home of his daughter, Amelia, wife of Elder Bruce R. McConkie, where his future and care could be made more certain.

Following the general conference of October 1971, the Quorum of the Twelve and the First Presidency sat in their weekly temple meeting reflecting on the events of the recently concluded conference. In identifying the salient features of the conference the Brethren recalled President Smith's complimentary remarks about his counselors. President Smith had told the stake presidencies and ward bishoprics present that he would wish for them the same choice unity he felt with his own counselors in the First Presidency. He then described his first counselor, President Lee, as a "spiritual giant, with the faith of Enoch and one magnifying his calling as a prophet, seer, and revelator." His second counselor, President Tanner, was described as "one of those chosen before he was born and possessing surpassing integrity and ability,"

When 1972 came, the year of President Smith's passing, there were times when he was not able to function well, but there were other moments when the Lord permitted him to give uncommonly clear direction. President Lee recorded one such occasion on January 8, 1972: "I had an interesting experience in our First Presidency meeting when I brought to President Smith a number of policy questions involving genealogical and temple sealings. His mind was very alert and he was able to respond with decisiveness and clarity."

General Conferences and the Solemn Assembly

President Smith's formal installation as President of the Church came at the general conference and solemn assembly of April 1970. A beautiful, calm spirit marked the pre-conference meeting for all General Authorities in the Salt Lake Temple for the fast and sacrament meeting which was followed by a special prayer. After this spiritual meeting, Bishop Victor L. Brown briefed the Brethren on the security measures which had been taken to safeguard the Saints during the forthcoming conference sessions. It was a time of racial unrest and frequent civil rioting, especially on college campuses.

General conference opened on Saturday, April 4, 1970, amid frightening threats of bombings on Temple Square. President Lee started the day with a 7:30 A.M. Welfare Agricultural meeting, where he spoke briefly. Earlier in the week he had spoken to the Regional Representatives and both sessions of Primary Conference. Now he turned to the general sessions of conference, where there was tension and apprehension because of two bomb scares on the nights preceding the conference. On Thursday night the Tabernacle Choir rehearsal was threatened with a bombing and the next night the Utah Symphony Orchestra had evacuated the Tabernacle for fear of bombing consequences.

The Sunday morning session was covered nationwide by radio and television as was also the Saturday morning session. All went well, with President Lee conducting at the request of the President of the Church, and with President Joseph Fielding Smith, President N. Eldon Tanner, and Elder Hugh B. Brown as the speakers.

The far-reaching and potentially disastrous climax came as feared in the Sunday afternoon conference session, when another bomb threat occurred as Elder A. Theodore Tuttle was at the pulpit preaching on the theme "If ye are prepared, ye shall not fear." A telephoned message was delivered to President Lee on the stand of the Tabernacle stating that a bomb would go off during that session. According to Salt Lake City Public Safety Commissioner James Barker, President Lee emphatically said to the policeman delivering the note in the Tabernacle: "There is no bomb in here; relax." The session continued uninterrupted.

The responsibility for that instantaneous decision and the assurance of that conviction are mind-boggling. It is one of the most significant illustrations of the seer-like qualities of President Lee. It was his gift to be guided by an intuitive inspiration, which quality his associates of the General Authorities understood and deeply admired in him.

Following this tense but spiritually rewarding Sunday afternoon session, the First Presidency and the Twelve met in the temple for prayer and began a twenty-four-hour fasting for divine protection. On this occasion they presented the names of new General Authorities to be announced the following day at the concluding session of conference. After approval by the Twelve, Elder Boyd K. Packer, the newly called apostle, and Elders Joseph Anderson, David B. Haight and William H. Bennett, nominees to be added to the Assistants to the Twelve, were called in, interviewed and given time to spiritually prepare themselves and their families for this historic happening scheduled the next day.

On Monday, April 6, 1970, the solemn assembly became the highlight of general conference. President Tanner conducted the session in the morning and President Lee was assigned to present the same formal voting procedures which have been followed without deviation during the last century, whenever there was a reorganization of the First Presidency. Despite continued threats of demonstrations in this session there was a tremendous evidence of unity and power of faith, as everyone in the Tabernacle, the Assembly Hall on Temple Square, and in the Salt Palace, and all the unseen audience tuned in by radio and television, were invited to stand and, when requested, witness with uplifted hands their sustaining vote of confidence and loyalty. In the three buildings mentioned not a single hand was raised in opposition.

President Lee's address concluded this solemn assembly after President Smith and Elder Spencer W. Kimball, newly sustained as Acting President of the Quorum of the Twelve, had spoken. President Lee felt a great spiritual uplift in carrying out his key role in this impressive service. There was a marvelous spirit of acceptance and joy as President Lee, at President Smith's direction, presented the charge to Elder Packer (formerly an Assistant to the Twelve) and the three new General Authorities before they were ordained and set apart at the next Thursday temple meeting.

At the general conference one year later, in April 1971, the emphasis was on the growth of the Church, especially international expansion. At the concluding session of that conference, the Church membership was announced as having reached 2,930,000, with the 3 million mark expected to be achieved by July. President Lee reflected that on this same date, April 6, thirty years previous, when he was called to the Council of the Twelve, the Church population was a mere 600,000.

President Lee felt now a greater satisfaction than on other occasions when he addressed the Regional Representatives Seminar two days earlier on the theme "The Challenge of Simultaneous Growth with International Problems." He took particular pride in the announcement and introduction of Brother Angel Abrea from Buenos Aires, Argentina, as a new Regional Representative. With the addition now of South America all the major continents where the Church was strong were represented in this powerful body of leaders.

The messages of the general conferences in 1971 concentrated upon meeting the pertinent needs of the Saints. In April there was a sharp warning against the inroads of immorality and drugs, the importance of instruction and training in the home, leader and teacher training and the need for love and understanding in holding fast to the iron rod when the buffetings of sin and temptation threaten the stability of the home and family.

Six months later the theme had shifted as the First Presidency stressed the imperative necessity of a sustained effort to reclaim the many inactive members of the Church and to give them opportunities of service.

A New Presiding Bishopric

In early 1972, an investigation into the reorganization of several business departments of the Church led to a recommendation by the Building Advisory Committee that a new Department of Physical Facilities be created. This move would unify the Real Estate, Church Building, and Maintenance departments under a single head for greater efficiency and economy.

As the recommendations unfolded, both President Lee and President Tanner had the simultaneous impression that Presiding Bishop John H. Vandenberg was the ideal choice to become the first managing director of this important new department. He was called to this new assignment. He was also made an Assistant to the Twelve, as was his counselor. Bishop Robert L. Simpson, who was now appointed managing director of the Unified Social Services Department.

Early in April the call had gone to Bishop Victor L. Brown, formerly second counselor to Bishop Vandenberg, to succeed him as the tenth Presiding Bishop since the restoration of the gospel. High praise was given to Bishop Brown's prayerfully chosen counselors, H. Burke Peterson, Regional Representative and former president of the Arizona Phoenix Stake. and President Vaughn J. Feather-stone, president of the Idaho Boise North Stake. President Joseph Fielding Smith stood in the circle to give his support as President Lee gave the charge and set apart this new Presiding Bishopric of the Church following April 1972 general conference.

President Lee's own sermon at this general conference came as a result of much prayerful searching and study. On Sunday, March 19, 1972, he wrote:

During the past two days or more, and really for the week in particular, I have spent many "lonesome hours," but hopefully not alone spiritually, pondering what the Lord would have me say at the forthcoming general conference. My decision was to undertake the subject heading "Time of Decision," the caution in controversies, political and otherwise, and to offer five guidelines suggesting how all might be guided to wise decisions in their personal and public life. I feel content after my diligent search.

In reference to controversies that would accompany the intense political campaign in the fall of 1972, President Lee outlined five certainties by which one could detect and know the path to safety in the search for truth. These were: (1) Follow the Light of Christ within us. (2) Follow the positive teachings of the gospel of Jesus Christ. (3) Do your business by the voice of the people. (4) Seek for statesmanlike men. (5)Judge by the light of gospel truths.

New Threats to President Kimball's Life

While President Lee was in New York City in February 1970, he joined Spencer and Camilla Kimball in their visit to Dr. Martin, the cancer specialist who had operated on Spencer's vocal organs thirteen years previously. Dr. Martin gave the patient a surprising but welcome appraisal of his condition by saying that because of this man's position in the Church he would advise no further surgery or cobalt treatments at this time, but recommended careful observation continuously to see if the wart-like tumor on his vocal cord was growing. He allowed that it was possible that Spencer could live out his years without any further surgery. He admitted, however, that this decision defied all the rules of medical practice, but after considering all aspects of his case, he was modifying his previous diagnosis and recommendations.

Increasing hoarseness in his voice, however, caused Elder Kimball concern and he asked to be excused from speaking at general conference in October 1970, because he thought he might be an embarrassment to the Church.

One year later, immediately after October 1971 general conference, Elder Kimball was now faced with another potentially fatal threat to his life. His weakness and fatigue had led to heart studies, and now operations to both his heart and his throat were being investigated.

President Lee urged Elder Kimball, following the temple meeting of October 14, 1971, to rest for a week at the Laguna Beach, California home owned by the Church, with the hope that it would give him and his wife a respite from the tensions they had been under during the last month.

Physicians decided that the heart operation could not be performed for Elder Kimball unless some attempt was made to arrest the growth of the cancer in his throat. Accordingly, Elder Kimball submitted to a long series of cobalt treatments. Again in December 1971 President Lee urged Elder Kimball to recuperate at the Laguna Beach home.

On March 13, 1972, Elder and Sister Kimball requested that President Lee and President Tanner attend a meeting with them and Spencer's physicians, Dr. Ernest L. Wilkinson and Dr. Russell M. Nelson, to consider the alternatives relative to his heart condition. His choice was to go on without an operation, with progressive weakness and loss of effectiveness (he gave himself just two months to live, and Dr. Wilkinson said death would come in the not-too-distant future), or to undergo open-heart bypass surgery to correct a valve leakage in his heart pump and to submit to a second procedure calling for bypass surgery to correct an obstruction in the main arterial supply line to the cardiac muscle, which would increase the blood supply to his heart.

Elder Kimball and his presiding authorities heard the medical report of this high-risk surgery. He wearily stated that he was an old man and perhaps a new, more vigorous replacement should be sought to do the work he could no longer do. President Lee and President Tanner were surprised that Elder Kimball should question whether they thought his continued service was important enough to seek an extension of his life.

Aroused by Elder Kimball's plaintive doubts, President Lee, speaking for the First Presidency, rose to his feet, pounded his fist to the desk, and said, according to Dr. Nelson's written summary of that crucial moment: "Spencer, you have been called! You are not to die! You are to do everything that you need to do in order to care for yourself and continue to live."

This positive declaration seemed to settle the issue. President Kimball said he would submit to surgery. Sister Kimball wept at the thought and Dr. Nelson sunk under the weight of the newly transferred burden which passed to him. The momentous decision, which was to shape the history of the Church, was not made by the physicians, Dr. Nelson reported, but was based solely on the desire of an Apostle of the Lord to follow the inspired direction of the First Presidency. It was decided that the surgery would be performed following the April 1972 general conference, provided that Elder Kimball would allow himself complete rest beforehand.

On April 6, 1972, Elder Kimball spoke in the general conference and did "very well," according to President Lee.

Following general conference the Presiding Bishopric and Assistants to the Twelve were taken with their wives to the council room of the Salt Lake Temple. There, before setting apart the new General Authorities, the First Presidency gave Elder Spencer W. Kimball and his wife, Camilla, and Sister Lois Brown, wife of the new Presiding Bishop, special priesthood blessings. With President Joseph Fielding Smith consenting, President Tanner anointed Elder Kimball and President Lee sealed the priesthood blessing. To some present, it was the most spiritual experience of their entire lives. On the eve of the operation President Lee also gave a blessing to Dr. Russell Nelson in which he told the surgeon that the operation would be performed without error.

The surgery day came on Wednesday, April 12, 1972. Because President Tanner was leaving the next day for a trip and Elder Kimball was being operated on this day, the Council of the Twelve's normal Thursday meeting advanced to Wednesday. During that meeting, a telephone call came from Dr. Nelson reporting that Elder Kimball had come through four and one-half hours of surgery without mishap and "his heart was prepared" for a perfect operation. Dr. Nelson said that he felt like a baseball pitcher who had just thrown a perfect game. He and his surgical team at the LDS Hospital had completed the entire procedure without loss of a blood vessel or a broken stitch. The long and difficult operation had been performed exactly in accordance with the blessings invoked by the priesthood. The Brethren in the temple sighed in grateful relief. The Lord had answered their prayers.

Eight days later President and Sister Lee went to the hospital at Sister Kimball's request and found Spencer in a highly nervous state, the aftermath of his extensive heart operation. President Lee gave him a priesthood blessing and he was quieted.

Just prior to Elder Kimball's release from the hospital on April 24, 1972, President Lee was back at the hospital blessing Elder Alvin R. Dyer, who had suffered a slight stroke that had impaired his speech. After the administration his speech improved and he was able to talk much more clearly. With President Smith also suffering recurrent impairments, some felt that the leadership circles of the Church were weakening.

Throughout Elder Kimball's long and discouraging convalescence, President Lee always encouraged and supported his future successor. On June 18, 1972, President and Sister Lee arranged a special visit to meet Spencer and Camilla Kimball at Laguna Beach, California, where Spencer was again recuperating. President Lee briefed him on many matters, hoping that he might be able to bring Elder Kimball a feeling of belonging and involvement after his three-month absence. Sister Kimball thought the Lees had produced a marvelous transformation by lifting her husband out of his depression and making him feel that he was wanted and needed.

Now Elder Kimball was ready to begin his return to physical and mental health and start his advancement toward vigorous leadership activity.
