Brent L. Goates, Harold B. Lee: Prophet and Seer ( 1985)

24 The First Area Conference

The first glimpse of a plan to have the leadership of the Church travel to distant areas of the world to take a general conference-sized program on the road came in November 1970-another product of President Lee's imagination and inspiration. On November 19 that year he confided with his associates plans for a possible regional conference for members of the Church in Great Britain. From this early probe it was decided to have the advisers of the auxiliary organizations consider the type of program which might be carried out for a three-day conference in England.

A fortuitous opportunity for consulting the women's auxiliary executives came on October 30, 1970, while the sisters were in New York City for the farewell testimonial of Sister Belle Spafford, who was retiring as the president of the National Women's Council. President Lee was in New York also for his business meetings, so he took the occasion to meet with the sisters regarding a proposal to have regional conferences in ten or twelve areas throughout the world where the members of the Church could attend in large numbers not possible in the semi-annual worldwide conferences in Salt Lake City.

When the announcement was made in Great Britain of the All-British area conference to be held in Manchester in August 1971, a public media excitement was triggered. The British Broadcasting Corporation sent a television team of four men and a young woman interviewer, Esther Ramtzen, to Salt Lake City for two weeks to make a documentary film on the Church.

With all their electronic equipment the BBC team came to President Lee's office and explored for one and one-half hours his thinking on his family background, positions most enjoyed in his Church service, the nature of revelation in the Church, the place of blacks in Mormon doctrine, the relationship between Church and state, how the Church retains its contact with Church members, the secret of Mormon longevity, and other similar topics.

Later Esther Ramtzen came back to see President Lee for a brief personal visit, and he gave her a copy of his book Youth and the Church. She informed him that her team would attend the Manchester conference. Elder Richard L. Evans was present for the entire interview and pronounced it "magnificent."

This was by no means the sum of the media curiosity sparked by the announcement of the first area conference of the Church. On August 9, 1971, Brother Henry A. Smith of the Church's Information Service brought a reporter from The London Times, Philip Norman, for another interview with President Lee. He asked that he might tape record the conversation, with a photographer sitting across the table snapping pictures. The interview was nearly an hour in length.

Then Elder Lee briefly interviewed Mr. Norman, asking him what had impressed him the most during his careful research at Church headquarters in Salt Lake City. He answered: "The efficiency I find in each phase of the Church I have studied is most impressive. I attended the funeral services in the Salt Lake Tabernacle for Jessie Evans Smith and I am much impressed with the great promise of hope in the life after death which your gospel teaches."

President and Sister Lee left Salt Lake City for the Manchester conference, just prior to the August 21, 1971 weekend, making a stop on the way to dedicate a new stake center at the Mid-Michigan Stake conference. (President Lee had organized this new stake in December 1968.) In the process of changing planes from Midland to Detroit, President Lee lost his briefcase containing his English conference papers, his sermons, and their passports.

With great anxiety he retraced his steps through the different terminals. After looking in vain in each place, he went out to board the shuttle back to the American Airlines terminal, thinking he possibly had left the case on the bus. Before boarding the shuttle bus he suddenly spotted his briefcase on the ground, intact and unmolested. Relieved, he later wrote in his journal: "Why 1 hadn't seen it before, I'll never know, and why it was safeguarded for nearly an hour, I'll never know. Only the good Lord could explain this experience. It was a miracle!"

First Area Conference-Great Britain

The assigned General Authorities began assembling in Manchester, England, on August 25, 1971. President Joseph Fielding Smith arrived with his son, Douglas; his secretary, D. Arthur Haycock; and his nephew and physician, Dr. Donald Smith. The President was still grieving over the recent passing of his wife, but seemed to adjust somewhat through the loving attention of his

son.

Preliminary youth sessions for the student leaders from Great Britain and the Laurel girls were successfully conducted by Sister Florence Jacobsen and Elders Marion D. Hanks, Joe Christensen, and W. Jay Eldredge. The first separate sessions for the adults as well as the youth, in King's Hall at the Bellevue Sports Center, were both addressed by President Smith and President Lee.

On Thursday, August 26, President Lee was impressed to call a special meeting of the General Authorities who were in England for the conference. The party was led by seven members of the Council of the Twelve. After briefing them on the details of the conference, he asked each of the Brethren to report his labors since they had last met. Dr. Russell M. Nelson, General Superintendent of the Sunday School, and his wife had come from Moscow, Russia, where he was lecturing. President Joseph Fielding Smith responded at President Lee's invitation and spoke with a clarity and freedom which his associates had not observed in a long time, just as so many were praying he could do when the conference started.

The meeting continued as each bore strong testimony at the end of his report. President Lee then closed the meeting with the Brethren all kneeling in prayer around a long table. It was a meeting long to be remembered by those in attendance.

On Saturday evening four thousand sisters met in one session while about two thousand priesthood holders met in the Trade Hall in downtown Manchester. The earlier public relations effort in Salt Lake City paid dividends, because both the Manchester Guardian and The London Times contained very satisfactory newspaper articles and the BBC aired its fifty-minute documentary on the Church prior to the conference. In the main the coverage was quite fair and positive, President Lee thought.

Approximately ten thousand persons attended the general sessions of the conference on Sunday. At a special entertainment for youth the night before, five thousand were in attendance.

President Lee gave high praise for the planning and management of the conference. He said that the excellent preparation was made possible by the splendid cooperation of the English Regional Representative, Elder Derek Cuthbert, and the stake and mission presidents under the chairmanship of Thomas Fyans, with Jim Conkling and Ray Loveless checking the public address and television systems.

The conference closed on a tremendously high spiritual note with President Smith's testimony and blessing on the English Saints. President Smith seemed stronger at the closing session. President Lee had also spoken well earlier at the Sunday morning session and at the Saturday night priesthood session. Lyrics of a special song had been composed by President Ernest Hewett of the Leicester Stake to go with original music. The entire audience joined with the excellent choir in singing the theme message in the last verse:

This is our place, here will we stay. To build, to strengthen ward and stake, Until the Lord supreme shall reign. This is our place, here we will serve.

The audience seemed loathe to leave, President Lee noted, as they all sang "God Be with You tilt We Meet Again" and lined the driveways to wave their farewells to the visiting authorities of the Church.

President and Sister Lee returned home after a visit to Switzerland, where they found missionary work moving very slowly. At the Swiss Temple President Lee also urged the possibility of having the endowment translations on two or more sound tracks for simultaneous transmission for patrons of different languages.

As they left Zurich for Frankfurt, where they were to have taken a plane to New York City, they found that their plane was delayed in Vienna. Shifting to another airline they arrived at Kennedy Airport only thirty-five minutes before their plane was to leave for Salt Lake City. President Lee always gave credit to the Lord for watching over them in successfully managing these tight travel arrangements. He wrote: "With the Lord's intervention with airline officials and customs and immigration authorities, we were rushed with our luggage and bags to the courtesy car which took us directly to our airline, where passenger agents were waiting to move us with our bags directly to our plane, with fourteen minutes to spare. Another miracle!"

President Lee arrived home on September 4, 1971, just in time to meet with the three astronauts of Apollo 15, who were on a nationwide tour and came to pay a courtesy visit to the First Presidency. They were accompanied by Church member Dr. James Fletcher, then the administrative director of the National Aeronautics Space Agency. President Lee invited all the General Authorities to share this joyful moment with these national heroes. Speaking for President Smith, President Lee told these courageous men of space: "We stood in awe and wonder at your phenomenal feat. We watched, we listened, we prayed, and we're glad to see you back on earth, safely home."

The day following the close of the April 1971 general conference, President and Sister Lee left Salt Lake City for another trip to the Orient. In Hawaii they were joined by Brother and Sister Adney Komatsu; after a flight of eight and one-half hours, they arrived in Tokyo, where a large number of Japanese Saints were at the airport to greet them. The heartwarming welcome signs throughout the airport expressed well the love of the Oriental Saints.

President Lee summarized the effects of their first event there, the Mt. Fuji servicemen's conference: "This conference was characterized by a young serviceman who said that in the past there had been more of fun and entertainment, but this conference was marked by deep spirituality. Never have I felt a finer spiritual uplift than in the closing session of the general priesthood meeting followed by a conference for the sisters. We left for Korea, our next stop."

Welcome signs also greeted the Lees when they arrived in Seoul, with many Korean members of the Church assembled at the airport. President Lee noted that in addition to the Choseen Hotel where they stayed-a fine, modern structure-many new buildings had arisen in the great city of Seoul, in contrast to the devastation he had witnessed when there seventeen years earlier on a mission tour with President Hilton A. Robertson of the Japanese Mission.

After listening intently to reports of the presidents of the four mission zones, comprising nineteen branches, President Lee was delighted to note the understanding each had of his leadership role. He observed also the many men of prominence, professors and businessmen, who now were joining the Church. On April 14, he dedicated a newly constructed chapel and spoke to an audience of about five hundred persons.

President Lee participated in the ground-breaking ceremonies for two more new chapels in Seoul the next day. He praised the guidance of President and Sister Slover for their work in developing local leadership and in promoting a solid and stabilized growth in the Korean membership, now numbering five thousand Saints. With 107 missionaries serving in Korea, the Church membership was increasing at the rate of one thousand per year. Praising the growth and spirit of the Korean members, President Lee said, "Bringing the gospel to the Korean people is like sowing good seed on fertile ground."

The next stop was Taipei on the island of Taiwan, where again a large company of Saints welcomed them with signs and roses. The meeting was held in a beautiful, new chapel, where an estimated audience of six hundred was in attendance. Total membership then was 5,100. They came from all parts of the country to be with and see a member of the First Presidency. President Lee wrote of his impressions here: "It was a sight to behold to see these interesting and faithful Saints attend in such numbers. Possibly this country is not too far away from achieving an organized stake. This country is surprisingly clean and colorful and measurably prosperous. A new mission home is to be constructed on the chapel property."

Next the Lee party went by plane to Hong Kong for a brief visit to this great international city of rotor million people. President Lee reflected that when he first visited here with Fern in 1954, seventeen years earlier, the Church had but ten members in Hong Kong. They had met in a hotel room with twenty persons present. Now the membership had increased to over five thousand. Again an enthusiastic and heartwarming reception came from the Saints. Over four hundred members attended the meeting before the Lees hurried back to Osaka, Japan, where despite a heavy rain more Saints were there to greet them at the airport. These Church members had waited patiently for President Lee's arrival, and it was after 9:00 P.M. when he dedicated their chapel before a capacity audience of about two hundred Saints.

It was still raining on Sunday, April 18, 1971, when President Lee began the Tokyo Stake conference. He was delighted to see the large attendance of over seven hundred at the morning session, and a similar number gathered for the Tokyo Mission conference. After an intensive day of conference and leadership meetings they finished their schedule at the mission home with a fireside meeting, attended by stake and mission leaders and their wives.

President Lee observed that the family home evening and home teaching programs were barely getting underway in Japan. He challenged the Japanese Church leadership to attain the level of at least 30 percent of families holding family home evenings and at least 50 percent home teaching visits by their next General Authority conference visitor. At the time of his visit these figures were a minuscule 3½ percent and 15 percent, respectively, with less than 20 percent of membership attending sacrament meetings. By a show of hands President Lee discovered that a tremendous number of those in the congregation had been members of the Church less than two years.

The Japanese Saints were reluctant to see President and Sister Lee leave Tokyo on April 21, 1971. President Lee thought that this was partly due to the remarkable empathy Sister Lee had developed for these wonderful Oriental people. They seemed to go to the extreme to shower the Lees and Elder and Sister Komatsu with gifts of genuine love.

The Church in the Far East, President Lee believed, was a sleeping giant, just awakening to the immense possibilities available through the influence of the gospel. He wrote, after returning home:

The growth of the Church in the Orient is most exciting, not only in numbers but also in strength of organization and leadership. We went to be with the people and we were certainly made welcome. It was heartwarming. A piece of your heart is left when you visit the Far East members. I have nothing but admiration for the spirit of the people and the growth of the Church. Greater days certainly are in store for the Saints in the Far East, if we can continue to teach and train them to hold those who are newly found members.

En route home President Lee addressed a special assembly of students, faculty, and many others at the Church College of Hawaii. He counseled the students against interfacial marriages and urged the students from other countries to return to their homelands, rather than to remain in Hawaii. He also stressed the importance of problems and so-called "defeats" as a means of finding oneself through the aid of adversity. Discovering the reasons for setbacks and then solving those problems could be the very device to help people keep their priorities straight in reaching eternal goals with an eye single to the glory of God, President Lee taught.

Temple Work Expanded and Perfected

Even before President Lee entered the office of the First Presidency he vigorously led a pursuit of studies on temple ordinances to ensure that they were in exact compliance with original texts. This was a consuming four-year campaign which was not culminated until May of 1972.

President Lee approached the investigation with characteristic humility and deep spirituality. On Sunday, January 31, 1971, he went alone to the temple and spent the entire day in prayerful meditation while studying the instructions and procedures prepared for temple presidents. He declared in his journal at the end of the day: "It was a glorious experience. I was fasting and did not return home until 4:00 p.m."

The spiritual probe continued into the next week. The following Saturday he wrote: "I went alone to an upper room in the temple and there prayerfully reviewed in full all the instructions and policies in temple procedures in the light of the revelations and the oldest documentation of ceremonies. I came to some very definite feelings about these vital matters."

Having received the spiritual direction he had sought, President Lee then launched a penetrating search for all records dating back to President Brigham Young's administration. The activity took him to the Oakland Temple and to Brigham Young University's motion picture studio, where efforts to produce foreign language sound tracks led to a decision to move forward into many languages for temple films.

President Lee continued to assist President Smith with his singular responsibilities in controlling the scaling powers for administration of temple work. On May 13, 1971, the First Presidency made a decision to go forward with the construction of the Washington Temple, after agreeing at a negotiated price with Temple Contractors Associates, comprising the Jacobsen Construction Company, the Okland Construction Company and the Sidney Foulger Company. An impressive building program at a prime location in Manhattan, New York City, was approved also.

On May 21, 1971, President Lee, under President Smith's direction, officiated at the laying of the Provo Temple's cornerstone, while a crowd nearing six thousand attended. Ben E. Lewis, chairman of the fund-raising campaign, announced that the suggested contribution goal of $1 million had been exceeded by $831,000, with more donations still arriving.

A solemn assembly at the St. George Temple, on November 13, 1971, commemorated the one hundredth anniversary of the breaking of ground for that sacred edifice, the first temple completed in Utah under the direction of President Brigham Young. The meeting was attended by 1,250 stake, ward, and quorum leaders.

After the sacrament was administered by the General Authorities, addresses on assigned topics were delivered by the members of the First Presidency and Elders Gordon B. Hinckley and Mark E. Petersen. The Brethren spoke with a clarity which made misunderstanding impossible. The three-hour meeting was described by President Lee in his journal as a "never-to-be-forgotten occasion. Undoubtedly, instructions given under such sacred circumstances are bound to be vital, which they most certainly were."

During early 1972, two new temples in Utah were dedicated. During the Ogden Temple dedication, approximately five thousand Saints from the twenty-eight stakes of the temple district were accommodated in each of six sessions beginning on January

First Presidency at cornerstone laying for Provo Temple (above) and at dedication of Ogden temple (below)

20, 1972. They were seated in twenty-seven different rooms of the temple and in the nearby Ogden Tabernacle.

Though weakened from the heavy demands of the occasion, President Smith still spoke at the dedication, as did others in the First Presidency, the Council of the Twelve, and additional General Authorities.

Many spiritual experiences were reported at the Ogden Temple dedication. Following the closing session President Lee's eldest grandson, David Goates, telephoned his grandfather to tell him of his unusual experience. David, his wife, Patsy, and his mother, Helen, all reported having seen a brilliant light at the pulpit whenever the First Presidency members stood to speak in the celestial room of the temple. The light, however, did not envelop the other speakers.

Three weeks later the companion temple in Provo, Utah, was dedicated. Because of more Church buildings on the campus of nearby Brigham Young University, linked by closed circuit television, an estimated thirty-five thousand or more were in attendance for each of the sessions.

As at the Ogden Temple dedication, President Lee was the concluding speaker, after which he gave the dedicatory prayer and led the Hosanna Shout. In his sermon, President Lee was impressed to speak of some personal spiritual experiences which unmistakably indicated the nearness to those on the other side of the veil. Elder Alvin R. Dyer testified later that he had seen the deceased President David O. McKay there, along with others whom he couldn't identify. Sister Norma Anderson, wife of Elder Joseph Anderson, Assistant to the Twelve and long-time faithful secretary to the First Presidency, also saw her own mother. President Lee noted in his journal that he was watching the strange look on Sister Anderson's face as she was probably witnessing this visitation.

Two BYU students seated in one of the large campus buildings told President Lee that many of the Saints were shedding tears when the prayer and the Hosanna Shout were delivered and also during the concluding anthem sung by the choir. The Holy Spirit visited these television-linked buildings with the same power as in the temple proper.

Passing of Elder Richard L. Evans

Shortly after the conclusion of the October 1971 general conference Elder Richard L. Evans became ill with what was at first thought to be influenza. President Lee was much concerned and went immediately to his home bedside, giving him a priesthood blessing at the request of Sister Alice Evans. Already Elder Evans's speech was becoming incoherent.

Elder Evans's brother, David W. Evans, wrote to President Lee concerning this noon visit in these words: "Richard told me with great feeling and affection of your visit and the comforting blessing you had given him. He had always known of your affection, but it was especially pleasing that he had this reassurance in his last hours of reflection."

On Sunday, the next day, the Evans family telephoned President Lee to report that Elder Evans was hospitalized after he became completely disoriented. After performing a spinal tap, physicians reported that their patient was suffering from a severe attack of encephalitis, a disease affecting the brain. Again President Lee rushed to his beloved associate's bedside and offered to Alice and her four sons the possibility of having a special prayer with the available members of the Quorum of the Twelve and others, along with the family.

This select and distinguished group of Church leaders and relatives surrounded the bed of Elder Evans in the intensive care unit of the LDS Hospital. There President Joseph Fielding Smith asked President Lee to proceed. He called on Elder Ezra Taft Benson to offer a prayer, following which Elder Marion D. Hanks anointed him and Elder Marion G. Romney was voice in sealing the anointing and blessing him as all men participated. Despite the combined prayers of such faithful men, the condition of Elder Evans remained critical.

By the following Sunday, physicians were reporting that, with Elder Evans in a deep coma, all signs were pointing to the end of his life. The family asked President Lee to sit with them in an adjoining room and talk of spiritual themes. Providing the comfort requested, President Lee said to the family: "I stand ready, as always, should you feel the need to draw close to me for any purpose. I love you and your dear mother, and I want to assure you that I will do anything that lies within my power to help to take the place of one whom I loved as my dear brother, or perhaps more so, because of the bond of fellowship that we have as Apostles of the Lord Jesus Christ."

Late on Sunday, October 31, 1971, Elder Richard L. Evans died. At President Smith's request, President Lee then directed that the Twelve and President Tanner be gathered back home from their traveling assignments around the world. The growing internationalization of the Church is indicated by the distant lands from which they were called home. President Lee telephoned President Tanner in Tiberias, Israel; Marion G. Romney was in Hong Kong; Gordon B. Hinckley in Munich, Germany; and Thomas S. Monson in Guatemala.

The Evans family requested that President Lee speak at the memorial service, along with President Smith and Elders Mark E. Petersen and Marion D. Hanks. They requested that prayers be offered by Jim Conkling and Ike Terry, associates from the Public Communications Department, with music to be furnished by the Tabernacle Choir, which organization Brother Evans had been intimately associated with for many decades. Everywhere there was the feeling of great loss, many saying that Elder Evans belonged not to just the Church, but to the world.

The Salt Lake Tabernacle was crowded to capacity as many nonmembers of the Church joined a sorrowing membership at the funeral service. President Lee thought the service was so harmonious and skillfully programmed and carried out with such finesse that it appeared that Richard himself must have masterminded it. The overwhelming sentiment was the tremendous loss felt by the leadership of the Church and the loyalty which existed among the Brethren. Fifteen top officials from Rotary International, including Dr. Walk, their immediate past president, came across the country to attend this funeral and to honor Elder Evans, who some years earlier had served this distinguished civic organization as its international president.

Because of the daily pressures of Church administration, President Lee was obliged to spend most of the previous night collecting his thoughts and making some notes for his part in the service honoring Elder Evans. His summarization for his diary indicated he felt that the effort had been blessed: "Perhaps as never before, as many expressed, there was a spiritual uplift and deep sense of spirituality if ever such were realized at a funeral service. For my part in the funeral it seemed that I had as much 'freedom' [direction from the Holy Spirit] in speaking as I had ever before experienced."
