Brent L. Goates, Harold B. Lee: Prophet and Seer ( 1985)

25 First Church Public Relations Department

The loss of Elder Richard L. Evans was particularly felt in the developing movement to create the first public relations department in Church history. President Lee had moved him into the forefront of this planning in January 1971. Reporting to President Lee on the promotion of the public relations and communications activities, Elder Evans had expressed himself as being "overwhelmed" with the remarkable advances which had been made in the last two years.

President Lee wrote in a letter: "I suppose there are few who have passed from the circle of the General Authorities whose passing had touched me more deeply than the death of Richard Evans. I had him working close to me on some very important communication matters."

This public relations effort was born out of the earlier militant harassment of Brigham Young University athletic teams and the possibilities that such persecution could snowball at the hands of those who had developed a hostility toward the Church, basically over the prohibition preventing blacks from holding the priesthood. President Lee found that little had been done to safeguard the offices of the Church and to protect the sacred buildings on Temple Square and the homes of the Church leaders, in the event of a riot or a militant demonstration-and rumors that such would happen flowed freely.

In February 1970, when President Lee was in New York City to attend Equitable Assurance Society meetings, he convened a two-and-one-half-hour meeting at the Waldorf Hotel with other Church leaders also in New York, for the purpose of exploring how the Church could move to the offensive, rather than always being defensive in its public relations. The priesthood-black issue had brought the Church to probably its lowest public image since the persecutions of the late 1890s.

A combination of General Authorities and Church leaders in the eastern United States were assembled at this pioneering study of Church public relations. Elders Richard L. Evans and Gordon B. Hinckley of the Church Information Service were present, along with Elders Ezra Taft Benson and Spencer W. Kimball, who were in New York City on other business. These Brethren were joined by eastern Church leaders-Robert Barker of Washington, D.C., Lee Bickmore, George Mortimer, G. Stanley McAllister, Bob Sears, DeWitt Paul, President Harold Wilkinson of the Eastern States Mission, and George Watkins. Together they counseled on how the Church could improve its dwindling public image.

Lee Bickmore, chief executive officer of the National Biscuit Company, emerged from that early meeting as the man in President Lee's mind whom the Church could recruit to coordinate the public relations, communications, publications, and translation and distribution activities. Seeking his leadership, President Lee set up an appointment to meet further with Brother Bickmore.

Brother Bickmore carne to Salt Lake City in March 1970 and met with Elder Mark E. Petersen and the Church Information Service Committee, under President Lee's direction; for one and one-half hours the issues were discussed again. This meeting led to the hope that Brother Bickmore might take the lead in the restructuring period.

By November 1971 a committee headed by Lee Bickmore and consisting of such industrial giants as Lorenzo N. (Ren) Hoopes of Safeway Stores, G. Roy Fugal of General Electric, and Jim Conkling, formerly of Columbia Records, was making recommendations to divide the communications work into two departments: (1) internal, for functions within the Church Office Building, and (2) external, the Church's public relations challenge with the public. This committee screened seven leading candidates and made recommendations for the top executive for the internal communications work. J. Thomas Fyans emerged as the chosen leader in this new position.

On January 4, 1972, President Lee and President Tanner called Thomas Fyans, newly appointed director of Internal Communications, to consider with them the men he would choose to head the divisions of Internal Communications-Distribution. He named, without any prior coaching, the same four men the First Presidency desired. They were: James Paramore, administrative services; Dan Ludlow, instructional materials; Doyle Green, editorial; and John Cart, translation. The organization was immediately set in motion, with Lee Bickmore and Ren Hoopes providing consultative direction.

Exactly six months later the Bickmore committee was ready to give the First Presidency their recommendations for organizing the External Communications Department. President Tanner and Elder Gordon B. Hinckley met with President Lee as Lee Bickmore gave his committee's report, which included candidates for the director of External Communications.

President Lee indicated that the director of this new department must be a man in whom Church leaders could place complete confidence and loyalty, and who had the organizational ability to make his place, along with natural abilities to greatly improve public relations and to communicate appropriately for the Church whenever the occasion required. A search commenced to find the man with such qualifications. On June 4, 1972, President Lee and President Tanner concluded that Wendell J. Ashton was that man, and offered him the position as the director for External Communications.

In two weeks Elder Mark E. Petersen was named an adviser to the External Communications Department and Elder Gordon B. Hinckley was released from the Internal Communications leadership to also aid in the new public relations work.

Meanwhile, Brother Ashton moved vigorously to launch the new program. President Lee found him full of ideas and plans. For example, he proposed that a dinner be planned for Lord Thomson of British broadcasting and publishing fame, that a national release be prepared on the appointment of Lee Bickmore as a special consultant to the First Presidency, that an announcement of the new mission representatives appointments be made to obtain greater publicity, and that a release be made announcing the forthcoming Mexico City regional conference. After observing this burst of energy and the helpful ideas from Wendell J. Ashton, President Lee wrote in his journal, "It is delightful to see how quickly he is moving into his new responsibilities."

Thus the correction of one of the Church's most glaring weaknesses that had worried President Lee as he joined in the new First Presidency in January 1970 was finally brought to fruition two and one-half years later, with the hope that the Church could reverse its negative public image and become better known for its worthy accomplishments.

Restructuring Duties of Council of the Twelve

The introduction of Lee Bickmore as a business management consultant to the First Presidency opened the door to a much more extensive reexamination of the ecclesiastical assignments of the General Authorities. Soon after the April 1971 general conference, Bickmore recommended expanding the consulting function through a firm in the Eastern United States with which he was very familiar. Accordingly, the First Presidency authorized the management consulting firm of Cresap, McCormick, and Paget, Inc., to begin a comprehensive study of Church operations to establish more objective administration guidelines.

President Lee used an interesting approach in making this assignment. He gave the nonmember consultants copies of the Doctrine and Covenants with sections marked pertaining to Church priesthood government operation and told them to read how the Lord had directed the Prophet Joseph to set up the kingdom of God. He then asked the consultants to translate this information into the best management organizational theory for the business world. In this approach President Lee capitalized on his exposure to big corporate management. His fertile and ever-searching mind permitted him to use his background in industry to challenge old concepts and introduce the best of his new learning experiences from all reliable sources.

By August 1971, the investigations were beginning to bring results. Through the efforts of Ren Hoopes, an industrial engineer from the Safeway Stores organization presented a thorough analysis of the Church's distribution problems and suggested solutions for the Church's system. Lee Bickmore also participated. Another two-hour meeting followed as Mr. Fredericks, one of the senior account executives of Cresap, McCormick, and Paget, Inc., made his first report on the internal operations of the Church, pointing out specifically that the Twelve Apostles were doing "staff" work: assignments, rather than centering their efforts in broader policy-making functions. President Lee wrote of his impressions regarding this report:

This we have been aware of before. These studies will now be placed in the hands of Lee Bickmore and his committee to study further, with the assignment to come back with recommendations. Hopefully these studies will point us to a clearer look at our problems and the most effective solutions. The transition, 1 foresee, may be "painful," but necessary, if we are to keep pace with the mounting problems of rapid expansion of the Church throughout the world.

President Lee spent the 1971 Thanksgiving Day weekend at the country home of relatives. Although he had little time to himself, he put together an outline of proposals for strengthening the missions of the Church and for restructuring the work of the Twelve. He defined the staff and administrative roles of the Assistants to the Twelve and the First Council of Seventy, who would be asked to assume the direct administrative load of supervising the departments of the Church. This rough draft, completed during vacation hours, was the beginning of major changes in the administrative functions of the General Authorities. The content of these proposals was a composite of ideas and suggestions from some of the Brethren and from the Cresap, McCormick, and Paget consultant's recommendations. Arriving home from the holiday weekend., he continued his studies and prepared to present his draft to the First Presidency at their next meeting.

Application of these delegation principles began to take place in early 1972 as members of the Council of the Twelve Apostles were taken from daily supervision over departments and other managerial advocacy roles so that they could fulfill their primary roles as special witnesses of Jesus Christ and of watching over the affairs of the Church generally. Accordingly, Elder Howard W. Hunter was released as the Church historian and Elder Alvin R. Dyer was installed as the managing director of the Historical Department, with Dr. Leonard J. Arrington as Church historian and Earl Olson as archivist. The new managing director then began reporting through two of the Twelve, Spencer W. Kimball and Howard W. Hunter.

The Genealogical Society was the next department to be so streamlined to relieve the Council of Twelve leader of day-to-day management responsibility. On April 13, 1972, Elder Theodore M. Burton became the president and managing director of the Genealogical Society, with Elder Howard W. Hunter of the Council of the Twelve being relieved of those duties to become the adviser to that organization.

A new pattern was being established. On May 31, 1972, the First Presidency held a two-hour meeting with the Twelve. In this special session, President Lee sought to impress on the Twelve their newly focused responsibilities in planning, policy-making, and exercising strict control of the funds being budgeted by the departments over which they were assigned as advisers, but not managers. The Presidency stressed that as much work as possible should be turned back to volunteers and regularly appointed priesthood and auxiliary leaders, rather than hiring specialists to do it.

This major restructuring effort of the highest echelons of Church government continued to serve well the quickly growing kingdom and make possible the administrative efficiency required as the Church expanded its worldwide borders.

Steady Stream of Programs Passes through Correlation Review

The plan to keep the correlation review program moving, designed by President Lee when he entered the First Presidency, proved to be an effective one. On June 4, 1970, he commented in his journal:

The temple meeting for all General Authorities is now becoming more and more meaningful to everyone as the total development of the Church programs are presented for the consideration of all the General Authorities. This meeting today featured the newly proposed Churchwide teacher training program under the priesthood, and was ably presented by Rex Skidmore and his associates. The plan was approved. The Presiding Bishopric presented the Bishop's Youth Committee proposals, revised more appropriately to fit into priesthood correlation. Elder Howard Hunter presented the Unified Magazines Committee's proposal for personnel organization to move this plan forward.

One of the most satisfying developments came to President Lee at the temple meeting for all General Authorities on the first Thursday of July 1970. The Brethren came fasting and were spiritually bolstered by partaking of the sacrament and engaging in a prayer circle, as was their usual procedure for their first meeting of each month. The policy decisions were again discussed in the business meeting that followed. The outline for the Presiding Bishopric to become the Church Committee for Scouting, along with the correlation advisors to the Primary and the MIA, was most enthusiastically received. President Lee wrote of his satisfaction by saying: "This is a phase of correlation I have been seeking since the correlation program was begun years ago." Actually, it fulfilled dreams and goals discussed with President J. Reuben Clark in the earliest days of the "simplification program" in 1941.

MIA June Conference in 1970 became the platform for announcing these and other changes to the public. The high point of the conference was the music festival in the University of Utah Special Events Center, in which four thousand young singers and musicians from throughout the Church participated in a most creditable performance. The announcements were made on Sunday, June 28, during the final session in the Salt Lake Tabernacle under the direction of the First Presidency, and included the new Scouting program and information regarding the three new magazines: the Friend for children, New Era for youth, and the Ensign for adults. All other Church magazines would thereafter cease publication.

The Saturday night general priesthood meeting on October 3, 1970, was hailed by many as one of the most spiritual ever held. It included announcements concerning the three magazines, the teacher development program, and the new bishop's training course. Neal A. Maxwell also was introduced as the new commissioner of education for the Church. One of the first changes in the educational organization was the merger of the Institute of Religion coordinators under Joe J. Christensen and the Latter-day Saint Student Association under Elder Marion D. Hanks to promote a greater harmony and closer cooperation.

The 1971 thrust of correlation review worked to the goal of bringing auxiliary teaching materials under budgetary controls for the first time. Early in the year the problem was outlined by the Presiding Bishopric and John Carr of the Distribution Department. They demonstrated how the various auxiliaries had continued to multiply materials without any control. A decision was made to place all units under Church budgeting procedures.

Meeting with President Tanner, President Lee called into counsel Elders Gordon B. Hinckley, Thomas S. Monson, and Boyd K. Packer, advisers to the auxiliaries and correlation chairmen, along with Doyle Green of the editorial department, in an endeavor to control the exorbitant demands of the several Church organizations to create teaching materials, which added up to an impossible load for the editorial department. Each was asked to work with his respective organization to establish guidelines and limitations to reduce the workload to reasonable levels. After this meeting the Brethren counseled together and submitted proposals which later were approved by the Council of the Twelve and the First Presidency.

The goal of gaining control over mounting Church expenditures elsewhere was a major campaign for President Lee in 1972. It may have been triggered by the request of the forty Church departments for increased employees, which if approved, would increase the personnel budget by over $3 million. This President Lee called a "staggering proposal."

Control measures were instituted in the Building Department and close scrutiny was made of the Financial Department's handling of the vast details of the Church's finances throughout the world.

Next President Lee urged a restructuring of the missionary program, which was presented and approved in the temple meeting of March 16, 1972. One significant feature established the First Council of Seventy into three committees: one with Elders S. Dilworth Young and Milton R. Hunter to give attention to organizational details at Church headquarters; another with Elders Bruce R. McConkie, A. Theodore Tuttle, and Loren C. Dunn to train and supervise a newly appointed body of missionary-minded brethren to be known as Mission Representatives of the Council of the Twelve and of the First Council of Seventy; and a third with Elders Paul H. Dunn and Hartman Rector, Jr., to develop more adequately the stake missions. It was decided that this newly organized Mission Representatives program would be set up and begin to function following the Mission Presidents Seminar during the last week of June 1972. Elder Lee felt deeply the importance of these innovations.

Two weeks later the First Council of Seventy approved their new assignments. There was excitement and challenge as the Seventies' leaders adjourned from their meeting with the First Presidency and the Twelve, and began to finalize their plans to implement the program with the mission seminar in June.

The correlation program now was also becoming a lesson in conservation of resources. When auxiliary leaders came to President Lee to complain about the Correlation Committee's handling of lesson materials, President Lee impressed the necessity of keeping costs to a minimum by presenting lessons for each class prepared in rotating series, rather than to introduce new lessons for every class every year as had been the past practice. Better planning now permitted the reduction of the translating, printing, and distributing costs which otherwise would cause continued delays in having new texts in the field on time at the beginning of each new year. It was a painful transition period and a learning experience for everyone involved.

President Lee advised a "leveling-off" period with new programs in the Correlation Executive Committee meeting of February 3, 1971, to give leaders and teachers in the Church an opportunity to thoroughly digest and to implement what they had already been given.

Emphasis continued on teaching earlier concepts' not fully understood. The Presiding Bishopric, for example, needed time to comprehend that the general Young Men's Mutual Improvement Association leadership was in reality their staff. Such lessons needed constant reinforcement.

The only major new programs to be announced in mid-1972 came from the temple meeting of June 1. Here the entire plan of mission supervision by appointing Mission Representatives was reviewed, along with a revision in the lesson plans used by proselyting missionaries throughout the world. A control committee for automobiles and houses owned by the Church was proposed. President Lee was impressed that the business was timely and orderly managed. He summarized the feelings of his Brethren with this comment: "After a lengthy discussion all of the General Authorities approved and seemed to sense the fact that here was another evidence of the power of the Almighty guiding the leaders of the Church."

A change in titles also was approved on the suggestion of Russell M. Nelson, newly called Superintendent of the Sunday Schools of the Church. In June of 1972, President Lee announced that hereafter the titles of superintendencies and assistants of the Sunday School and the YMMIA would become presidencies and counselors.

Spiritual Experiences Continue

The demanding and even harried pressures of administering the far-flung business of the Church during this period did not block the steady flow of inspiration in President Lee's life.

Always attuned to the spiritual, though writing in his diary more of the historical business of the Church than of his own feelings, President Lee recorded this significant observation in his entry for Thursday, May 27, 1971: "In the temple meeting today the two prayers by Elders Hugh B. Brown and Richard L. Evans were among the most inspirational we have ever heard there. We knew we were brought near to heavenly things. The Spirit lingered on throughout the meeting and afterwards."

On May 19, 1971, he was a speaker at the funeral services for Sister Pearl Lambert in the Hawthorne Ward of Salt Lake City. Of this event he wrote in his journal of a most singular experience: "There was a remarkable spirit at the funeral and I was uplifted thereby. As I was seated on the stand, I seemed to see a congregation facing me which included Fern in a black dress. Over her shoulder was someone whom I surmised might have been Maurine."

While time probably didn't permit further comment on such an unusual experience, his family members were aware of how he had prayed mightily for such reassurance after these two loved ones had passed away. None came then for him, but this experience is one of the only two instances where his beloved family members were permitted to be with and comfort him.

It is not unexpected that many of the spiritual events of President Lee's life came in association with his service as a funeral speaker. Such a setting seemed to bring President Lee into contact with another, more spiritual realm. One most interesting experience, demonstrating his spiritual perception, came on Saturday, July 3, 1971. His personal diary account describes this spiritual moment:

Today I was at the office waiting for Joan to call me when suddenly someone seemed to say to me: "You should be at a funeral." Suddenly it dawned on me that several days before, Charles Perschon had asked Frances [his secretary] if I would speak at his father's funeral honoring Bishop William F. Perschon. She had failed to put it on my calendar. I immediately looked in the morning paper and found that it was at 2:00 p.m., which was the exact time when I had been reminded. I was about twenty-five minutes late, but arrived in time to speak at the services for as fine a bishop as I have known.

President Lee rendered continuous service in using his gift of healing for the blessing of the sick. Elder Neal A. Maxwell often has remarked that President Lee bore the burden of administering to his Brethren with great patience and love, but not without personal anxiety. His service to the sick and the bereaved included relatives, countless friends, and often even strangers. One miraculous experience is recounted here to represent such unforgettable memories.

On April 27, 1972, Dr. O. Preston Robinson, general manager and editor of the Deseret News Publishing Company, suddenly became ill with flu-like symptoms. After his condition worsened, with a fever of 104 degrees, he was admitted to the LDS Hospital on May 1, 1972.

When the Robinson's son, Bruce, a prominent neurosurgeon, arrived from Michigan to tend his father, he broke down and cried bitterly to find his father so desperately ill. As he was taken into the intensive care unit Pres's wife, Christine, remained in his former room to pray on her knees for many hours. She stated that she felt there was someone actually in the room with her, although she was alone, and that this personage had come to take Pres away.

In the four or five days of terrific struggle for life, many of the Apostles of the Church came to express concern and to bless Pres. Included was his brother-in-law, Elder Gordon B. Hinckley, who prayed long and fervently. His prayer especially had great force, profound meaning, and also conveyed a spirit of humility and genuine love for his sister's husband.

Christine writes of the ordeal in these words:

I could not rest, sleep, or eat during this period of time and early Saturday morning, when I was on my knees, I felt a great need to call President Harold B. Lee. I waited until I thought that Brother Lee would be awake and I called him about 7:30 in the morning. He said that he and his wife, Joan, had just arisen from their knees where they had been imploring our Father in Heaven to help Pres, and he said that he felt a great urgency, and that he would come to the hospital and be there in about fifteen minutes.

Christie, daughter of Pres and Christine, met President Lee when he arrived. Later she wrote her impressions, saying: "I was so impressed with the spirituality and humility of this man. We walked together down the corridor of the hospital, our arms entwined, to see Mother. I felt the great power of his presence and his great love."

Christine continued:

When President Lee arrived, he; my doctor son, Bruce; and I entered the intensive care section where Pres was lying in a coma. I had not previously been in that room, because the doctors had asked me not to look at Pres for fear I would get upset when I saw him connected with all the different medical equipment, looking so very ill. It did seem that every part of Pres' body was connected to some type of medical equipment.

Pres, of course, was unconscious, but when President Lee put his hand on Pres's shoulder and said, "Pres, look at me," my husband briefly opened his eyes. I took one of Pres's very swollen hands in mine, and as President Lee prayed, it seemed in reality as if there was a shaft of light which went up from Pres in his bed to our Father in Heaven.

President Lee's prayer was long and I have never had such a feeling of spirituality and closeness to my Father in Heaven as I had at this time. Brother Lee said that he was speaking for the prophet himself, the only living prophet of our Father in Heaven on earth at this time. He requested that his prayers go past the angels and to the very foot of the throne of our Father in Heaven himself. President Lee pled for Pres's life. He did not say that his life would be spared in any way. He said that we were to bide by the will of our Father in Heaven. He spoke of our Father in Heaven giving his own son's life that we might have eternal life. He put Pres's life directly in the hands of our Father in Heaven and prayed that whatever would be done for him in any way whatsoever would be directly in accord with the wishes of our Father in Heaven. President Lee prayed that our Heavenly Father would personally take over Pres's care and direct it. Our son, Dr. Bruce Robinson, was then blessed that he would have unusual powers to know what to do at exactly the right time for his father.

After the prayer, not any of us moved for some time because we were all so very affected by this tremendous spiritual outpouring to which we had been witnesses. Then, President Lee took hold of Pres's hand and said to him: "Fight! Fight with everything you have to the last rampart!" He instructed Bruce that if he had any feelings whatsoever that anything should be done for his father, to do it immediately and not delay even a second. The doctors had been debating whether or not Pres's condition could stand a tracheotomy. It was at this time that Bruce said: "I feel strongly that we should perform this operation." President Lee then pushed Bruce and said: "Go, have it done immediately." This operation took place an hour later. Following this operation, his grave illness began to improve gradually.

Some time later that morning, when I went to Pres's bedside and took hold of his hand again, I stood there looking at him. I was all alone, the curtains were pulled, and I felt like a tremendous mantle then came down out of heaven and completely covered me. I could actually feel this mantle start with my head and cover every bit of my body down to the very tips of my toes. I have never had such a feeling. I felt that it was actually a piece of cloth, or something I could reach out my hand and feel. As it covered me, I had a tremendous peace which entered my soul and a great conviction that I knew, beyond a shadow of a doubt, that Pres's life was going to be spared, that he would have all his faculties, and that he would live and yet do a great work here upon the earth.

Many times after this, I was told by the doctors that Pres would not live, but this did not affect me in any way, because I knew that he would live. The personage, or whoever it was that had been at my side all the time, disappeared and no one could convince me that Pres was not going to live and have his full faculties, despite the fever which reached 106.6, the highest ever seen by this doctor, who said if it were not lowered it would have burned out Pres's brain cells.

We were told that President Lee and President Tanner, both of whom had visited Pres, had announced in the Council of the Twelve meeting on May 11, my birthday, that a miracle had taken place in Pres's recovery, and it had been recorded in the "modern Acts of the Apostles." President Lee visited Pres twice after he had administered to him, once to give him another blessing.

After his remarkable, rapid, and complete recovery, Pres Robinson wrote to President Harold B. Lee and conveyed his heartfelt appreciation for his "great expression of pure love in action," stating:

Although I did not hear the marvelous administration and blessing that you gave me, both Christine and Bruce have filled me in on a few of the details. They have said that it was the most humble yet the most powerful and beautiful blessing that either of them had ever heard. We are all convinced that it went straight to the throne of our Father in Heaven, who, through the special keys and gifts you possess, heard and answered positively.

When President Lee recorded in his journal this experience it was in his usual terse and humble words: "On the following day Pres rallied, talked coherently, seemingly has passed the crisis, and was on his way up-no doubt another miracle of healing, in the Lord's way."

Pres Robinson lived a happy and fully productive life for well over a decade after his near escape from death.

New President of BYU Chosen

At the request of the search committee seeking to screen candidates for a new president of Brigham Young University, Dr. Dallin Oaks, a law professor at the University of Chicago, made arrangements to travel to Salt Lake City for an interview. When Dr. Oaks arrived at the airport in Chicago to board his plane, a powerful foreboding came over him. So strong was that oppressive feeling that he called another airline, and after learning that he could take a later flight to Salt Lake, he changed his reservations and walked with his bags to the other terminal building.

When he arrived at the ticket counter at the departure gate, he saw among the waiting passengers President Harold B. Lee of the First Presidency. He greeted him only briefly, for they didn't know one another well at that time. Later, however, aboard the plane there was a fifteen-minute delay in departure, which gave Dr. Oaks an opportunity to make himself better acquainted with President Lee. President Lee invited him to sit next to him and they talked until the plane was ready for takeoff. That visit, which might also be construed to have served as an interview, was to have profound significance in the days ahead. Now Dr. Oaks had reason to understand his feelings which led to a switch in airlines that day.

The search committee completed their work and nominated Dr. Oaks as the prime candidate to become the next president of the university. President Marion G. Romney made a long report of the committee's search to the First Presidency, but before he could announce their decision, President Lee interrupted impatiently, saying, "We all know who the next president is going to be." Apparently President Lee knew before the search committee had even begun its work, although the impromptu interview aboard the plane in Chicago had never been mentioned to anyone.

When the selection committee completed their assignment and referred the business to President Lee, he felt impressed to telephone Dr. Oaks and invite him to come with his wife for a final meeting to clarify certain statements made before the search committee. That visit with President Lee on March 30, 1971, proved to be very satisfactory. President Lee recorded in his diary his delight with the experience, saying: "Dr. Oaks's attitude was right, his humility impressive, yet he had a vision of the work which would be entailed. All this left us with a complete unified feeling that he was our man."

The inauguration of President Oaks occurred on November 12, 1971. President Lee felt that the inaugural address of President Oaks, and his own speech on that occasion, were well coordinated and on a distinctly spiritual plane.

This significant career move was destined to affect forever the life of the Oaks family, as well as the Church at large. After serving nine years as President of Brigham Young University, Dallin H. Oaks returned to his first love, the law profession. He was soon thereafter appointed a justice of the Utah Supreme Court. Not long thereafter he was named and sustained as a member of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles, at the general conference of the Church on April 7, 1984.

Intimate Glimpses of President Lee

The demanding, quickened pace associated with President Lee's rise to direct the affairs of the Church as First Counselor in the First Presidency caused many adjustments in his personal life. He recorded in November 1970 the confession that for the first time since his calling as an Apostle in 1941, he had not kept pace with his daily entries in his personal diary: "I spent some hours at the office on Saturday trying to catch up on personal matters and was startled to discover that I hadn't had time to keep my financial records for the whole month of October, nor my diary."

Through all his adult years President Lee suffered from migraine headaches. His heavier administrative pressures didn't help this malady and it continually plagued his efforts. He wrote on January 13, 1972: "Following the temple meeting today I became ill with an intensely severe headache and nausea. I was unable to come to the office, as I had promised, to set apart and ordain my Dr. Hal Bourne a bishop, for which I was very sorry."

Advancing travel technology during these years made it possible for the Lord's servants to be more places faster and return home quicker than ever before. President Lee noted on November 23, 1970, as though he were recording history, the fastest air trip he had taken to New York City: "I left by American Airlines nonstop to New York at 1:00 p.m., arriving three hours and forty-five minutes later, the fastest trip by plane I have taken across the country. I was in the hotel room by 8:00 p.m., Eastern time."

For thirteen years President Lee had made monthly round trips from Salt Lake City to New York City to attend the board of directors' meetings for the Union Pacific Railroad Company and the Equitable Life Assurance Society of the USA. On March 17, 1971, he made the trip for the last time to attend a formal black tie dinner of the Equitable Board, held at the University Club in New York City, given as a farewell testimonial to Robert Blum, Grant Keehn, and himself. All three had reached retirement age. There were fifty directors and officers in attendance. Each of the retirees were asked to speak. President Lee had accompanied President J. Reuben Clark, Jr., to give his farewell address under these circumstances and noted with pride how President Clark chose to testify of Jesus Christ despite the mixed backgrounds of the audience. Now, in his turn, President Lee didn't hesitate to do the same. His own journal summary of the event follows:

There was a warm, friendly attitude manifested towards me with a letter from James F. Oates, Jr., former president of The Equitable, containing most laudatory comments. I spoke to them of the educational opportunities I had while a director for nearly thirteen years, since 1958. I spoke of the fact that they were all active members of their respective churches, that insurance company activities had a definite relationship to the welfare work of the Church with which I have been identified for forty years, and closed by a recital of the incident of Peter and John blessing the crippled man at the temple gate... "Peter took him by the right hand and lifted him up," significant of the greatest need in the world today. In the final Equitable board meeting they presented me with an embossed resolution of commendation.

The passing years were adding to President Lee's beloved progeny. While President and Sister Lee were in Oakland investigating the plan for filming temple work in January 1971, their first great-grandchild was born. David and Patricia Goates were the proud parents of a robust baby boy named Jeffrey Hewlett Goates. Impressed with this new extension of "his kingdom," President Lee wrote: "This now advances us to the third generation of our lives with much to remember and more to contemplate in the future."

President Lee was never one to allow the pressures of his Church leadership to cause him to forget his patriarchal relationships, although time for family contacts became increasingly more constricted. He encouraged the visits of his maturing grandchildren. On Sunday, November 29, 1970, President Lee's five oldest grandsons, in company with their wives and dating partners, had dinner together at David and Patsy Goates's home, and then came to President Lee's home about 9:30 P.M. for a visit which lasted until midnight. At the suggestion of grandson Alan Wilkins, the group knelt in prayer before returning home.

Visiting with grandsons (left to right) David Goates, Alan Wilkins, Larry Wilkins, Hal Goates, Drew Goates

President Lee's second wife, Joan, had repeatedly urged that he take her to see his childhood home in Clifton, Idaho. While vacationing in Wellsville, Utah, on August 13, 1971, President Lee fulfilled his wife's longings. Concerning his reflections about "going home," President Lee wrote:

The old saying: "You can never come back home again," came back forcibly as I saw the sad deterioration of the old homes where the pioneer families had with pride kept their lands in a respectable condition. These people have now passed on, and those who have come along to inherit or purchase from the former owners have built newer homes, but have left the old homes to fall to pieces and present a shocking spectacle of a dying generation. I was comforted somewhat widen I found that our old home had been torn down and a fine new home had replaced it.

After returning home, President Lee dictated on a tape recorder some of the events of his boyhood and growing-up years. The following Sunday, with his entire family gathered at his daughter Helen's home for a monthly fireside, President Lee played the tape for his grandchildren. It became a cherished possession, an authentic recitation of his most inspiring childhood stories, told in his own voice.

During these years in the First Presidency, President Lee found that one of his most effective service roles was to accept invitations to speak at weekend youth conferences. He involved his wife, a most able and inspirational speaker. It was a conscious decision to devote his energies as an investment in the future generations. He loved the youth of Zion. Typical of such regular exposures to youthful audiences was one he wrote about on Sunday, April 16, 1972: "I spent a day at home resting from the extreme exertions of the past week, but after a few hours of rest, I went with Joan to an M-Men and Gleaner Girl Fireside at the Mt. Ogden Stake Center, where approximately two hundred were in attendance. We had considerable satisfaction and I was actually refreshed and revived after returning from Ogden about 11:00 p.m."

The following weekend President and Sister Lee were on the road again, this time attending an early morning all-girls fireside group numbering one thousand, which he addressed in Provo, Utah, in the Joseph Smith Building on Brigham Young University campus.

Even after becoming President of the Church, he continued his commitment to youth conferences, but with much larger audiences and increasing effectiveness in building the faith of future Church leaders.

These experiences seemed to be moving President Harold B. Lee inexorably toward his ultimate destiny as President of the Church. He undoubtedly would have been content to remain as he was, but such was not to be. He was born to be a prophet, and he was prepared. Soon he was only a quick heartbeat away from becoming the eleventh President of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.
