Brent L. Goates, Harold B. Lee: Prophet and Seer ( 1985)

President of the Church

1972-1973

1972—1973. President Nixon visited Peking. A freeze on retail prices was declared to curb inflation. A period of controversial intervention in Vietnam ended, having taken 58,014 American lives and wounded 303,000 more.

26 538-Day Ministry as President Begins

For two and one-half years, lacking twenty-one days, President Joseph Fielding Smith presided over the Church. In that First Presidency, Harold B. Lee served as a strong leader, carrying a heavy load with wisdom, aggressiveness, and yet with a humility which always gave respectful deference to the aged President, who would die just prior to his ninety-sixth birthday.

July 2, 1972, dawned as any other Sabbath day for these two Church leaders. President Joseph Fielding Smith spent most of the day attending his local ward church meetings and in reading the scriptures in his favorite chair at the home of his daughter, Amelia McConkie, located on the high bench area just below Ensign Peak in Salt Lake City.

In the Lee family a celebration of Sister Freda Joan Lee's seventy-fourth birthday had taken place with a dinner at the home of President Lee's daughter, Helen. As was often necessary, President and Sister Lee left hurriedly following the dinner for another meeting.

In the early evening Helen decided to deliver the remainder of the birthday cake to "Aunt Joan." As her father greeted her, Helen thought he looked very weary. She said to him: "Oh, Daddy dear, you look so worn out. I'll just leave these things and run on. You don't need to visit tonight; you look like you're all visited out."

But President Lee protested: "No, you wait a minute. Aunt Joan is just changing her dress. She'll want to see you."

Passing of President Joseph Fielding Smith

They stood and talked for a few minutes in the kitchen, with Helen still remonstrating, feeling that they needed their rest and thinking she should leave. But as President Lee asked about his grandchildren living in Provo, for whom he was always concerned, the telephone interrupted their conversation. It was 9:30 P.M. Sister Lee answered the phone and recognized the urgency of this call. She announced: "Harold, this is President Smith's son Douglas on the phone. He seems to be very agitated."

Quickly, President Lee took the phone. Helen remembers:

I'll never forget the look on his face. He kept repeating: "Oh, no. No. Oh, no." (Apparently Douglas was rehearsing the details of President Smith's passing.) He covered the phone receiver and looked as though all the cares in the world had suddenly settled upon him. He said to us, so gravely, "President Smith is gone." He finished his conversation with Douglas, but was left visibly shaken by the sad news.

He hung up the phone after having given instructions as to whom should be notified. He slumped against the door frame close by and put his head in his arms. He just kept shaking his head... over and over.

Aunt Joan and I went over to him, and I put my hand on his arm and said: "Daddy dear, I guess the day has finally come that you must have thought through the years you would never be prepared for." He answered: "Oh, I'm afraid I'm not, I'm afraid I'm not." Aunt Joan quickly assured him that he was prepared.

I had never seen him look so weak and so completely at a loss. All through the years, except for the circumstances of my mother's passing, Daddy was a "Rock of Gibraltar" to all of us-the very epitome of strength and goodness. But at that moment he was completely devastated.

It was only a moment, however, until he straightened up, squared his shoulders, and began to take charge. He said to Aunt Joan: "Now, dearie, you must go change your dress again while I make some phone calls, and then we must quickly go to Bruce's [McConkie] home." The moment of weakness was gone. It seemed as though he had reached back into his thirty-one years of apostolic preparation and found there the resources at his command to meet the challenge of this inevitable moment.

Helen left President and Sister Lee and returned home to find her husband, Brent, working at his desk. Quickly conveying the news, Helen said:

"Let's hurry and gather the children together. We must pray for Dad. I think he needs the strength of our prayers-he looked so tired and so ill. You could read the pressure of the situation on his face. Let's all assemble now in family prayer for him."

It was a choice experience to unite our faith under such grave circumstances. We knelt around our bed. My husband prayed, and then called on me to pray. Then he asked each of the children to add whatever they wanted to our prayers. That was a sweet, lovely experience as they poured out their hearts to their Heavenly Father in behalf of their grandfather.

Even at that point we weren't allowing our minds to jump ahead to what might occur after the Council of the Twelve would meet to select a new president. Our only concern at this moment was that this father and grandfather needed the Lord to give him strength to face extreme pressures and circumstances in the next week, including the funeral service and all else which would follow. We wanted to give him our united faith and help.

Soon President N. Eldon Tanner and his wife, Sara, arrived at the Lee home and took President and Sister Lee to the McConkie home to meet with President Smith's grieving family. President Lee went immediately to the couch, where the body of this venerable, faithful servant of the Lord rested. For a long time he held the lifeless hand, reluctant to part with his longtime associate in Church leadership. After prayer with the family he arranged for them to meet with a committee of the Twelve at the Church Office Building on Monday morning.

Earlier on that memorable day at the birthday dinner for Sister Lee, President Lee had requested that his granddaughter Jane come with her family to the Lee home for a family home evening on Monday to play her violin. Jane had played at a ward sacrament meeting a few weeks before when her grandparents were away and unable to hear her perform. Her selection was a number the two daughters of President Lee played when they were young girls-a family favorite. Realizing the pressures now on President Lee a phone call was made to him the next day to change or confirm the appointment. President Lee emphatically said: "By all means I want you to come. It is all the more important now than it was when we talked about it yesterday."

Thus, by invitation and appointment, all the family came to be with President and Sister Lee for Monday family home evening, including his son-in-law Ernest J. Wilkins and his children from Provo. It was one of those enchanted moments when all family members wanted to draw close to their beloved grandfather at this special time.

President Lee greeted his progeny as they arrived, but soon a rather uncomfortable pall hung over the group. All were reluctant to speak of the events that would shortly come to pass. President Lee asked Jane to play her violin. At the conclusion of the performance he expressed his pleasure and asked for a second number to be played. Jane explained that she had brought no other music with her, so she agreed to play some hymns while the rest of the family sang. Jane asked her grandfather to choose the hymns he wanted to sing. He immediately requested two, "Love at Home" and "I Need Thee Every Hour." Then President Lee said he would like to finish with "How Firm a Foundation," reciting these words from the third verse, which at that moment were particularly significant to him:

Fear not, I am with thee, O be not dismayed, For I am thy God and will still give thee aid; I'll strengthen thee, help thee, and cause thee to stand, Upheld by my righteous, omnipotent hand.

Recognizing that all of his grandchildren would have in their minds many questions about that which would shortly unfold in the history of the Church as it related to their grandfather, President Lee then explained the events in the coming week. He told them about making the arrangements with President Smith's family for the funeral and about their requesting him to be one of the speakers. Then he told them that the day after the funeral all the members of the Council of the Twelve and the counselors to President Smith would meet by appointment in the council room of the First Presidency and Council of the Twelve in the Salt Lake Temple. He explained that it was the order of the Church that following the death of its President, the keys of leadership are immediately transferred to the Council of the Twelve, and that as the President of that quorum, he would have the responsibility to take the lead in governing the Church until such a time as that body would direct that the First Presidency would be reorganized.

President Lee carefully explained, in words that even the little children would understand, that three options were open to the Council of the Twelve: (1) the First Presidency could be reorganized and, if that were done, the senior member of the Council, himself, would likely be chosen as the new President of the Church, if precedent were followed; (2) they could take no action and allow the Quorum of the Twelve to govern the Church as was happening at that moment; or (3) by revelation they could choose any member of the Twelve, if so directed by the Lord, to preside over a new First Presidency.

The children asked many questions and a good discussion followed the words of President Lee, who was always the teacher to his family when the teaching moment arose. A phone call interrupted the discussion and soon President Lee announced that he must leave. Before the family meeting was adjourned, however, Brent Goates asked: "Before you go, Dad, would you just tell us what you want us to do as your family to help you the most, not only during this week as you move through these historic and emotional experiences, but in the years ahead? What is it that we can do to support you most as your family?"

Hesitating only a moment, President Lee responded with this challenge: "Be true to the faith-just live the gospel as I've taught you to do, as you know it to be right. That is all I want my family to do for me. Be undeviating in the path of righteousness. That's all I could ask of my loved ones, you who are dearest to me. There is nothing you could do that could help me more or make this grandfather happier than that."

His message was clear. None of the family members looking back on this experience could have any doubt as to his expectations. He was acting in the role of a true patriarch, emulating the Heavenly Father of us all in repeating the simplest yet most important message of the ages in a clarion call to keep the commandments. Family members still remember him most for the gospel truths he taught and the powerful direction he provided throughout their lives, but especially for that family home evening where all their hearts were united and intimately entwined through his leadership.

Picture taken for film Strengthening the Home, 1972

Immediate Threat to Health

With history in the making, and pressures for spiritual communion never greater, opposition was the immediate companion. It came now in the form of a serious attack on President Lee's health. He had been experiencing pain in his lower left side, like a pleurisy irritation. It gradually worsened, and the phone call which interrupted and ended the family home evening just described was from the physician, whom Sister Lee had phoned.

Early on the July 4, 1972 holiday, Dr. James Orme came to the home and examined President Lee. He requested that President Lee go to the LDS Hospital for X-ray and heart studies. There physicians examined carefully his chest area. By means of sophisticated nuclear machines, after injecting radioactive iodine, they were able to discover that blood clots were forming in President Lee's lungs. Physicians insisted that despite all the worries and burdens of Church reorganization on his mind, he be isolated in a room for an entire day and night while a series of injections of heparin were administered to dissolve any clots and to thin his blood. These treatments were spaced four hours apart at first, and then six hours apart, necessitating a young medical intern coming to the Lee home at 1:30 A.M. Even moments before leaving his office to attend the funeral of President Joseph Fielding Smith he was required to receive these injections.

Faced with the responsibility of conducting the funeral services and speaking his tribute to the late President, and also appearing at a testimonial honoring the later Elder Richard L. Evans, amid never-ceasing medical treatments, President Lee spent a hectic day and night with this tumultuous schedule. Observing the turmoil, Sister Lee suggested a priesthood administration. In the most humbling experience of their lives the healing ordinance upon the head of the soon-to-be-chosen President of the Church was performed by son-in-law Brent Goates and brother-in-law Charles J. Ross.

President Lee had to give early consideration to the choice of counselors, in the likely event that he would be selected as the next President. He knew whom he had in mind, but he had to obtain the confirmation of the Lord. To do so President Lee spent an hour or more in the temple and then continued through the night in prayer. When Thursday morning came there was no doubt in his mind that N. Eldon Tanner should be named as the First Counselor. President Tanner, when approached, graciously assured President Lee that he would willingly remain as Second Counselor, unless President Lee directed otherwise.

It also was clearly manifest to President Lee that Elder Marion G. Romney should be his other counselor. This proposition was pleasing to President Tanner and was then again spiritually confirmed to President Lee's satisfaction. President Lee testified concerning the revelation to appoint Elder Marion G. Romney to the First Presidency in a letter to John K. Edmunds, president of the California Los Angeles Mission, dated July 10, 1972. President Lee wrote: "I am sure if there was ever a man in the world the Lord loved and wanted to be honored in such a call, it was Marion G. Romney."

Both President Lee and President Tanner agreed that the filling of the vacancy in the Twelve should be delayed until the next general conference and that a solemn assembly should be planned in the same manner as when President Smith was installed as President of the Church at the October 1972 general conference.

Tributes to President Smith

But now it was time to pay a proper homage to their dear, late President Joseph Fielding Smith. The Salt Lake Tabernacle was filled to capacity, including most of President Smith's 169 direct descendants. The music was furnished by the Salt Lake Tabernacle Choir. President Tanner eulogized the family. Elder Bruce R. McConkie, a son-in-law, "provided a superb portrayal of the President's life," according to President Lee's diary notes. President Lee's sermon spoke more particularly to the spiritual phases of President Smith's life. He stated:

As we have been associated, particularly in the last two years as the counselors of President Smith, we have marveled at the clarity of his mind, the health of his body, the fact that he could speak well, and could walk without difficulty when most men at his age could have done neither. . . .

This we have witnessed time and again, as we were engaged in discussing very serious matters-decisions that should only be made by the President of the Church. It was then that we saw this sparkling wisdom come to light as he recounted, undoubtedly beyond his own present understanding, things that he called up from the depths of his soul.

The innermost feelings and thoughts of the soon-to-be President surfaced as President Lee closed his eulogy for President Smith:

Since the shock of his passing came, and realizing now that the Twelve would have the responsibility to take up the labors and determine what path to take in order to reorganize the Presidency of the Church, and serving as I do as the senior member of the Council, I have been concerned. I have wanted to know what the Lord's will would be. I wanted to do nothing except I knew it was of the Lord. I have sought most earnestly to know, to be guided, so that this Church could go on and be worthy of those who have sacrificed, who have given their lives that this Church might grow.

I have received a special witness these last few days. I had a comfort from one who wrote, "Men who are called to these leading positions in the Church were foreordained to that mission before they came to this earth." If I didn't believe that, I wouldn't dare stand in the place where I am today; believing that, I have no fear, anxiety, and concern, because I know the Lord is at the helm in guiding the work of the Church.

If the Lord knew me before I came here, as my friend reminded me, and he knows me now and has accepted of me, the Lord being my strength, we will attempt to follow in the footsteps of this beloved leader of ours. Brother Tanner and I have loved this man these last two and one-half years. It hasn't been pretended. He begat love. Because he loved us, we have stood by him, as he stood by and trusted us. We have mourned his passing with you, his dear family; and we want to express to you our feeling that now he has gone, you may not feel that you are alone. You still belong to us. We want you to know that the arms of our love are about each and every one of you here in this great family of President Smith.

Earlier in the week President Lee, along with other Church officials, paid tribute to the late President in the Deseret News of Monday, July 3, 1972. Part of President Lee's praise follows: "We who have been his closest associates knew of his kindness, his gentleness, and his concern for others. He sought no honors of men. His purpose in life could well be penned in one sentence-his was an 'eye single to the glory of God in bringing to pass the immortality and eternal life of man.' His death closes a chapter of history when the leadership of the Church has been in the hands of great men who were acquainted with the earliest leaders of this dispensation."

The days between the death of President Smith and the reorganization of the First Presidency were once more a time of speculation and curiosity, not only for members of the Church but also for the media and the public at large. Brent Goates was approached by Jack Goodman, a veteran Salt Lake City journalist, free-lance writer, and correspondent of The New York Times. Jack explained that the Times wanted him to file a story on the reorganization of the First Presidency, but to have it ready in New York City on the day of the reorganization required him to file an advance story. Knowing President Lee wouldn't allow such a presumptuous, premature interview, Mr. Goodman asked Brent, whom he had known in newspapering circles in earlier years: "What type of leadership may be expected when Harold B. Lee becomes the President of the Church? What are his dominant leadership characteristics?"

The penetrating questions forced serious reflection on the part of Brent, who knew his father-in-law well as a person and as a Church leader. The analysis required was not difficult, but the communication of those conclusions to the unbelieving readers was extremely complicated. Brent's answer by necessity eliminated the prime characteristic of the next President of the Church. How could he explain that Harold B. Lee's primary virtue was his spirituality, his intimacy with the God who directed his thoughts and footsteps, his totally uncommon ability to obtain flashes of inspiration and illuminating light in answer to his ponderings and prayers? He was a revelator and seer and he possessed the miraculous powers of his office and calling in unusual abundance. But how could this be explained, and if explained, comprehended by those not understanding continuous revelation to the leaders of the Church?

The spiritual depths of President Lee's leadership simply had to go unspoken, Brent concluded. And so the interview emphasized other salient qualities of President Lee, which also were impressive. His amazing organizational ability was cited, as attested by the development of the welfare plan of the Church, and recently proven anew through the correlation reorganization of all phases of the Church. His ability to instill confidence in Church members, develop discipleship among the leaders, and thrill the young people with a sense of their importance were among other characteristics mentioned. Yes, greatness could be expected of this man of God in many aspects of leadership, but the greatest quality of all, his spirituality, would not find its way into print on the pages of The New York Times or any other public media.

First Presidency Reorganized

The day of President Smith's funeral, which was also the day before the reorganization meeting of the Council of the Twelve, was a time for final meditation and prayer on President Lee's earlier conclusions. He wrote of his activities in his personal journal in these words:

I have talked with President Tanner after making certain that my choice of counselors is in accord with the Lord's desire. I have had no one in my mind but President Tanner and Marion G. Romney, and in that order. Even though Eldon agreed heartily with the suggestion of Brother Romney and left the way open to continue him as second counselor if I desired to do so, I felt the order was correct.

I felt certain that despite the difference in seniority, President Tanner had earned the right for this advancement in recognition [as first counselor] in my judgment, and I feel with the Lord's sanction, after having spent an hour or more in the temple in prayerful meditation.

I sat for a moment where I was joined in marriage to my darling Fern in 1923 by President George F. Richards and again in the sealing room where my lovely Joan was sealed to me by President David O. McKay. I poured out my soul in gratitude for these, two of the greatest women who have ever walked the earth, who have been brought to me through circumstances which attested to the divine guidance of the Almighty, who knew my need.

First Presidency from 1972 to 1973: President Harold B. Lee, N. Eldon Tanner, marion G. Romney

Friday, July 7, 1972, is entered on records of the history of the Church as one of its most important dates in modern times. At 8:00 A.M. on that clear, warm, summer day, the entire Council of the Twelve and ordained Apostles in the former First Presidency met in the sacred council room of the Salt Lake Temple to consider the reorganization of the First Presidency of the Church. Following an opening prayer by Elder Hugh B. Brown and a prayer at the altar by Elder LeGrand Richards, each member of the Twelve expressed his own thoughts on the subject. Finally it was time for Elder Spencer W. Kimball to speak, and he made the motion that Harold B. Lee become the President of the Church; when this motion was unanimously approved, President Lee assumed his seat as the prophet.

With all of the Twelve participating, Spencer W. Kimball was voice in ordaining Harold B. Lee and setting him apart as the eleventh President of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, as prophet, seer, and revelator, and as Trustee-in-Trust of all Church properties. Then President Lee set apart and blessed President Tanner as first counselor and Marion G. Romney as second counselor in the new First Presidency, and also Spencer W. Kimball as President of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles.

Elder Kimball had been suffering from Bell's palsy, which affliction had cut short his recuperation in California from heart surgery and caused his face to sag noticeably. At first it was believed that he had suffered a stroke, but the later examination after he returned home confirmed the palsy diagnosis. While much relieved, still Elder Kimball felt embarrassed by his weakened condition and poor physical appearance. After the blessing by President Lee, however, there was a marked change in his appearance. It was an indication that he had received a special spiritual blessing, wrote President Lee.

In a letter of appreciation ten days later, Elder Kimball wrote to President Lee to thank him for the great honors and blessings conferred on him. He said that he knew beforehand by the Spirit the counselors President Lee would choose and said that his sentiments paralleled that of the President. With regard to his physical condition Elder Kimball wrote:

I felt somewhat ill prepared for such a responsibility. It has been some nine months since I could fully immerse myself in the spiritual, and I fear I failed in measuring up to the great opportunity and privilege. I am getting back to normal. My face has improved and I am stronger. I expect to be back part-time very soon. I asked my doctor if an hour or two a day would hurt me now and he said it would be good for me. I think he wanted me to ease into the work the next two or three weeks.

You and your sweet wife have been so kind and good to us-so far beyond our deserts-that I wish there was something I could say or do that would adequately express proper gratitude and affection. I shall try to do so by just serving more efficiently.

Immediately following President Lee's setting apart in the temple, a press conference was requested where fifty or more representatives of wire services, television and radio stations, and newspapers were permitted to ask questions of the new President. When asked what his first message would be to Church members and the world, President Lee replied: "The greatest message that one in this position could give to the membership of the Church is to keep the commandments of God, for therein lies the safety of the Church and the safety of the individual. Keep the commandments. There could be nothing that I could say that would be a more powerful or important message today."

In response to a question about conditions of the world at that time President Lee noted that the Prophet Joseph Smith was informed by the Lord 140 years earlier that peace would be taken from the earth and Satan would have power over his own dominion. He then added: "After 140 years, is there anyone here who doubts that that time is here? But the Lord said he would reign among his people, and the most powerful weapon that can ever be forged against the wickedness of the world is the powerful teachings of the principles of the gospel of Jesus Christ. That's what he gave them to us for, to combat fear and untruth and wickedness in the world."

Commenting about the challenges ahead, President Lee called the task of leading more than three million members of the Church "ominous." He also said that the greatest challenge facing the Church was to keep pace with the growth in the membership:

We approach this task knowing that the Church is growing, which is our greatest challenge today. To keep pace with the growth and to see that the members everywhere are properly shepherded, taught, and led becomes now our greatest responsibility. Through the graces of the Almighty we have been directed to lay some cornerstones, and we hope to build on that foundation in the years ahead. We approach the future like the prophets of old . . . like Nephi, when he said: "I, Nephi, went forth not knowing beforehand the things which I should do." We will lean on the spiritual guidance of the Lord.

When asked why Blacks could not hold the priesthood, President Lee answered: "For those who don't believe in modern revelation there is no adequate explanation. Those who do understand revelation stand by and wait until the Lord speaks."

As President Lee introduced his counselors, he testified of their call by revelation, saying:

May I say that it is my responsibility to name counselors. We have some of the great men of the earth who form the membership of the General Authorities of the Church. Any one of them is just as qualified as any of us, or others; but to know which ones were to receive the sanction of the Lord required some soul-searching, and to that task I devoted myself. I have had the witness as to the men who should be called to be my counselors. They've been called not by the will of men or the choice of men. They've been called by the direction and guidance of the Spirit of the Lord, and they are the men who are acceptable to the Lord. We know that. We have received a witness of it.

Thus was launched into that service the eleventh President of the Church, President Harold B. Lee. He was the first native of Idaho to be called to the highest position in the Church. The average age of the eight Presidents of the Church from John Taylor through David O. McKay was seventy-three years of age when assuming that office. President Lee was exactly seventy-three years old, the youngest President of the Church in nearly forty years.

The new First Presidency were a unique international blend, since President Lee was born and reared in the United States; President Tanner, although born in the United States, lived most of his life in Canada; and President Romney was born and reared in Mexico.

Press conferences and interviews, as President Lee was soon to discover, were frequent events. The Church itself encouraged and sponsored many through its new Public Communications Department. It had been a long time since the Church had had such a vigorous President who could perform so well before cameras and photographers. A series of remarkable, unusual interviews followed. In content and tone they were masterful.

On July 19, 1972, Mr. Dan L. Thrapp, religion editor for The Los Angeles Times, sought an appointment. During this one-hour interview, many searching questions were asked, including the inevitable query concerning the blacks and the priesthood.

Mr. Thrapp wrote of President Lee's physical appearance: "Although his unlined face makes it scarcely credible that he is seventy-three, he is relatively young, compared to recent presidents who died at ninety-six and ninety-five years of age."

Mr. Thrapp asked how President Lee could explain the phenomenal growth of the Church, doubling within twelve years at a time when many other churches were stagnating or losing membership. His answer: "The basic reason is that this Church alone holds the truth among many great churches." President Lee wrote in his diary how he welcomed with pleasure answering this question: "This gave me the opportunity to impress the fact that the great strength of the Church is the individual testimony of each member, communicated by faithful missionaries and received after soul-searching by those who are honest seekers for truth. The report of this lengthy interview is to appear in an issue of the Times, which also syndicates to a large number of newspapers throughout the country."

The almost-adoration of people toward the new President caused the mantle of leadership to rest uncomfortably on his shoulders. The first evidence of this came on July 14, 1972, when President Lee met alone with the Presiding Bishopric, who requested to have his photograph and message to the Aaronic Priesthood of the Church, as a part of the leadership program, replace a similar one from the recently deceased President Smith. President Lee hesitated, not wanting to discontinue President Smith's work, but when the Presiding Bishopric persisted in showing its necessity, President Lee finally reluctantly consented.

Further efforts to diffuse attention from himself came as Utah's Twenty-Fourth of July holiday approached. The Days of '47 parade committee had repeatedly urged him to follow the usual practice of having the President of the Church ride at the head of the parade on its long march. President Lee countered with the suggestion that it would better demonstrate the unity of the new First Presidency by having all three ride with their wives, while his secretary, D. Arthur Haycock, would drive the open limousine. President Lee recorded his pleasure at this arrangement as follows: "This proved to be a very satisfying change, both to the counselors, who had previously never been included, and to the spectators, who lined both sides of the parade route, ten deep, even beyond the final stop into Liberty Park. As we passed it was heartwarming and humbling to have many stand and applaud out of their respect for their new leaders."

First Public Sermon of the President

A long-planned return vacation to the Grand Teton National Park near Jackson Lake, Wyoming, seemed all the more inviting now that the new burdens of worldwide Church leadership had settled on President Lee. He welcomed the opportunity to rest, think, and write in the beautiful mountain setting of the Grand Tetons, where twice before he had vacationed with his wife and Helen and Brent. But somehow it was different this time. President Lee rode uneasily in the back seat of the automobile, while this time, Brent never relaxed a moment as he drove his precious passengers to Jackson, Wyoming. The earlier events of the month had changed the easy family relationship to a keen awareness that now President Lee belonged to the world, which exacted an accounting of his safety every minute.

Everywhere along the way, whenever Brent stopped the car for gasoline or refreshments, many well-wishers, recognizing the new President of the Church, paused to express their commendation, faith, and loyalty. Young people especially, working at summer jobs on the ranches and inns, passed the word faster than telegraph that the President of the Church was coming to Jackson Lake. They were more than ready when the word came later that President Lee would hold a meeting which they were invited to attend.

The impromptu speaking invitation came officially from Brother Stone, a faithful Church leader and the manager of the Jackson Lake Lodge. He set the time at 9:45 P.M. so that the employees, numbering several hundred, could be off work and assemble in the spacious ballroom of the lodge. They came from all the nearby tourist spots, park locations, and ranches, and when the meeting commenced a crowd of 637 was eagerly awaiting the first public sermon from the new President of the Church.

President Lee sensed the missionary opportunities which existed at this tourist center where many members of the Church were employed. He chose to speak to this challenge and did so by using a missionary dialogue which these faithful youth could use with their fellow workers or the never ending visitors they served. It was an excellent lesson on how to do missionary work, followed by his fervent testimony, sharpened by his new prophetic calling. Long into the night, President Lee shook hands with the young, admiring members of his audience. He recalled this experience in his diary with these comments: "These young people had come from many distant places. There was a good spirit present. This being my first major speaking appointment since becoming President, I suppose some came out of curiosity, but mostly our faithful Saints came seeking and hungering for the truth."

A few weeks later he received a letter from a member of his home ward, John W. Jay, who arranged the Lee party reservations in the Grand Teton National Park in connection with his work with the National Park Service. In this letter Brother Jay told about a visit he had had with Bishop Wilde of the Jackson Ward, who related an interesting story of seventeen-year-old Steve Rogers. Steve was not a member of the Church, but had attended the meeting at the Jackson Lake Lodge. He was so impressed with that meeting that he also attended the sacrament meeting at the Jackson Ward, where President Lee spoke again. Brother Jay's letter gave further details:

Bishop Wilde returned to his home after the church meeting on Sunday evening and about 7:30 p.m. he received a telephone call from this boy. He told the bishop that, after hearing your two talks, he was so convinced that there was no other way-that ours was the only true church. He was very anxious to be baptized and confirmed a member of the Church by Bishop Wilde that evening.

Bishop Wilde stated that several of the young people who are not now members of our church, but who were in attendance both at the lodge and at the church, have expressed an interest in learning more-but Steve Rogers was so convinced after hearing your messages that he wanted the baptism performed as soon as possible.

President Lee rejoiced in this splendid result from his sermonizing at Jackson Lake and thanked his host, Brother Jay, for such a "restful and joyous experience." He then testified to Brother Jay that he knew that the Spirit was powerful for that first presidential address, saying: "I was interested in the story of the conversion of this young man. I was not surprised because the Spirit that was in our meeting at the lodge was the kind that could have brought joy to the hearts of all who were there. I felt it and I suppose this young man did likewise."

Even though he was now inundated with the constant demands of presiding over the Church, President Lee still chose not to delegate to others the privilege of meeting with the departing missionaries in the temple. He always loved this teaching experience and no doubt reasoned that he seldom could be of more ultimate influence than to persuade the ambassadors of the Lord, going to all parts of the world, concerning the vitality of the true gospel they would teach. President Lee's diary entry of August 11, 1972, contains these thoughts: "I had my first session in the temple with the missionaries since my present call was received. This fact seemed to intensify both in me and in the missionaries an unusual depth of spirituality. One young missionary, representing the group, and with the fervor of the occasion, pledged loyalty, love, and support to) me in my new calling"

Conversion of a Lamanite

On August 18, 1972, President Lee had an interesting meeting with a group of about thirty Indians from the Cheyenne and Arapaho tribes of Oklahoma, who were brought to Salt Lake City on a bus by Rodney N. Dotson, an Oklahoma Stake high councilor. The purpose of the trip was to teach these largely nonmember Lamanites more about the Church.

President Melvin Longhorn of the Watonga-Canton Selling Branch, Oklahoma Stake, told President Lee that there are more Indians in Oklahoma than in any other state: "We have 97,000 Indians from sixty-four tribes there. Missionary discussions are being taught to the Indians by full-time Elders who have met our bus along the way. They ride with the Indians for a few miles, teach them a lesson, and then get off the bus."

President Lee welcomed the touring Indians to Salt Lake City as he met with them in the First Presidency council room of the Church Office Building. In his remarks, he said: "As you have been told, we have a feeling of brotherhood with you because of our knowledge of your history and people."

He then explained the relationship of the Indians and Church members through the blood of Israel. He related a story which illustrated the parallels between the tradition of the Indian people and the history of the Lamanites as found in the Book of Mormon. Only three of the Indians in the group were Church members when they arrived, but Elder Dotson hoped for baptisms before the end of the trip.

President Lee bore his testimony to the group in a characteristically familiar manner, saying: "When you feel something as you read the Book of Mormon, it is your heart telling you things that your mind doesn't tell you. That is the Spirit of the Lord speaking to you, bearing witness to your soul that it is true."

President Lee then gave each Indian a copy of the Book of Mormon. Two chiefs, one representing the Cheyenne nation and the other, the Arapaho tribe, presented President Lee with beautiful feathered headdresses and two shawls for Sister Lee made by the Indian women.

There was a much deeper significance to this meeting however. Among the group, like the righteous Alma in the court of the wicked King Noah of Book of Mormon fame, there was at least one believing Indian who listened with his heart. President Lee's appearance touched him deeply; fourteen months later, Robert Allen Fletcher wrote a letter telling President Lee of his part in his conversion. Robert had come with his grandfather to learn of the Church's program for the Lamanites. He wrote of the meeting with the prophet:

I was so impressed by the surroundings I was in, and especially your presence. I knew that there was something different about you, but I didn't know what it was. I developed a love for you, as if you were a very close friend. I have a great respect for my prophet of my Lord. I will always cherish that day, for you gave me a paperback Book of Mormon that has been with me all this time.

Back home, I was asked to attend the institute at my college. I did so, and my institute teacher, who was one of the men who was on our trip, asked if I would like to speak to the missionaries. By this time I couldn't wait. I had to find out more about the Church. After they gave me my discussions I was baptized on October 17, 1972.

I love you and respect you and would ask for your blessings and your counsel. I can't stop writing this letter. I feel you close to me as if you were one of my own relatives or even one of my immediate family.

Mexico City Area Conference

Exactly one year after the British Saints enjoyed in Manchester, England, the first area conference of the Church, a second area conference was held in Mexico City, August 26-28, 1972.

At this time Mexico was the home of the largest number of Church members in any country in the world except the United States. Statistics read at the conference showed that there were more than 82,000 Latter-day Saints in Mexico. In addition, 33,000 Saints then resided in the republics of Central America. Membership of the Church in these areas since 1960 had increased more than 500 percent. At the time of the conference there were 256 wards and branches in Mexico and 90 in Central America.

President Harold B. Lee explained in his opening address one purpose of the area conference in Mexico City: "Many have wondered why this particular conference was held in Mexico City for the Saints residing in Mexico and Central America. One of the reasons is to give recognition and to commend the wonderful labors of the many, who over the years have been instrumental in bringing about the tremendous growth of the Church in these countries."

Many history-making and unusual accomplishments came about at this conference. It was the largest gathering of Saints ever to meet under one roof at a general or area conference. It was the largest gathering of Spanish-speaking Saints and the largest gathering of the Latter-day Saint descendants of Lehi. The Mexican and Central American members also had the privilege at this conference to be the first to sustain President Lee and his counselors in the new First Presidency. (They had been set apart just two months earlier on July 7.) It was also the first time a separate Aaronic Priesthood session was held in connection with an area conference.

The participation by the Tabernacle Choir also set some new records. For example, it was the first Tabernacle Choir Sunday morning broadcast over CBS to emanate from a non-English-speaking nation. This occurred at the Sunday morning choir broadcast, which also marked the 125th anniversary of the choir, and its 2,245th traditional nationwide broadcast.

The scene was a far cry from the choir's first appearance at the old bowery on Temple Square. The historic broadcast from Mexico was presented from the 17,500-seat amphitheater at the National Auditorium Chapultepec Park in Mexico City. By 7:30 A.M. on Sunday, two hours before its broadcast, there were seven thousand persons in the mammoth hall, about twice as many as ever attended the broadcast in the choir's Salt Lake Tabernacle home during summer months. Yet by air time, there were in excess of sixteen thousand persons present in what may have been the largest audience ever to attend a live broadcast.

The principal motivation for the attendance of this large audience was to see and hear the prophet, seer, and revelator of the Lord for the first time in their lives. Traveling from as far away as Panama, Honduras, and Costa Rica-as well as from Tijuana, Mexico on the north, a fifty-three-hour bus ride-these faithful Saints came and sacrificed much to see the living prophet, President Harold B. Lee. Said one member of the Church from Guatemala: "We did everything we could to come see the prophet of the Lord, the representative of our Savior on earth."

Another member stated: "To be able to sit and listen to his words and to know and feel in your heart that you are listening to a prophet of God is one of the most beautiful experiences in my life."

The conference began on Saturday night with four simultaneous meetings at four different locations to which President Lee rotated in a whirlwind visit.

The first of these four separate but simultaneous meetings began at 7:00 P.M. and the last one ended at 9:30 P.M. Harold Brown and D. Arthur Haycock drove President Lee to each meeting, where he spoke briefly. It was an evening never to be forgotten.

The first stop was at the Mexico City Stake center at Churusbusco, where over five hundred Aaronic Priesthood youths, immaculately groomed and polished, stood up the instant they learned of the President's arrival. Not a whisper could be heard as all of these young eyes focused on one man. President Lee spoke to them of prayer. As he left, the President turned to his companions and repeated several times: "Did you see those faces? Did you see those faces?"

After next visiting Teatro del Bosque, where 450 young women of Aaronic Priesthood age heard the President, the drivers whisked him on to the women's session in the nearby National Auditorium, where over three thousand sisters were gathered. At the conclusion of his visit there, not a whisper, not a sound, could be heard except muffled sobs and the footsteps of the departing President.

The final stop was at the priesthood session held in the Mexico City North Stake Center at Camarones. On his arrival all stood as if in one army of priesthood while President Lee walked to the front of the hall. As in the other three meetings nearly all present had never before seen a President of the Church in person. Tears were rolling down the cheeks of many men, who wiped them away with white handkerchiefs or the back of weathered fists. After President Lee had impressively taught important lessons about the priesthood, many present wanted to shake his hand' and if they could have done so, would have pressed themselves on him.

The emotions at every meeting had been high. President Lee, at his first opportunity, had gone to these Latin-American Saints and taught them in a close and intimate way. They had heard his voice. They had looked into his eyes. They had personally felt his spirit. "We shall never forget this experience," one man said, as if for all.

A new method of translation was introduced at this conference. It was a system of direct, simultaneous translation similar to the one used at the United Nations. President Lee, however, preferred to use Brother Eduardo Balderas from Salt Lake City as his translator.

In his major Sunday morning address President Lee noted that the amazing growth of the Church in Latin America would not have taken place without the conviction of the truth in the hearts of the faithful members of the Church. Stating that the strength of the Church is not to be measured by tithing contributions or membership, President Lee said:

The real strength of the Church is to be measured by the individual testimonies to be found in the total membership in The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. The evidence of the hastening of which the Lord spoke in the Doctrine and Covenants can be found in no greater measure than in this land of Mexico and in the countries of Central America, as witnessed by the overwhelming, superabundance of the blood of Israel to be found here. Now there is a grand total of 115,132 in Mexico and Central America in eight stakes and seven missions.

The closing session of the area conference on Sunday afternoon permitted President Lee to again teach the Saints, to express his love for them, to commend their growth and progress, and to share his intimate feelings concerning his new presiding position in the Church. Among his teachings were these memorable statements:

It would be my prayer that we might have restored your confidence and love for the work of the Lord, and for the General Authorities who preside over this church. It is hoped that you have received the guidance necessary to enable you to feel the divine spirit which has flowed from our Heavenly Father through all which has been done during this conference.

And now in my place as the President of the Church, and with my heart full of love toward all of you people, I extend my blessing to you and pray that your lives will become symbols of your faith and your love for your Heavenly Father.

May you have a renewal of your desires to serve him more fully and to keep his commandments in order that you might feel his nearness and be persuaded to be more faithful and diligent in all your performance in the Church.

I bear you my testimony to the divinity of this work. I know with more certainty than I have ever known before that we are engaged in the work of the Lord.

Remember that the head of this Church is our Lord and Master. During the experiences of these last few weeks, I have come to know more certainly than ever before in my life that the Savior of this world is a living personality.

To him should we give our loyalty, our faith, and our love. I will endeavor to serve you and lend all the strength I have to see to it that the work of the Lord can be projected to the fullest extent as you faithful Saints will prepare yourselves to receive all that our Heavenly Father has in store for his faithful servants.

On Monday morning, August 28, 1972, a press conference was conducted by President Agricol Lozano of the Mexico City East Stake presidency. There were about ten representatives of the leading newspapers and radio stations in attendance. They requested that President Lee respond to questions about the war in Vietnam, abortion, use of drugs, and many other current issues of the day. President Lee started off the conference with this superb statement: "Every time I come to this republic I am touched by the deep faith, the dedication, and the warm friendliness of the Mexican people. They are a choice people. There is in Mexico and Central America a superabundance of the blood of Israel."

Burton F. Howard, legal counsel for the Church in Mexico, was among those attending and listening most intently to all that transpired. He later told President N. Eldon Tanner that he had never been more spiritually uplifted than at this press conference.

The native Spanish-speaking Saints felt the inspiration of the conference deeply, too. The stories and faith-promoting sermons lived on to bless their lives for many years and proved to be a fresh affirmation that indeed "sacrifice brings forth the blessings of heaven."

A Prophet in Hiding

President Lee returned from Mexico City to face conditions that must have given him a glimpse into the persecutions and physical dangers which constantly surrounded the first prophet of this dispensation, Joseph Smith. He was learning that prophets are hated as well as loved, and their lives at times are endangered. It is a risky occupation to dare to be called God's spokesman on earth, for the enemies of righteousness can be vicious and murderous.

According to a New York Times story out of San Diego in 1974, under the byline of Everett R. Holles, an apostate church faction was involved in a frightening intrigue. The newspaper article said, in part:

More than twenty members of various branches of the LeBaron family migrated to Mexico from Utah beginning in 1956 after their expulsion from the Mormon Church in Salt Lake City for apostasy and refusal to renounce polygamy.

Under leadership of Joel LeBaron, the dissidents set up their first splinter sect in the Mexican state of Chihuahua, where a venture in turkey-raising collapsed in 1962. Having increased the cult's membership by bringing in more excommunicated U.S. Mormons and Mexican converts, the sect moved to Las Molinos on the Baja, California peninsula.

The leader of the Church of the Firstborn of the Fullness of Times, Joel LeBaron, was beaten and shot to death, leaving his brother Verlan as his successor. Verlan also became a new target for an ambitious brother, Ervil LeBaron, who was later convicted and imprisoned for murder. Verlan, fearing for his life, kept on the move and traveled thousands of miles shortly after Joel's funeral, providing the Federal Bureau of Investigation and the leaders of the LDS Church with details of the fugitive Ervil's history and threats.

During a visit to Salt Lake City in the late summer of 1972, Verlan LeBaron had learned through another polygamist leader, Rulon Allred, that Ervil had said two weeks before Joel's death, that both Joel and the prophet of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, President Harold B. Lee, would be killed. It was later found that the report was a misinterpretation, that the "hit list" referred only to the "false prophet," Verlan, as the prophet marked for death.

This distinction not being recognized, a tight blanket of Church security was thrown about President Lee. He wrote of this unusual circumstance in his diary in these words, under date of September 4, 1972:

Because of the security that has been thrown around me due to the threats and possible dangers from the fugitives of the so-called Church of the Firstborn, Joan and I thought it prudent to stay home. This was providential inasmuch as it gave me much needed time to begin some preparations for the forthcoming solemn assembly and the October general conference.

As the pressures from the Police Department and Church Security continue to mount and are now so visible to everyone, thus arousing doubts and speculations, it was thought advisable for us to obtain an apartment on the tenth floor of the Hotel Utah where we could stay at night. This has some convenience, but only served to intensify the number of officers who were surrounding us wherever we moved.

Now any appearance of President Lee was accompanied by a large personal security force. Neighbors had wondered about the "stake-out" on the streets near the Lees' home in the Federal Heights area of Salt Lake City. On the second Sunday of September, 1972, President Lee attended the Olympus Stake conference at the request of President Jack H. Goaslind, Jr. Although he had urged that the police protection be as inconspicuous as possible, all precautions had to be taken, including an inspection of the chapel the day before the conference and three or four automobiles traveling ahead of, behind, and by the side of the President's car, which was driven by his secretary, D. Arthur Haycock.

Additional protection was provided at the executive offices of the President of the Church, and electronic door safety devices were installed which could be used to control any undesirable visitors whose purposes in calling might be questionable.

Despite the harassment of accompanying security officers President Lee was grateful for his police protection. Just before leaving for Europe he wrote to Salt Lake City police chief Earl Jones concerning his appreciation for their services, saying:

Before leaving the city for the next two weeks I want to express to you my personal thanks and appreciation for the protective service that you and your department have so freely and so graciously extended to me.

While I have felt no fear, I realize full well that when vicious men are on the loose, and especially when they are of a cult, an offspring of the true Church, that the devil could stir them up to enmity, therefore precautions were thought to be important.

In order to show my appreciation for what you have done in a tangible way, I am attaching hereto a modest check as a contribution to the Police Mutual Aid Fund, in the hope that thereby you will know that I have not been unmindful of the time and concern you and your men have extended in my behalf.

The next day when President and Sister Lee left for the Salt Lake City airport, they were driven by Brother Haycock and flanked by three police cars. A member of the Church employed at the airport told President Lee that he had thought he would never live to see the day when a President of the Church would be obliged to come to the airport guarded by police. Soon thereafter the clarification of the death threat was made and the extreme protective measures were relaxed.

One year from the day of Joel LeBaron's murder, which occurred on August 20, 1972, the successor president of the Church of the Firstborn of the Fullness of Times, Verlan M. LeBaron, wrote to President Lee and apologized for the threats of violence to the Mormon prophet. He said: "I regret that you were inconvenienced at all by these terrible happenings and sincerely trust that you will have no further problems as a result of these dangerous fanatics."

The tense precautions passed, but brought impressively more awareness and experience to this new prophet, not yet even sustained by the general membership of the Church, on some unique and surprisingly dangerous aspects of his sacred calling.
