Brent L. Goates, Harold B. Lee: Prophet and Seer ( 1985)

27 First Church President Visit to Holy Land in 2,000 Years

When the General Authorities held their monthly meeting in the Salt Lake Temple on September 7, 1972, the meeting turned into a summary of the magnificent Mexico City area conference. Then President Lee requested that Elder Gordon B. Hinckley explain some of the purposes for their proposed trip to Europe and the Middle East.

After President Lee concluded the meeting, there was such a spiritual outpouring that some present were in tears, particularly Elder Hinckley, who was much concerned about the responsibility he was to bear soon in escorting the President of the Church over many miles of possible dangers and evil influences. There were some reservations about going to Israel as planned because of the bitterness engendered by the massacre by Arab terrorists of eleven members of the Israeli Olympic Games delegation at Munich, Germany, earlier that week. This violence had triggered reprisals from Israel's military; the crisis could have escalated and exploded into armed conflict at any time.

The first meeting on the European trip was held on September 14 in London. It was a luncheon appointment with Lord Thomson of Fleet, a wealthy and influential British newspaper owner who on this occasion entertained about twenty-two guests representing some of the most influential men from various fields of endeavor in England, some being lords who had received that honor from the king or queen for distinguished service outside of Parliament. Lord Thomson, followed by Lord Netherthorpe, who had been to Salt Lake City, spoke in most complimentary language about their honored visitors and about the Church, which they represented. In concluding his compliments Lord Thomson, who owned the London Times and the Sunday Times, said: "But there is one thing about these people-if you join them, you have to give one-tenth of your income to the Church, and I don't think I could do that."

The day was completed with a visit to the London Temple, where President Lee gave the sealing powers to seven brethren, and with an impromptu meeting requested by the presidents of the North London and East Anglia stakes in the Hyde Park Chapel, where Elder Hinckley and President Lee spoke. Over six hundred Saints attended this memorable occasion with the President of the Church. At the end of the first day, Elder Hinckley wrote in his journal: "President Lee appears extremely tired and even sick. tie says he is all right, but I am concerned. He has been the victim of too much 'police security' at home, in addition to the very heavy demands of his office."

The next day President Lee, Elder Hinckley, and their wives, along with mission president Milan Smith and his wife, Jessica, were again guests of Lord Thomson at a luncheon at Thomson House, especially arranged for the Church leaders. He invited some of the leading religious leaders of the Jewish, Catholic, and Protestant churches, in addition to the top officials of his own editorial executive staff, about twenty persons in total. This event proved to be one of the most delightful experiences of the entire tour, as again Lord Thomson spoke in highly complimentary terms concerning the Church. Questions about the Church and world problems were discussed around the table. Lord Thomson asked about the Church's missionary program and Elder Hinckley responded in considerable detail. All attending seemed to be most interested.

Indicative of the influence of those present at this luncheon was a Mr. G. C. Brunton, managing director and chief executive of the Thomson organization, a man second in command to Lord Thomson, and who was seated on Elder Hinckley's left. On the right side of Elder Hinckley was Sir Isaac Wolfson, a most impressive person and a leading benefactor to the nation of Israel. "Surely the Lord was with us and prompted us in that which was said and done at this luncheon," wrote Elder Hinckley.

Following the Lord Thomson luncheon, a press conference was arranged at Connaught House, where President Lee and Elder Hinckley were to meet the British journalists and media. Nine reporters from the leading papers in London and the Thomson newsmen attended, and the conference went extremely well. Providentially, the discussions were on various topics of a high level, with no mention of the usual controversial issues which are typically encountered at such occasions.

In the evening President Lee and Elder Hinckley and their wives met with four hundred missionaries of the England East and England South missions, where Presidents Milan Smith and Wallace G. Bennett presided. President and Sister John Madsen of the England South Mission also attended. Elder Hinckley summarized the day with this journal entry: "I am sure this was an occasion the missionaries will never forget. It was worth all the effort that it took. Tonight we were on our knees thanking the Lord for his marvelous blessings upon us, and asking that he will give the President strength for the long journey ahead of him."

On Saturday morning, September 16, Lord Thomson sent his private car, a beautiful new Rolls Royce which had been delivered from the showroom only a week earlier, along with a courteous driver, to take the Church leaders to the British Museum, where they saw the famed Rosetta Stone and the artifact relics from Egypt's King Tutankhamen exhibition. That night and on Sunday morning, Elder Hinckley reorganized the London Stake presidency; thirty-one-year-old John Henry Cox, bishop of the Kings-ton-upon-Thames Ward, was sustained as the new president. When Elder Hinckley told President Lee his only concern was Cox's youthful age, President Lee passed a note to Elder Hinckley which read, "I was thirty-one when I became stake president."

Sunday night the Lees and Hinckleys flew to Athens, Greece, arriving in time to go to the military base, where they held a meeting with fifty Latter-day Saints, most of whom also had been at the airport to greet them. The next day was spent in meeting officials of the Greek government to learn the procedures necessary to legally establish the identity of the Church as "a house of prayer." The project was left in the care of President and Sister Edwin Q Cannon of the Swiss Mission, which also had stewardship for both Greece and Israel in those days.

After completing the business of the day the six Americans went to the famed Acropolis just as the sun was setting over the Mediterranean Sea. There the Parthenon again displayed its glorious past in culture, wisdom, and ancient architecture. It was a thrilling sight to these leaders to stand on this mountain with the

At the Parthenon with Gordon B. Hinckley, 1972

city on all sides. Since it was about closing time at the Acropolis, Elder Hinckley suggested that the party return to Mars Hill at 7:00 A.M. the next morning and have President Lee speak in commemoration of the famed address given there by the Apostle Paul to the learned citizens of Greece.

Ominously, that night President Lee recorded in his journal that he was experiencing a somewhat severe distress in his lower right back, similar to the pain he had felt before the funeral of President Smith in early July.

In accordance with the plan, President Lee, Elder Hinckley, President Cannon, and their wives came early to Mars Hill where centuries ago Paul had preached his famous sermon on the "unknown God." Together they climbed the rocky hill. Elder Hinckley spoke first, and thoughtfully recorded all that was said on this glorious occasion on his cassette tape recorder so that this event could become a part of documented Church history.

After President Lee had recounted the New Testament account of Paul's sermon on Mars Hill (Acts 17), he concluded his sermon with these words:

Here then was the opening of the work among the Grecian people. As Paul began to expound the doctrine, he gave us a key as to how we all could know that Jesus was the Christ. He said to the Corinthians, "No man speaking by the Spirit of God calleth Jesus accursed: and no man can say [the Prophet Joseph Smith said that should have been translated 'and no man can know'] that Jesus is the Lord, but by the Holy Ghost." So we who have been baptized and received the gift of the Holy Ghost, we too can know by the witness of the Spirit that he is the Christ, to know which is to gain eternal life.

At this point a number of the local brethren and sisters had joined the meeting, so President Lee continued to speak for their benefit. He added his own current feelings about the trials and testing to which Presidents of the Church are subjected:

As we come to positions of trust and responsibility centuries later, bearing the same message, teaching the same gospel, worshipping the same God, faced with the same opposition, we must not hesitate or slacken our zeal to project the work of the Lord. The work of the Lord never was presented with ease. It had to be brought forth out of blood and sweat and tears and sacrifice. So it may require that in our day, too, more than we know. As I read back over the history of the Presidents of the Church in our dispensation, I have become aware that all of these men went through periods of trial and testing before they came to their position in the Church. So, today, may this kind of a meeting make each one of us have a feeling of dedication.

After President Lee bore powerful testimony to this handful of faithful Saints on Mars Hill, Elder Hinckley offered the closing prayer. It was so eloquent and sweeping yet so humble that President Lee summarized with a powerful statement: "We shall let that prayer become a prayer of rededication of this land."

The remainder of the day was spent visiting various officials of the Greek government and the Greek Orthodox Church. The Lees and the Hinckleys then flew by plane to Tel Aviv, arriving after dark. Just to set foot on the Holy Land seemed inspirational and filled them with anticipation for the experiences that awaited.

The first of three days in the land where Jesus walked began with visits to various government and Church leaders, all of whom received President Lee graciously. After a visit to the famed Israel Museum, President Lee had a delightful interview with Jerusalem Mayor Teddy Kollek. Concerning this historic visit President Lee recorded in his journal: "We talked about the possibility of a monument on the Mount of Olives containing the Orson Hyde Dedicatory Prayer, which is well known to the mayor and all Jewish officials. We also discussed the possibility of a visitors' center."

The mayor said that the city was trying to acquire property on the Mount of Olives to create a park for meditation. He indicated that it might be possible to have a monument with a reproduction of the Hyde prayer in the park. He promised to write to President Lee on the proposed project as progress developed.

There were additional fascinating visits to high officials and some beginning stops to see the sacred shrines of Jesus' ministry. In early evening they came to the Garden Tomb, where about thirty Saints who live in Israel gathered to be with the prophet. The light from a bright, September moon filtered through the olive trees, spreading a soft glow over the Garden Tomb area in Jerusalem. Ordinarily at this hour the spot would have been deserted, but on this occasion a special meeting was about to take place on this night of September 30, 1972.

Elder Hinckley's dictated journal captures the feelings of the Church authorities as they met in this sacred place, embroidered with such deep significance.

As we stood in the tomb cut from stone, we could imagine Joseph of Arimathea, Mary, and others bringing the body of Jesus and laying it there in a hurry to have this done before the Jewish Sabbath. We could then imagine the first day of the week, when the burial clothes were left in the tomb, but the body was gone, the stone being rolled away. We could imagine the two angels sitting at either end of the tomb, and Peter and others of the Apostles coming and looking in consternation at the empty burial place. And then we could see in our mind's eye the risen Lord with Mary, and hear again the conversation which took place.

It seemed to us that this was in very deed the place of the burial and resurrection of the Master, the place where occurred the greatest event in human history, when the Master of life broke the bands of death.

President Harold B. Lee, the prophet of God, who only recently had been ordained to that calling, was now presiding at a meeting in those holy surroundings. Hymns were sung and prayers were spoken. Organizing a Jerusalem branch of the Church was an idea which came unpremeditated as inspiration of the moment. David B. Galbraith was sustained as the president of the first branch of the Church of Jesus Christ to be organized in the Holy Land in nearly two thousand years. A children's chorus sang "I Am a Child of God." Then, Elder Gordon B. Hinckley spoke movingly, recounting from the book of John some of the events of the death, burial, and resurrection of the Savior. President Lee's sermon was then delivered. Elder Hinckley recorded these statements in his journal:

President Lee said that when he and his wife Fern came to the Garden Tomb in 1958 there was a feeling about this place that was different from all other places. He read the scripture: "In the place where he was crucified there was a garden." "That is," President Lee went on, "in the hill where he was crucified there was a garden." He had concluded that Golgatha was right up on the top of the hill above here and that this was indeed the very garden where Joseph of Arimathea brought the body of the crucified Lord.

He told the group assembled, "Though you are few in number, you are laying the foundation of something that will be great." He indicated that in the visits we had made to various officials during the day, there had been a respect of us greater than we could have hoped for.

We sang "Now Let Us Rejoice," after which Brother Brandly offered a prayer. We set apart Brother Galbraith and Brother Tvedtnes and then we sang "God Be with You till We Meet Again." No one present will ever forget this occasion.

The fast and long pace of the day had fatigued President Lee, whose body was weakened by his lung disease. Back at the hotel President Lee wrote of his concern over his physical condition and pain: "These arc exhausting days. My physical strength is at a seriously low ebb. I know something is seriously wrong. There is a severe pain in my lower back and a weariness that was emphasized by a constant effort to expel mucus. Joan insisted that I have Brother Hinckley and President Cannon administer to me."

Just as the Hinckleys, next door in the hotel, were about to retire, Sister Lee knocked on their door and asked if Elder Hinckley would give President Lee a blessing. President Cannon anointed him and Elder Hinckley scaled the anointing. Concerning the blessing Elder Hinckley wrote: "I felt the power of the Spirit of the Lord as I spoke the blessing. I felt confident that the Lord would heal his servant."

The journal account of President Lee reveals the fulfillment of the blessing:

The next morning, after a severe coughing spell, I expelled two clots which seemed to be blood-one, about the size of a dime, was like dried blood, and the other one was red, as a fresh clot. Immediately my shortness of breath ceased, the weariness was diminished, and the back pains began to subside, and twenty-four hours later they were entirely gone.

I now realize I was skirting on the brink of eternity and a miracle, in this land of even greater miracles, was extended by a merciful God who obviously was prolonging my ministry for a longer time, to give to him in whose service I am all the strength of my heart, mind, and soul, to indicate in some measure my gratitude for his never-failing consideration to me and my loved ones.

The next morning Elder Hinckley said President Lee appeared stronger, but he said only that he felt better. It wasn't until one day later when they were finishing breakfast that President Lee shared with his companions his testimony that the Lord had brought to pass a miracle in his behalf in response to the blessing given to him. By this time Elder Hinckley observed that his health was remarkably improved. Undoubtedly the expelled material had nearly blocked off one of the lobes in his lungs. Divine intervention had rescued him from a most serious extremity.

For the next two days, under the leadership of "our faithful David B. Galbraith, about whom I cannot say enough of good as our driver and guide," said President Lee, the Lees and the Hinckleys toured the Holy Land, seeing again the sacred places and walking where Jesus had walked. It was a tiring and wonderful two days in which they saw much, completely enjoyed the experiences, and had their faith renewed.

From Israel the touring General Authorities flew to Rome, where, on the weekend of September 23 -24, they attended youth conferences and other church meetings, with visits between meetings to religious shrines and art galleries. President Lee's journal gives his impressions of both the general meetings and group sessions which he and Elder Hinckley and their wives attended:

About 250 of fine appearing young people and their chaperones participated at a three-day conference which proved to be a great success. The youth of both the Italy South and North missions participated. In the evening we met first with the missionaries and following that, a meeting with the branch members and the missionaries, with about 200 to 275 persons in attendance. It was again an amazing indication as to how the work has taken root in Italy.

Elder Hinckley's journal speaks more of the blessings these young and new members of the Church felt as they saw for the first time the President of the Church:

We drove to Santa Severa, a distance of about sixty kilometers, where the young people of the two Italy missions were having a youth conference. They were overwhelmed with joy at the sight of President Lee, of whom they spoke as "the Prophet." We came into their testimony meeting and listened to quite a number of their testimonies before I spoke. Then President Lee spoke briefly. They surrounded him and besieged him as he tried to get a bite to eat. We returned to Rome, a drive of about one hour and a half, and to our rooms in the Ambassador Hotel, weary but gratified with the opportunity of participating in the Lord's work in so wonderful a manner.

Again the next day, Sunday, the Lees and the Hinckleys were up early to return to the youth conference. Elder Hinckley explained his excitement on this occasion in his journal: "It was a stirring thing to look into the faces of some 250 Italian Saints. These are pioneers of what will become a great future for the Church in this land. I explained how the President of the Church is chosen and how meaningful this is to have him present in this meeting. We all bore testimony, and it was an inspirational occasion."

Next some three hundred more fine-looking Italian Saints assembled for a special meeting in Milano, having gathered from over a wide geographical area. These long and tiring days found President Lee looking extremely fatigued. "The President was under terrible strain before we came, and there is no rest on a trip of this kind," wrote Elder Hinckley. Yet they were up at 5:00 A.M. the next morning to meet with 180 missionaries from the Italy North Mission.

The European phase of the long journey came to a close with a visit to the Swiss Temple in Zollikofen, not far from Bern. There President Lee presided over a change in the leadership of the temple by releasing President and Sister Charles Grob and installing President and Sister Immo Luschin on September 26, 1972.

The final European sermons were delivered at the chapel in Lausanne, Switzerland, where people began to gather at 9:30 A.M. for an 11:00 A.M. meeting. Some had traveled more than four hundred miles, and 318 were on hand as the meeting began. Elder Hinckley wrote of this occasion: "They had come to see the President of the Church. It was a tremendous treat for them to hear President Lee and, for many of them, to shake his hand. They were a wonderful looking congregation-intelligent, refined people."

Back in the United States President Lee's party was met at the New York City airport by President and Sister David Lawrence McKay and missionaries of the New York City Mission. The immediate pressures continued, for en route from the airport to the hotel, Wendell J. Ashton, Director of the Public Communications Department, briefed President Lee and Elder Hinckley on the details of a luncheon and press conference planned at the Waldorf Astoria Hotel the next day.

On September 28, President Lee and Elder Hinckley enjoyed lunch in the hotel with a small but important group of men, including such luminaries as Lowell Thomas, the famous radio commentator; Norman Vincent Peale, well-known Protestant preacher; Frank N. Milligan, president of Kennecott Copper Corporation; George Scott, executive vice president, First National City Bank of New York; Lee Bickmore, chairman of the board of National Biscuit Company; Frank Wangeman, president of the Waldorf Astoria Hotel; and various Church officials. Elder Hinckley called it a "delightful occasion."

Following the luncheon President Lee, Elder Hinckley, and their staff went to the third floor of the hotel to conduct a press conference in which President Lee met twenty-two of the most sophisticated news reporters he had ever faced. Staffing the interview were representatives of United Press International, Associated Press, Time, The Washington Post, The New York Times, Religious News Service, Hunter College, New York Daily News, and others, including three from WRFM in New York.

President Lee's recollection of the press encounter is as follows:

I announced the appointment of Lee S. Bickmore as a special consultant to the First Presidency after Brother Ashton had introduced him and explained our need for his services. For an hour I fielded searching questions about the Church's finances, welfare program, the reasons for the rapid Church growth, etc. The only question relative to the black question came after the press conference from a Jewish reporter, while a New York Times woman reporter questioned me further. George Cornell, religious editor of the Associated Press, characterized my responses as more honest and forthright than are usually given at such interviews. Frank Wangeman of the Waldorf Hotel management, said it was his most inspirational hour. The results seemed favorable.

That assessment seemed to be supported by Elder Hinckley's appraisal, for he wrote in his journal that "President Lee handled himself remarkably well."

The long journey came to a close as the weary travelers arrived at the Salt Lake City airport on Thursday, September 28, after a five-hour, nonstop flight from New York.

President Lee recorded his impressions on being home that night in these words: "We returned home somewhat weary, but of necessity must plunge into the problems awaiting me-general conference and the solemn assembly, where I will be sustained, the transgressions of trusted men in high places requiring disciplinary action, and the call of a new Apostle. Joan has returned home with a cold, but is recovering. It's great to be home. I found all is well, and America is beautiful."

Elder Gordon B. Hinckley, President Lee's loyal, faithful companion whose experience at world travel and skill at special events management is unsurpassed, summarized this portion of his personal journal under the title "A Journey to Be Remembered." He wrote:

All four of us came home feeling well. I have never taken a trip for so long a period and felt better than I have on this trip. I have not had a single sick day and have felt well. We have witnessed a miracle in the restoration of the President's health. Moreover, the respite from the pressures of his office has been a wonderful relief for him. The good he has done in getting out among the people can never be estimated. They will never forget the occasions of meetings when he bore testimony, and personal interviews when they listened to him and shook hands with the Lord's chosen prophet.

And for Marge and me it has been an incomparable experience, one we shall never forget. The unfailing kindness of President Lee and his delightful companion made traveling with them a joy and a privilege.

We thank our Heavenly Father for his blessings. His watchful care has been over us. We have been preserved from accident and evil. His Spirit has gone before us to touch the hearts of those on whom we have called. Nature has favored us and men have respected us and honored us. We have given encouragement to a thousand missionaries, have enjoyed them, and have been enriched by their expressions of faith. We have borne testimony to the Saints in England, Greece, Israel, Italy, and Switzerland. We have walked where Jesus walked and testified of his divinity as the Son of the Living God. We have declared our knowledge of these things where Paul declared his knowledge centuries ago. We have proclaimed the prophetic calling of Joseph Smith and affirmed the prophetic calling of his successor in office, Harold B. Lee.

This has been a journey to remember. This has been an experience to cherish.

Significance of President Lee's Visit to Jerusalem

Over the years, many General Authorities had come and gone, visiting in the Holy, Land. Each time the handful of Saints who lived in Tel Aviv and Jerusalem would eagerly inquire whether their coming was an official visit, to organize the Saints or start the work moving forward. Each time the Brethren would answer that they were there to vacation, or tour, or were just visiting while passing through on other assignments. This continued until President Lee visited the Holy Land in 1972.

David B. Galbraith, the first president of the Jerusalem Branch, had lived in the Holy Land since 1969. His perspective is important in assessing when the Church began to move forward in that sacred territory. In delivering the 1979 Mediterranean pre-Cruise lecture at Brigham Young University to those who were traveling to Jerusalem for the dedication of the Orson Hyde Monument on the Mount of Olives, Elder Galbraith said:

And now, as we look back on President Lee's visit, it stands out as a landmark. It may even be so important that it will be regarded as a landmark of the restoration of the Gospel.

It was most importantly the first visit made by a living prophet of the Lord in two thousand years. Never before had the prophet, seer, and revelator of the Church of Jesus Christ come to the Holy Land. For this reason, it was a very special occasion.

While in Jerusalem, President Lee repeatedly said that this was a time of preparation. He said it was a time to win friends and bring the name of the Church before the Jewish people and keep it prominently before them.

Elder Galbraith remembers the first major breakthrough accomplished at the time of the organization of the Jerusalem Branch.

During the prophet's visit we asked if we could meet on Saturday to worship instead of Sunday, explaining that in Israel everyone works a six-day week and Saturday is the Jewish Sabbath, the only day when school and work are closed. We were shocked when President Lee said that there was no precedent for this, that the scriptures were clear and that Sunday was the Lord's day. But just before he left he said: "I feel your request is too important to answer on the spur of the moment. Write me a letter directed to the First Presidency and the Council of the Twelve and explain your reasons for such a request." Just a few months later we received authorization to meet on Saturday instead of Sunday.

That Sabbath day decision was especially significant because it accommodated the local Saints and allowed them to meet their personal obligations on Sunday and to worship on Saturday.

President Lee's decision to authorize Saturday worship was an important change in direction and offered new thinking to the handful of Saints in the Holy Land. But Elder Galbraith also cited other important milestones:

While in Jerusalem President Lee suggested that we find a parcel of land on the Mount of Olives on which we might honor Orson Hyde. This wasn't the first time this suggestion had been made, but it came to us very strongly when made by the prophet. Well, we looked, and I can assure you that there is probably not a more sensitive piece of real estate on earth than the Mount of Olives, unless it is the Temple Mount across the way. There was nothing for sale, or at least nothing that would meet our needs.

But one day the mayor of Jerusalem, Teddy Kollek, called me on the phone and said: "Do you think your church would be interested in developing a five-acre tract of land right in the heart of the Mount of Olives and naming it after your Orson Hyde?" "Would we ever!" I exclaimed. Months of negotiation brought a fulfillment of mutual goals of the Church and the city of Jerusalem. I always felt that this was a very positive step in demonstrating our interest in a beautiful meditation park which could be enjoyed by Moslem, Christian, and Jew alike.

Why was this such a significant event in Church history?

Elder Orson Hyde was an original member of the first Council of the Twelve chosen by the Three Witnesses in 1835. He served with Joseph Smith in the leadership of the newly restored Church in this last dispensation. He left Commerce, Illinois (Nauvoo), on April 15, 1840, in response to a prediction by the Prophet that he should do a work among the Jews. He journeyed to Europe, calling upon Jewish leaders in England and Germany. Later, on this same mission, he traveled on to Constantinople, Cairo, Alexandria, and finally to Jerusalem. Eighteen months after departure, on Sunday, October 24, 1841, he ascended the Mount of Olives in Jerusalem and pronounced an eloquent prayer dedicating the land of Palestine for the gathering of the Jews. This was long before the Zionist movement under Thedor Herzle was flowering.

The Prophet Joseph Smith had blessed Orson Hyde, assuring him that inasmuch as he was interested in the Lord's people, the God of their fathers would bless him. His blessing stated: "In due time thou shalt go to Jerusalem, the land of thy fathers, and be a watchman unto the House of Israel; and by thy hands shall the Most High do a great work, which shall prepare the way and greatly facilitate the gathering together of that people" (History of the Church, 4:375).

His name is now being blessed by peoples of many lands. A monument to this Latter-day Saint Apostle stands on the very hill where he, and Jesus, spoke and taught. He is honored by Jews and Mormons as the symbolic reminder of a common belief in the gathering of the Jews back to their native land.

Additionally, while President Lee was in Jerusalem in 1972, he authorized also the local leaders of the Church to start searching for land which could be purchased. It was a most exciting idea to contemplate that after nearly two thousand years there might someday be a meetinghouse in Jerusalem.

The search for land was started and it continued through almost a decade of discouraging years. Yet the mere thought of the ultimate millennial world rule, after the second coming of the Savior, when there will be two world capitals ("for out of Zion [United States] shall go forth the law, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem"-Isaiah 2:3), gave the local Saints a feeling of being a part of historic destiny.

Citing still another breakthrough springing from President Lee's visit, Elder Galbraith said:

Now you can better appreciate why we consider President Lee's 1972 visit such an important landmark. Prior to his visit none of these movements were happening, and now, one event after another, meant that we were really moving forward.

He authorized the translation of the Book of Mormon into Hebrew and Aramaic.

Elder Galbraith continued in his 1979 presentation to emphasize later developments since President Lee's visit in Jerusalem:

In August 1975 the First Presidency announced that Israel would be administered by the International Mission. It was only about a year after that that the Brethren decided to call Special Representatives to serve nonproselyting friendshipping missions.

Also, in April 1977, the Church was first recognized as a legal association in Israel and became a legal entity in that country. We are no longer there by sufferance, but we are there by right.

Since then there have been other developments in education growing out of the decisions of the First Presidency. They approved sending the seminary and institute teachers of the Church to the Holy Land. The program is called the Scriptures Workshop, and in my opinion it is one of the most important accomplishments we have made.

Another important development was the Study Abroad Program, under which Church youth are brought to Israel, not for six days or for six weeks but for six months. This provides an in-depth exposure so that in this extended period our young people can get an understanding and appreciation of the culture, the tradition, the language, and the religion of the Jewish people and get a real feel for them and an appreciation for their way of life.

Elder Galbraith concluded his presentation with this summary:

I hope through this explanation you can see the progress we have made in this land since President Lee's visit. Please note the step-ping-stones, and you can see what President Lee meant when he said: "First we have to do all we can as a people and as a Church, and only then can we expect the Lord to remove the obstacles."

Thus was commenced a mighty movement which, while slow in starting, will not conclude until the windup of the great millennial events, which will be of interest to all Christendom. The Lord's church will be there, and perhaps historians looking backward will trace the commencement of preparation for these climactic experiences to a visit of the prophet of God, President Harold B. Lee, to Jerusalem in 1972, after an absence of such priesthood influence for nearly two thousand years.

Bruce R. McConkie Chosen New Apostle

One of the most urgent of the pressing problems President Lee found at home awaiting his attention was the necessity to make a selection of a new member of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles, filling the vacancy created when President Marion G. Romney was taken from those ranks to become the Second Counselor in the First Presidency. Now with the October 1972 general conference near at hand, President Lee pondered over the names earlier nominated by the Quorum of the Twelve at President Lee's request. While he didn't know it at the time, President Lee would make only this one appointment to the apostleship.

President Lee recorded in his personal journal on Sunday, October 1, 1972, the details of how he received the revelation to make this appointment:

Today while fasting, I went to the most sacred room in the temple. There for an hour I prayerfully considered the appointment of a new Apostle. All seemed clear that Bruce R. McConkie should be the man. When I told my counselors they both said that from the first they seemed to know also it was to be Elder McConkie.

When I talked with Brother McConkie he related an experience he had at the recent Mexico City area conference. When the General Authorities were sustained, following the reading of Elder Marvin J. Ashton's name (the eleventh Apostle in seniority), he heard his own name spoken. Since that time he had wrestled with this forewarning in the temple for a long time, and seemed to feel, as President Grant had expressed himself when he was called, that he "seemed to see" a council of the Brethren on the other side, where they were advocating his name.

Quorum of the Twelve sustaining Bruce R. McConkie (foreground) as an Apostle at solemn assembly, October 6, 1972

The reference to President Grant's call to the apostleship was not an unfamiliar story. Nine months later it was to resurface in the form of a personal letter from President Grant to Don Carlos Young, whose son, George Cannon Young, brought it to President Lee to read. In the letter President Grant related his testimony of his being called to be an Apostle, when he "seemed to see and hear" a council meeting beyond the veil in which his father and Joseph Smith were consulting together relative to the filling of two vacancies in the Quorum of the Twelve. The Prophet Joseph said to Jedediah M. Grant, Heber's father: "Here is Heber who is my son and bears your name. If he were to be called he would represent both of us," an obvious reference to the fact that Heber's mother had been sealed in a temple marriage to the Prophet Joseph Smith.

With the choice of a new Apostle made, the General Authorities were stirred to a spiritual pinnacle by the preparatory meeting of the Brethren in anticipation of conference, where Elder Gordon B. Hinckley and President Lee reported on their travels to the Middle East. All now was in readiness for the commencement of the 142d Semiannual General Conference of the Church.
