Brent L. Goates, Harold B. Lee: Prophet and Seer ( 1985)

28 "The Greatest Moment of My Life"

On only ten previous occasions since the Church was organized in 1830 had the Saints voted to sustain a new President. Such a moment in eternity came again on October 6, 1972, when Harold B. Lee was sustained in a solemn assembly as the prophet and President of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

Following the voting, which was done in quorums of the priesthood, after the Saints in general had raised their hands to sustain the new prophet, President Lee spoke:

Today at the greatest moment of my life, I find myself without words to express my deep and innermost feelings. What I say, therefore, must be actuated by the Spirit of the Lord, that you, my beloved Saints of the Most High God, may feel the depths of my soul-searching on this momentous and historic occasion.

President Lee spoke openly of his inner feelings and the bonds of brotherhood he felt with the Saints, as he continued:

Again, in the mighty demonstration of this solemn assembly, I am moved with emotions beyond expression as I have felt the true love and bonds of brotherhood. There has been here an overwhelming spiritual endowment, attesting, no doubt, that in all likelihood we are in the presence of personages, seen and unseen, who are in attendance. Who knows but that even our Lord and Master would be near us on such an occasion as this, for we, and the world, must never forget that this is his church, and under his almighty direction we are to serve! Indeed, I would remind you what he declared in a similar conference of the Saints in Fayette, New York, and undoubtedly would remind us again today. The Lord said: "Behold, verily, verily, 1 say unto you that mine eyes arc upon you. I am in your midst and ye cannot see me. (D&C 38:7.)"

After paying tribute to his toil predecessors in the office of President of the Church, President Lee returned to his soul-searching thoughts to allow his audience to look into his heart:

To him who sought no earthly honors, but whose soul delighted in the things of the Spirit. President Joseph Fielding Smith was there with his smiling face, my beloved prophet-leader who made no compromise with truth. As the "finger of God touched him and he slept," he seemed in that brief moment to be passing to me, as it were. a sceptre of righteousness. as though to say to me, "Go thou and do likewise."

Now I stood alone with my thoughts. Somehow the impressions that came to me were, simply, that... when an individual is ordained and appointed to lead the people. he has passed through tribulations and trials, and has proven himself before God, and before his people, that he is worthy of the situation which he holds..., and that when a person, as Elder Orson Hyde said in 1853, has not proved himself before God, and before his people and before the councils of the Most High, to be worthy, he is not going to step in and lead the Church and the people of God.

Comparing his tempering and molding to the shaping by adversity of the Prophet Joseph Smith, President Lee added:

At times it seemed as though I too was like a rough stone rolling down from a high mountainside, being buffeted and polished, I suppose, by experiences, that I too might overcome and become a polished shaft in the quiver of the Almighty.

Maybe it was necessary that I too must learn obedience by the things that I might have suffered-to give me experiences that were for my good, to see if I could pass some of the various tests of mortality.

The refining, purifying Spirit of the Lord had attested to his acceptance and pronounced a spiritual blessing upon him, which was described in self-analysis by the new President in these words:

The morning after my call came, as I knelt with my dear companion in prayer, my heart and soul seemed to reach out to the total membership of the Church with a special kind of fellowship and love which was like the windows of heaven, to give me a brief feeling of

First Presidency gives sustaining vote at solemn assembly, October 6, 1972

belonging to the more than three million members of the Church in all parts of the world.

I repeat what I have said on other occasions, that I most fervently seek to be upheld by the confidence, faith, and prayers of all the faithful Saints everywhere, and I pledge to you that as you pray for me, I will earnestly try to so live that the Lord can answer your prayers through me.

From President Lee's journal comes his personal reflections on "the greatest moment of his life":

The solemn assembly, as was expected, was a tremendous spiritual experience, especially for me, and from all that has been observed and said, it lifted the people heavenward. I conducted the session and President Tanner directed the voting, which was done with no dissent. My acceptance had to have been heaven-inspired, for without that my humble offering would not have had the impact which was in evidence.

In expressing his support of the First Presidency, the newly called Apostle, Elder Bruce R. McConkie, described President Lee as "a seer, a man filled with the spirit of revelation and of wisdom, who is on intimate terms with that Lord whose we are."

Speaking at the world broadcast of general conference from the Salt Lake Tabernacle on Saturday, October 7, President Lee again declared the principles and doctrines of the Church to provide the solution to the problems that afflict the world. President Lee observed in his diary after two days of general conference: "All the talks at each session were so harmonized as to make one think that each speaker had been assigned his topic, which was not true."

At the general conference priesthood meeting, President Lee bluntly denounced the actions of certain members of the Church who in defiance of the law were refusing to pay their income taxes to the government.

President Lee told those assembled at the general priesthood meeting more concerning his calling to preside over the Church.

Never had I thought of myself as one day becoming the President of the Church. As a boy in my rural community, I used to hear the Brethren talk about a "pillar" in the Church, I wondered what in the world it meant. It must be something great to be pillar in the Church. Well, now, maybe I am beginning to realize something about what that means.

When he bore his testimony at this general priesthood meeting, President Lee firmly taught the constancy of modern revelations:

I bear you my solemn witness that it is true, that the Lord is in his heavens; he is closer to us than you have any idea. You ask when the Lord gave the last revelation to this Church? The Lord is giving revelations day by day, and you will witness and look back on this period and see some of the mighty revelations the Lord has given in your day and time. To that I bear you my witness.

In the closing sermon of the conference President Lee conceded that the experiences of the conference and his installation as President of the Church had made him a different man. He said:

I come now to the closing moments of this session when I have time for some sobered reflections. Somehow I have had the feeling that during the expressions here, whenever my name has been mentioned, they were talking of somebody other than myself. And I really think that is so, because one cannot go through the experience that I have gone through these last three days and be the same as before. I am different than I was before Friday morning.

I cannot go back to where I was because of the love and faith and confidence that you, the people of the Lord, have reposed in me. So you have been talking of somebody else. You have been talking of somebody that you want me to become, which I hopefully pray God I may, with his help, become.

His last words to his beloved Saints on that occasion were:

My love goes out to my own family, to my associates, to all within the sound of my voice, even the sinners; I would wish that we would reach out to them and those who are inactive, and bring them into the fold before it is too late.

God be with you. I have the same feeling as perhaps the Master had when he bid good-bye to the Nephites. He said he perceived that they were weak, but if they would go to their homes and ponder what he said, he would come again and instruct them on other occasions. So, likewise, you cannot absorb all that you have heard and that we have talked about, but go to your homes now and remember what you can, and get the spirit of what has been done and said, and when you come again, or we come to you, we will try to help you further with your problems.

Thus ended the 142d Semiannual General Conference of the Church with its historic solemn assembly. The summary commentary in the diary of President Lee included these interesting reflections from the person most affected by the conference:

I gave the closing remarks of the conference and opened my heart to all my people and gave them my blessing as they were to now leave for their homes. Never has there been ever a greater spiritual experience when it seemed as though the Lord was indeed in our conference. There began an avalanche of letters, not only frown our faithful leaders and members. but from those not in the Church. One of the choicest was a letter from my dear old friend, John A. Sibley, a great Southerner and a former director of the Equitable Life Assurance Society of the U.S.A. with whom I worked.

I was particularly impressed by a letter from my second cousin, Sterling McMurrin of the University of Utah, who has seemed to withdraw from any contact with me. He extended the prayers and blessings of the McMurrin family and warmly commended my efforts. One sentence was somewhat significant: "Your uncommon strength as a leader and your personal talents and abilities and broad experience will be of inestimable worth to the Church in the crucial years ahead."

The public acceptance of President Lee was overwhelming. The spiritual momentum had built from session to session. Few if any in the congregation could remember a time when a President of the Church dominated the conference scene so completely. President Let's complete visibility seemed to add to the spiritual excitement of the Saints.

He opened his heart to the Saints, allowing everyone in the international television audience to look for the first time within memory into the heart of a prophet. The Saints loved it and loved him for it. During the interlude before the morning session on Sunday, the last day of the conference, the Saints began to sing spontaneously, "We Thank Thee, O God, for a Prophet," as they caught the first glimpse of their President. It was an expression of love for him who had been so magnificent in his leadership of the conference, lifting the congregation to the highest spiritual peaks and vet remaining ever so humble.

Rarely had a President of the Church talked so freely about his feelings as he ascended to the highest position on earth. This seemed to allow Church members to relate in a personal way with him, establishing an immediate, tremendous rapport. Obviously he was the youngest President after several aged prophets. The sermon style of the past, however, while always inducing respect, seemed seldom to place the prophet on a level which permitted his followers to empathize with him on a human relationship basis. President Lee did this and was loved for it.

President Let's capacity to influence others was magnified by the fact that he conducted every session of conference himself, thus controlling the tempo and the spirit of the meetings. It had been a long time since the Church had had a President who was physically able to work that hard during general conference. Too, President Lee was so at case as the Church's presiding authority that he also felt free to make little editorial comments and admonitions between the speakers, providing a welcome break from the all-too-familiar television script. It was a delightful change of pace which conference listeners found refreshing.

So at ease and so much in command was President Lee at this conference that, despite a huge television audience, he paused at one point to teach a lesson on light-mindedness and avoidance of laughter in sacred assemblies.

This conference also saw the appointment of five Brethren who were given new general Church leadership assignments. Elder Bruce R. McConkie was sustained as the new member of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles; Elders O. Leslie Stone, James E. Faust, and L. Tom Perry were added as Assistants to the Twelve; and Elder Rex D. Pinegar, president of the North Carolina-Virginia Mission, was called to fill the position vacated by Elder McConkie as a member of the First Council of Seventy.

Elder Faust came to President Lee's office thirteen days after his conference appointment was announced to inform him of a remarkable personal revelation by which he knew ten days before the conference through spiritual communication of his call to be an Assistant to the Twelve.

Having thus been installed and sustained, President Lee settled more firmly into his work of presiding over a fast-growing Church with 3,200,000 members. The time and challenge ahead was verbalized by President Lee in his address at the final session of the conference when he said: "We now come to the closing moments of a momentous conference, history making and in many ways a conference that has great significance because of the time in which we live. Perhaps never have we turned a page of the history of the Church with greater challenge, with greater problems, or with greater promise for the future."

Dr. Sterling McMurrin, in his family's letter of support to President Lee, saw the challenge of the Church in this manner: "It is a time when the Church itself is moving toward a fulfillment of its own universality and the cultivation of an authentic world-mindedness."

Faced with the unrelenting demands of his worldwide ministry, President Lee underwent a physical examination by his physician, who, when he heard about his narrow escape from death in the Holy Land, concurred that his life had been spared by the spiritual aid he had received through the priesthood blessing administration. For three hours President Lee again submitted to X-ray studies at the LDS Hospital to see if there were further need of steps to reduce the threat of blood clots to his lungs. Despite all this President Lee wrote: "I feel exceptionally well, considering the pressures and experiences of the last month."

Revealed Changes in the MIA

The next major developmental change in the Church concerned the restructuring of the Mutual Improvement Association to make it conform to the Aaronic Priesthood program, and the establishment of a Department of Melchizedek Priesthood designed to help Young Adults and Special Interest groups, so that they too could receive their activity program under the direction of priesthood quorums. On October 27, 1972, President Lee interviewed Robert L. Backman and Ruth Funk, and extended calls to them to preside over the newly aligned Aaronic Priesthood MIA programs for youths ages twelve to eighteen years. Both accepted their calls with humility and showed much promise for providing splendid leadership in the future.

Elder Backman will remember forever the counsel and significance of his interview with President Lee. He has written of that experience:

When I was called by President Harold B. Lee to be president of the Aaronic Priesthood-MIA, I had a most interesting conversation with him. He talked about the young people of the Church and about the challenges they face in growing up in this world in which we live. He expressed his deep concern about the fact that some of them could go through Primary, Sunday School, Mutual, priesthood quorums, and seminary and come out the other end without testimonies.

He said: "Do you know why I think it is? Because our young people have grown up spectators." Then he gave me a challenge that I've never forgotten and one which I have passed on to the youth of the Church on many occasions. He said: "Bob, I challenge you to provide a program that will prepare this generation to meet the Savior when he comes."

At a meeting on November 7, there was an unusually fine response from newly called leaders and commendation for the past work of those being released. The need for this new organizational structure was again stressed, which in part was a move to outline a program for the older single persons, including widows, because in the future the married couples would find their activity programs with the priesthood quorums where their husbands belonged.

After receiving the unanimous endorsement of the new MIA program from all the General Authorities in their monthly temple meeting, the changes were announced by the First Presidency in a circular letter on November 10, 1972. The Deseret News carried the announcement in its daily papers. Some, including some friends and relatives close to President Lee, thought this history-making move might be considered radical and revolutionary, especially in terminating the long prominence of the Mutual Improvement Association general boards. The answer by President Lee indicates the depths to which he felt these moves were not only justified, but inspired. He wrote in his journal: "I sought as kindly yet as forcibly as I could to tell these dear people that these were moves long studied, prayed over, and heaven inspired, and that they must accept without question the divine nature of these changes. Only God knows how I must stand alone ofttimes in making final decisions, and then must leave the results with the Lord."

President Lee was always concerned with strengthening the youth of the Church. A trip to San Diego, California, and Mesa, Arizona, by President and Sister Lee underscored his intense desire to build the youth of the Church whenever his time and energies permitted. A spiritually charged audience of two thousand young adults-eager, clean, and choice people, seemingly seeking earnestly to know what their role in the Church and world might be -heard the Lees speak in San Diego. After dedicating the San Diego Mormon Battalion Visitors' Center with Elder Mark E. Petersen, the Lees moved on to Mesa, Arizona, where over thirty-two hundred young people flocked to hear sermons from the President and from Bishop Vaughn J. Featherstone. President Lee's modesty concerning his appointment as President of the Church is clearly evident in his journal as he wrestled uneasily to defuse the adoration heaped on him by these admiring youthful audiences: "The spiritual fervor generated in such a gathering as the Mesa youth conference was almost frightening in its intensity, as they adopt in some cases an almost worshipful attitude, which I am trying earnestly to play down to a respectful and appropriate loyalty to their Church leaders."

President and Sister Lee came home by plane on Sunday, November 5, with this issue still on his mind as he attended, with Sister Lee, the Emigration Stake conference, his home stake. Following a talk by a priest who spoke of his spiritual commitment at the solemn assembly, President Lee was asked to speak. His comments included the same admonition he made in Mesa the day previously: "I took occasion to urge that they respect the position and not the person, in order for my next door neighbors to 'comfortably' accept me in my calling as tile President of the Church."

Back home in Salt Lake City President Lee consented to another interview by a newspaper reporter, representing the United Press International. Meeting in his small, conservatively furnished office in the administration building of the Church, President Lee, at seventy-three years of age, was described by the reporter as a man who looked and acted like a man in his fifties or sixties.

Inevitably the most piercing question of the day emerged in the interview as the reporter asked why the Mormon Church prohibited blacks from holding the priesthood-a practice that brought protest and criticism to the Church throughout the world. In answer President Lee gave the most positive reply yet announced to this vexing question, predicting that the Church would some day grant that privilege to blacks. His statement, published on November 16, 1972 by the UPI, was: "It's only a matter of time before the black achieves full status in the Church. We must believe in the justice of God. The black will achieve full status, we're just waiting for that time."

The article went on to clearly indicate that any change in the policy of the Church toward the black must come in the form of revelation, or divine communication from God to the President of the Church. President Lee ended this discussion with this classic statement: "Our doctrine towards blacks cannot be explained in abstract terms. If one believes in revelation, then the reason is clear; if he doesn't, then there is no adequate explanation."

The business of the over 3-million-member Church rolled on under the watchful stewardship of this dynamic prophet, seer, and revelator. This included giving tentative approval for a chapel and commercial building in Tokyo, Japan, to be constructed on a most expensive piece of property purchased earlier by the Church.

In the monthly temple meeting President Lee took occasion to ask the new leadership of the Melchizedek Priesthood-MIA to speak. The result was most pleasing and inspirational, as he recorded it:

In the temple meeting with all the General Authorities present with the exception of those ill, we enjoyed one of the most unusual spiritual experiences that seemed to have radiated into the souls of everyone. A most unusual testimony was borne by Bishop Vaughn J. Featherstone, whose early family life provided little to uplift him, and yet he, through great personal effort and determination, became one of the chief executives of the Albertson food chain, and now a General Authority of the Church. All of us had difficulty restraining our tears as we listened to this great man as he laid his soul bare to us.

When President Lee was shown the finished movie film of his admonition to the Saints regarding the subject of home and family, which had been filmed in the living room of his own home, his mind began to probe other forms of effectively teaching the Saints. Already this film, intended for all stake conferences in early 1973, was programmed for use in all stakes and missions with translations in seventeen different languages. These experiences impressed on President Lee at this early date the possibilities of using videotape communications in regional meetings and instructional programs, thereby avoiding the mounting burden of travel throughout the world by general board members from the auxiliary organizations. While the equipment costs would be great, they would be offset by immense savings on travel, reasoned President Lee, and its application in seminary and institute classrooms would be unlimited. His active mind was ever pioneering new ideas.

One adaptation President Lee made with the traditional Christmas observance for Church employees remained thereafter as the practice for many years. He changed the plan for the usual Christmas dinner for Church employees to a devotional meeting in the Salt Lake Tabernacle. On this first event, in 1972, three thousand persons were in attendance to hear the First Presidency speak. This was followed by a two-night reception in the foyer of the then new Church Office Building, where five thousand employees and partners came to personally shake hands with members of the First Presidency. The innovation was declared a success in President Lee's words: "While it was a strain on us, as the Presidency and our wives, the great feeling of unity and fellowship were ample compensation."

Unusual Priesthood Blessings

As with all other periods of his life, President Lee continued to exercise his seemingly unlimited faith for the purpose of bringing peace, happiness, and health to those who were suffering. Several interesting incidents occurred at the close of 1972.

A widow of a deceased Apostle came to the President to ask if he would give a blessing to her son-in-law who was out of work. Another somewhat "different" request came from a sister in Wyoming who sent a handkerchief and requested President Lee to bless it and return it to her so that she could place it over her husband's eyes. She had faith that his failing eyesight could be thus corrected and that through faith he would be made well. President Lee told her that he knew of no such ordinance, but with that kind of faith they would certainly be rewarded.

On December 19, President Lee received a letter from Mrs. Leora Johnson of Burley, Idaho, a faithful mother of a seventeen-year-old daughter, her seventh child, who had just been operated on for what was believed to be Hodgkin's disease, a form of fatal cancer. The daughter, Norma, was then facing a further abdominal spleen operation and cobalt radiation treatments. In this letter the mother explained that her daughter felt that if she could just shake the hand of the President of the Church (not even asking for a blessing), or receive a letter from the prophet, that her faith was sufficient that further surgery would be unnecessary.

President Lee responded by inviting the Johnson family to come to his office. He recorded in his journal the circumstances of their coming on December 27:

A lovely family by the name of Johnson drove all the way from Burley, Idaho, to bring their seventeen-year-old daughter with the faith that this beautiful child, if she could but shake hands with the President of the Church, could be made well. She is suffering from Hodgkin's disease in its advanced stages. The roads were hazardous from the ice and snow. Surely such faith will be rewarded. I gave her a blessing.

In a follow-up letter to President Lee, received on January 17, 1973, Norma Johnson explained the results of that blessing.

I would like to tell you something which happened to me after we left your office. You see, I was very tired after traveling all morning and all, so after we had eaten, we went to a motel. I lay down in the bed and took a nap. Then I awakened and wasn't awake enough to think clearly. I pushed myself up into a sitting position with my right hand. That may not sound unusual, but when I had my operation they cut through all the muscles to my shoulder, and not only was it painful to try to move and use it, but it just wouldn't work. As I sat there I realized I hadn't been able to do that before. Then I started moving it around to see how much movement I had. I found I could move it any way I could move my other shoulder. And it didn't hurt, either!

It was really hard to believe at first and I just sat and thought about it for a minute. Then, I remembered a phrase in the blessing you gave to me. It said something like all my nerves and muscles would be connected and returned to their normal functions.

I really felt wonderful. I really do love you and the Lord. You're both so wonderful to those of us who are weak and need help.

President Lee answered the glorious news in the above letter with a reply to Norma's parents, which demonstrates how he typically extended himself to see that those receiving blessings continue to find favor with the merciful God, who watches over the faithful.

I was so pleased to receive your letter. I had concern about the travel conditions following the hazardous trip you made to Salt Lake City, knowing that the roads could be worse upon your return. I assure you that I joined with you in praying that the Lord would see you safely home. Apparently he heard our prayers.

It was so reassuring to hear your testimony about Norma's returning strength. Surely the faith of that sweet, little girl will be rewarded in the Lord's own way and in his own time. Tell her to keep up her faith and her prayers and they will avail her much in support of the blessings of the priesthood which she has received.

You may tell her that we had her name on our prayer roll in the temple this last Thursday, where the First Presidency and the Twelve have their regular meeting in the council room of the temple. Here, around the altar, we offered a special prayer for her.

To Norma, President Lee directed a personal letter:

Yes, my dear girl, the day of miracles is not past. The same kind Heavenly Father sends through his priesthood the powers of healing to those who have faith in him and in the sacred ordinances by which he has granted special favors to those who arc worthy, like yourself.

I am not surprised at your testimony. I had a good feeling after you left here and as I told you I was confident your faith would be rewarded. Yes, I will await with interest further word from you, but I want you to know that we have .you in our prayers constantly as your name is now on our prayer roll in the council room where we have a special prayer circle when the Presidency and the Twelve meet each Thursday.

Year-End Meditations

The musings and ponderings of the President of the Church on the last day of 1972 were recorded in his private journal:

Without doubt this year has been the most momentous year of my life, with the death of President Joseph Fielding Smith and the reorganization of the First Presidency. Already I am looking ahead and seeking for solutions and answers from spiritual sources. The Lord will point the way to give direction and instruction to our Saints in all the world, without the necessity of having our general auxiliary boards continuing to make their worldwide travel, which has about reached a point that we must now begin to utilize the modern techniques which have been developed by industrial concerns. We must devise other ways to do the work of training by eliminating the extreme travel, about which some of our leaders are beginning to raise a warning flag. I am certain I have received, in some measure, a partial answer, and with the aid of the great leaders, and under divine guidance, a way will be found.

Thus, 1972 was closed, completing the first six months of the ministry of Harold B. Lee as President of the Lord's church on earth.
