Brent L. Goates, Harold B. Lee: Prophet and Seer ( 1985)

29 Another "Brief but Shining Moment"

Interesting projects continued to develop and concerns mounted as President Lee moved further into his leadership role as the prophet, seer, and revelator of the Lord's church.

He was pleased with the recognition of the Church as one of the world's major religions as indicated by a request made by the Columbia Broadcasting System to record a statement for television relative to the ending of the United States' participation in the Vietnam War, and also about the position of the Church on the decision of the United States Supreme Court to nullify all antiabortion laws in the individual states. The commentary was released on a Sunday morning world religion broadcast and featured similar statements from the Catholic Church, the Jewish religion, and the Lutheran churches, as well as a spokesman from a national women's organization. President Lee's answers placed the LDS Church closest to the Catholics on the abortion question.

Negotiations were pursued leading to the development of new visitors' centers on Temple Square, in Salt Lake City, at the Washington Temple, and at a project in Jerusalem. A representative of the Council of Churches came in ,January 1973 to discuss the proposals for a "meditation park" on the Mount of Olives in Jerusalem, which project was being promoted by Mayor Teddy Kollek of Jerusalem.

By February 1, President Lee also was moving toward the solution to the problem of excessive travel required to teach new leaders in the expanding Church. He learned from Jim Conkling and Elder Thomas S. Monson that some new recording developments were just coming on the market which held promise of providing the answers to the Church's communication needs, and which would be marketed at lesser expense than videotapes. He immediately dispatched Elders Monson, Neal A. Maxwell, and Thomas Fyans to see a demonstration of the products in Los Angeles, California.

President Lee's confident administrative style permitted him to trust his associates. It was not necessary for him to build a rigid dictatorship to maintain control of the decision-making processes within Church administration. Instead, he favored placing responsibility on leaders and then holding them accountable for their stewardship.

This openness of trust is illustrated by a situation which came to his attention in early 1973, when a department managing director came to discuss some business with him. From this interview President Lee discerned that this director's immediate superiors were holding the supervisory reins so firmly that he and others felt restricted in their assignments. They did not feel free to act as their titles indicated that they should perform. President Lee determined that he would interview those leaders to help loosen the controls and allow more independence for men in managerial roles at the Church headquarters.

One month later President Lee dealt with the problem of overreaching managing directors. When all the General Authorities were assembled for their monthly meeting, President Lee took occasion to repeat again the role of General Authorities in working with those who were not General Authorities. He urged them to remain in the role of a "coach" (his favorite and familiar simile for comparison), and not Become the "quarterback on the field." As he was speaking, a flash of inspiration prompted him to quote from Doctrine and Covenants 107:99, "Now let every man learn his duty, and to act in the office in which he is appointed, in all diligence." President Lee emphasized the meaning of the word let in his inspired, uncommon interpretation. To impress his point he defined it to mean to allow each man the freedom to act in his office and calling, and to restrain from meddling or interfering in his performance of duty. President Lee advocated instead that the leaders teach "correct principles," as the Prophet Joseph urged, so that those who follow can learn to govern themselves. This philosophy of management became another hallmark of President Lee's leadership.

At this same February temple meeting, preliminary reports from the Melchizedek Priesthood MIA management team were given by Elders James E. Faust, Marion D. Hanks, and L. Tom Perry. Their plans relative to the beginning of the activities among the eighteen- to twenty-five-year-old age group and the proposals for those persons twenty-six years of age and over were enthusiastically endorsed. President Lee described this meeting as one in which "we had a great outpouring of spiritual refreshment."

On February 7, 1973, a multi-million-dollar addition to the library at Brigham Young University was approved with student and private contributions promised to augment general Church funds. This library was later to bear the official name of the Harold B. Lee Brigham Young University Library.

An unusual dinner meeting in the Lion House became a memorable event, when 225 young adults of the Olympus Stake came to honor their outgoing stake president, Jack H. Goaslind, Jr., who then was called to be a counselor in the presidency of the Young Men's Mutual Improvement Association. Sister Lee spoke first at this meeting, and before President Lee began his address the stake leaders presented him with a replica of the famed Michelangelo sculptured figure of Moses. This gave President Lee a theme text for his remarks, and he later wrote that it "led me to some spiritual expressions that were beyond anything I had contemplated. There seemed to be an unusual spiritual outpouring." For President Lee, however, this was not such an uncommon circumstance; he often was led by the Holy Spirit while he was sermonizing.

No amount of business or problems at home seemed to keep President Lee away from his favorite practice of teaching the departing missionaries in the temple. Even on a holiday in February 1973, when the Church offices were officially closed, President Lee went to the temple for the usual question-and-answer session with the missionaries leaving for their missions.

Dedication of the Harold B. Lee Library at Brigham Young University, 1974: (left to right) Freda Joan Lee, Helen Lee Goates, Marion G. Romney, Dallin H. Oaks

The monthly meeting in the temple, which President Lee had inaugurated to keep all General Authorities informed, now had become an established, regular meeting. At that meeting on the first day of March 1973, President Lee learned that Elder Gordon B. Hinckley was assigned to a youth conference to be held in Johannesburg, South Africa. This gave him the idea that following such a conference they both might go to Brazil and explore the possibility of locating a temple site there. This was the initial development of the small temple concept for distant places, South America being the first desired site, which would look to the future pressing need for bringing temples closer to the increasing membership of the Church. This dream culminated with the dedication of the São Paulo, Brazil, Temple on October 30, 1978.

President Lee received something of a hero's welcome when he, his wife, and his secretary, Arthur Haycock, returned "back home" to Idaho on March 9, 1973. The occasion was a speaking request from the president of the Idaho State University student stake. At the ramp of the plane he was met by city, county, and state officials who presented him with an inscribed medal from the governor of Idaho. It was presented by one of the Idaho State Supreme Court justices. In the afternoon he spoke to a standing-room-only audience in a stake center, from which the address was broadcast by television and radio into two other buildings. President Lee summarized this event by saying: "While it was a pressure-packed experience, it was something of a homecoming for me, an Idaho native, now 'coming home' again."

During the month of March 1973, President Lee underwent extensive treatment to cure a chronic lung infection. He had suffered from a lingering cough and the presence of dark-colored mucus. A bronchoscopy was performed in the hospital. An intensive physical therapy program continued for a week in the hospital and after he returned home. It was conducted three times a day, from morning until late evening. Heavy medicinal support augmented the physical therapy. Through it all President Lee good-naturedly endeavored to maintain contact with his Brethren at the Church Office Building, though the hectic period of treatment made it most difficult. He wrote, "With the aid of my faithful Arthur Haycock, my son-in-law Brent, and plus Joan's untiring help, I have managed to keep meeting my responsibilities."

President Lee's seventy-fourth birthday, on March 28, 1973, which was to be his last, found him almost smothered by gifts, cards, letters, and bundles of Primary children's personalized expressions of love. The latter was no doubt stimulated by a calendar picturing a montage of President Lee's life, which appeared in the Friend magazine. He also took time on his birthday to perform a marriage for Kent Wirthlin Parker-a grandson of his dear friend, the late Bishop Joseph L. Wirthlin-and his bride, Pat Cracroft.

On the Sunday before the birthday, his daughter Helen invited all of President Lee's entire family for a home night to honor their grandfather. On this occasion each family member expressed his feelings about the contributions Harold B. Lee had made to him or her during the growing-up years. "It was a delightful occasion," wrote President Lee in his journal that night.

In April it was time for another general conference and the General Authorities assembled again in their pre-conference temple meeting where, as President Lee described it, "a wonderful outpouring of the Spirit was in great abundance." Following this meeting, President Lee recorded an Easter message on the Resurrection to be released on April 22 during the Tabernacle Choir broadcast.

The pre-conference events started with President Lee delivering the keynote addess as the Regional Representatives and Mission Representatives of the Twelve and the Seventies met in their seminar, which was held for the first time in the auditorium of the new Church Office Building.

On April 6, 1973, the first general session of the 143d Annual General Conference of the Church began. Explaining the inspiration that had come to him to counsel the Saints at this time, President Lee said in his opening address in the Salt Lake Tabernacle: "Today we are witnessing the demonstration of the Lord's hand even in the midst of his Saints, the members of the Church. Never in this dispensation, and perhaps never before in any single period, has there been such a feeling of urgency among the members of this church as today. Her boundaries are being enlarged; her stakes are being strengthened."

President Lee noted that in the early days of the Church the Lord had appointed specific gathering places, but now, in concurrence with the teachings of Elder Bruce R. McConkie at the Mexico City area conference, President Lee instructed that, with the Church membership distributed over the earth in seventy-eight countries and the gospel being taught in seventeen different languages, the gathering place for the Saints was in their own native countries. Rather than move to a "Utah Zion," they must make their homes and local stakes the places of refuge and strength by keeping the commandments of God. The Church would reach out to stakes throughout the world.

On Sunday afternoon, April 8, 1973, President Lee rose to give his concluding remarks after a marvelous and inspirational general conference:

I believe I have never known when the General Authorities have so completely covered the various areas where we have had great concern.

If you want to know what the Lord has for this people at the present time, I would admonish you to get and read the discourses that have been delivered at this conference, for what these Brethren have spoken by the power of the Holy Ghost is the mind of the Lord, the will of the Lord, the voice of the Lord, and the power of God unto salvation. I am sure all who have listened, if they have been in tune, have felt the sincerity and the deep conviction from those who have spoken so appropriately and so effectively.

President Lee concluded his teachings at this conference with his powerful testimony and blessing:

And so I come to you today with no shadow of doubting in my mind that I know the reality of the person who is presiding over this church, our Lord and Master, Jesus Christ. I know that he is. I know that he is closer to us than many times we have any idea. They are not an absentee Father and Lord. They are concerned about us, helping to prepare us for the advent of the Savior, whose coming certainly isn't too far away because of the signs that are becoming apparent.

All you need to do is to read the scriptures, particularly the inspired translation of Matthew, the 24th chapter, found in the writings of Joseph Smith in the Pearl of Great Price, where the Lord told his disciples to stand in holy places and be not moved, for he comes quickly, but no man knows that hour nor the day. That is the preparation.

Go home now to your people, I pray you, and say as did Joshua of old: "as for me and my house, we will serve the Lord" (Joshua 24:15). Teach your families in your family home evening, teach them to keep the commandments of God, for therein is our only safety in these days. If they will do that, the powers of the Almighty will descend upon them as the dews from heaven, and the Holy Ghost will be theirs. That can be our guide, and that kind of Spirit shall guide us and direct us to his holy home.

And so, as it is my privilege to do, I give you faithful members of the Church everywhere my blessing. God bless you, take care of you, preserve you as you travel home so that there may be no accident or no untoward experience. Take to your people out in the far reaches the feeling of love that we have for all of them; and indeed, as the missionaries go out, that love extends not only to those of our Father's children who are already members of the Church, but those who are our Father's children to whom he would have us bring the gospel of truth; make them also to enjoy all the blessings that we now have.

May the Lord help us so to understand and do, and fill our stations, and not be found wanting in the day of judgment that we have not done all we know how to do to advance his work in righteousness, I humbly pray in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ. Amen.

President Lee sensed that this testimony and blessing had been directed by the Spirit, for he wrote in his journal "that it seemed to have lifted me spiritually beyond my natural self and made me know that that which I felt was heaven sent."

The Tabernacle Choir closed the conference with a song which held enormous sentiment for President Lee, titled "The Link Divine." It was sung at the funerals of both his wife Fern and his daughter Maurine. He confided in his diary: "I was so emotionally moved by the music, as well as by the spiritual experience of my remarks, that I had difficulty controlling my emotions."

The weekend after general conference found President and Sister Lee and Arthur Haycock in New York City to participate in a press conference held at the famous Lincoln Center to announce the official commencement of construction on a new stake and two-ward facility in a thirty-six-story apartment house building complex which the Church was erecting on Manhattan Island.

Their first day in New York, April 13, began with a breakfast interview with Edward B. Fiske, religion editor of The New York Times. It was hoped that this visit would result in a more favorable reporting by the Times. After that President Lee met with two hundred missionaries in the Manhattan Ward chapel, and later in the evening, with the members of the New York Stake to explain the details of the new building plans as they affected those Saints.

The press conference was held in the Chorus Room of the Philharmonic Hall, across the street from the site of the new Church construction. In attendance were sixty-two representatives of radio and television stations, newspapers, magazines, and wire services. Emil Fetzer, Church architect, and Fred A. Baker, manager of the Church's Department of Physical Facilities spoke and unveiled an architect's rendering, in color, of the proposed building. President Lee explained to the journalists the significance of the Church coming to the largest city of the world with a major building program. At the end of the conference Wendell J. Ashton declared: "This was really a historic day for the Church in New York City."

The New York City weekend concluded with President Lee dedicating a newly completed stake and ward building for the New Jersey Central Stake. He returned home somewhat weary, but was not deterred from meeting the next day with 195 outgoing missionaries in the Salt Lake Temple for the usual question-and-answer session.

The next weekend was spent at home attending his own Emigration Stake conference. The Lees were entertained for Sunday dinner at his daughter Helen's home. He wrote true words in his journal respecting this family time when he stated, "This seems to be the only time we get to see much of our family anymore because of the varied activities and our intense schedule."

A most significant new idea was germinating in the mind of President Lee as he called Neal A. Maxwell, Church Commissioner of Education, to consult with him on Monday, April 23, 1973. The topic of conversation was the suggestion that there should be a "single voice" in the preparation and the production of teaching and training materials if the Church was to properly correlate its efforts in achieving desired educational objectives. The idea was favorably accepted. President Lee wrote: "This seems to be, in light of experience, much needed to avoid the overlapping and confusion now in existence." From this conceptual beginning came later the powerful, controlling Correlation Department of the Church.

On Sunday, April 29, 1973, President and Sister Lee were again away for a Young Adult area conference, this time in Long Beach, California. More than fourteen thousand young members of the Church from Southern California assembled within two hundred yards of the Pacific Ocean in the Pacific Terrace Center, the largest indoor auditorium in the area. So great was the interest in this conference that each attendee had to be admitted by ticket, and it was surmised by the sponsoring seminaries and institutes of religion and the stakes of Southern California that fifty thousand could have been assembled under similar circumstances in the Rose Bowl at Pasadena, California.

President Lee spoke of sanctification, which produces the right to "see Him, for He will unveil His face unto you," and said that the laws and ordinances of the Lord are the way by which we are purified and made holy. Continuing this thought he added: "Keeping every law that the Lord has given us is one step closer to receiving the right to enter one day into the presence of the Lord. The most important of all the commandments of God is that one that you're having the most difficulty keeping today."

The sermon was an intensive scriptural study. President Lee believed that the youth of the Church were hungering for the gospel truths. He taught them how to find Christ and gave them his powerful witness that here was the sure ground on which they could build happiness. His final admonition was: "You keep your eye on him whom the Lord calls, and I say to you now, knowing that I stand in that position, that you don't need to worry about the President of the Church ever leading people astray, because the Lord would remove him out of his place before he'd allow the President to lead his children astray."

Reaction from the young people attending the conference was most positive. They felt inspired, uplifted and blessed to have been able to hear President and Sister Lee, according to a letter of gratitude from Karl S. Farnsworth, Coordinator of the Church Educational System.

A glimpse into how President Lee's mind approached his opportunities to teach the youth of the Church is disclosed in a letter written May 15, 1973, to Bishop Gaylen R. Jackson, bishop of the Lompoc Ward, Santa Maria Stake, California. Bishop Jackson had praised President Lee's address and spirit at the Long Beach conference. In reply President Lee wrote: "I am always hopeful that when young people come needing and wanting so much, that I am able to respond to their needs. Your kind letter and comments have given me encouragement that our efforts have been fruitful."

Varied Concerns and Activities

President and Sister Lee, and Arthur Haycock and his wife, Maurine, then spent a few days vacationing at the Church's Laguna Beach, California, home. President Lee wrote in his journal, "This provided me a much needed rest from the pressures, and a time to catch up on matters long delayed at the office." He spent most of the day Monday dictating correspondence to his secretary and just trying to relax and to be free from the "worries which had troubled me."

President Lee's pleasant hiatus was disturbed, however, when he turned on the television that historic day of May 1, 1973, and became aware of the broad coverage given the Watergate scandal, which involved the president of the United States. He was greatly distressed by the continuing investigation of the "bugging" of the Democratic headquarters by overzealous Republican campaign managers. He heard President Richard Nixon give a lengthy national radio and television broadcast denying any personal involvement "by knowledge of or any effort to cover up" such activities. It was obvious, however, that every effort would be made to prove otherwise, and rumors of threatened impeachment were lurking should the stories be proven true. President Lee noted that ten of President Nixon's aides were summarily dismissed or had voluntarily resigned, and one, John H. Dean, was prepared to make new charges if granted personal immunity by the Senate Investigating Committee.

The worries on the mind of President Lee were not confined to Church and national affairs. Returning home for a quiet weekend President Lee spent much of his Sunday dictating letters to some of his grandsons, about whom he was concerned.

On Friday, May 4, 1973, all the General Authorities were again called to meet with the First Presidency in their monthly temple meeting. Of this session President Lee wrote: "As usual, there was a great spiritual outpouring, with a highlight being a testimony of Marion D. Hanks concerning his new work in the Melchizedek Priesthood-MIA."

President Lee called on Elder Gordon B. Hinckley to explain to all the Brethren the plan of the First Presidency to go forward with an "experimental" model of a small, stake-center-sized type of building which would serve as a temple in the Latin-American countries, nearer to the people than the larger, existing temples. He then assigned Elder Hinckley and Elder O. Leslie Stone to go to Europe and to South Africa, instructing Elder Hinckley to return home by way of Brazil, where a search could be made near the São Paulo area for a site where one of these new temples might be constructed.

Later this same day President Lee was surprised by a request for an immediate television interview with a team of reporters from the National Broadcasting Company, who had come to Salt Lake City for the purpose of preparing a documentary on the Church to be released in the fall of 1973. For an hour and a half President Lee sat before the brightly lighted cameras and responded to numerous questions from Tom Pettit, the interviewer, and head of the seven-member news team. The penetrating questions covered many Church doctrines. Without the aid of his scriptures or notes, President Lee was forced to depend on his memory of doctrine and history, but his performance brought praise and sincere admiration for his remarkable ability to perform so well without notice or preparation.

On the weekend President Lee spent all day Saturday reviewing an avalanche of divorce clearances, restorations, and cancellations of sealings, which duty he thought was indicative of the times and showed a weakening of morals anti an acceleration of sin and transgressions moving in upon the Latter-day Saints, who must live in this wicked world. This exercise was repeated on many weekends and always brought the President depression and occasionally even physical distress as he bore the burdens of the Saints.

The press interviews with this gifted and articulate President of the Church continued, the next being with James Reston, columnist and vice-president of The New York Times. who was in Salt Lake City to deliver the commencement address at the graduation exercises of the University of Utah on June 2, 1973. Mr. Reston very adroitly asked questions relating to how the Church was meeting various problems-with youth, missionary methods, welfare program, and finances-and President Lee, just as adroitly, moderated the discussion around the table to include President Marion G. Romney, Elder Mark E. Petersen, and Wendell Ashton, who had arranged the interview.

While President Lee was most interested in worldwide progress and growth in the Church, he was not willing that this expansion occur until it was totally, justifiable. The questionable availability of leaders to support a major expansion in Brazil, and political ramifications of a too rapid expansion in Korea, caused President Lee to hold up these ambitious developments in early June 1973.

The same caution was exercised by President Lee when one week later he turned around proposals which would place two of each stake's four quarterly conferences in 1974 under the direction of Regional Representatives of the Twelve. President Lee's reasoning was expressed in his diary as follows:

I called attention to the fact that this was wrong because of the time these volunteer, unpaid brethren would be called away from their families and their businesses, and also that they were not "line officers" in the priesthood line of authority. This brought out the fact that where the General Authorities could not go, then stake presidents must be assigned to conduct their own conferences. Therefore, no stakes should be created until there are presidents competent enough for such a responsibility. This seemed to bring some realistic thinking into the minds of some Brethren who seemingly are bent upon speeding new stakes without thorough consideration of their readiness to take over full responsibility in the event of fewer visits from General Authorities due to political restrictions or war conditions.

On June 20, 1973, the First Presidency commenced their three-day open house celebrating the completion of the new Church Office Building, which dominated the downtown skyline of Salt Lake City. At twenty-eight stories it was the tallest office building in Utah. Business and community leaders were invited on the first night, and all three members of the first Presidency and their wives were in the reception line, along with other General Authorities of the Church. President Lee's comments on this experience were: "While these nights were very tiring they seemed to provide a gesture of goodwill to our non-Church fraternities. We have received many expressions of appreciation and commendation."

Lord Thomson of Fleet (London, England), who had so graciously hosted President Lee in March 1972 on that historic trip, came to visit Salt Lake City and the leadership of the Church. On June 23, 1973, the General Authorities and their wives were hosts to him and his son, Kenneth. They were guests at a mountain restaurant, as Church officials tried to reciprocate for the gracious hospitality extended to President Lee in London, when they were privileged to meet a number of the top political, business, and religious leaders of England.

The Thomsons attended the MIA June conference general sessions and the Church's dance festival at the University of Utah stadium. On the following day, Elders Gordon B. Hinckley and Marvin J. Ashton took their guests to Lake Powell for a boating day, hosted by Bishop Robert Rice. There, under the evening stars, they held a "family home evening." Lord Thomson's son, Kenneth, greatly impressed the Brethren. He indicated that he wanted to return next year with his wife and sixteen-year-old daughter, whom he hoped would enroll at Brigham Young University.
