Brent L. Goates, Harold B. Lee: Prophet and Seer ( 1985)

30 A Historical Reorganization from the Lord

At the MIA June Conference of 1973, nearly thirteen thousand leaders and officers of the Melchizedek and Aaronic Priesthood MIAs from throughout the Church met in Salt Lake City to learn their new assignments and responsibilities. Announcements had been made by the First Presidency during the previous November regarding the MIAs' planned merger into the existing priesthood leadership structure, and the time had come to put those plans into action.

This reorganization was actually another in a series of changes in the Church's youth program which, under President Lee's direction, gradually moved the priesthood into the major leadership role previously held by auxiliary management. For example, in December 1970 the Aaronic Priesthood and the YMMIA teachers were instructed to serve simultaneously in both organizations, which began the unification between priesthood and auxiliaries.

This conference became a history-making event as the newly constituted Aaronic Priesthood and the Melchizedek Priesthood MIA was presented to the leaders, thus launching a new stage of priesthood leadership over the youth and the older single membership of the Church.

The June conference address of Ruth Hardy Funk, general president of the Aaronic Priesthood MIA Young Women, outlined the process by which this new adaptation came into being:

I recall a unique experience that was granted the general presidencies of the Aaronic Priesthood MIA when, on Thursday, March 29, we were invited to share a celestial hour with the Brethren in their weekly temple meeting at which all of the General Authorities were in attendance. At the time we were called, President Lee referred to the direction and change of the MIA program, as it now would become the Aaronic Priesthood MIA, as the most significant change I would see in my lifetime as far as the organization of the Church is concerned. After days and months, I am beginning to know in just a small way this enormous significance, which I am sure will grow and grow and encompass all the priesthood programs of the Church.

After weeks of prayerful pondering with our Presiding Bishopric, appraising considered suggestions by our board, after deep deliberation by the Correlation Committee, and exact scrutiny by members of the Twelve Apostles acting as advisers for the curriculum of the Aaronic Priesthood MIA, and finally after careful review by the First Presidency, the proposed organization was refined and made ready by this divine process to be presented in the temple. Our joy was great.

The day prior to this appointed hour, President Lee extended through the Presiding Bishop an invitation to the joint presidencies to be in attendance at the temple meeting when the proposal would be presented to the governing body of the Church. This would include us as women. The significance of this occasion was reinforced when President Lee said that according to his knowledge this was the first time in the history of the Church that any women had been invited to be in attendance at this special meeting.

The formality, the order, the spirit, the tremendous feeling of power, the strength of the priesthood manifest, and the sacredness of the entire setting were almost overwhelming. President Lee commented on the historical nature of our being there and then asked us to stand and be introduced individually.

Following Bishop Victor L. Brown's presentation and the discussion that followed, at which he initiated a response from the women present, a vote was called for, after which President Lee assured us of the support of everyone in the room. Official approval was thus made for the Aaronic Priesthood MIA.

In this holy setting in the company of these Brethren, prompted By President Lee's great consideration for the young women of the Church in allowing us to come, we were allowed to witness the process whereby all matters and all programs of the Church become official.

A simultaneous program to reach out to the single adults in the Church who are eighteen years of age and older was announced as the Melchizedek Priesthood MIA. This organization was to correlate Church activities that would meet the needs and bless the lives of these sometimes forgotten individuals in a couple-oriented society. President Lee expressed his immense concern for these single members and had earlier said to them:

Some of you do not now have a companion in your home. Some of you have lost your wife or husband, or you may not yet have found a companion. In your ranks arc some of the noblest members of the Church-faithful, valiant, striving to live the Lord's commandments, to help build the kingdom on earth, anti to serve your fellowmen.

Life holds so much for you . . . . The Church offers so much opportunity for you to help souls, beginning with your own, to find the joy of eternal life. (Strengthening the, Home [pamphlet].)

In words of absolute certainty President Lee made public his positive declaration that these revised programs were the product of revelation from the Lord. Speaking at the June Conference in the Salt Lake Tabernacle, President Lee said: "During the year that has passed, we have pondered, we have prayed, we have searched, and now we come with a declaration to all of you that you may know with a certainty that defies all doubts that this which you have witnessed, this which you have heard, has been divinely inspired."

Quoting from Doctrine and Covenants 59:21-23, which states that nothing offends God so much as to confess not his hand in all things, and noting the promise that the worker of righteousness will receive God's reward, President Lee stated his position:

I choose not to offend God by claiming that all of this has come by the will of men. I confess with all my soul that these things are of the Lord, and they have come through righteousness, through prayer, and through great needs.

What is that great need? During the last year I have tried to reach out to the youth at several youth conferences. From one of those youth conferences I received from a member of the stake presidency a note that suggests something that the world needs greatly.

He said: "One recently reactivated young man of about fifteen years said in our fast and testimony meeting, 'President Lee must have known that there was lots of wickedness and evil in this area and that the kids here were in trouble, and just to think that he loves us enough to come all this way just to help us.' "

If it means nothing more to the youth, to the children, to those who are young adults, and those who are over those ages, that all of this is to evidence a love for them that comes from the General Authorities and from your Heavenly Father, then we have yet accomplished much.

President Lee concluded his address with this reaffirmation: "You have had unraveled before your eyes an evidence of the revelations of the Almighty God in your day as he has poured out his blessings in this great step forward in building the kingdom of God."

The trend toward shifting the responsibility for youth programs to give more priesthood direction continued into the June conference one year later, in 1974, when the dissolution of the Mutual Improvement Association was announced. The Aaronic Priesthood MIA then became simply the Aaronic Priesthood and the organization for young women ages twelve to eighteen became known as Young Women; these functioned under the direct supervision of the Presiding Bishopric of the Church and under the bishop of each ward. This action released the APMIA Young Men's Presidency under Robert L. Backman, and the APMIA Presidency of Young Women, although President Ruth H. Funk, with her counselors Hortense H. Child and Ardeth G. Kapp, were resustained as the general presidency of the new Young Women's organization.

Thus ended the MIA of the Church, which traced its beginning to 1869 when President Brigham Young organized his daughters into what he called the Cooperative Retrenchment Association. An activity program for young men was organized also by Brigham Young in 1875 and named the Young Men's Mutual Improvement Association. The Cooperative Retrenchment Association became the Young Ladies Mutual Improvement Association in 1878 and the Young Women's MIA in 1934. The two auxiliaries became the Aaronic Priesthood MIA for Young Women and Young Men, under President Lee's reorganization, in 1972. The Melchizedek Priesthood program for LDS singles over the age of eighteen continued unaffected by the 1974 announcements.

The growing membership of the Church was announced at the 1973 June Conference as being contained in 244 regions, 935 total units made up of 624 stakes and 311 districts. At that time there were 44 non-English speaking stakes.

Mission Presidents Seminar

Three days later at a two-day seminar for new mission presidents and their wives at the new general Church office building, it was announced that there were a total of 107 Church missions, including six new ones opening on July 1, 1973.

At the new mission presidents' seminar, President Lee was asked to provide the usual keynote address to guide the thirty-five new presidents and their wives. This he did, speaking, as he recorded in his diary, "freely, without notes, to impress matters that I felt were 'heaven-inspired.' "

President Lee's remarks centered on the spiritual guidance needed by every individual associated with missionary work, at any level. He illustrated by explaining how he applied revelation in his missionary work, declaring:

When I ponder the lists of names submitted to me, I realize that these are not just names; they are real people, individuals, and I want to know something about them. I want to fulfill my responsibility with that same spirit of prophecy. No callings in the Church are given more careful consideration than are those for the mission field.

A prospective mission president once asked me, "Do you have a department to help me get my affairs in order?" I replied, "Yes, we do. It is the Lord. If you will go to him prayerfully, and humbly, he will help you get your affairs in order." That mission president returned to tell me that I was right.

President Lee further admonished the mission presidents:

Your work will not be judged by how many baptisms you put on the records of the Church, but by how many converts you have-how many are still active after a few years. No one is thoroughly converted until he sees the power of God resting upon this church, until he knows that Joseph Smith was a prophet of God, and that the present leadership of the Church is directed by the Lord. The new member must do his spiritual housekeeping and be prepared to receive the witness of the Spirit. After that he must work to keep his testimony alive, because it is as fragile as an orchid: it will die if he departs from gospel principles and activity in the Church.

You are being sent out to teach your missionaries to convert the world. Teach them the simple principles of the gospel. And what is the gospel? The answer is found in the scriptures:

"And this is my gospel-repentance and baptism by water, and then cometh the baptism of fire and the Holy Ghost, even the Comforter, which showeth all things, and teacheth the peaceable things of the kingdom. (D&C 39:6.)"

On June 27, 1973, after speaking for an hour at the mission presidents' seminar, President Lee left by plane for New York. He wanted to attend his Union Pacific Railroad director's meeting there; but first he visited with Lee Bickmore, who was convalescing from a severe illness at his home in Short Hills, New Jersey.

At the Union Pacific meeting which he felt was so important to him, he heard an oil expert from a Union Pacific subsidiary give a clear picture of conditions then confronting this country and the world, a time when the need for oil and gasoline supplies was at an all-time high.

Having been briefed on the economic and business conditions then existent, which information President Lee prized and felt important to his data bank for decision making in administering a worldwide Church, he then tried to return hastily to Salt Lake City in the hope that he could arrive before the mission presidents' seminar had adjourned. On his return flight he failed to make connections in Chicago for Salt Lake City because he received no personal courtesy from the booking airlines company. The airline was apologetic, but that didn't erase the need for seventy-four-year-old President Lee to make the long walk from one airline terminal to another without assistance. President Lee noted in his journal "that if this experience had been taking place a week earlier I could not have physically been able to carry my bag that distance." No doubt that this was the last time that the President of the Church ever traveled across country alone, and the airline companies were thereafter much more attentive.

Back in his office on July 3, 1973, President Lee found the usual accumulation of correspondence awaiting his attention, but he also had time to think back on the events of the previous year. It was on July 2, 1972, that President Joseph Fielding Smith died suddenly. President Lee wrote of his feelings after having served one year as the President of the Church: "The tremendous responsibilities that were to be then thrust upon me were little realized, but as the time passed, in retrospect now, I could never have contemplated the magnitude of problems that we were confronted with. One of the major challenges was the challenge of what to do to meet the problems of our young people who were needing guidance and direction, as young adults in a changing world."

With Friends and Family

Amid an intense heat wave that sent Salt Lake City temperatures soaring as high as 104 degrees, the first anniversary of the current First Presidency's installation did not pass by unnoticed by other members of the Presidency. President Tanner and his wife, Sara, invited the First Presidency, along with the President of the Twelve, Spencer W. Kimball, and their wives to a dinner at their apartment. In President Lee's personal commentary describing that event there is contained a goal statement which had dominated his administration. Wrote President Lee: "It was a most delightful experience to review the unity which had developed a warm, spiritual feeling of brotherhood to bind us together with bonds more sacred than blood relationships, as we together had sought the blessings of the Lord upon his work. We have strived to unite our brethren and the Church, with the priesthood to predominate as the center and core of the Church and kingdom of God, as set forth in the revelations."

During the second week of July, there was a brief respite from duties as President and Sister Lee, with his secretary and his wife, Arthur and Maurine Haycock, took several days of rest at Laguna Beach in California. While there they again listened to the Watergate hearing, in which testimony was being given that involved the president of the United States in compromising situations.

The Lees returned on July 14 for a Lee family reunion, held in Tooele, Utah, the town where two Lee brothers first settled on arriving in the West in 1850. The Church position of President Lee had been maximally exploited to produce a crowd numbering over a thousand, resembling a stake conference assemblage in filling the Tooele Stake Center to capacity. For years previous the Lee family reunions had struggled with only modest numbers attending.

The program was carried out in such a manner as to give the Lee family a great thrust in genealogical research and temple work. A huge chart reaching around the cultural hall gave all present a chance to identify themselves with their ancestral lines. Many of those present staved until after President Lee had spoken so that he could shake hands with them and their children. Some even handed their small children to President Lee and then snapped photographs of their progeny with the prophet. In all, President Lee was delighted with the new enthusiasm being generated in the family reunion, for he wrote, "I felt it was the most successful reunion we had ever had and that much good will result from it."

New York and Back

Following the late July meeting of the Union Pacific Railroad Board in New York City, President and Sister Lee went to Rochester, New York, where Wendell J. Ashton had arranged for news media representatives to photograph and question the President at the Hill Cumorah, just prior to the opening of the annual pageant. The President and his party saw the pageant two nights from different points each night. President Lee noted great improvement in the continuity of the "New Witness for Christ in America" and likewise in the music, composed and arranged by Crawford Gates. A heavy rain fell an hour before the performance one night, but none fell during the pageant.

Personal appearances at the pageant were demanding. One day before the pageant President Lee met in the Sacred Grove, where the Prophet Joseph's first vision took place, with about one thousand participants in the pageant and with the missionaries. On the Sunday morning of July 29, President Lee spoke to about ten thousand persons assembled on improvised seats at the base of the Hill Cumorah. Again that evening at a sacrament meeting in the Rochester Second Ward chapel, seven hundred members of the pageant cast and the area missionaries came to hear the President of the Church. By now, and with the constant greeting of the crowds who surrounded him as he moved from place to place, President Lee's voice had begun to show the strain, and a hoarseness developed that made his speech difficult. After a restless night he was the guest of the Eastman Kodak Company on a tour of their facilities before returning home to Salt Lake City.

The first Sunday of August found President Lee at home in Salt Lake City and responding to an invitation from President Francis M. Gibbons, the president of the Bonneville Stake and "our faithful secretary and administrative assistant to the First Presidency." The setting was the annual Bonneville Stake's sunset services on the grounds of the Garden Park Ward. There was such a large crowd, estimated at 2, 100 people, that many were standing; young people were on the adjoining rooftops, and some were even perched in surrounding trees. Music was furnished by the Bonneville Stake Symphony Orchestra and Chorus under the direction of Harold Gottfredson, and was superb, according to President Lee, who also praised the audience by reporting, "never was there better attention."

The message was one of patriotism, as President Lee explained how the Saints might save the Constitution of the United States, if that tragic day was to come. President Lee's summary in his diary follows:

I concluded by calling attention to the prophecy of Joseph Smith that "the constitution would hang as by a thread." I then pointed out that the basic principles of the three separate and independent branches of government were being threatened in the demands of the present Senate investigation. I then read a statement of President J. Reuben Clark, Jr., pointing this out that if either the executive, the legislative, or the judicial were to presume to make the law, enforce it, and then pass judgment, we would approach tyranny. At least the audience heard and listened to this last statement. I finally said that if the basic principles laid down in the Constitution were to be threatened, as is now a possibility, that we might come to [such] a time as when Abraham bargained with the Lord to save Sodom and Gomorrah from destruction, if he could find some righteous souls. Similarly, if such a downfall of the Constitution were imminent, the righteousness of this people might again importune the Almighty to save it because of their pleadings. o

Into this busy mixture of business, development of the Church's administration, pressures from family, and the constant demands of the Saints, President Lee never overlooked the opportunities to do his personal missionary work. An interesting experience developed out of the regular monthly board meeting of the Bonneville International Corporation on August 10, 1973. President Lee recorded the event in his diary as follows:

Following the meeting Lloyd Cooney, station manager of our KIRO radio and television station [Seattle], and I continued a discussion we have been having on religion in an effort to get him baptized. His wife, daughter, and two sons are members, but he has delayed until he received a testimony of the truths of the gospel. During our interview I reviewed the process by which one may know when, beyond his reasoning, he feels in his heart that it is true. Then, I said, the Spirit is conveying that witness. He then told me he was ready and his first thought was to have me baptize him, and to have Tony Eyring confirm him a member of the Church. I readily agreed, but then related the experience of the Grimm family of Tooele, Utah, when Pete was baptized by his son. This put into his mind the thought that this would be a great experience to share with his family, also. A few days after his return home he called to say that one of his sons was to baptize him and the other confirm him that same evening. He seemed to have a tone of great joy in his voice. 1 told him that when he had been in the Church a year that I would be delighted to perform the sealing in the temple for him and his family, perhaps at the time one of his sons was to be married.

Memories of his boyhood missionary days in Denver, Colorado, later resurfaced when President Lee spoke at the funeral services for Willis J. Woodbury on August 13, 1973. Elder Woodbury was Harold B. Lee's first missionary companion in the Western States Mission in 1920. Being a cello player, Elder Woodbury would often offer to play music as an entry into the homes so the two Elders could then teach the gospel While they were companions Elder Lee provided piano accompaniment many times for Elder Woodbury as they performed for Church and civic groups, in addition to the homes they had tracted out.

Area Conference in Munich, Germany

On the weekend of August 18-19, 1973, President Lee spent many hours preparing his sermons for the Munich area conference, timing each talk to be certain he was within prescribed bounds. This was difficult to do because approximately half of the time would be allotted to a translator. In addition, President Lee recorded a taped message for the servicemen in Europe which was to be released from Munich. President Lee wrote of his concerns during these pressure-packed days: "These arc the last-minute pressures that seem never ending as I try to meet the demands that come repeatedly from various departments and elsewhere. Only with the Lord's help can I begin to encompass all that is expected of me."

In that humble spirit President and Sister Lee and Arthur Haycock and his wife left by plane to travel to Munich, via New York and London. They arrived in Munich, Germany, for the area conference to begin on Saturday, August 25, in the spacious Olympic Auditorium, where the 1972 Olympic Games were held.

It was the largest group of Latter-day Saints ever assembled in continental Europe for a conference of the Church. Some fourteen thousand members from many areas of Europe-Germany, Spain, France, Holland, Belgium, Switzerland, Austria, and Italy-had gathered eagerly to hear messages from the General Authorities and their own Regional Representatives of the Twelve and stake presidents. The conference included the participation of the Salt Lake Tabernacle Choir, along with other fine local choirs. Road-shows, folksinging, and folkdancing provided color and interest during the Friday night preconference activities, which included entertainment from many nationalities.

With Spencer W. Kimball in expression of love at area conference in Munich, Germany, 1973

This conference was an experience in love and brotherhood. The Saints came from varied cultures and backgrounds. They came from nations that had been enemies and had previously been engaged in mortal combat. There were tremendous language barriers to be overcome. It was finally decided to broadcast the proceedings in German over the loudspeaking system and provide simultaneous translation into five other languages through cordless headsets.

The Saints came by bus, by car, and by train. Crossing at country borders was not easy. They were housed in public campgrounds, in temporary dormitories, such as schoolhouses, in small guest houses and hostels; the seven hundred members of two Munich branches invited some seven hundred visiting Saints into their homes. These housing arrangements had been made six months in advance.

Munich was chosen as the conference city not only because it is centrally located but also because facilities were available there that would accommodate the expected crowds. Olympic Hall was none too large. For some meetings every seat in the fourteen-thousand-scat capacity building was taken, necessitating the setting up of extra chairs.

All three members of the First Presidency were in attendance, as were ten other General Authorities, many of whom spoke in languages other than English. In his opening conference address President Harold B. Lee said:

My beloved brothers and sisters: It gives me genuine delight to stand before a congregation of Latter-day Saints in this city of Munich.

In this congregation there are those who speak at least six different languages, including the Germans, the Italians, the French, the Spanish, the Dutch, and the English. Although we are of different nationalities, I am reminded of the remarks of the Apostle Paul as he wrote to the Galatians in his day when he said: "There is neither Jew nor Greek, there is neither bond nor free, there is neither male nor female: for ye are all one in Christ Jesus." [See Galatians 3:26-29.]

As I paraphrase that statement and apply it to this congregation, I might say, using a part of the Apostle Paul's language: "We are neither English nor German, nor French, nor Dutch, nor Spanish, nor Italian, but we are all one as baptized members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, and also we are Abraham's seed."

President Lee then explained why area conferences were held:

We have planned to go out to many of the far reaches of the Church because of the great worldwide increase of Church membership that has grown in 143 years. From 1840 to 1973, we have gone from that mere handful of members who were organized on April 6, 1830, to over three million members, who live in seventy-eight countries throughout the world, speaking seventeen different languages.

One of our purposes in coming to these various areas is that many more of our people can assemble than could come to the semiannual conferences held in Salt Lake City. Our first desire is to evidence to our members everywhere, even in the most remote areas from the headquarters of the Church, that they are not forgotten and that the General Authorities of the Church have their interests at heart. They are working for your interests no matter where you are, just as they are doing for members who are nearer to the headquarters of the Church.

Another reason we have come is to feel the spirit of our members everywhere, to become acquainted with the conditions under which you live, to meet the local leaders of the Church, and to communicate with them in such a way that they may feel the unity of the purpose for which they have been called to preside in the stakes, missions, and branches of the Church.

And finally we have come together in a more intimate way to strengthen the members of the Church to stand true to the covenants that they made in the waters of baptism at the time they came in as converts to the Church. The nature of this covenant was explained by the ancient prophet, who before the baptism of some new converts, spoke these words that have great meaning: "that ye have entered into a covenant with him, that ye will serve him and keep his commandments, that he may pour out his Spirit more abundantly upon you. [Mosiah 18:10.]"

Then President Lee spoke of the immense contributions that the peoples of the countries involved in the conference had made and were then making to the building up of the kingdom of God, followed by a strong plea to the Church members to follow the current leadership. He then bore this personal testimony:

Now, my dear brothers and sisters, as one whom you have sustained in the high position as the President of the Church, I declare unto you in all soberness and sincerity, with all the humility of my soul, that I know that The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is indeed the kingdom of God on earth. The priesthood of God is here and has been handed down since the restoration of the Church through messengers who were sent to restore that authority that the ordinances of salvation might be administered to all the faithful on the earth. The priesthood of God holds the keys of salvation; it is our responsibility to discharge our obligation to the Lord in carrying the message of the gospel to all our neighbors and friends in every way we can to assist in the spread of the gospel so that the time may come when the prophecies of ancient days might be realized, when truth will cover the earth as waters cover the mighty deep. So I bear my witness as to these things and leave my blessing with you this day as we now go into the proceedings of this great conference, in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, amen.

In his closing remarks President Lee referred to the youth activities held on the Friday night prior to the general sessions. In his personal journal he recapped his thoughts on this subject:

We are sure that bringing together these young people at this first attempt was a beginning that will bear fruit for the future. Many of these young people saw for the first time how many youth there are in the European area. Before this many of these have been in small branches where there are just a handful of young people. Now suddenly their vision has been enlarged. Their pride in performance will be improved.

President Lee gave reassurance to the European Saints by saying:

Don't be afraid of the testing and trials of life. Sometimes when you are going through the most severe tests, you will be nearer to God than before.

I say to you faithful Saints, be true and faithful in keeping the commandments of God. Then the power of Satan cannot touch you. You will feel peace in your heart as you live the commandments and you will know that the Father is in heaven, that all is right in the world, and even though you may at times be forced to suffer persecution, if you will be true to your faith, the Lord will reward you far beyond the value of money.

This testimony closed his public address: "I know that Jesus is the Savior of the world. I received this special witness at the time I was called to be an Apostle of the Lord Jesus Christ. Before I was worthy to accept a position in the Council of the Twelve Apostles, I knew I must love everyone who walks the earth."

The final song of the conference was sung, the benediction offered, and the conference was closed. But the people could not leave. Spontaneously they joined with the choir in singing "God Be with You" as President Lee stood smiling and waving. When he left the building to get into his car to return to the hotel, he was all but overrun, mostly by the young people who desired one more look, one more word, one more smile, one more picture, one more wave anti a possible handshake.

The editor of the Ensign wrote of the conference: "They knew they may never see their prophet again. Once more they burst forth into song and nearly everyone was crying, singing, and waving as the car pulled away. The experiment in love and brotherhood was complete. Blessings from the meeting in Munich will flow from the Alps to the Pyrenees, from the North Sea to the Mediterranean for years to come."

The results of the conference were most gratifying to President Lee. He recorded in his journal on Sunday, August 26, 1973 this summary statement: "Never have I experienced such a response from an audience as I have had here, where all animosity of past wars were forgotten in a brotherhood which made everyone a 'kin' in The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. The choirs provided a marvelous harmony of appropriate music for the conference."

The route homeward after the Munich area conference took President and Sister Lee to visits with missionaries in Vienna, Austria, and on to London, England, where President Lee reorganized the London Temple presidency. While in England the President spoke to all the missionaries in the England Central and England Southeast missions, and also to the British Isles Young Adult conference. Here they shared the spotlight with Elder and Sister Gordon B. Hinckley.

On the last day of August, president Lee was taken to the Loughborough Stake center, where nearby a college facility was utilized for housing representatives of the young adults from the British Isles and some parts of Ireland. As he spoke to a general session of this conference President Lee was impressed by the quality and appearance of these wonderful young people. To take further advantage of the presence of the President of the Church, a joint session was held in a stake building which would accommodate a crowd of fifteen hundred. Tickets were issued to members and leaders of the Birmingham, Bristol, and Loughborough stakes.

On the final day of the youth conference, a theater provided seating for an even greater audience to hear President and Sister Lee and Elder and Sister Hinckley. President Lee wrote in his journal that "the spiritual response was overwhelming and many tears were shed as we bade farewell to those in attendance after giving our testimonies and our blessings upon those assembled."

President Lee arrived home in Salt Lake City on September 3, 1973 and the next day at the office was greeted by the concern over a governmental revolt in Chile, where the Communist regime under President Salvadore Allende Gossens was ousted. The safety of the mission president and missionaries was assured by a telephone call which miraculously brought contact with the mission president after repeated failures.

Last Conference Preparations

On September 11, President and Sister Lee went to Brigham Young University, where, at the first devotional assembly he had attended since becoming President of the Church, he was presented with the Exemplary Manhood Award from the Associated Men Students of BYU. ASBYU President Mark Reynolds presented the award to President Lee "for his brilliant and dynamic leadership" and his sterling qualities as a man.

For the occasion a record-setting attendance of 23,304 students and visitors filled the Marriott Special Events Center on campus. The crowd was said to be the largest worshipping congregation ever held in one place in the Church, so far as was then known.

President Lee seized the opportunity to again counsel his young friends: "Keep your eye on those who preside over the Church today and look to them. Jesus Christ stands at the head of the Church today and thus current revelation is the strength of the Church.

"The measure of your true conversion is whether or not you see the power of God resting on the leaders of this Church and thus gain a testimony that goes down into your heart like fire."

President Lee also had specific advice for students. He said: "Learning by faith is no task for a lazy man. Someone has said, in effect, that such a process requires the bending of the whole soul -the calling up from the depths of the human mind and linking them with God. It makes those who follow this course great in the sight of the Lord."

The President also reinforced the statement of President Dallin Oaks, made the week before in his opening address to BYU students when he noted that the main reason for establishing BYU was for students to perfect their education. President Lee added that the need to develop the whole person while at college, and not just the intellect, is vital.

The small temple concept was much on President Lee's mind when offers to purchase Church-owned property in Tokyo, Japan, appeared to present sufficient earnings to finance such a project. The First Presidency sent a team of attorneys and building and financial advisers to Japan to make further studies.

With the October 1973 semiannual general conference looming ahead, the meeting in the Salt Lake Temple on Thursday, September 27, summoned the attendance of all General Authorities of the Church. There President Lee had the new Melchizedek Priesthood-MIA leaders, Elders James E. Faust and Marion D. Hanks, present reports, and Bishop Vaughn J. Featherstone did likewise for the new Aaronic Priesthood-MIA. President Lee was pleased with the reports and wrote: "There was a delightful spirit and harmony which has laid the stage for a most spiritual general conference."

He also chose this occasion to more broadly introduce the latest administrative development in his ever fertile mind. Having just called Dee Anderson to become the full-time auditor of the Church budgets and also the executive secretary of the Budget Committee, with the hope to gain a constant watch over the expenditures of the Church and thereby achieve long-needed control, he then explained in the temple meeting that the First Presidency was now considering a similar move to "audit" the teaching materials of the Church. This move would be for the purpose of making certain that the end result would be like assuring that the "water would go to the end of the furrow" -meaning that these materials attained the goals for which all the Church teaching efforts were intended. President Lee later wrote his impressions of that day, saying, "This will be one of our next moves to improve and to give us a 'security' in spiritual as well as in financial matters."

This early insight was the forerunner of the Church Correlation Department. Already he had in mind the one man who had the vision and the ability to do what was needed in this venture, Elder Neal A. Maxwell, then serving as the Church Commissioner of Education and as a Regional Representative of the Twelve.
