Brent L. Goates, Harold B. Lee: Prophet and Seer ( 1985)

31 Last Conference Messages

The October 1973 general conference began as usual with the Regional Representatives of the Twelve Seminar, attended also by all General Authorities. As was customary, President Lee set the theme for the seminar at the opening session. He tried again to impress the Regional Representatives with their role as "staff' officers, as contrasted with "line" officers, and to re-emphasize the importance of the training and teaching they did to prepare stake and mission leaders.

Balmy autumn weather allowed thousands who could not Find seating in the historic Salt Lake Tabernacle and other buildings to sit on the lawns and flower boxes around Temple Square as the 143d Semiannual General Conference opened. Favored with such beautiful weather the Saints came expectantly in great numbers to obtain counsel and instruction from their Church leaders on meeting the challenging evil influences of the world.

Speaking in the opening session President Lee used the text, "Who Am I?" stating that the answer to this question was desperately needed if the Saints were to cope with the lack of self-respect evident among the people of the world, especially in their manner of dress and personal behavior, which in many cases seemed to lack the basic principles of decency. The message was a timely one and deeply struck a responsive chord with his listeners. President Lee declared:

Self-respect and the behavior that flows from it grows out of an understanding of who we are, where we come from, and our relationship to God, our Heavenly Father . . . . When one has departed from the path which would have given him peace, he is like the troubled sea, casting up mire and dirt (Isaiah 57:19-21). It seems to me that it all results from the failure of the individual to have self-respect.

Who are you? You are all the sons and daughters of God. Your spirits were created and lived as organized intelligences before the world was. You have been blessed to have a physical body because of your obedience to certain commandments in that premortal state. You are now born into a family to which you have come, into the nations through which you have come, as a reward for the kind of lives you lived before you came here and at a time in the world's history, as the Apostle Paul taught the men of Athens, and as the Lord revealed to Moses, determined by the faithfulness of each of those who lived before this world was created.

At the general priesthood meeting, more than 185,000 men and boys, listening in person or by closed-circuit radio and television, heard President Lee give instructions regarding marriage, divorce, the programs for single persons in the Church, and a summation of area conferences. President Lee wrote in his journal brief comments about this meeting in these words:

I spoke plainly to men who arc over the usual marriageable age and have neglected finding a wife. I also urged the local brethren to give sanction and leadership to the new Melchizedek Priesthood-MIA. Some of them have not yet done so, and expressed their conviction that this work should be carried from now on. I hope that from the present emphasis much more good will be realized, rather than to lag behind and then miss the thrust of enthusiasm which has been engendered.

President Lee began his general priesthood meeting sermon by reference to the recent area conference in Munich, Germany:

As we witnessed the feeling that was there, we have felt that we should continue these area conferences. The first such conference was held in Manchester, England, where we had about fourteen thousand there. We were in Mexico City next, where we had representatives from all the Central American countries and from Mexico. We came away with a feeling that if. . . we all realized that we were the children of one father, we would stop shouting at each other as much as we do. We are all of one great family. And that should apply not only in political matters, but it should apply in our dealings with each other.

As politicians, or as those who are engaged in competitive temporal activities, we must say: "Because I am a holder of the priesthood of the living God, I am a representative of our Heavenly Father and hold the priesthood by which he can work through me; I can't stoop to do some of the things that I might have done otherwise, because of my fellowship with the priesthood of God."

We can't be holders of the priesthood and be like other men. We must be different, because priesthood means a fellowship in the royal household of the kingdom of God.

President Lee spoke plainly about the Melchizedek Priesthood-MIA program-which dealt with single persons eighteen years and over-encouraging priesthood leaders to assume their responsibilities and to see that the program functioned in the wards and stakes, saying:

Now brethren of the priesthood, if you knew the processes by which these new programs came into being, you would know that this just didn't come out of somebody's imagination; this was done after some of the most soulful praying and discussing that I believe I have ever experienced. We know, and we announced when it was given, that this came from the Lord. This was an evidence of a thing that the Lord was giving us to do to meet a special need.

But it troubles me when I read some of these things where sisters are pleading with us to try to do something to stimulate the activities where the bishops or stake presidents have not caught on to what it is all about.

In the early days of the welfare program, everywhere I went people were saying to me, "Brother Lee, how is the welfare program going?" And I would answer, "Just as well as the individual bishop of each ward makes it go. In some wards it is an absolute failure. In other wards it is going great guns." And that is exactly what is happening with what we are now launching.

He also spoke directly to the single priesthood holders over twenty-five years of age and still unmarried, warning them: "There are some examples that point up an area of need which applies directly to young men in the past-twenty-five age, who for some reason, and hard to understand, as holders of the priesthood are shirking their responsibilities as husbands and fathers."

President Lee quoted President Joseph F. Smith, who also spoke as a prophet on this same subject, saying: "Marriage is not a man-made institution. It is of God. It is honorable, and no man who is of marriageable age is living his religion who remains single."

President Lee also warned about the growing tendency of married people seeking new companions, which had become then a growing problem in the world. In urging all married brethren to avoid being caught up in the fearful wave of marriage dissolutions, President Lee cautioned:

One of the painful things that I have as a responsibility is to have to work through the flood of recommendations for cancellations of sealings of those who have been married in the temple. It is frightening, brethren, and much of it stems from one of the greatest of all sins, next to murder, the sin of adultery, that is running rampant throughout the Church. Brethren, we must ourselves resolve anew that we are going to keep the law of chastity; and if we have made mistakes, let's begin now to rectify these mistakes. Let's walk toward the light; and for goodness sake, brethren, don't prostitute the wonderful opportunity you have as men, as those who may link hands with the Creator in the procreation of human souls, by engaging in an unlawful relationship that will only go down to disgrace and break the hearts of your wives and your children. Brethren, we plead with you to keep yourselves morally clean and to walk the path of truth and righteousness, and thereby gain the plaudits of a Heavenly Father, whose sons you are.

The sunny, autumn weather lasted uncharacteristically throughout the entire conference, to the delight of the thousands of Saints who came from throughout the free world. Finally, on Sunday, October 7, 1973 the time arrived for President Harold B. Lee's closing address. No one suspected these would be the last words he would speak in general conference from the podium of the Salt Lake Tabernacle.

Listeners paid close attention as President Lee began his last conference sermon by discussing the conditions of the world and current events. He announced the safety of two hundred missionaries and the members of the Church caught in the political uprising in Chile, and also the students and members of the branch of the Church in Israel, which nation was then involved in the three-week war initiated by Egypt and Syria.

Then President Lee mentioned those who would persecute the Church, saying: "Some of the greatest of our enemies are those within our own ranks. . . . When we see some of our own today doing similar things as was done to betray the Master in his day, some who have been recognized and honored in the past as teachers and leaders who later fall by the wayside, our hearts are made sore and tender. But sometimes we have to say just like the Master said, 'The devil must have entered into them.' "

President Lee used a favorite quotation from President George Albert Smith regarding those who have disgraced the honors that the Church had given them in times past and who were trying to join the forces of the enemy against the work of the Lord, and then added: "So, you Saints of the Most High God, when these things come, and they will come-this has been prophesied-you just say: 'No weapon formed against the work of the Lord will ever prosper, but all glory and majesty of this work that the Lord gave will long be remembered after those who have tried to befoul the name of the Church and those of its leaders will be forgotten, and their works will follow after them.' "

President Lee gave personal witness concerning the direction given at this conference:

Now, you Latter-day Saints, I think you have never attended a conference where in these three days you have heard more inspired declarations on most every subject and problem about which you have been worrying. If you want to know what the Lord would have the Saints know and to have his guidance and direction for the next six months, get a copy of the proceedings of this conference and you will have the latest word of the Lord as far as the Saints are concerned.

As I say, realizing that is a very bold statement to make, I have thought of a great revelation where the Lord said something about the creation of the universe. . . . (D&C 88.)

May I paraphrase what the Lord has said in this great revelation. Any man who has seen any of the least of these happenings among us today, has seen God today moving in his majesty and in his power. Let us make no mistake about that. . . .

Likewise I say to you, as I stand with you and see the moving hand of the Lord in the affairs of the nations of the world today, we are seeing the signs of our times as foretold by the prophets and by the Master himself, and we see what is happening and the things transpiring before us in our day. In the Church, we have been witnessing some of the most dramatic things, and I can testify that you are seeing what the Lord is revealing for the needs of this people today.

Referring again to world conditions, President Lee asked the question:

Where is there safety in the world today? Safety can't be won by tanks and guns and airplanes and atomic bombs. There is only one place of safety and that is within the realm of the power of Almighty God that he gives to those who keep his commandments and listen to his voice, as he speaks through the channels that he has ordained for that purpose.

President Lee then quoted extensively from Matthew, chapter 24, but said that the message could be better understood from the Inspired Version, which is found in the Pearl of Great Price, telling of the signs and wonders preceding the Savior's coming. He indicated that Church members should be familiar with those signs, and stated:

Brothers and Sisters, this is the day the Lord is speaking of. You see the signs are here. Be ye therefore ready. The Brethren have told you in this conference how to prepare to be ready. We have never had a conference where there has been so much direction, instruction, so much admonition; when the problems have been defined and also the solution to the problem has been suggested.

Let us not turn a deaf car now, but listen to these as the words that have come from the Lord, inspired of him, and we will be safe on Zion's hill, until all that the Lord has for his children shall have been accomplished.

President Lee then paused. For a moment he collected his thoughts. As he concluded, there was a certain intimacy in his manner as well as in his voice:

And so in the closing moments of this conference, I have been moved as I think I have never been moved before in all my life. If it were not for the assurance that I have that the Lord is near to us, guiding, directing, the burden would be almost beyond my strength, but I know that he is there, and that he can be appealed to, and if we have ears to hear attuned to him, we will never be left alone.

I am grateful for strong men like President Tanner and President Romney and the Twelve and all the General Authorities, who are united more so than I have ever experienced before during my lifetime. The General Authorities are united and working together and are speaking with one voice to the world.

Follow the Brethren; listen to the Brethren. I bear you my witness as one whom the Lord has brought to this place, as Brother Gordon B. Hinckley has said. I thank the Lord that I may have passed some of the tests, but maybe there will have to be more before 1 shall have been polished to do all that the Lord would have me do.

Sometimes when the veil has been very thin, I have thought that if the struggle had been still greater that maybe then there would have been no veil. I stand by, not asking for anything more than the Lord wants to give me, but I know that he is up there and he is guiding and directing.

Peace be with you, not the peace that comes from the legislation in the halls of congress, but the peace that comes in the way that the Master said, by overcoming all the things of the world. That God may help us so to understand and may you know that I know, with a certainty that defies all doubt, that this is his work, that he is guiding us and directing us today, as he has done in every dispensation of the gospel, and I say that with all the humility of my soul, in the name of the Lord, Jesus Christ. Amen.

And so it was finished. Over sixty times Harold B. Lee had stood before the Saints in the Salt Lake Tabernacle during general conference, and now he had declared his last message, powerfully and humbly. He had witnessed, as it was his divine commission to do, to the Lord Jesus Christ's impact on His modern Church. Emotion filled the Tabernacle as he sat down. He had opened his prophetic heart to the visibility of all. He had conducted all the sessions of the conference and had once again interjected praise, recognition, and commendation for each speaker. He bad personalized the meetings and provided additional warmth seldom seen in the televised, script-bound proceedings.

Elder Wilford W. Kirton, Jr., the Church attorney, offered the benediction, his voice wavering, visibly touched by the spiritual force of the meeting.

Following conference President Lee received numerous commendations and personal testimonies from many who had received a spiritual resurgence from President Lee's leadership and counsel. For example, the Church historian, Leonard J. Arrington, wrote to President Lee: "The staff of the Historical Department was particularly inspired with your Saturday night talk in priesthood meeting, in which you were willing, as was characteristic of Brigham Young, to share your own personal experiences and thoughts in an informal way for the edification of the Saints."

Sister Olga C. Brown of Salt Lake City, a former member of the Primary Association General Board, wrote: "I admire your ability and efficiency in conducting the sessions, and your thoughtfulness in making little remarks of praise and encouragement to many of the speakers."

Delivering last conference address, October 1973

Paul H. Evans, director of Broadcast Relations for Bonneville International Corporation, wrote to report to President Lee that the coverage was successfully given through 250 television and radio stations broadcasting from within fourteen countries and forty-eight states in the United States to a total of forty-one countries in five languages. Then he added his own appreciation for President Lee's conduct of the conference:

Our great admiration for you continues to grow as proudly we have observed the effective and gracious manner in which you most prestigiously direct the carefully programmed segments of the various proceedings. Your warm and thoughtfully placed comments, spoken within each of the sessions, to us were offerings of such appropriateness as to significantly strengthen the inspirational tone of the entire conference. Also, how beautifully your major addresses completed totally the inspirational flow of those meaningful gatherings.

Even nonmembers were moved to write. Mr. and Mrs. John C. Matheny from Richmond, Virginia, wrote:

Gentlemen: We have had a problem in our family that we just did not know how to solve and had been praying for inspiration for two weeks as to how best to handle it. Today, we turned to your station and the "Mormon Conference"-and there was the answer to our prayers!

The messages carried on this program concerned so many of the general family problems of today that it was unbelievable that so many could be on the same program. We realize that just listening to the program will not solve our problem in itself, but at least we know what to do in trying to solve it ourselves. Keep these messages coming!

One week later, President Lee wrote in his journal:

From everywhere, and including the Council of the Twelve, the unanimous expression came that there was something unusual in this conference. The Brethren were inspired to define the problems confronting us today, and then suggested the application of gospel teachings to supply the solution. There seemed to have been something in my closing remarks which came spontaneously that seemed to many to be prophetic of the times, and to outline the need for our people to "stand in holy places and be not moved" as the Master has counseled, when the signs of his second coming were drawing near.

And a Little Child Shall Lead Them

There was one more grand postlude to the general conference. As was traditional, the General Authorities and their wives met for dinner the week following general conference. The committee in charge chose to reenact a meeting of the pioneer Polysophical Society, which President Lorenzo Snow founded in 1852 and featured every two weeks a varied program of talent in music, literature, and dramatics to broaden the cultural and intellectual edification of the membership. (This organization became the forerunner of the Mutual Improvement Association of the Church.)

At the conclusion of this program, held on the twenty-sixth floor social hall of the new Church Office Building, little seven-year-old Michael Van Harris, grandson of the master of ceremonies, Francis Urry, brought a note to President Lee. Michael had taken similar notes to each of the performers throughout the evening. The note asked President Lee to "leave his blessing" upon the gathering. Led to the stage before the assemblage by little Michael, President Lee picked the young boy up in his arms, turned his back to the audience, and spoke quietly with him. Then he faced the audience and said:

This is about the greatest honor that I've ever had, to be led by Michael's hand. The Savior said, "and a little child shall lead them and. . . he that would be the greatest among you must be the servant of all." Michael says I am supposed to give you our blessing. I asked him what that meant, and he said, "I guess it means to pray."

This has been a most delightful occasion. And not the least of the performers has been this sweet, lovely child. I'm sure we've been impressed by Michael. You must have a wonderful mother and father, and you must have a sweet family life. We're proud of you, Michael.

The innocent little lad answered politely, "Thank you." President Lee went on, saying to Michael:

And so if you'll stand by my side now. . . . We've just come, Michael, from a great conference-our Heavenly Father's conference. We've felt a great spirit that our Heavenly Father wanted to pour out upon his Saints and we were there, and as we bowed our heads in prayer, and lifted our eyes to heaven, we knew he was up there. You know he is up there, don't you? You've talked to him, haven't you Michael? You know that he answers prayers. So now, you and I, you silently and I will speak a prayer tonight. . . ; you close your eyes and just whisper to yourself your prayer, and I'll pray out loud.

"Heavenly Father . . . we present ourselves in this glorious company where have been assembled some of the most choice Saints in all the world. We have felt the joys of thy attending influence, our Father. We've known what it has meant to hear Thy voice, through thy servants. We've heard thy words, as thou hast spoken into our minds, and impressed upon our hearts, and the Saints have felt that, Father, for this is a day when thy people need so much, realizing as we do, that we have the keys for the salvation of all mankind. In a day of great troubles, when waters are heaving over their banks, great earthquakes occur, wars and rumors of war, bloodshed, horrors, oh, if it please thee, our Father, that in the tops of the mountains thou hast builded a throne to which thou could come, even a Holy Temple, that we've tried to keep clean and worthy. We remember the lament that thy Son did make. It saddens our hearts when He said, 'the foxes have holes, the birds have nests, but the Son of Man has no place to lay his head.' Holy Father, we trust that that may never come in our time, where there shall not be a place where thou canst come and where thou canst lay thy head. We'll try our best to keep these sacred places for thine abode. Keep us under thy watchful eye, our Father. As never before, we need thee.

So, tonight with united hearts, we thank thee our Father, for the privilege of being in thy service. We know what it means to humble ourselves realizing that in order for us to win thy favor, we must, like thy Son, be willing to kneel at the feet of those who need their feet bathed in cooling water and lifted up above the sordid trials and miseries of today. Give us the grace, Father, to be that humble, and follow the pattern that was laid down by Thy Son.

With these humble words of prayer, led to this point by this dear, sweet pure child, take us home in safety. Let our homes be filled with thy love, and to thee we will ascribe the honor the praise and glory, forevermore."

The social was ended, but President Lee's acquaintance with Michael Harris was not. They seemed to have a special kinship with each other, as though they had met before in another sphere. President Lee called for Michael to come and visit him in his office. When his parents brought him, the prophet had him occupy the chair of the President of the Church, saying, "One day, Michael, you just might be sitting there." When it was time for him to leave, President Lee put his arms around Michael's parents and said: "I have never been so impressed with a child's spirit in my life. He has a very special mission to perform. If you will guide him in the paths of righteousness, you will stand back and marvel at the things that this boy will accomplish."

In subsequent correspondence Michael received a beautiful letter from President Lee and an autographed photograph. Michael wrote back and sent his photograph, saying to his mother, "President Lee is my very best friend, and Mom, President Lee really loves me." Subsequent events in the lives of these two special friends were to confirm Michael's declaration.

When President Lee passed away, just two and one-half months later, Michael felt as though one of his immediate family had died. His parents comforted him with the thought that if he would always choose to do right, as President Lee would want him to do, he could see him and be with him again.

In the spring of 1976, two and one-half years later, a sudden unprecedented foreboding came on nine-year-old Michael and his family. Their thoughts turned to death and dying, for no apparent

Michael Van Harris visits the President in the Church Office Building, October, 1973

reason. Within two weeks Michael became ill and was treated at the hospital to clear his lungs from congestion. The congestive attack occurred again when his father was at work, and his mother, Jane Urry Harris, hurriedly prepared to make another emergency trip to the hospital. After arranging for the other children, Sister Harris came out of the house to find Michael sitting on the step of the porch with a beautiful, peaceful look on his face. He had an almost transparent, ethereal appearance and was not struggling or fighting for breath as before. When his mother called for him to come, he stood up immediately, then fell backwards, unconscious. From this attack he was not to recover, and he died a few days later. He lingered only long enough for his mother to learn that she must not oppose a divine will that was calling back home her oldest son. The peace and warmth that followed her acquiescence gave her the assurance that Michael's passing was the Lord's will.

Elder Boyd K. Packer, who had selected Michael from among many other young boys for his role as messenger for the Polysophical Society program, wrote to Michael's parents that, in his opinion, Michael's death was not untimely and that he felt that President Lee had played a part in his passing, because they had such an unusual relationship.

Sister Harris later spoke of this heart-wrenching experience and offered this testimony: "I also believe, with every fiber of my being, that President Lee did come to again take Michael by the hand and lead him, for I will never forget the look on Michael's face before he became unconscious. It was the same look of peace and love that he had the day we spent with Michael's 'very best friend,' President Harold B. Lee."

Careful Use of Authority

Now it again was business as usual at the President's office in the stately old Church Administration Building on South Temple Street in Salt Lake City, Utah. The routines found President Lee slowing down the appetite of the External Communications Department for establishing new, staffed centers throughout the world. Instead, President Lee again turned the effort inward and urged the leaders to work through the regular priesthood channels with volunteers to obtain better results.

A favorite, oft-repeated teaching lesson, which had its origin in President Lee's early welfare experiences, found renewed application immediately following the October 1973 general conference. President Lee found it necessary at this time to counsel with a Church-appointed administrator whom he had sustained in a stressful personnel controversy but whom he later privately counseled with love so he would become more compassionate with his workers. President Lee wrote to this leader of "lessons that I had to learn the hard way," recalling this experience:

On one occasion, just before I was called to the Council of the Twelve, a certain matter was referred by the Welfare Committee to the new Presiding Bishopric, the President of the Relief Society and myself, for a study and a recommendation. I waited to be invited to a discussion of that subject, but I received no invitation. Shortly there came a letter signed by all three members of the Presiding Bishopric announcing a decision. This, of course, was construed by the Welfare Committee as a slight and an affront to the Welfare Committee.

Brothers Henry D. Moyle and Robert L. Judd of the Committee went over to see President J. Reuben Clark, Jr., and voiced their disappointed feelings. President Clark, being a good diplomat, sidestepped any head-on controversy between these brethren and the Presiding Bishopric.

Within six weeks of that incident I was called to the Council of the Twelve. President Clark invited me one day to ride with him to his ranch in Grantsville so that he could have the opportunity of talking with me about some matters, and during the course of our visit together I made mention of the incident with reference to the Presiding Bishopric refusing to meet with me, representing the General Welfare Committee, and then I made some such remark as, "I suppose that now the Presiding Bishopric would be willing to sit down with me and discuss the problem."

President Clark saw in this remark a continued feeling of resentment on my part. He said to me, rather sharply, but with a fatherly look: "Yes, my boy, now you do have the whip hand, but in your position, you must never use it."

As additional responsibilities have come up to the present time I have found that President Clark's counsel was very wise and timely. The greater my responsibilities the more careful I must be in using that authority in a way that would be not inconsistent with my position. The greater authority one has the more careful he has to be to not use his whip hand.

Then, after assuring his leader-student of his personal love for him and confidence in his operation of one of the Church's largest corporations, he summarized: "I would have you think, as I have been taught to think over the years, that the greater my responsibility the more careful I must be in using my authority to the hurt of individuals whose feelings might be more tender because of my position."

President Lee again turned his love and energy to the young people when on October 13, 1973, he was a speaker at the University of Utah Institute. About three thousand students crowded into three buildings to hear the President, but through telephone connections with twenty other institutes throughout the West, the total audience was estimated at ten thousand persons. His subject was "In Whom Can You Trust?" a topic chosen in the wake of the betrayals of trust by national political leaders and some, as well, in the Church.

Prominent visitors continued to pay their respects to the President of the Church. On October 16, 1973, Mr. McKinley-president of the Texaco Oil Company, one of the world's largest producers of oil-and his wife visited with President Lee. His guest expressed his concern about the acute dangers of the Arab nations cutting off their oil supply to the United States because the Americans were supporting their enemy country, Israel, in the growing Middle East crisis. President Lee told his visitors of scriptural statements as to the "signs of the times" which were to precede the second coming of the Lord and that this conflict could be related to such predictions. In retrospect, both men were right. An Arab oil embargo did leave America in short supply, and President Lee's warnings were prophetic.

The next day eleven of the leaders of the Pentecostal Church, who were among those attending a ten-day world conference revival in Salt Lake City, were received by President Lee in the First Presidency's room of the Church administration building. He described his visitors of the clergy as well appearing and respectful in every way, with the exception of one young man. President Lee was intrigued by the doctrinal aspects of their conversation and wrote in his journal concerning this exchange:

They opened up avenues for a dialogue on points of doctrine to pinpoint the differences in their beliefs as well as to call attention to their teachings as to abstinence of liquor and tobacco, which if we were to exclude the use of tea and coffee, would be close to our Word of Wisdom. When it came to the importance of baptism of the Spirit, as being essential to salvation, they had difficulty in their lack of understanding. Also, vicarious work for those who had no opportunity while in mortality to accept the gospel was new to them. They seemed very interested and yet amazed as we called attention to the promise of the Master that they would hear the voice of the Son of God and would come forth out of their graves. The whole concept of salvation for the dead was unfamiliar doctrine which they apparently had overlooked. They, asked why this doctrine wasn't taught in the Book of Mormon, since we declared that therein was the fulness of the gospel. This called for a definition as to what constituted "the gospel," and that where the power to confer the Holy Ghost was to be found, therein was the source of all that pertained to the gospel.

His Books

Apart from the initial book Youth in the Church (later republished in 1973 as Decisions for Successful Living), which had been offered for public sale twenty years previously, the first reference President Lee made in his journal to the publication of his sermons and writings appears under date of October 22, 1973. On that date he learned that Doyle Green, managing director of Church Magazines, with President Lee's knowledge was working on a compilation of his sermons for a proposed book that would be published soon. Besides the Decisions book, President Lee authored Ye Are the Light of the World, the book just mentioned, and Stand Ye in Holy Places, which was published in 1974 after his death.
