Brent L. Goates, Harold B. Lee: Prophet and Seer ( 1985)

32 Final Spiritual Crescendo

On October 26, 1973, President and Sister Lee went to Ricks College in Rexburg, Idaho, where, after a luncheon with faculty and Church leaders, both were speakers at a devotional assembly before a student body and homecoming audience of over five thousand persons assembled in the Hart Auditorium and two other buildings. Before speaking, President Lee was presented with a painting of the Teton Mountains and a plaque containing a beautifully inscribed tribute. An originally composed song entitled "Listen to the Wondrous Voice" and other music dedicated to President Lee was sung by the combined Ricks College choruses.

At Ricks College-A Spiritual Peak

President Lee recognized a spiritual peak on this occasion and was prompted to say to his audience: "There is a wonderful spirit here today. There is something unusual about this meeting today. I don't know what it is. Maybe it is one of those occasions when we could feel and hear and see remarkable things happen. You have brought with you a tremendous spirit, and I feel it."

President Lee's entire message hit a pinnacle of patriotic spiritualism and has been quoted often in defining the Church's attitude toward its elected officials and the destiny of America as a chosen land. President Lee's call for optimism, even in the gloom of the Watergate scandal, which shortly would bring about the resignation of President Richard M. Nixon, became a rallying banner for the Saints to follow. He firmly stated that this country would survive against all its enemies, whether from within or without.

President Lee told his listeners that the United States is a great nation:

We are living in a time of great crisis. The country is torn with scandal and with criticism, with faultfinding and condemnation. It is an easy thing to climb on the bandwagon and join the hotheads in condemnation, little realizing that when they do, they are not just tearing down a man, they are tearing down a nation, and they are striking at the underpinnings of one of the greatest of all nations of all the world-a nation that was founded upon an inspired declaration we call the Constitution of the United States. The Lord said it was written by men whom he raised up for that very purpose, and that Constitution stands today as a model to all nations to pattern their lives.

President Lee then pointed out why the United States is such a favored land: "This is the cradle of humanity, where life on this earth began in the Garden of Eden. This is the place where the New Jerusalem is. This is the place which the Lord said is favored above all other nations in the world. This is the place where the Savior will come to his temple."

Stressing again that the United States will never fail, he said: "Men may fail in this country. Earthquakes may come, seas may heave themselves beyond their bounds, there may be great drought and disaster and hardship, as we may call it, but this nation, founded as it was on a foundation of principles laid down by men whom God raised up, will never fail."

President Lee then shared with his collegiate audience a portion of his remarks made recently in a meeting of the First Presidency and the Council of the Twelve:

While it is true there are dangers and difficulties that lie ahead of us, we must not assume that we are going to lie down and watch the country go to ruin. We should not be heard to predict ills and calamities for the nation. On the contrary, we should be providing optimistic support of the nation. You must remember, brethren, that this Church is one of the most powerful agencies for the progress of the world, and we should all bear our testimonies [so] that we... all sound with one voice. We must tell the world how we feel about this land and this nation and bear our testimonies about the great mission and destiny that it has.

It is the negative, pessimistic comments about the nation that do as much harm as anything to the country today. Brethren, we must tell them in a positive way what they should be doing. We should not be so concerned about finding out what is wrong with America, but we should be finding what is right about America and should be speaking optimistically and enthusiastically about America.

His classic statement of trust in the destiny of America was also made during this sermon: "Yes, men may fail, but this nation won't fail. I have faith in America, and you and I must have faith in America if we understand the teachings of the gospel of Jesus Christ."

Another spiritual event took place prior to the devotional assembly. A committee of college students was assigned to prepare a tribute to President Lee by an instructor, Mrs. Dora R. Jenkins, teacher of creative writing at Ricks College. All were busy with homecoming activities and were overwhelmed with the assignment. But even the selection of these eight students seemed to be inspired, as were their individual contributions.

The students sat with their instructor, who had received a priesthood blessing as her personal preparation, awed with the job that faced them. They sought inspiration in prayer and committed themselves to a twenty-four-hour fast. When the fasting started, so did the mini-miracles. The group met at 4:00 P.M. and wrote until 1:00 A.M., struggling for the right words. The next day they met again, thinking they had only to finish up the text. Instead, they found they were not in tune and spent the next six hours in futility. After they had sufficiently humbled themselves, the Spirit returned and they concluded their work at 4:00 A.M. the next morning. Many hours and much prayer was spent before the Spirit had directed one particular word, chastened, which seemed to strike a deep chord in President Lee's heart when he read it.

The tribute, presented to President Lee by Steven Flint, student body president, reads as follows:

As sons and daughters of the living God, we stand united in tribute to the living prophet. Since Eden, God has called his chosen servants-men of faith and wisdom who rise above the sins of the world by mastering themselves, their lives perfected in virtue by earthly trial; so are prophets raised up in the necessity of time to join this line of inspired men.

People of all nations cry for leadership-not leadership of oppression or bondage, but the divine leadership of Christ's church, where men are foreordained to lead God's children from sin into celestial glory.

That leadership requires years of preparation and celestial refinement. For possession of those keys of peace in this last dispensation of time, the keys that unlock modern miracles and usher in Christ's millennial reign, a man must be chastened of God.

given life in a small world where the things of man were smaller still

raised up at first by candlelight and always by gospel light to be a man while still a child of God

made strong by a loving father's design tempered and mellowed by youth and placed before mountains on which to strengthen his feet

then given a burden to bear alone with the light of an earlier life to show the way

encircled again given future light and a call from an earlier home

Called from the simplicity of farms and fields to stand in the upper rooms of the temple, where the veil is thinnest, comes such a man, whose life is a testimony that speaks the praises of God. This is a man who is more than a man, a man bearing Israel's prophetic inheritance, one of God's choicest sons.

Thanks be to God that we live in a prophet's time, when his inspired leadership draws us close to standing in those holy places where we prayerfully await Christ's second coming.

President Lee wrote of his appreciation to the Ricks student tribute committee in these words: "I think never before have I been so moved by the outpouring of love and genuine loyalty which was in evidence at the devotional we had recently at the Ricks College. My wife, Joan, and I came away uplifted and perhaps more benefitted than the students because of this demonstration and faith in us. You gave us the courage and strength to try to carry on and to be worthy of the commendation which you so generously extended towards us."

A week after his experience at Ricks College, as President Lee was having lunch at the Lion House next door to the Church Administration Building, he walked over to the table of Dr. Truman G. Madsen, director of the Institute of Mormon Studies at Brigham Young University, and after a cordial greeting made this startling statement: "A translator who was assigned my closing address at the general priesthood meeting of general conference had an experience which was most remarkable. It helps me understand how the Prophet Joseph Smith could translate the Book of Mormon. I would like you to have a copy of his story."

Receiving tribute at Ricks College from student body president, Steven Flint, October, 1973

Without further explanation President Lee excused himself, leaving his hearers breathless and wondering. Brother Madsen wrote for the promised story, but first it appeared publicly in President Lee's words in this press account of the memorable Ricks College address:

We had something happen at the last conference theft I am going to tell you about to indicate something that will give you a key to how the Lord can open the mind of a man and give him spiritual understanding beyond what his natural self could do.

We had eleven translators or interpreters who were down in the basement of the Tabernacle, translating in eleven different languages. One of these brethren was translating for the Swedish brethren, and for most of the talks they had the script so they could study it, and as the speakers spoke in English, they would repeat it for the benefit of those who were listening. This man, who was translating from my English into Swedish at the priesthood meeting, where he had no script (I was talking from an extemporaneous standpoint in my closing address), said something happened, and I want you to hear what he said:

"The whole conference was a spiritual experience, but at the general priesthood meeting I had an experience which I have never had before. I knew that there were some Swedish brethren attending the conference who had never been here before and perhaps would never come again. Therefore, I had a great desire that they receive everything that the prophet had to deliver. Not having a script, I commended myself into the hands of the Lord, and as you began to speak, I was startled by the fact that I knew one or two words and even three ahead of the time you would say them. At first, I was so startled that I did not dare to pronounce them as they were given. Usually I close my eyes and listen and then interpret as I hear the speakers deliver, but this time I was prompted to look at your face on the television screen. In this very unusual situation, I looked at you and began to translate the words as they came, but to my amazement I did not receive just the words in my mind, but with my inner eyes, I saw them emanating from the vicinity of the temple of your head and coming toward me. I did not see them actually as written on something, and yet, I saw them and how they were spelled and experienced the power of the Spirit as I received them.

"One of the things that made it even more dramatic was that when a complex sentence was about to be delivered, I received more words so that I could reconstruct the grammar into good Swedish and deliver it at the very moment you pronounced the words. Never have I experienced the great force with which the interpretive message was flowing as I did at that time.

"The same experience happened during your closing remarks on Sunday afternoon, except that I did not see the words coming to me. I have talked with the Swedish members in attendance who have expressed an awesome amazement of what they experienced. They said they heard the interpretation and understood the interpreted message delivered at the same moment as you delivered the words in English. But the interpretation was all they heard, that the message came directly from you to them. They have all expressed that their attendance at the conference was a fantastic experience, never to be forgotten."

President Lee provided his interpretation of the experience for his Ricks College audience, saying:

Latter-day Saints, don't you think for a moment that the Lord does not have means of communicating with us, sending us messages that are beyond our understanding, even to translating an unknown language into our understandable language. He did it with the Prophet Joseph. He did it with King Mosiah. He has done it with others. He will do it today, as we have need. I have no doubt.

My whole soul pleads that I may so live that if the Lord has any communication that he would wish me to receive for my beloved people that I could be a pure vessel through which that message could come. I do not ask for anything. I do not want anything more than the Lord is willing to send, but I trust that I may live worthy so that I won't be a lame vessel or a broken reed that the Lord cannot use in times when he wants to communicate with his people.

Plans He Would Not Finish

With apparently no hint of his imminent death, President Lee moved vigorously into planning the next area conference. His diary entry of November 22, 1973, stated: "I met with the committee of the Twelve and J. Thomas Fyans relative to the next year's area conference for the Scandinavian countries in Stockholm, Sweden, in August 1974." This was a meeting President Lee would plan but would not live to carry out.

A significant management study was on his desk which also would remain as unfinished business. Lee S. Bickmore, whom President Lee looked forward to involving soon on a full-time business consulting staff position at Church headquarters, conferred with President Lee on December 4, 1973 regarding a comprehensive study of the Health Services Corporation. At that time the entire First Presidency discussed with Brother Bickmore the problems of the former Church Hospital System. They decided to engage the consultation firm of Cresp-McCormick-Paget to make a formal study of these problems.

A Final Testimony of Satan's Reality

On the first Sunday of November 1973, President Lee spent the early morning hours, as was his practice, at the Salt Lake Temple considering problems on which he alone, as President of the Church, could decide. With these matters weighing heavily on his mind, along with a personal problem on which he had consulted with one of his family members, he came to rejoin Sister Lee at their Federal Heights Ward fast and testimony meeting. He arrived late, quietly sat down, and received the sacrament. Just prior to the close of the meeting, President Lee's familiar voice came from the back of the chapel, asking permission of bishopric counselor E. Douglas Sorensen to delay closing the meeting, for he "thought the Lord had been so mindful of me in a special way, a few days before, that he would think me an ingrate if I failed to express myself." According to ward member, Sister Elaine A. Cannon, who recorded his statements in her journal, he spoke these unforgettable words as he remained standing at the rear of the chapel:

Brothers and Sisters, beloved friends and neighbors, members of my ward family, and those in my own little flock over whom I have stewardship: I'm sorry to disturb you, but I know that it would be disturbing to my Father in Heaven if I don't say something to you at this time.

By way of testimony I want you to know that I know that God lives, that Jesus is the Christ and our Redeemer, and he is at the head of this Church; I am not. I know that he operates in all the affairs of this church and I say this by way of testimony that you may know that I know he lives.

And then, after a long pause, he uttered these remarkable words:

I say this to you by way of a serious warning, that I also know that the adversary lives and operates in the affairs of man. And he is determined to cause a downfall of men. If he can't get to us, he will try to get to those closest to us, for he is in a mighty battle with the work of the Savior. And I must tell you these words of warning. So keep close to the Lord. Don't be discouraged. The Lord will take care of his own. If you are prepared, you need not fear, if you are on the Lord's side."

This was a powerful, most unusual testimony, not alone because it came from the prophet of God to his own neighbors, friends, and relatives who had often heard him bear witness to the reality of the Savior Jesus Christ, but also because he had never before borne such a fervent witness to the reality of Satan. It was his last message to the members of his ward, for seven weeks later he was taken in death.

Early Teachings Reappear in His Last Sermons

During the Christmas season in early December 1973, President Lee was sought after constantly to attend innumerable Christmas socials for the many Church departments and business organizations with which he was affiliated. While enjoyable, the incessant demands, every day and every night, did drain his physical and emotional strength. President Lee's grandson, Alan Lee Wilkins, reflected:

We were visiting during the Christmas season when I became aware of the tremendous schedule and the manner in which Grandfather drove himself. As we visited, we remarked that Grandfather looked tired and asked if he couldn't take some time to rest.

He had Grandmother Joan bring out his schedule calendar, and she showed us that they had two and three appointments, starting at six o'clock every evening during every day of the week through that whole month and into the next month.

I was amazed-a man of his age keeping that kind of a schedule. He put in a full day at the office and then had this kind of a schedule to go home to, plus his travels throughout the Church and the demands that brought. He told us of staying awake most of several evenings during area conference trips. He said to us: "Now you see what my schedule is like. I can't rest. I know the Lord will sustain me as long as he wants me to be here, but I can't rest."

Among the many December engagements was that of grandson Drew's wedding

So with characteristic courage and dedication he plunged into his December schedule. Still President Lee engaged in some of his most rewarding activities, such as the sessions in the temple teaching the outgoing missionaries, in which he welcomed the challenge of answering new questions that stimulated his resourceful gospel compendium.

It was uniquely appropriate that the last days of President Lee would include a brief focus on his earliest and most enduring labors in developing the welfare plan of the Church. On December 5, 1973, President and Sister Lee were guests of the Deseret Industries in their new branch located at Murray, suburban Salt Lake City. The occasion was their annual Christmas dinner. As usual, the two visitors were requested to speak to these choice workers, including many handicapped persons, following a dinner which was served to four or five hundred employees and their guests.

In his remarks President Lee paid tribute to the Deseret Industries workers, whom he described as "those who are willing to give so much for others, Deseret Industries is a place where people can come and work and feel that they are needed. There is nothing more important than knowing that there is someone who cares."

He then recalled for his attentive audience the early years of the welfare work when the Deseret Industries program was developed, patterned after the Goodwill Industries but adapted to the Church plan of compensating the workers mainly with commodities, plus some cash to meet their financial needs. President Lee paid tribute to the lifelong accomplishments of this endeavor when he wrote in his journal, "This has now become one of our greatest, truly welfare developments." The pages of his journal beyond December 12, 1973, remained blank.

For many years President Lee had stated that he would rather spend his Christmas season with the poor and handicapped personnel at the Deseret Industries than anywhere else. They were his kind of people. He loved them and understood them. for he considered himself one of them "by the things which he had suffered." Quoting from his old schoolbook, he once described his life as "but the simple annals of the poor."

Another return to nostalgia came on Sunday, December 9, when President and Sister Lee were invited to speak before a conference-sized audience composed mainly of high priests and their wives of the Cannon Stake, where his elder brother, Perry, presided as stake president. At age seventy-eight Perry Lee was the oldest stake president in the Church. Cannon Stake was once a part of the Pioneer Stake, where Harold B. Lee presided at age thirty-one as the youngest stake president in the Church at that time. In returning to the scenes of his Pioneer Stake roots, President Lee described it as "a most satisfying experience to recall the years gone by when I served as their stake president."

President Lee prefaced his remarks with comments on the theme of personal revelation that had been chosen for the Cannon Stake ward conferences. He illustrated the theme by telling of his experiences in Florida, South America, and at the most recent general conference, when incidents of spiritual interpretation of languages were manifest. Yet, when concluding his address, the lifetime impress of the welfare plan was still on his mind and he returned to his early philosophical moorings and urged his listeners to store food, clothing, and fuel against shortages that were occurring throughout the country. President Lee warned, "Some have not listened, and even now it may be too late."

Last Major Public Address

On December 13, 1973, President Harold B. Lee spoke plainly of the needs of the day in his last major address. His audience was some seven thousand Church employees and their partners at their annual Christmas gathering in the Salt Lake Tabernacle. It was, he noted, a throng as large as the original number of Saints who had gathered in that edifice in the early days.

After drawing parallels between the martyrdom of the Prophet Joseph Smith and the crucifixion of the Savior, with particular references to the mourning mothers of both prophets, President Lee again barked back to the Depression days of the 1930s when he helped inaugurate the Church welfare program. He wondered whether the present evidences of food and fuel shortages might not represent the tip of the iceberg of deprivation predicted almost forty years previously. Pressing the point, President Lee asked: "Do all of you who are close to us here as employees and their families listen to the Brethren who said that to you, and have been trying to urge you to put aside in storage for at least a year, food, fuel, clothing? Have you done that today?"

Noting that he was speaking to the young fathers and mothers as though they were his own family, he expressed a humble, heartfelt wish that he could do more, saying: "I wish I could be a thousand times more understanding, to deal a thousand times more kindly, and with a thousand times more wisdom and foresight. Please, God, I only want what he wants me to have. And I only want to be what you, the faithful members of the Church, would wish me to be."

Fittingly, the final entry in President Lee's personal diary, dated December 12, 1973, also referred to a long-sought welfare achievement. When power failures and possible sabotage had halted work at the Church's Deseret Clothing Mills some years before, President Lee insisted that preventive measures be adopted. After attending a Christmas dinner at the plant where 437 women were employed, he proudly wrote of the accomplishment in his last journal entry: "They have now, at my urging, a second auxiliary plant and a diesel unit for emergency electrical power if they had a power failure."

President Lee believed in self-sufficiency and preparation. That was his "theme song" from his earliest days in the welfare plan leadership to the last note written on the pages of his journal.

No Sermon—Just a Prayer

As the Christmas parties peaked, so did the fatigue of the President of the Church. On December 18 he arrived about fifteen minutes late at the Lafayette Ballroom of the Hotel Utah where the annual Christmas party of the Beneficial Life Insurance Company was held. President Lee apologized to the company president, Douglas H. Smith, for his tardiness, saying: "I would not have come out tonight for anyone else except you. I am so weary that I would have stayed home, but I felt strongly compelled to be here in support of you and Beneficial Life."

After the dinner and presentations, the time came for President Lee to give his annual Christmas address. The company employees were eagerly awaiting his message, because they knew that on this occasion the previous year a miracle had resulted after the President urged prayers in behalf of a blind girl performer, and later she was blessed with improved vision. Now, as he stood again before them, every eye in the large ballroom was focused on him. After arriving at the podium he stood silent and motionless for what seemed like a long time but was probably only forty seconds. Then he began speaking.

He said that the world was on the brink of another war; Egypt and Israel were in severe military combat. The United States' Secretary of State, Dr. Henry Kissinger, had been dispatched to the Middle East to attempt to resolve the crisis. Acknowledging Mr. Kissinger's unique aptitude as an international negotiator, he then said, "I would ask that all of you join with me in a prayer of petition to our Heavenly Father."

This unforgettable moment was captured through the poetic words of Elder S. Dilworth Young:

Here, gathered in the City of the Saints, At this happy Christmas time, Well fed— Well clothed— Sheltered from the cold, We sit waiting, Waiting to be told, the often Spoken tale Of angels, and of shepherds, Of wise men come to worship. The prophet of the Lord Begins to speak. He speaks not of a birth But of his feelings at the Place of crucifixion, Of suffering. Then suddenly We are reminded- Reminded of the hate And hold of Satan On the world— The stern reality of men Dying for what to them Is sacred land. He prays that men Who hold the fate of Palestine will remember Who it is they represent— And call for peace, Christ's peace, To be until he comes again. And asks our faith Be exercised that It be so. The party ends. He stands aloof, alone, The tragedy and sorrow of the world Etched in his face. His drooping shoulders Mutely witness his great sorrow. Can't we understand? The love of Christ is Love of fellowmen And charity! [^1]

Douglas Smith described the effect of President Lee's supplication:

The feeling of direct communication of the prophet and the Father in this emotional appeal was intensely felt by all. There was no question that he, as a prophet of the Lord, was talking with the Father in Heaven. and was sharing this most intimate experience with each of us.

After he finished, there was total silence. Most of us were extremely hesitant to open our eyes, because we knew he was talking with the Lord. His deep compassionate love for all of the children of the Lord-Arab, Jew, and Gentile-was appealingly expressed.

The party ended on this quiet reverential, subdued mood. As President Ezra Taft Benson was leaving, he asked Douglas Smith if President Lee's prayer had been recorded, to which he explained that no message at any of their parties had ever been recorded. President Benson then expressed his keen disappointment, adding, "In all my experience I have never been more deeply touched by such a happening."

This appraisal. coming from one who had prayed with Apostles and prophets in the temple for decades, accentuated all the more the singularity of the event they had just witnessed-the night when several hundred were allowed to listen in as the President of the Church talked with God on a person-to-person basis.

Eight days later President Lee was taken in death.

Â© S. Dilworth Young 1976. Used by permission.

---
Notas:
[^1] Â© S. Dilworth Young 1976. Used by permission.
