Brent L. Goates, Harold B. Lee: Prophet and Seer ( 1985)

33 Death of a Prophet

There are moments in the life of every person which are locked forever in the heart, and defy all contrivances to call them back, except as precious memories. Such an enchanted moment is remembered by Jane Goates Reiser, President Lee's granddaughter, recalling such a time in her life-the early hours in the Goates home on Christmas Day, 1973.

I remember how my heart was singing with the joy only Christmas Day can bring. Everyone was bustling to prepare an enormous meal, and I loved the companionship of working together with other kind hands-my special More and my sweet sisters-in-law.

All was ready at last and we looked around the table at so many happy faces of loved ones. As I gazed upon the beautiful meal laid before me, a warmth and joy filled my heart and I gave thanks to my loving Heavenly Father for his outpouring of blessings upon my head. Soon our beloved Grandfather and Grandmother Joan would be joining the family throng-no one suspecting it would be for the last family gathering.

At 2:00 P.M. the sumptuous turkey feast was declared ready to be served. Helen telephoned to see if President and Sister Lee were ready to join the remainder of the family and learned that a "five-minute visit" from one of the local Federal Heights Ward families was stretching out and delaying them. Reluctantly the family proceeded with the dinner, but all were disappointed that Grandfather Lee was not present to pronounce the blessing and family prayer.

The delay at his home presents an example of the sacrifice so typical in the life of President Lee. A young mother dying with cancer had come with her husband and three little boys for President Lee's advice. Now that the doctors had given no hope for preserving her life, they wanted to know whether they should return to their home in California or stay in Utah with their families, with whom they were visiting during the holidays.

President Lee's advice follows: "There is a time of testing ahead. When you are a 'golden nugget' you must prepare for a fire. Go back home and live each day, and when the Lord wants us he'll take us, and it will be all right."

He was unaware that this advice might have personal application to him on the next day of his own life. The little family returned to California, comforted by the prophet. In departure, they took the last photograph of President and Sister Lee. They reported later that he had confided that he was not feeling well. They described his cheeks as puffy and his color ashen. He had told them that he was fatigued and that in recent days he had felt the presence of his deceased wife, Fern.

It was past 3:00 P.M. when President and Sister Lee joined the family for Christmas dinner. They took their places and were soon busy eating the turkey and his sister Verda's traditional holiday ham. During the meal President Lee suggested to his grandson namesake, Harold Lee Goates, that he bring in the tape recorder from the other room so the family could listen to a tape recording of the Tabernacle Choir's Christmas gift to him, a special broadcast rendition of his favorite hymns. Included on the tape were: "O Link Divine"; "How Beautiful upon the Mountains"; "I Need Thee Every, Hour"; "I Know That My Redeemer Lives"; and "One Sweetly Solemn Thought." When the batteries in the tape recorder failed, President Lee seemed disappointed that he couldn't share his pleasure with his loved ones.

After dinner the happy family moved into the living room, where gifts were exchanged. President Lee's sisters, Stella and Verda, and Verda's husband, Charles, were there. A convert from President Lee's long-ago missionary days in Denver, Mary Dean, who was visiting from California, was also part of the group. All the Brent Goates family were present, including President Lee's eldest grandson, David, with his wife, Patsy, and their two children, who represented two of the three great-grandchildren of President Lee. Another grandson, Lesley Drew Goates, brought his bride of only twelve days, Jane Stephenson Goates.

As had been customary for many years, President Lee had come prepared with little envelopes containing cash gifts for every member of his "kingdom," but this time he seemed tired and spent as he proffered his generosity. Although entering into the events with appreciation and interest, he showed no effort to project himself.

Helen had prepared a Christmas program based on an article written by her mother, Fern, and published in the Friend after she and President Lee had toured the Holy Land in 1958. Fern had made reference to several Christmas songs which took on new meaning to her as she "walked where Jesus walked." Her beautiful words describing the sacred scenes of the Holy Land were to be interspersed with the music referred to in the text, using talent from the family. The violinists and vocalists were ready to perform, but her father's fatigue prompted Helen to suggest canceling the program. He quickly objected, however, and urged her to proceed. President Lee listened and made comments, but much of the time his eyes were closed. Afterwards, he said to Helen: "Thank you so much, dearie. That was just beautiful and gives us the real Christmas spirit, to reflect upon the land where Jesus lived and taught."

It was after 6:00 P.M. when President and Sister Lee stood up to retrieve their coats. Surprisingly, however, it was evident that President Lee was in no real hurry to depart. With hat in hand and overcoat over his arm, he lingered for almost an hour, uncharacteristic of his usually rapid departure. He moved slowly from room to room as he made his way to the back door, pausing frequently to share his feelings and thoughts with those around him. He seemed to be in good spirits, though his manner was quiet and reflective.

Parting Words to Family

What subjects were on the prophets' mind on the day before his death? The topics discussed at his extended departure on Christmas Day reveal some of his thinking. He reiterated the faith-promoting stories he had told earlier at his brother Perry's stake high priests meeting regarding translation experiences with the gift of tongues. One such story occurred in Italy, where a young lad named Filipo was his interpreter. Sister Lee reminded him that he was to perform Filipo's marriage in the temple on the following Friday morning. The President replied, "Yes, that's right, if I just have the strength." Sister Lee quickly added, "Of course you will, dear. You must be there." He also told of the miraculous finding of some sacred temple manuscripts earlier thought to be lost, which relieved his mind immensely.

To Brent he spoke privately for the first time of the development of plans for the new. small temple in São Paulo, Brazil, not vet publicly announced. Of particular interest was his optimism concerning improving relationships with the leaders of the Reorganized Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints. This reconciliation he was quietly promoting through an intermediary, Buddy Youngreen, and the President was most pleased with the promising possibilities ahead.

Finally, for each of the three younger grandchildren, he had special messages of encouragement, praise, and kindly admonition. To Jane he gave counsel about choosing a companion in marriage. To Jonathan, almost sixteen years old and already taller than his grandfather, he said, noting the maturing changes that had taken place in him the past year, physically and spiritually, "I'm proud of you, big boy!" He lingered long in praise of his youngest grandson, Timothy, saying, "You are indeed special to all of us, our sweet Tim." Those benedictory and loving words, now emblazened as with fire on their hearts and minds, were his last to his family.

President Lee paused just long enough before going out of the door and down the back steps to kiss his daughter Helen and thank her for the lovely day and for providing the opportunity for the family to be together. The door closed behind him and he was gone.

About an hour later, Helen received a telephone call from the daughter of Clyde Edmunds, one of the original members of the Church Welfare Committee, announcing that her father had passed away that morning after a lingering illness. She asked for President Lee's phone number so she could give him this information, but Helen hesitated to oblige, remembering how weary her father had been as he left her home. She offered, instead, to relay the message to him, thinking she could call the following morning after he was more rested. Helen felt impressed later, however, to phone him that evening.

She gave her father the message and President Lee readily agreed that he would by all means call the Edmunds family, though he said: "I almost hesitate to do so since they will probably ask me to speak at the funeral and I just don't know if I have the strength." Helen replied, "I know, Daddy dear, you looked so tired tonight! I felt guilty about keeping you long enough for our little program. Perhaps we should have let you go home sooner."

"Oh no, no, dear," answered President Lee, "that was lovely! We needed that spiritual touch to our day. It was wonderful to hear Mother's beautiful words about the Savior once more and to listen to the girls sing and play. I enjoyed the spirit in your home all through the afternoon and evening."

Then, responding like a true patriarch to his family, never content until each and every child was accounted for, he expressed his concerns for those who had not been there, and spoke of his desire to keep all his family close together. The last wishes of Helen's mother on the same subject were then recalled, and resolves were renewed as Helen urged her weary father to put his mind at ease about all the family and try to get some rest. Unknown to either of them, this was to be their final conversation. It is significant that though he had the burdens of the world on his mind, he never lost his deep love and concern for each one of his precious family.

The day after Christmas was spent in the Goates family leisurely exchanging gifts and running errands. At 5:00 P.M. on December 26 a phone call from Sister Lee announced to Helen the surprising news that President Lee had been admitted to the hospital two hours earlier. Brent, former administrator of the Latter-day Saints Hospital, rushed immediately to see what had occasioned the admission of President Lee and to check on his privacy and the adequacy of his accommodations.

Sister Lee explained on the phone to Helen that the President had gone to bed on Christmas night soon after returning home. He had slept longer than usual-a full ten hours, and yet on awakening the next morning, he still felt fatigued. Concerned, Sister Lee called his physician, Doctor James Orme.

Doctor Orme arrived promptly at the home and carefully conducted a physical examination. He found railes in his lungs; this, in addition to his marked fatigue, prompted Doctor Orme to recommend hospitalization. They agreed that President Lee would enter the hospital, where tests could be conducted to narrow the diagnosis. The President declined the immediate ambulance service urged by Doctor Orme.

President Lee then phoned his private secretary, D. Arthur Haycock, and requested that he come to his home and bring some work that was pending and some letters to be signed. After they had worked together at the Lee home for some time, Brother Haycock drove President and Sister Lee to the hospital at 3:00 P.M., and he was admitted to Room 819.

At the Hospital

When Brent arrived at 5:00 P.M. he found the room darkened, with President Lee facing the wall, trying to obtain rest and relief. In a whispered conversation President Lee requested that Brent and Arthur Haycock give to him a priesthood blessing. Arthur answered that President Marion G. Romney had been notified of his hospitalization and was then on his way. With this news President Lee decided to wait for President Romney to arrive.

President Romney was the Second Counselor in the First Presidency and a dear friend of forty-three years in the Lord's work. When he came into the room President Lee directed that Brent anoint him with consecrated oil and President Romney seal the blessing, with Arthur Haycock joining in the circle. President Romney pronounced a tender and beautiful blessing, reminding our Father in Heaven how invaluable was President Lee's leadership to His work on the earth, and then blessing him with the faith to be healed, and those participating with the faith to heal-true gifts of the Holy Spirit. After the blessing all were comforted, and President Lee said: "I feel much better now. There are not three men of greater faith in the world than you three and I am grateful for that blessing."

President Romney leaned over the bed, kissed President Lee, and exchanged with him words of love and confidence and even a bit of humor.

While Brent attended to many administrative details, President Lee now tried, as often as possible, to turn his face to the wall and to rest in the darkened room. He was often interrupted, however, by professional technicians serving their important patient. One of these was Nola Hunt, R.N., Administrative Assistant Director of Nursing. Her recollections of first seeing President Lee are as follows:

President and Sister Lee were in the room. The President, who was lying in bed, reached out and shook hands with me and said, "I thought you might be a little lonesome for me so I came back to see you." I thought to myself, "He is so weary and tired." His color was ashen, and I seemed to detect a slight cyanosis [discoloration] about his lips. I spoke briefly with his wife and then left to evaluate other patients.

Between these medical visits President and Sister Lee had prayed together and enjoyed an "intimate conversation" in which President Lee told his wife, "God is very near."

Nurse Hunt ordered additional nursing help for the division, and with Brent Goates and Arthur Haycock reviewed the President's chart and physician's orders. There were no emergency orders and a chest X-ray had been ordered, but no special time was set. No urgency was indicated.

Now the doctors, consultants, and house physicians began to assemble. Brent was relieved to find Doctor Alan H. Morris was on the job. He was a brilliant lung specialist recently recruited to become the assistant director of the hospital's pulmonary function laboratory. He took his two residents to the bedside and thoroughly checked President Lee's lungs. He then carefully briefed the resident doctors, quizzing them as he proceeded, and prepared them with instructions for proper treatment to meet every eventuality.

After that examination Brent sought a private interview with Doctor Morris, who revealed that President Lee was anemic, probably due in part to the blood loss from coughing that morning; his lungs were in poor condition, which was not surprising, since he was known to be suffering from chronic bronchitis; and he was in heart failure.

This latter conclusion came as a great surprise and Brent reminded Dr. Morris that never before had that diagnosis been made, and that his medical history would prove that fact. Doctor Morris firmly, but quietly replied: "That may be true, but I am certain he is in heart distress now. The blood gas studies confirm this. Perhaps if we get him oxygenated properly these symptoms will disappear." Immediate steps were taken to introduce more quantities of oxygen through an oxygen mask.

About this time President Lee inquired about his dinner. When his supper tray came, Mrs. Hunt wanted to put it across his bed but President Lee wanted instead to sit on the side of the bed. The nursing supervisor slipped his robe on him and put on his house slippers. She remembers thinking that "his feet were cyanotic and slightly swollen, but the shoes went on without difficulty. He looked so ill. I thought to myself, 'What is really going on?'"

It was 6:00 P.M. when Mrs. Hunt brought a food tray for Sister Lee as well. President Lee arc only a little of his chicken and rice dinner, but then finished with his favorite-bread and milk.

When Mrs. Hunt returned she noted that he had carefully covered his tray with his napkin and was lying in bed with the oxygen going. He had slipped down in bed, so Mrs. Hunt asked Sister Lee to help her get him up in the bed. Mrs. Hunt recalls:

We took hold of his arms, and I asked him to bring his knees up and push with the bottom of his feet. This was a great effort for the President and seemed to take all the energy he had. I looked at his face and the thought crossed my mind, "This man could arrest any moment." He turned to his left side. I took a pillow and placed his hands and arms on it, saying, "I'm a pillow girl and I know that this will help you rest better." His usual response would have been, "Thank you," but he seemed too weary to say that.

He appeared asleep, so I talked with Sister Lee and told her how I felt about his being so very tired and that we must do all we could to save his strength. She concurred with this and mentioned the beautiful blessing given to him by President Romney. I stepped out of that quiet and peaceful room and told Brother Haycock that I felt the President was very ill and I had never seen anyone more weary.

She then attempted to persuade Sister Lee that it was best for her to return home for the night. In a few minutes Sister Lee agreed, although she hesitated until Mrs. Hunt promised her she would stay with him and take good care of her husband. Arthur Haycock agreed to wait at the hospital until Brent returned from taking Sister Lee home. There was a tender exchange of love between Sister Lee and the President as she bade him goodnight.

Brent drove Sister Lee home. Before returning to the hospital, he stopped at his nearby home to tell Helen what was happening. He also told Helen to save his dinner, for he would be home as soon as her father was settled for the night.

In the meantime, Arthur Haycock took up his vigil on a chair facing President Lee's bedside, reading the newspaper while the President rested. Suddenly President Lee sat up in the bed, took off the oxygen mask, cleared his throat, and produced a specimen in a tissue, saying to Arthur, "Here, they'll want that."

That precise moment is remembered forever by Arthur. He later reported:

He acted as though he wanted to get out of bed. His face was ashen, covered with perspiration, and his eyes were glazed and bulging. He was staring at me. He didn't respond to my comments. I think he may at that moment have suffered a fatal atack. I laid him back down in his bed.

I didn't like what I saw, so I went immediately to get the doctor. It was only fifteen feet from Room #819 to the nurses' station. I motioned to the nurse to come, and said to her, "He tried to get up out of bed."

"Good," replied the nurse, not sensing the gravity of the situation. "If he's awake we'll take him to X-ray."

It was approximately 7:50 P.M. when Nurse Hunt took a wheelchair to President Lee's room in preparation for his trip to the X-ray department. As she passed the nurses' desk she said to the clerk, "Have someone from Inhalation Therapy come up and accompany us to X-ray." The comment even surprised herself. She mused:

I had never made such a request before. Why did I say it then? I took the wheelchair into the room. At that brief moment I was alone with President Lee. With super effort and strength I saw him raise himself up in bed so he was resting on both elbows. His eyes were open wide, and he was looking straight up. He appeared to be in a trance, and I took hold of his right arm and said-

"President Lee, can you hear me?" There was no response that he did. His eyes closed slowly and he slipped back onto the bed pillow. I knew his spirit was gone from his body. I knew, too, what my training had taught me. I needed to sound the cardiac arrest alarm.

Called Home

At that precise second Arthur Haycock brought the resident doctor to the room. Arriving at the doorway, the doctor took one look at the patient and shouted down the hall, "Cardiac Arrest!" The nurse adjusted President Lee's oxygen mask and lowered his head, and help was there from many doctors immediately.

Just as Brent returned, he saw Arthur Haycock motioning him to hurry to the room. He announced that a cardiac arrest had been called. Without entering the room, Brent rushed to the nursing station for help. He was passed by nurses running to the room, but he remained to get Doctor Morris, who was speaking on the telephone. He was ignoring Brent's motions until the latter shouted "Cardiac Arrest!" At that Doctor Morris slammed down the phone and raced to the room. Everyone knew then that an intensive care expert was at work. Brent then tried to phone Doctor Orme. Much later the doctor was reached and told to rush to the hospital because his patient was in heart arrest.

In the meantime, Arthur Haycock had phoned President Romney to return to the hospital, and also had reached President Tanner in Arizona and President Spencer W. Kimball, who was at home.

Brent phoned Helen and informed her of the disaster which had struck, and told her to notify Sister Lee. Helen and Jane drove to Sister Lee's home and brought her back to the hospital, where they met Brent down the hall in a room to which President Lee was to be transferred.

Shortly afterward President Kimball came through the door. He was stunned, almost in shock. The family asked him to lead them in a pleading prayer to Heavenly Father, but he was hardly able to speak. Next, President Romney arrived. The family could only ask him to help them pray again, to add his faith to the urgent, broken-hearted petitions. There was nothing else to be done.

Doctor Douglas Ridges, director of the cardiology department at the hospital, came in to explain that attempts were being made to install an electric pacemaker, because at that moment President Lee had no heartbeat of his own and artificial respiration was still required.

About ten to twelve persons, plus much equipment, jammed the room as the doctors asked for more and more specialized drugs and equipment, and runners were meeting every demand. Doctor Morris, fortunately, was directing the emergency care. Dr. Orme arrived and gravely explained to the family that the prognosis was very poor and that a new complication had developed.

Brent's account of the agonizing vigil written a short time later, states:

Still, despite the obvious bleak medical reports, as President Romney and I paced the floor neither of us felt that the end could come to our prophet-loved one. I still waited for the miracle. He had been saved through three other hospitalizations. He was at the pinnacle of his performance in Church leadership. The kingdom needed him. No one could take his place. We knew the Lord knew that, and we had exercised our faith and priesthood. Now when was the Lord going to come to our rescue? He could send angels to help. I knew it must come soon, but I waited, expectantly. It could come any moment now. But... it never came.

I was back in the room with Helen and the family when Doctor Orme came down the hall and announced that they had ceased treatment and that at 8:58 p.m. he had passed away. No one can describe the emptiness and awfulness of that announcement. It just couldn't be! Yes, he was sick, but certainly in possession of his faculties. Our greatest concern at that time was how we were going to forestall his giving a talk the next Sunday night to the Special Interest members in the Salt Lake Tabernacle. That was then the extent of our worries. Now, he was gone and we were lost in grief, and soon the entire Church membership would be devastated. How could it be? How could the Lord allow this tragedy to happen?

Such were the human, very mortal, protestations of loved ones. But the protests changed nothing. The Lord's will had been announced, and from this verdict there was no appeal.

The necessary nursing care was tenderly and reverently attended to after the room in which President Lee's body lay was cleared and had become suddenly silent once more.

Mrs. Hunt closed her record of this poignant experience with these reflective comments:

The room was then made clean and tidy. Before I left, I stood at his bedside and felt within me that this was according to God's plan. I saw him changed in the twinkling of an eye. All the knowledge and wisdom of medicine or the most skilled physicians could not bring him back. It was simply not to be. Peace and tranquility filled his room. I quietly closed the door.
