Brent L. Goates, Harold B. Lee: Prophet and Seer ( 1985)

34 Shock, Tributes, Funeral, and Burial

When the door closed on the life of President Harold B. Lee, President Romney, President Kimball, and Brent Goates stood together in stunned silence. No one could speak. Finally Brent became aware that he was witnessing a transference of power and authority to a new prophet. He described that historic moment in his journal:

The three of us, President Romney, President Kimball, and I, stood with our arms about one another, bowed in grief and sick beyond words. After the longest time my administrative training finally overcame the blanket of grief enough for me to realize that some action had to be taken.

Courageously I ventured into the sacred, grief-laden silence and whispered to the new leader of the Church: "Do you want me to phone Wendell Ashton with the news of the President's passing?" Two heads nodded mute approval as the others, too, broke momentarily back into reality. Then President Kimball, senior Apostle and President of the Quorum of the Twelve, in his first executive order as the leader of the Church, said: "I think you'd better tell him to prepare a news release.'

I fumbled in the directory for the phone number and obtained the line, then listened as President Romney, who now had stepped aside because there was no First Presidency, told Wendell the sad, shocking news. I then gave Wendell the details-death came at 8:58 p.m. from lung and cardiac arrest. The cause of death I gave was my own conclusion, but I felt that my medical-hospital Background and intimacy with the medical treatment of President Lee was sufficient to provide accuracy under the stress of the moment.

How quickly the transformation had occurred! It was automatic. With the last heartbeat of President Lee, President Kimball assumed the mantle of leadership over the kingdom of God on earth. Arthur Haycock, sitting at the side in abject sorrow, suddenly found himself responding to the crisis and working now for the successor to President Lee. He went to the hospital board room and commenced notifying members of the Council of the Twelve, while Brent handled arrangements for the family with the mortuary and the hospital.

In the room down at the end of the hall feeble efforts commenced to comfort the loved ones and President Kimball, who stood in unbelieving anguish. This family could empathize with President Kimball because they remembered just seventeen months before when a phone call had brought word to President and Sister Lee of the passing of President Smith, and then it was President Lee who was in that same bewildered state of wishing it had never happened.

Helen's immediate task was to comfort and give support to Sister Lee. But all of these principals to the tragedy were just going through the motions with a numb and automatic response.

The day-after-Christmas drama, which seemingly had not taken on any significance until the 5:00 P.M. phone call from the hospital, had resulted in an unbelievable crisis at about 7:15 P.M., and ended when Brent drove Sister Lee back to a husbandless home at 11:00 P.M., where her family awaited her arrival.

Brent returned to his home to find Helen and Jane back from the hospital, and a housefull of their broken-hearted children, who couldn't comprehend yet that they never again on this earth would be with their beloved grandfather. It was many hours past midnight before this gathering of mourners adjourned.

Thus ended an unfathomable, heart-breaking ten-hour period on a day never to be forgotten by the Church. That day was December 26, 1973, his last in mortality.

The Shock Spreads

When the announcement of President Harold B. Lee's sudden passing reached the public there was an immediate reaction of disbelief, shock, and despair. Four years later Elder W. Grant Bangerter, speaking in the Salt Lake Tabernacle at the October 1977 general conference of the Church, recreated this historic situation:

President Lee's death was completely unexpected. It is necessary to remember that over a period of twenty-five years members of the Church had awaited the time when Harold B. Lee would become the President. There had been every reason to think that this would eventually happen, due to his relative youthfulness and because he occupied a position in seniority following Joseph Fielding Smith and David O. McKay, both of whom were of advanced age.

In addition, Harold B. Lee had gained more than average prominence. His leadership in the welfare and priesthood programs of the Church, his forceful nature, and his sound judgment had made him one of the Apostles most listened to and one whose influence and advice were most respected. He had an evident spiritual stature which commended him to the members of the Church as one of the great men of our time. He possessed an unusual ability to relate as a personal friend to countless people. It was expected that when he became President he would preside for twenty years or more.

Suddenly he was gone!-called elsewhere after only one and one-half years. It was the first time since the death of the Prophet Joseph Smith when the President had died before it was time for him to die.

In deep sorrow and concern the surging questions arose in the minds of the people, much as they did at the time when Joseph Smith was killed in Carthage, Illinois. "What will we do now? How can we carry on without the prophet? Our great leader has gone. Can the Church survive this emergency?"

Of course we knew that the Church would survive, but it could not possibly be the same. We had never expected Spencer W. Kimball to become the President, and we had not looked to him for the same leadership evident in the life of Harold B. Lee.

Elder Bangerter then followed with a magnificent tribute to the new President, Spencer W. Kimball.

The news was indeed a stunning shock to members of the Church who for the past century had grown accustomed to watching Presidents of the Church grow old and live unusually long lives. President Lee, at seventy-four years of age, was the youngest Church President to die since the martyrdom of Joseph Smith. When he assumed the world leadership of the Church on July 7, 1972, at age seventy-three he became the youngest man to head the Church in the thirty years since World War II. Now, unbelievably, he had served the shortest tenure of any of the eleven Presidents, just less than eighteen months.

It is not surprising that the simple facts of his death seemed unbelievable, even to journalists and the media reporters, who accused the Church and family of withholding information from them. Shock and stunned reaction was universal among those who loved and appreciated President Lee. President N. Eldon Tanner wrote of his feelings, typical of many other responses: "President Lee's passing is a great shock to all of us, the greatest shock I've experienced in my life, and our sadness cannot be adequately expressed."

Tributes Arrive

Immediately following the announcement of President Harold B. Lee's death, tributes and messages of sympathy and appreciation began to pour into Church headquarters by telegram and by letter. Only a small sample, beginning with President Spencer W. Kimball's first published reaction, is included here:

President Harold B. Lee and I have been associated in the Council of the Twelve from 1943 until he was called into the First Presidency by President Joseph Fielding Smith in 1970. Even before that time we had established a friendship. He was my ideal. He had a tremendous understanding of the doctrines of the restored gospel of Jesus Christ, and of the organization and functioning of the Church.

President Lee was a great friend of the downtrodden and sorrowing. While he was an outstanding administrator and tireless worker, frequently he found time to visit the sick and those heavy of heart. When President Lee prayed, he really talked with his Heavenly Father.

He truly measured up as a prophet of God in every way-in leadership, perception, activity, and in his responses. He was a man of superior courage. Many times I have seen him stand alone for a principle. He would give his unshakable witness of the divinity of the restored gospel without hesitation, to the mighty of the earth as well as to the lowly.

President Lee was loyal to his family, friends, and brethren. Only a few days ago, in a meeting of the First Presidency and the Twelve, he spoke of his esteem and affection for his associates in the leadership of the Church.

The Resolution of the Council of the Twelve read as follows:

The world needed President Harold B. Lee when his time came to be the Lord's leader among mankind.

He was a prophet continually in tune with heaven, who spoke and acted with unswerving courage and boldness in applying the teachings of the Savior to the challenges and problems of these turbulent times. Indeed it could be said of him, as it had been said of his predecessor, Brigham Young: "He was a lion of the Lord". . . .

President Lee lived the words of his Master. Harold B. Lee believed and taught with all the fiber of his soul the divinity of the Lord's mission, the reality of the resurrection for all mankind, and the restoration of the fulness of the gospel of Jesus Christ through the Prophet Joseph Smith.

President Lee stood tall as a leader among men, both within and without the Church.

To all Church members as well as to all people everywhere, we reaffirm to the world the words of Harold B. Lee on the day he was ordained and set apart as President of the Church: "Keep the commandments."

From the President of the United States, Richard M. Nixon:

Mrs. Nixon and I were deeply saddened to learn of the sudden death of Harold B. Lee. All Americans mourn the loss of this dedicated President of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, and we send our heartfelt sympathy to the members of the Church and to President Lee's family.

As President of the Church, and as an educator, missionary, businessman, and public official, President Lee's influence for good has been deeply felt. The Church's successful welfare program that began in the 1930s gives just one example of how President Lee's administrative and organizational skills combined with his faith and courage to bring hope and inspiration to millions in our nation and in our world. For my part, I knew him as a warm and generous friend whose counsel and prayers I valued greatly.

From Lord Thomson of Fleet, London, England, owner of the Times of London as well as some two hundred other newspapers:

I have lost a warm friend and the world has lost one of its great leaders in the passing of President Harold B. Lee. He was an inspiration to all who came in contact with him. The work he has accomplished has been a great blessing not only to members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, but to all mankind. His passing leaves a great void in my life.

From corporate executives of American industry, including Frank E. Barnett, chairman of the board, Union Pacific Corporation, Union Pacific Railroad Company:

It was with profound sorrow that we learned this morning of the passing of Harold B. Lee. On behalf of the entire board of directors and officers of Union Pacific, I convey our deepest condolences on his passing. His influence for good extended throughout the world, and I am confident there were few men more loved and respected. He was a tremendous inspiration to those of us at Union Pacific who had the privilege of knowing and associating with him for almost twenty years. I know that the inspiration and teaching of this great leader will be a force for good for time immemorial.

From James F. Oates, Jr., retired chairman of the board, Equitable Life Assurance Society, and a personal friend of President Lee, wrote:

No one that I have known has ever lived a more useful life of service than President Harold B. Lee. He was enormously effective, not only in the business aspects of his great enterprise, but also as a spiritual leader. The country will miss him very much indeed.

From Dr. Norman Vincent Peale, famed author and pastor of Marble Collegiate Reformed Church, New York City:

I was shocked at the news of the passing of my good friend, President Harold B. Lee. I admired him tremendously. He was one of the most enlightened and creative religious leaders in the world. A giant has fallen.

From Elder Ezra Taft Benson, the Council of the Twelve:

President Harold B. Lee was a man of faith, vision, and a warm and compassionate heart toward all people. He has been an international leader without a peer. Programs he has initiated will bless people in many nations for generations.

His distinguished leadership has shown a grasp of Church and world needs which has revealed his prophetic insight as a prophet of God.

From Neal A. Maxwell, Commissioner of Education, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints:

The suddenness of his passing is such a shock, and yet so much was accomplished under his leadership that his presidency made up in height what it lacked in length of time.

From Rabbi Abner Bergman, Congregation Kol Ami, Salt Lake City:

I knew President Lee both in an official capacity as well as personally, and always found him to be a paragon of warmth, kindness, and personal integrity. . . .I will miss him. Many will miss him.

From the Presiding Bishopric of the Church:

President Harold B. Lee's untimely death was a great emotional shock to us. We will sorely miss this noble, Christ-like Latter-day prophet. He truly was a man of God. His short tenure as President of the Church was packed with decisions and spiritual guidance that will have a far-reaching impact not only on Church members but on the whole world.

He had an understanding of business like few men. His knowledge of doctrine of the Church and kingdom was unmatched. His life was one of total integrity and unwavering loyalty to the Master. He had empathy and compassion for every living soul.

Surely in his passing we lose one of the sweet, noble souls in all humanity.

From Belle S. Spafford, General President, Relief Society:

For thirty years members of the Relief Society General Presidency have had close and rewarding association with President Lee. We have benefited therefrom. We have felt the warmth of his personal friendship. We have marveled at his tender concern for the "one," and his selflessness in giving of himself. We revere him as prophet, seer, and revelator, chosen of the Lord to lead His earthly kingdom in a precarious period of time.

From D. Arthur Haycock, personal secretary to President Lee:

In the sudden passing of President Harold B. Lee, I have lost a longtime and cherished friend. President Lee was my seminary teacher over forty years ago. That association has continued ever since. While I was in my early twenties, he ordained me a bishop. Whenever there was a serious problem or a special event in our family, President Lee was close by to comfort and cheer or to encourage and commend, depending upon the circumstances. During the thirty-five years since I first began employment at the Church headquarters, I've had close personal association with President Lee. He's always been so kind and gentle, wise and strong-virtues which he shared freely with others. To know him was to respect and love him. To be in his presence was to know for a surety that he was a prophet of God.

Scores of other tributes, too many to list, came from respected leaders from all walks of life.

A Period of Mourning

On Friday, December 29, 1973, the first handful among thousands of mourners began arriving before dawn on the steps of the Church Administration Building, 47 East South Temple Street, headquarters of the Church in Salt Lake City, where the body of Harold B. Lee would lie in state. The Deseret News told of three teenage boys in shirtsleeves who were the first to arrive and shivered in the predawn chill as they waited for the viewing to begin. "We wanted to be here first," one of them said. It was 7:25 A.M. and there was a faint light in the east behind overcast skies as the hearse arrived and the coffin bearing President Lee's body was carried to an inner foyer.

Flowers began arriving at 7:55 A.M. and the line awaiting admittance to the building stretched east halfway up the street by the time the first mourners entered the building. A drizzling rain began about 8:00 A.M., with many umbrellas being raised above the waiting crowd.

By 11:00 A.M. an estimated 2,575 persons had passed the open coffin. The mourners came from all walks of life, the poor and the rich, and included government leaders, older couples, businessmen, young girls, and entire families including small children clasping their parents' hands. Many had tears in their eyes as they left the building through the northeast door.

A silence broken only by whispers prevailed in the inner foyer, but many of the mourners stopped in a corridor near the exit door to examine memorabilia on display, including a greeting sent to President Lee by Korean members of the Church. He was the first General Authority to ever travel and teach in Korea.

President Lee's body lay in state for one and one-half days. Even though it snowed and rained almost continually, the lines of mourners showing their esteem never diminished. President Lee's grandsons took turns standing at both ends of the casket in a reverent honor guard, sometimes in three-hour shifts. Though many who passed by were their friends and acquaintances, there was no acknowledgment or conversation now, as mutual grief bowed everyone in silent sorrow.

One poignant moment to be remembered was when the line

Mourners standing in line outside Church Administration Building

Line files past casket, where grandson Drew stands as honor guard

temporarily came to a halt as a young woman, with five small children, quietly lifted each child up to the casket's edge.

Counting the last visitors on the day of the funeral, more than fifteen thousand persons came to view President Lee for the last time in this lifetime.

Memorial Services

In the beautiful marble rotunda of the Church Administration Building, the public viewing ended as nearly 250 persons remained for the family prayer, which was led by President Lee's elder brother, Perry, who then was serving as the president of the Cannon Stake in Salt Lake City. Following the prayer, the General Authorities left the foyer and formed two lines on the steps of the building.

President Lee's body was then brought from the inner foyer of the office building to a hearse waiting at curbside by seven grandsons of President Lee, along with Richard Callister, a grandnephew of Sister Lee. The grandsons serving as pallbearers were: David Brent Goates, Harold Lee Goates, Lesley Drew Goates, Jonathan Lee Goates, Timothy Lee Goates, Alan Lee Wilkins, and Jay Earl Wilkins. Honorary pallbearers were all the General Authorities of the Church.

Because of the inclement weather, most persons accompanying the casket moved to Temple Square in the nearly one hundred automobiles which had been parked along the street to carry the family and General Authorities and their wives to the Tabernacle.

With bowed head, President Lee's wife entered the Salt Lake Tabernacle, which was filled with five thousand friends, relatives, and leaders from all walks of life. She was accompanied by family members.

President Spencer W. Kimball conducted the service and was also a speaker. Other speakers were President Lee's two counselors in the First Presidency-President N. Eldon Tanner and President Marion G. Romney, along with Elder Gordon B. Hinckley of the Council of the Twelve.

The invocation for the service was offered by Elder Marvin J. Ashton of the Council of the Twelve and the benediction was given by D. Arthur Haycock, President Lee's private secretary and a Regional Representative of the Twelve.

Leaving Church Administration Building for the Tabernacle

The rostrum was filled with flowers. Members of the Salt Lake Tabernacle Choir were in their seats, and Dr. Alexander Schreiner was at the organ filling the giant, oval-shaped hall with solemn organ chords and quiet melodies. During the service the choir sang some of President Lee's favorite music, the same selections they had recorded a few days before as a Christmas present to him: "I Know That My Redeemer Lives," "Lead Kindly Light," "I Need Thee Every Hour," and "How Firm a Foundation."

President Kimball Speaks

In his fifteen-minute address President Spencer W. Kimball, borrowing a phrase used by the late President at a funeral for a stake president, characterized Harold B. Lee as a "giant of a man." He bore strong testimony of the Savior's divine leadership over his church and President Lee's mission as a "great, noble and good man who became one of the Lord's rulers here upon the earth," after the manner of Abraham (see Abraham 3:22-23).

Saying "a giant redwood has fallen and left a great space in the forest," President Kimball further characterized President Lee as follows:

A giant of a man he was. A man endowed with a rare native intelligence, he recalls a thousand experiences over the terrain of time, having a unique gift to quickly get to the heart of matters under consideration and quickened by a capacity to discard extraneous information, thus freeing the mind for decisive action.

A giant whose shadow fell across the world, bringing under it the influence of the gospel to millions of members and friends of the Church.

A giant, who, while carrying the challenges of the apostleship and the First Presidency under divine influence, anxiously still took time to share his thoughts and his counsel with countless thousands on an individual basis.

A great giant, who, with inspiration, made the experiences, stories, and the counsel of the scriptures find a place in the hearts and minds of men the world over.

A giant who reached into the inner recesses of his listeners' hearts to plant understanding, vision, direction, and comfort.

A great giant who represented our Father in Heaven to all of his children and bore them comfort, strength, and godly influence.

A master teacher, who much like the Savior, took the ordinary experiences of today to teach the will of the Lord.

At the funeral in the Tabernacle

Yes, among our generations has walked one of God's most noble, powerful, committed, and foreordained giant redwoods-President Harold B. Lee.

Comparing him also to the ancient prophets Samuel and Saul, President Kimball said: "President Lee was a mighty prince among us. He was a dynamic leader, one easy to follow. Everybody knew that President Harold B. Lee was a prophet, as did Israel concerning Samuel. 'And all Israel from Dan to Beersheba knew that Samuel was established to be a prophet of the Lord' (1 Samuel 3:19-21.)" President Lee's similarity to Saul, said President Kimball, was "that with the mantle of authority upon him, he came soon to he another man with a new heart and the revelations continued to illuminate him and the people through him. President Lee has thus given leadership to the Apostles. He has stood high, taller than any pine."

President Kimball, speaking in his hushed, husky voice, then made reference to his role as President Lee's successor. Referring to his fervent prayers for President Lee's welfare, President Kimball continued:

President Lee has gone. I never thought it could happen. I sincerely wanted it never to happen. I doubt if anyone in the Church has prayed harder and more consistently for a long life and the general welfare of President Lee than my Camilla and myself.

I have not been ambitious. I am four years older than Brother Lee (to the exact day, March 28). I have expected that I would go long before he would go. My heart cries out to him and for him. How we loved him!

President Tanner's Tribute

President Tanner showed an uncharacteristic emotional edge as he approached his task of paying tribute to President Lee. He had to pause briefly amid his tearful remarks, his voice cracking with emotion, explaining "it's the third time I've stood here on such an occasion," meaning the deaths of three prophets to whom he was serving as a counselor.

President Tanner described President Lee as "a true servant of God," citing the relationship which brought them together in the leading councils of the Church as the basis of that conclusion.

When I was called by President McKay to be his Second Counselor in the First Presidency, though President Lee had been a member of the Council of the Twelve for approximately thirty years, he, a senior member, supported me in that position and worked with me, showing me every respect and courtesy a junior member could have shown to a senior member in such a position. I always admired him for this, and loved him, realizing again more fully than ever before that he was a true servant of the Lord.

He had only one thing in his mind, and that was to serve the Lord, do his will and keep his commandments, and help build the kingdom of God here upon the earth.

President Tanner's unique experience provided a basis for appraising President Lee's work:

It has been a real opportunity, privilege, and blessing to be able to work so closely with these three prophets of God, to sit at their feet and see how the Lord works through them, and I bear testimony without reservation that these men were prophets of God.

There has never been any question in my mind about President Lee as a prophet, and I was so pleased that members of the Church as a whole accepted him so quickly and so completely, and were prepared to follow him as one speaking for the Lord.

Concerning President Lee's missionary zeal, President Tanner noted: "His whole desire was to spread the gospel and to help the people understand the mission of Jesus Christ, which he did so ably. He never missed an opportunity to bear his testimony and answer questions and explain the principles of the gospel."

He also described a meeting between the First Presidency and the Ambassador of Iran, in which world conditions, particularly those in the Middle East, were discussed, and President Lee said with conviction and humility: "We think the only solution to this difficult problem is for all of us to belong to the one true church of Christ. When that happens, we will realize that we are all children of the same God, and that we ought not to quarrel with each other, but that we should love one another."

President Tanner said President Lee concluded with this remark: "Why is it that they are shouting at one another in the Middle East? It is because they don't really believe in the one and true living God, and they are not members of the true church of Jesus Christ. If they would accept this, we would have peace, and the same would be true throughout the world."

President Tanner observed that President Lee was always very careful not to criticize or belittle any individual or any church, but was emphatic in his beliefs and convictions.

Presidents Spencer W. Kimball, N. Eldon Tanner, and Marion G. Romney (sustained the following day as the First Presidency) lead Apostles from Tabernacle after funeral service

Continuing, President Tanner said:

His influence was felt for good wherever he went, and with whomever he was associated. As we came out of our December meeting of the First Presidency and the Quorum of the Twelve, to which all of the General Authorities had been invited, and where President Lee had counseled and instructed the Brethren and had borne his testimony, I said to President Romney, "There is no greater evidence that we have been listening to a prophet of God than what we have heard this day." President Romney replied: "I agree fully. There is no question about it. The Spirit of the Lord has borne witness unto my soul that he is a prophet."

Describing his untiring service, President Tanner said of President Lee:

Our beloved President was always working as though he had a deadline to meet, and that he must meet it while running at high speed. He never thought of his own comfort or convenience. We urged him on many occasions to take a little respite, to relax and rest, but he seemed never to be concerned about himself. He wanted to be of service to his fellowmen, and... he was determined to do all in his power to further the work of the Lord and to build people. He loved and showed an interest in everyone, and was loved by them.

Tribute from an Old Friend

President Marion G. Romney, who was at President Lee's bedside the night of his death, composed for the newspapers this tribute to President Lee:

He was not only a prophet but also a great seer and revelator. I have never been associated with a man who drew more heavily upon the powers of heaven than Harold B. Lee.

He had an unshakable assurance that God lives, that Jesus is the Christ, and that His gospel in all its purity and fulness was restored to the earth through the Prophet Joseph Smith. He never flinched before anyone in giving that testimony.

Long before he became President of the Church, he made inspired contributions to the upbuilding of the kingdom of God on earth which will strengthen the Church for decades to come. He was a pioneering leader in the establishment of the great welfare program, and he was the leader who, under the First Presidency and the Twelve, organized and molded the correlation program of the Church. Never in my experience has the Church been better organized and better administered than under his great leadership. He truly was one of the greatest prophets who have walked the earth.

Now at the funeral, President Romney, his voice quavering with emotion, described his first meeting with President Lee some forty years earlier:

The operator of a neighboring grocery store introduced me to his brother-in-law, Harold B. Lee. He was dressed in striped coveralls. His left hand was on his breast, and he reached out his right to shake my hand. Captivated by his magnetic presence, I felt I had found a friend. The experiences of forty years and his last words to me, spoken as he lay on his deathbed last Wednesday afternoon, confirmed that first impression.

The theme of President Romney's tribute was that Harold B. Lee was in the shadow of the Almighty:

The source of his greatness was his knowledge that he lived in the shadow of the Almighty. God was his partner and his guide. With Him, he was in constant communication. He accepted the gospel of Jesus Christ for what it is-the eternal truth. In it he found the key to the solution of every human need. His convictions were conceived and fortified by his experiences.

In his tribute of love and respect to a "mighty man of God, my long-time friend, President Harold B. Lee," President Romney gave this eloquent description:

Humility before God and fearlessness before men were the essence of his character. His ministry has been characterized by an uncommon originality and daring. He was neither circumscribed nor restricted by the learning of the world nor by the wisdom of men. We who sat with him daily were frequently amazed at the breadth of his vision and the depth of his understanding.

President Romney outlined the development of the Church welfare program as guided by President Lee and said:

Many there were in the midst of the great depression of the 1930s, who having faltered, turned to state and federal governments for help. Harold B. Lee was not among them. Taking the Lord at his word that man should earn his bread in the sweat of his face and convinced that all things are possible to him that believeth, he struck out boldly with the fearless ingenuity and courage of a Brig-ham Young to pioneer a way whereby his people (he was the President of Pioneer Stake at the time) could, by their own efforts and the help of their brethren, be supplied the necessities of life.

Those who were close to him in those dark days know that he wept over the suffering of his people, but more than that, he did something for them.

With all his heart he loved and served his fellowmen. He loved the poor, for he had been one of them. "I have loved you," he said. "I have come to know you intimately. Your problems, thank the Lord, have been my problems, because I know, as you know, what it means to walk when you have not the money to ride. I know what it means to go without meals to buy a book to go to the university. I thank God now for those experiences. I have loved you because of your devotion and faith. God bless you that you won't fail."

The development of the welfare program seemed to President Romney to be a preparation for greater works to come, particularly the correlation program as directed and guided by President Lee. President Romney explained:

During the last fifteen or so years, his has been the predominating influence in organizing, developing, and correlating the organizations and functions of the Church. That the Church is today well on the way to being so structured that it can efficiently administer to the spiritual, temporal, and educational needs of its rapidly expanding membership, is, in large measure, due to his genius.

In closing, President Romney recalled an article he had written about President Lee many years earlier, in which he had predicted, "The future must reckon with Harold B. Lee."

Since then, we have been reckoning with him for twenty years, and he has not once faltered. We mourn his passing, but there is no need to mourn for him . . . . There is laid up for him a crown of glory. He will dwell in exaltation and eternal life with the prophets of ancient and latter-day times.

Tribute from a Traveling Companion

Elder Hinckley said "President Lee's was a magnificent heritage" and pointed out how his ancestry and early life had combined to mold him into a superb instrument to carry out God's will on earth.

As I took over this vast congregation, as I see this veritable garden of floral tributes, as I have noted the hundreds of telegrams and other expressions of love and sympathy, there have crowded across my mind the images of a hundred contrasting scenes of his earlier life-of days of struggle and poverty and anonymity; and I have marveled at the manner in which the Lord has magnified his chosen servant.

Elder Hinckley, told of family deprivation, sorrow, and tragedy in the Lee ancestry, then added:

It is a long odyssey from that Idaho farm to this Tabernacle, where thousands gather in respect and love to pay him honor and acknowledge the power of God in his life. But with all of the triumph of that life, there also has been much of sorrow, much of struggle, much of adversity, much of disappointment, of frustration, of bitter defeat.

But be it said to his eternal credit that wherever circumstances knocked him down, as they frequently did, he stood again where he had fallen and then moved on to greater achievement. Perhaps even in this travail there was the molding power of the Lord in his behalf, for out of that chastening process there came a refinement, a patience, a polish, an understanding, a grace beautiful to witness and marvelous in its expression.

Elder Hinckley further told of preparing for this funeral address by looking at a handwritten memorandum from President Lee, and how his initials "HBL" seemed to grow into three words-Humility, Benevolence, and Loyalty:

Ours was the rare privilege of traveling with President and Sister Lee many thousands of miles in the British Isles, in Europe, in Israel, and in other lands. No one could have that experience without coming to know that here was a humble man-a man without arrogance, void of officiousness, never haughty or noisy or offensive. His was not a groveling humility, but rather that of which the Master spoke when he declared on the Mount: "Blessed are the meek: for they shall inherit the earth." (Matthew 5:5.)

In 1972 we walked together in the Holy Land . . . . On that sacred occasion, when moonlight filtered through the leaves of the olive trees [at the Garden Tomb meeting], he whom we sustained as prophet spoke in humble, quiet testimony. We felt something of heaven and I saw that night President Harold B. Lee as a man of true humility, with the faith of a child, standing in the stature of a prophet who bore witness of the living reality of the Lord Jesus Christ.

Man of benevolence. Legions are those who could testify of his kindness. Much has been written of his great service in the Church welfare program.

But there have been other more intimate expressions of love. I know of no man who went more frequently to the hospital to visit the sick, to comfort, to bless. There sits a man in this hall today who could testify of his coming in the hours of the night in a time of desperation; and in the authority of the holy priesthood in him vested, he laid his hands upon that man's head and rebuked the very powers of death.

Loyalty to God and his Son, the resurrected Lord. This was the flawless gem in the crown of his life. He was wont to say, "Never think of me as the head of this Church. Jesus Christ is the head of this Church. I am only a man, his servant." Of him, the Lord, he testified with a persuasiveness almost irresistible. A business leader said to him one day, "I believe in the Lord, but I do not have a testimony of the living Lord." President Lee replied, "Then you lean on my testimony while you study and pray until your own is strong enough to stand alone."

The magnificent tributes and testimonies borne by his fellow General Authorities and the beautiful music of the Tabernacle Choir subdued the aching hearts and brought much comfort. Outside the Tabernacle the elements and atmosphere were much less soothing.

The Burial

Leaden skies above Salt Lake City produced a downpour of cold rain after the funeral. The day, gray and dreary, had begun with a brief sprinkling of snow turning to occasional drops of rain during the funeral, but a heavy storm erupted just as family members and friends of the late President of the Church began to surround the grave high in the hillside overlooking a fog-shrouded valley at the Salt Lake City Cemetery.

At least one hundred persons attended the graveside rites, many of whom were waiting as the funeral cortege entered the cemetery. Graveyard attendants had shoveled snow from the site and mourners stood on soggy grass or on the canvas that was spread on the winter ground. Besides the General Authorities and family members, those gathered at the grave included children, elderly persons, and others who wished to pay their last respects to the prophet who had led the Church for only one year, five months, and nineteen days.

Private and public interest mingled at the gravesite. Banks of microphones broadcasting the proceedings to radio listeners necessitated a maze of electronic wiring. Floral offerings were arranged at the scene, providing a bank of color to the otherwise gloomy black-and-white backdrop at the graveside service.

President Spencer W. Kimball presided at the brief service, sharing an umbrella with L. Brent Goates, who later pronounced the dedicatory prayer.

This was the scene as, under a sea of black umbrellas and in a drenching rain, President Harold Bingham Lee was buried at the side of his first wife, Fern Lucinda Tanner Lee, who died September 24, 1962. Under the adverse circumstances the dedication of the grave lasted only a few minutes, but some mourners had stood for more than half an hour in the rain awaiting the arrival of the funeral cortege.

At dedication of grave

L. Brent Goates, a Regional Representative of the Twelve, began his dedicatory prayer:

It is not unfitting that the heavens should weep today, because we, the Church membership worldwide, weep too-for ourselves-at the sudden passing of President Lee . . . .

The loved ones and leaders of the Church take comfort in the assurance which has come that President Lee's work here on earth is done, knowing that only thy summons can release a prophet from his life's mission, and that he has undoubtedly gone on to a much more glorious and important assignment in the world beyond . . . .

In the authority of the Holy Priesthood, I thus dedicate this grave as the final resting place of President Harold Bingham Lee's mortal remains until the time of the resurrection of the just, when body and spirit will again be reunited, to clasp the loved ones here reposed, in the morning of the glorious resurrection attending the coming of thy Son, Jesus the Christ.

IN MEMORY OF A PROPHET OF GOD

A prophet died, and at his grave Stood mourning Saints of God;

We wept, and heaven wept; her tears Splashed on the winter sod.

Some lived and died and never knew The value of his word Because they never knew he was A prophet of the Lord.

Some found their comfort far away And never saw his face, Nor touched his hand, nor heard his voice; Still knew his gentle grace.

Some lived near the prophet's heart And knelt with him in prayer; Acquainted with a noble man, They knew his kind watch-care.

I bless his name because I knew! And know! And shall remember The day I wept, and heaven wept, One sad day in December.

—Jo M. Shaw

Gone, but Not Forgotten

Who can measure the loss of their living Prophet as felt by thousands of loyal, faithful Saints? What was the significance of the passing of President Harold B. Lee to innumerable individuals who suffered from this separation? A glimpse of an answer comes from these few, selected responses after the funeral.

From far-off Tokyo, Japan, the patriarch of the Japan Tokyo Stake, Ken Watanabe, wrote to the widow of the President:

As I pause and reflect upon the life of President Lee I am saddened and new tears roll down, for he was not only my Prophet, Seer and Revelator, but also my father, teacher, brother, and friend.

His passing was the greatest shock of my life. As many others, I shed tears of love for him. I think I wept for him more than anybody here in Asia. Oh, how I loved him. But, now he has gone...

I do not know the will of the Lord fully, however, I know that the President has finished his mission here on the earth and was called home for the greater assignment. I also feel that the best way to pay my tribute to him is to become like him and to keep all the commandments of the Lord and to have a privilege to meet him when the Savior comes. Till that time, I hope to be a good son to you, Sister Lee, as John the Beloved was to the Savior's mother.

The youth of the Church felt bereft, too. When Elder James E. Faust spoke at Brigham Young University early in January, 1974, he made some remarks and bore his testimony about the passing of President Lee. Afterwards he received a letter from a young lady that said, "I felt very close to President Lee, although I never knew him." Elder Faust added his concurrence to the Lee family, saying, "I think this statement is indicative of how thousands and thousands of people felt toward him."

Perhaps representing all the youth of the Church is Connie Holton of Salt Lake City, who came to the Lee home with a loaf of bread on Christmas, 1973, and also left an endearing note which stated in part:

One of the strongest spiritual experiences that I've received has been when I felt the Holy Ghost testify to me that you are a prophet of God. This I have felt whenever I've been in the sound of your voice. My prayers are with you always, for I realize, although I'm sure in only a small way, that your responsibilities are great.

I deeply love you and know that you are a spokesman for Jesus Christ. Hopefully I will be found worthy to be with you and the prophets of the ages and all the righteous when Christ comes again. I promise to sustain you in all things for I know that in doing so I will be following our Savior.

Even nonmembers of the Church who had had only a brushing acquaintance with President Lee felt so moved by his sudden passing that they were compelled to write of the loss they too felt. Here is one such comment from a journalist, Tammy Tanaka, of the Religious News Service of New York City. Her expression came in a letter dated January 11, 1974, addressed to Wendell J. Ashton.

President Lee is one of the most beautiful human beings I have ever met-whose inner light and love I will always remember as a goal toward which we should all strive. I cannot find words to properly describe him, but President Lee made a permanent and deep impression on me, as I know he did on others.

I have the profoundest love and respect for this great man, whose power and closeness to God is indisputable!

From Seattle, Washington, F. Arthur Kay, then a Regional Representative of the Twelve and later the President of the Seattle Temple and a General Authority, wrote this letter of bereavement on January 3, 1974:

We, of the Great Northwest, were stunned and unbelieving at the first news releases, hoping and praying they would prove to be false. Few, if any men, in my time, have left a greater void or a greater sense of profound loss at their passing. Few, if any, have had a greater impact on the Church and its programs designed to meet the needs of the individual member, and few, if any, have inspired a greater response for good in the lives of all who knew him the world over.

President Lee left so many lasting and profoundly moving effects on my life and those of my family that we shall revere his life and labors forever, and because of this great love and respect, we extend it to you, his family.

A previously unknown departing missionary, who was befriended by President Lee at the Missionary Training Center when his mother passed away, wrote from the Italy South Mission to Sister Lee on January 1, 1974, to return the gift of faith which he had received from the President of the Church. Elder Gary W. Gerhard wrote:

I loved President Lee very much and I know that he loved and continues to love every person on this earth with every fiber of his soul . . . . You see, President Lee thought of me and my family four months ago, when I was in the Missionary Home, when my mother passed from this earthly existence. He bore a solemn testimony to me that I cannot deny of this plan of salvation, and now I have been moved by the Spirit to write to you, and leave you my testimony and love that this Church is the kingdom of God on earth.

The personal ministrations President Lee rendered to so many friends and the loss they felt, is represented by a letter to Sister Lee from Lenore (Mrs. George) Romney of Bloomfield Hills, Michigan. She wrote:

We love him, too! Your loss is incomparable because you had so much, but we share with you deep sorrow that your beloved Harold's magnificent spirit and personality cannot again shine upon us in this life. Yet always I have what he brought to my soul: renewal in every way and faith in my own worth and mission. In fact, his influence upon me was greater than that of any other man, save that of my own father and my husband.

Every moment, every glimpse of him, I treasure, for I was warmed and blessed by his every word. As you know, he restored me to life and health while in our home, blessing our family with his prophetic insight and inspiration, and restored me anew with his magnificent blessing in the Oakland Temple with you at his side. Later he helped me have the courage to stand firm in the bruising political arena, knowing, through his loving counsel, what was required of me. Later, our visit together in St. George at the commencement exercises of Dixie College was another peak experience. I shall always feel the glow of his tender, compassionate consideration of me.

I still see President Lee standing before us in the Salt Lake Tabernacle with prophetic vision and personal revelation pouring forth from his countenance that shone with the light of heaven upon us all, thrilling and stirring our souls.

The same sentiments were being expressed in his most intimate circle, too. From the office staff who daily worked with him and saw him under all situations and pressures came a tribute from Francis M. Gibbons, secretary to the First Presidency, written to Helen and Brent Goates on the night of his death.

All of us share the great loss which you and your lovely family have suffered this day. God bless you in this sad hour.

Without exception, we all reached out to President Lee as if to a father. His unfailing concern for our welfare and his constant reaching out to help us and ours made us all feel that we were part of his family, while the concrete achievements of his ministry will hardly be exceeded by any of his predecessors except Joseph, and, perhaps, Brigham. I believe that the thing that will make his memory endure was his great capacity for love and compassion and his ability to make everyone feel needed and loved.

Reason in a Parable

The meaning and purpose of the tremendous loss of President Lee is nowhere better understood nor more beautifully and expertly explained than in these words of Elder Boyd K. Packer of the Council of the Twelve, excerpted from his remarks at the conclusion of the Coordinating Council meeting of January 30, 1974:

Harold B. Lee-prophet, seer, and revelator. All of us have been close to him and worked closely with him over the last few years. He, of course, could properly be titled, "the architect of priesthood correlation." Under assignment from President David O. McKay he served as chairman of the Correlation Committee for many years. As a counselor to President Joseph Fielding Smith, and as President of the Church, he directed what is known as Priesthood Correlation. We have visited with him, sometimes in intimate conversations, in travel, or in his office, or in meetings such as this. We've looked back with him to his junior years as a member of the Council of the Twelve.

He saw some drifting and felt some anxiety, and he carried that concern with him for years. There is no question but what he saw today, for he was a seer; or that he understood and saw what was out in the world. He saw the narrow places that we must navigate as a Church. And, over the years, as he grew in stature, there came, as he often expressed, ideas that met their day.

Now, as we were jolted by the death of President Lee and sat up and took note of what happened, all of us, I think, asked ourselves the question and asked one another the question, "Well, what does it mean? Harold B. Lee has gone. What does that mean?"

Imagine a group of people who are going on a journey through a territory that is dangerous and unplotted. They have a large bus for transportation, and they are making preparations. They find among them a master mechanic. He is appointed to get their vehicle ready, with all of us to help. He insists that it be stripped down completely, every part taken from the other part and inspected carefully, cleaned, renewed, repaired, and some of them replaced.

Some of the gears are not efficient. They are not producing the power they should for the amount of fuel they use. And so they are replaced. This means a change in linkage, a change in the pattern of connections and delivering the power. So they go to work, with this master mechanic directing the retooling and refitting of this vehicle.

There are steep inclines that must be made and there has to be sufficient power. There will be curves and switchbacks, there will be places where control will have to be perfect, where the braking will have to be perfect.

So, painstakingly and deliberately, without undue pressure, the bus is disassembled, and ultimately is put together again.

Then comes the time when there has to be a shakedown, a test run, if you will. The signal comes that this master mechanic will also be appointed the driver. He will head the journey.

So the test is run. It is not a very long one, but there are some very difficult obstacles in it so that it is a full test. All of us, as we stand by, are delighted with the result. It is roadworthy! Now we know that it will make every hill and it will go over, and if necessary through, any obstacles in our way.

We see the master mechanic, pleased with his work, step down and say that it's ready. He dusts a little dust off the radiator cap.

Then comes the signal that Spencer will drive. And the protest comes, "Oh, but not another! We need Harold to drive. There's never been anyone who has seen so much and knows so much about the vehicle we are going to use. No man in all history has so completely gone through this vehicle and no one knows as much as he knows. No one is so thoroughly familiar with it!"

But the command is definite. Spencer will drive! Some protest that the new driver isn't so much a mechanic. "What if there is trouble along the way?" And the answer comes back, "Perhaps that's all to the good that he may not be a mechanic. It may well be, for should there be a little grinding of the gears, he won't be quite so inclined to strip it down, take out all the gears, and start to overhaul it again. He'll try first a little lubrication perhaps, a little grease here and there, and that will be all it needs."

We must now move forward and move out. The signal comes to all of us who are on the crew. "Climb aboard. Spencer's been appointed to drive!" We obediently and with acceptance move out into that journey.

The death of a prophet is never accidental. A prophet cannot be taken, save his ministry is complete. Those of us who were present in that first meeting that first morning after that night of shock, came to know by that sacred power of communication that He is in charge. This is His work and He will do as He will do. We of the Twelve were reminded in those meetings as the reorganization was effected, that "my thoughts are not your thoughts, neither are your ways my ways" (Isaiah 55:8).

The work of President Harold B. Lee will have effect just as long as this Church endures; until the Lord himself says, "It is finished," until His work is done. Never through all generations can it be minimized or mitigated.

Never will the Church be the same, always it will run with more precision, more power, so that as we are on the hills, we will make the grade. When we are on the switchbacks, we will have the control. The brakes are intact so that they can be applied if we move too quickly or stray too closely to the edge of safe travel.

And so the question, then, What about those of us of the crew? What's ahead, then? What's our signal?

We must do things in order with moderation and dignity and restraint.

Those feelings have been on my mind constantly. I can confess sleepless nights as I have prayed and wondered and pondered over "Why?" I thought, when we needed President Lee the most, he who was familiar and conversant as no man ever had been with the programs of the Church, he was taken from us. But the peace was there immediately. There is no question, the Lord is in charge.
