Llewelyn R. McKay, David O. McKay, Home Memories of President David O. McKay ( 1956)

Section One

FAMILY BACKGROUND

THE MOTHER OF PRESIDENT DAVOD O. MCKAY

IN the life of a great leader there are multiple influences which develop and enhance his attributes, character and personality. In many different ways, in conversations, in writings and in speeches father has emphasized his love, reverential devotion and deep appreciation for his beloved mother, for it is to her that he attributes the greatest source of inspiration and righteous guidance during his youth, thus giving him a solid anchor to which he has firmly held throughout his life.

In referring to her many virtues, father has written of her:

"I cannot think of a womanly virtue that my mother did not possess. Undoubtedly, many a youth, in affectionate appreciation of his mother's love and unselfish devotion can pay his mother the same tribute; but I say this in the maturity of manhood when calm judgment should weigh facts dispassionately. To her children, and all others who knew her well, she was beautiful and dignified. Though high-spirited she was even-tempered and self-possessed. Her dark brown eyes immediately expressed any rising emotion which, however, she always held under perfect control.

"In the management of her household she was frugal yet surprisingly generous, as was father also, in providing for the welfare and education of her children. To make home the most pleasant place in the world for her husband and children was her constant aim, which she achieved naturally and supremely. Though unselfishly devoted to her family, she tactfully taught each one to reciprocate in little acts of service.

"Her soul, to quote the words of the poet was, 'As pure as lines of green that streak the first white of the snowdrop's inner leaves.' In tenderness, watchful care, loving patience, loyalty to home and to right, she seemed to me in boyhood, and she seems to me now after these years, to have been supreme.

"Mother left us when she was still young, only fifty-four. During the intervening twenty-seven years I have often wished that I had told her in my young manhood that my love for her and the realization of her love and of her confidence gave me power more than once during fiery youth to keep my name untarnished and my soul from clay.

"From my beautiful, ever devoted, and watchful mother, from my loyal sisters in our early home associations, and from my beloved wife during the maturer years that followed, I have received my high ideals of womanhood. No man has had inspiration from nobler, more loving women. To them I owe a debt of eternal gratitude.

"Among my most precious soul treasures, is the memory of mother's prayers by the bedside, of her affectionate touch as she tucked the bedclothes around my brother and me and gave each a loving, goodnight kiss. We were too young and roguish, then, fully to appreciate such devotion, but not too young to know that mother loved us.

"It was this realization of mother's love, with a loyalty to the precepts of an exemplary father, which, more than once during youth, turned my steps from the precipice of temptation.

"If I were asked to name the world's greatest need, I should say unhesitatingly wise mothers; and the second, exemplary fathers.

"If mother love were but half rightly directed, and if fatherhood were but half what it should be in example and honor, much of the sorrow and wickedness in the world would be overcome.

"The home is the source of our national life. If we keep the spring pure, we shall have less difficulty in protecting the stream from pollution.

"My Mother! God bless you!

For your purity of soul,

Your faith, your tenderness,

Your watchful care,

Your supreme patience,

Your companionship and trust

Your loyalty to the right,

Your help and inspiration to father,

Your unselfish devotion to us children."

BOYHOOD OF DAVID O. MCKAY

Father was born September 8, 1873, the third of ten children and the oldest boy in the family. When he was only seven years of age, tragedy hit the household, death taking both older sisters within a week. Margaret died of rheumatic fever and Ellena developed a fatal case of pneumonia. Both girls were buried in the same grave, side by side. Father has often mentioned the stoicism with which his mother met this grief and placed her trust in God's will.

As a boy father delighted in the ownership of many pets, his dog, his pony, many rabbits, and a magpie whom he tamed and taught to talk. His love for animals has remained constant throughout his life. Responsibilities came along with the fun of childhood, and young David worked hard and long hours with his father in the fields.

When father was eight years of age, his father received a call to go on a mission. To accept such a call for two or three years away from home was no easy decision to make. Another baby was on its way, and plans had been made to enlarge the house and furnishings. The responsibilities of running the farm were too great to be left to his wife, so when David showed the letter calling him to a mission, he said: "Of course it is impossible for me to go." Jennette read the letter, looked at her husband, and said decisively: "Of course you must accept; you need not worry about me. David O. and I will manage things nicely!" Even though many of the neighbors and friends took the side of David and maintained that this was an inopportune time for him to leave home, Jennette stood firm. "Well," said "Uncle John" (John Grow) to David, "you may be right, and you may be wrong; but if Jennette has set her mind that you should answer the mission call, you might as well give in! I'll keep an eye on things and help out when I can!"

April 19, 1881, David O.'s father left for his mission in Scotland, leaving young David with new responsibilities. David had the normal vitality of youth, as evidenced by his aunt's statement while she was taking care of him as a youngster: "Jennette, if you will just take care of this boy, I'll gladly cook for the threshers!" In the absence of his father, the boy David quickly redirected his energies to chores and farm work. Circumstances thus helped to produce a maturity beyond his physical years.

He was proud of his new baby sister, Annie, and realized that added responsibilities now rested on his shoulders. With the help of members of the priesthood quorums, the grain was planted, and the summer brought a good crop of hay. The fall brought a disappointment, however, because prices of grain were too low to bring a profit. Upon good advice the grain was stored until spring when a high price was obtained. Without sending word to father McKay, Jennette decided to surprise him by having the addition to the house built. On the eve of father McKay's return, as the family sat around the living room to hear some of his experiences, one of the children asked if he had had any miracles. He put his arm around his wife and replied, "Your mother is the greatest miracle that one could ever find!"

During the ensuing summer, young David took a job carrying the Ogden Standard, a daily newspaper, to LaPlatta, a booming mining town, beyond Middlefork Canyon. This responsibility required leaving Huntsville at 7:00 a.m. each morning, and he could not return until about 5 p.m. in the evening. This brought some extra money, but better still it gave an opportunity to make many friends among the miners who welcomed him with open arms as he brought the newspaper from the city.

As David O. and Thomas E. gradually took on more responsibilities in helping their father, a vital lesson was taught by father McKay. He did not "tell the boys" what they were to do, but at breakfast each morning he asked the question: "Boys, what is your plan for today?" and let them make the decision as to the most important tasks to be completed. Thus they always felt that the farm belonged to the family and not to their father. As a small boy I remember grandfather asking his sons (though now grown men) the same question when problems arose, allowing them to make the decisions but always ready and on hand to offer good advice and counsel when needed.

The first responsibility in the Sunday School came January 27, 1889, when he was made secretary, and four years later he was made a teacher in this organization which has always remained dear to his heart and in which he has remained active all his life. He liked this teaching so much that he kept the position until he had to give it up when he was a senior at the university (October 4, 1896). Besides Sunday School work, he was active in the presidency of the deacons' and teachers' quorums and helped organize groups to chop wood every week for the widows in the ward and to maintain and clean the chapel—a task delegated to the younger boys of the ward.

There was much fun among the young people, too. Horseback riding on the ranges, swimming in cold Spring Creek, baseball on the "Square," dramatic series, debating, and glee clubs all were organized, and David O. joined in them all. He was particularly happy when playing the piano with the town's dance orchestra and in taking the group to Eden and other neighboring towns to liven up the young people.

During this time he learned how to "snake" timber from the high mountains through the brush and trees to the wagon where it was piled high and brought home to a large barn.

Arthur Woolley, a dear friend of father, knows how close to his heart is the valley of his youth and said in a speech at an Ogden banquet given in father's honor:

"When winter comes and snows fall again in your beautiful valley, you will hitch your teams to the bobsleigh. You will load the straw-filled wagon box full to overflowing with your grandchildren. You will take your place standing, wearing a full-length coonskin coat and a cap of the same fur on your head. With reins grasped firmly in hand, looking like a Viking, with a hearty guffaw, cheeks aglow, and eyes sparkling from health and the crisp air and the joy of living, you will drive a fine team with sleighbells jingling through the lanes of the valley and in the adoration of your posterity."

While attending Weber Stake Academy David lived for two years with his grandmother Evans on 28th Street in Ogden. He was a tall, stately young man with an innate charm and gracious smile. His friends recognized his vigor of leadership; his courteousness, sincerity, quick wit and enthusiasm won for him a place in the hearts of youth and of older people. After two years, he returned to Huntsville to teach, but he yearned to continue with his education. The parents desired an education for all the children irrespective of financial hardships, so it was decided that the four older children should attend the University of Utah. Father describes this trip to Salt Lake:

"My brother, my father, my sisters Jeanette and Annie, and I rolled over the sand ridge from Huntsville with horse and wagon, a cow in the trailer, with a sack of flour milled from wheat we had grown, with jars of fruit which mother had put up, going down to start our schooling at the university. We got as far as Farmington and had a chance to sell the cow, so we did this and took another one later. We were assured of bread, milk, and fruit. We rented a house and thus began our first year. The second year, we rented a house from Mrs. Riggs, the mother of my wife."

School was important. The love for learning grew by leaps and bounds; deep friendships were formed; and his fine sense of values was enhanced. He became the president of his class and was selected valedictorian to represent his fellow classmates at commencement. Participating with enthusiasm in sports, he became right guard on the university's first football team. The greatest event during this time was his acquaintance with Emma Ray Riggs, daughter of O. H. Riggs and Emma Robbins, from whom as stated above, the McKays rented a cottage. This acquaintance led to a courtship and finally to the first marriage ceremony performed in the Salt Lake Temple in the twentieth century.

The marriage did not take place right after graduation time, however. Through Professor William M. Stewart, head of teacher training at the university, David O. had been offered a position to teach in Salt Lake County, so to receive a call to go on a mission came as quite a surprise, and perhaps somewhat of a shock. His heart was set on entering a profession which he so dearly loved—teaching, and furthermore the years at the university had drawn tightly on the family's purse strings, and David O. desired to earn some money to contribute to his parents' hard earnings. Yet there was no question of refusing the call, and in August, 1897 farewells were spoken.

During his mission he had an opportunity of visiting the birthplace of his father in Thurso and to meet some of the friends who knew his parents. To them he declared: "If a young missionary of the Church had not found his way to Grandfather's humble cottage, I should not be here today!" Later he visited his mother's birthplace in Wales near Merthyr Tydfil. It was with great joy that he could write to his mother after seeing the room in which she had been born and to tell her of his acquaintance with many of her childhood friends. His visits built communities of goodwill, sympathetic tolerance, and left encouragement wherever he went.

THE ANCESTORS

During his travels throughout Scotland during his mission, father became very interested in the land of his forefathers and in the history of the McKay clan. Statues, castles, old ruins, and many landmarks pointed continually to stories of bygone centuries with which his ancestors were closely associated.

The "Mackays" are of Celtic stock. The ancestor who founded the house of Mackay probably descended from the old Royal House of Moray, and the fiery blood of the turbulent McEths ran in his veins. The surname Mackay is the English equivalent of the Gaelic MacAoidh from Mac (son) and Aoidh (the genitive of the proper name Aodh). Aodh was a popular Celtic name, a form of Aed which translated means "The fiery or impetuous one." As time went on, the spelling of MacAoidh took many forms including Iye, Y, Aytho, Maciye, Makky, Macky, Maky, McKye, McKeye, Mackie, Mackey, Mcky, McAy, McCei, MacCay, Mackee, Makgie, Ison, Eason, Easson, and many others. The name MacIsaac is a corruption of MacIye. Clan Morgan, the old name for Clan Mackay is probably derived from the Moray connection of the clan.

Clan MacKay is known to the "seanachies" as "Clann Mhorguinn," or Clan Morgan. In the "Book of Deer" of the eleventh century, the Clan Morgan and their "toiseach," or chief, granted lands to the Abby of Deer, Aberdeenshire, at that time. The clan are also called "Clann Aoidh"; the lowland form is Mackie, and the Irish, Magee. In Manx they are known as Kay. At least two clans MacKay existed—an Argyllshire and a Sutherlandshire clan. The Argyllshire Mackays are to be found at an early date in Islay and Kintyre. The Mackays of the North are always called Clan Morgan by the Gaelic "seanachies" and claim to be descended from the common ancestor of the Forbeses and Urquharts.

Duthaich Mhic Aoidh, the Mackay country, covered five-eighths of the County of Sutherland, Scotland. In early times the chiefs were known as "of Strathnaver," and this term was used to refer to the whole Mackay country. The first Mackay lands, twelve davochs of church lands at Durness, were obtained in the early thirteenth century before the Norsemen were expelled from Scotland. Successive Mackay chiefs added to their lands, and by the seventeenth century they owned most of the modern County of Sutherland. This was rugged country, wild, with high mountains, fertile valleys, and open moorland with rivers and lochs offering excellent fishing. The Reay Forest has long been famous, and early histories speak of great herds of deer which roamed the hills. Sea fish were plentiful on the coast, and the people became independent with cattle, sheep, goats, and farm products of barley, oats, and rye. They developed to a proud folk, displaying loyalty to their chiefs, demonstrating courage whenever called upon to battle. Their reputation for honesty and fair play was widespread.

The first historic chief was Angus Du, who flourished during the years 1380-1429. He was referred to as "Angus the Absolute," from the fact of his having 4,000 men at his command. Angus was an old man when the fierce battle of Drumnacoub was fought in 1429, and the clan was led by Iain Abereigh, who gained a great victory.

The chief of the clan from 1614 to 1650 was Donald, whom Charles I raised to the Peerage in 1628, with the title of Lord Reay. Henceforth, the lands of the Mackays were known as the "Lord Reay Country." Hugh Mackay of Farr, father of Donald, Lord Reay, is said to have been the first of his family to turn Protestant. Lord Reay carried over a regiment of 3,000 men to Germany to the assistance of the King and Queen of Bohemia. He afterwards engaged in the service of the King of Denmark against Germany, and upon the King making peace with the conqueror, he entered with his forces into the service of Gustavus Adolphus, bringing new recruits and supplies of men.

In 1642 Lord Reay sold Strathnaver to the Earl of Sutherland, to redeem loans of money which he received to discharge debts incurred in transporting and maintaining 12,000 men which he recruited for foreign service to assist the Protestant cause in the great Thirty Years' War. During the chiefship of Eric, seventh Lord Reay, in 1829, the remaining portions of the estates were sold to the Countess of Sutherland, so that the MacKays of the North were forced during "Sutherland Clearances" to move from the lands of their inheritance. Most of them moved to the coast of Northern Scotland.

Thus we first hear of President McKay's great-grandfather, (David Oman) for whom father was named, living in Caithness where he became steward for the Earl of Caithness. This was a respected position, and no doubt gave opportunity for close association with the Earl and his household at Thurso Castle, the home of the Earl. David Oman and his wife, Barbara Monroe, had a large family of ten children, seven girls and three boys. The sons emigrated to India and became well-to-do plantation owners. The girls remained in Caithness. One of the girls, Ellen Oman, met William McKay (born 1804) from Strathnaver with whom she fell in love and married (1838).

William took his bride to the little town of Janetstown, not far from Thurso, where he built with his own hands a "but and ben" cottage. This spot has become very dear to father, as I discovered when I accompanied him on a trip to see it in 1952.

THE "AULD HOUS"

On August 13, 1953, our group was ready at 6:50 a.m. to make the last lap of our journey to Thurso, situated on Pentland Firth on the most northern tip of Scotland. Two miles from Thurso in Janetstown stands the old homestead built by President David O. McKay's grandfather, William McKay, about the year 1838, and this was our objective. Our party consisted of President McKay and mother in the back seat, and Elder Richard Orgill and me in the front of one car. In the second auto were President and Sister A. Hamer Reiser, their two daughters, Elaine and Carolyn, and the driver, Elder Bryant Stringham.

Although it rained in torrents as we drove along the picturesque coast of the North Sea, father predicted sunshine when we reached our destination. We crossed the barren peat hills where we are told the trees were burned to kill the ravaging wolves and wild animals. Other folk claim the marauding Norsemen scorched the earth. The famous Scottish heather covered the ground and gave the various shades of green in the grass an accompaniment of purples. Roving herds of sheep constantly crossed the road. No one could doubt being in the sheep country of Scotland as all the hillsides were dotted with sheep. Scattered here and there were farmhouses, many of which had long been abandoned, and the thatched roofs were falling to the ground.

As we reached Thurso, the storm had subsided and left an almost imperceptible morning breeze. We stopped our cars to get breakfast at the hotel, but father noticed a sign across the street which diverted his interest away from eating: "Wm. Oman, Grocer." "There is a family name!" he exclaimed. "My grandmother's maiden name was Ellen Oman, and I was given 'Oman' for my middle name!" and he immediately went into the store to see if he could find a relative in the proprietor.

During breakfast, father telephoned to Mr. Abroch MacKay, the "man who knows all about the McKay clan." Abroch MacKay turned out to be an elderly, cultured, and educated gentleman who possesses a wealth of material about the history of northern Scotland. "Yes," he began, "I have a letter concerning your grandfather, William McKay, written by the postmaster of Janetstown where William McKay lived." He graciously presented this letter together with two pamphlets, one of the account of the 1935 meeting of the McKay Clan Association in London; the other a small history of the McKay clan. Father, in turn, gave Mr. MacKay three pounds sterling for a rare edition of the History of Caithness.

We are told that the McKay clan once owned all of the county of Sutherland, as far back as 1160 when history tells us of the "expulsion of the MacEths (McKays) from Moray." Between the years 1815 and 1818, however, the "Strathnover Clearances of Sutherland took place to make room for sheep" and hundreds of families were driven out into the county of Caithness. Among these was a great-great-grandfather of President McKay.

"When I was here in Scotland fifty-four years ago," said father, "I located the home built by my grandfather William McKay, and I think I can find it again. Go straight out this road to a village called Janetstown." After we had gone two miles ("which is much faster than when I was here before," remarked father; "as a missionary I economized and always walked such a short distance") father pointed out a small, two-chimney, rock house left of the road. "There it is!" and his eyes sparkled with joy. "We shall inquire in this house here, because it looks as though the old home is unoccupied."

We didn't need to knock. Faces were already peering out the window and a man came out to greet us, introducing himself as Charles McIver.

"McIver!" exclaimed father. "It was a McIver to whom I spoke fifty-four years ago when inquiring about the old home."

"That's right; that was my grandfather. I read in the papers that you were in Scotland and knew it must be you as soon as you stepped from the car. Yes, indeed, that's the house across the way where the 'Black Minister' used to live. My father spoke of it many times!"

I learned later that father's clan was known as the "black" (darkhaired) McKays to distinguish them from the "light" (blondhaired) clan. William McKay was called minister after he joined the Mormons.

Charles McIver had come into possession of all the adjoining property to his house including the old McKay home. "I'm sorry," he said, "the old place isn't very presentable. I use it for storing potatoes now. You are welcome to drive over if you like and look at it."

Indeed we should like to do so. As predicted, the sun broke through the clouds and smiled at us as though he were reflecting the joy and happiness in father's heart.

As we all gathered in front of the home, tears came to father's eyes as he looked through the door. "If it had not been for two missionaries knocking on this door about 1850, I shouldn't be here today! In this little 'but' and 'ben' (living room and kitchen) house were born my father, Uncle Isaac, Aunt Ena, Aunt Kate, and Aunt Isabel. Fifty-four years ago I knocked on this door to inquire if this is the old home. A sweet old lady opened the door, and I told her who I was. She turned into the kitchen, and I thought 'Aha, now that she knows I'm a Mormon, she won't let me in,' but she called out: 'You'll come richt in an' you'll sit richt doon. An' are ye Willie's grandson? Ach 'a nee, Ach 'a nee—I'm gettin' auld! They used to dip 'em I' the burn—Do ye do that noo?'

"I can still see that dear old soul standing here. Her name was also McKay, but no relation as far as we could learn. She treated me royally and hoped I'd come back again. Well, here I am again, but time has taken its toll."

Father explained how the inner hall ran along the front of the house leading at the left into a living room and at the right into the kitchen; and a single bedroom situated between. The cooking was done on a small stove set in the fireplace. We admired the thick, foot-and-a-half walls of stone, still as sturdy as ever. In the garden which once flourished were still some plants of rhubarb, the same "strawberry" type as my grandfather had in Huntsville. It is not improbable that the Huntsville variety originated from this plot.

We took many pictures and returned across the street to thank Mr. McIver. This time Mrs. McIver came out of the house and also her bashful daughter—who needn't have been bashful, for she is very charming! When told of the old Mrs. McKay who met father fifty-four years ago, Mr. McIver informed us that she was his aunt and that she passed away in 1918.

It was worth the trip to see how much joy had come to father and how gratifying it was to him to be once again in the land of his forefathers and particularly to be in his father's birthplace.

I could see that he was reluctant to bid farewell to the old homestead. Undoubtedly it hurt him to see it falling into ruins because as we drove away, he called to Mr. McIver: "Please take care of the auld hous!"

"Do you know," father said as we sat down that night to supper, "I think President Reiser's suggestion has merit to have the old place restored as it used to be."

I couldn't eat much supper, because, somehow, there was a lump in my throat. [^1]

PRESIDENT MCKAY'S GRANDFATHER

Father spoke endearingly of his grandfather in remarks at a meeting in Edinburgh, August 14, 1952:

"Very few who are present realize what this moment means to me. With appreciation of your welcome I associate in a reminiscent mood events that brought me to the position that I now occupy. Let me state briefly that it has been over a hundred years since my grandfather, William McKay, and my grandmother, Ellen Oman McKay, left Thurso, Scotland, having become converts to the Church.

"About 1877 William McKay, my grandfather, came back to his native land as a missionary and went up to Wick, Thurso, and Aberdeen. About 1882, his son, David, my father, came over here as a missionary. He too was in Glasgow, Dundee, Aberdeen, and in Thurso. In 1897 I was called as a missionary and Rulon S. Wells appointed me President of the Glasgow Conference.

"An old lady in Thurso whom I visited in 1898 was the playmate of my grandmother. . . . And so, as I look back in reminiscent moods upon these events, and I stand before you with gratitude in my heart that a humble elder a hundred years ago knocked at a door in Thurso, or really Janetstown near Thurso, . . . I am thankful that my grandfather and grandmother believed . . . because that was the beginning of all the events that have happened in the century leading to this moment."

William and Ellen Oman reared a family of five, two sons and three daughters, in the little three-room cottage: Isabella, Williamena, Katherine, Isaac, and David.

In the year 1850 a thirty-seven year old elder, William McKay (no relative) appeared at the cottage and after several visits converted William to the Church, baptizing him November 3rd. Two days later Ellen Oman was also baptized, this couple becoming the first converts to the Church in the North Country. The three eldest children also became members and all began working enthusiastically to preach to the neighbors. Two years later William was ordained to the office of elder, and because of his ardor and sincerity in preaching to all whom he met, he was nicknamed "The Black Minister."

William decided to take his family to Zion and after making sailing arrangements, he disposed of his home and property and packed what belongings could be taken on ship. Unfortunately, the trip had to be postponed because the children came down with measles. A "friend" took advantage of the situation, and persuaded William to lend him the money which had been obtained from the sale of William's property, so that the "friend" could sail to America—promising to have the money on hand in New York when William would arrive at a later date. With trusting heart, and willing to help out a friend, William consented.

In April, 1856 William left with his family for Liverpool where he joined 764 other Mormons who were leaving for America. The McKay family was listed among the passengers as follows:

Name Age

——— ——-

William McKay 49

Ellen Oman McKay 46

Isaac McKay 16

Isabella McKay 14

David McKay 12

Williamena McKay 7

Catharine McKay 5

The company sailed May 4, 1856 on the sailing vessel Thornton and spent forty-one days on the ocean, landing at Castle Gardens, New York. But what a disappointment awaited the McKay family! The good "friend" who had promised to meet them and return the borrowed money had absconded with the funds that William had depended on to provide for the journey to Iowa City. Hence, the family was stranded.

After a family council, it was decided to accept the first opportunity of jobs and to work diligently until enough money was saved to continue toward their objective. Isaac and David, consequently, went to New Jersey to work in a brickyard, and the father traveled to Connecticut to work as a farmer. Ellen Oman with her three daughters rented an unfurnished, upstairs apartment. She sold the accumulated tea which had been obtained on the ship which gave enough money for food to tide them over until the menfolk had earned their first money.

After two years, the family moved to Iowa, and again settled down for another year's work saving money and preparing for the long trek across the plains to Utah. By the end of a year the family owned two two-year old steers, two cows, one old ox, a wagon, and a scanty supply of provisions, and all were happy that the 1,000 mile journey could begin. They joined the company of Captain James Brown at Florence. On the eve of departure, June 13, 1859, a council of instructions was held. Captain Brown reported that there was a widow with a small child in the camp who had no means of transportation and who was too ill to walk. "Is there anybody here who can make room for this widow and her child?" Every wagon was heavily loaded, and no answer came from the assembled men. William had always taken the best possible care of his wife, and he planned to have her ride in the wagon across the plains, intending to walk the whole distance himself. He reported the incident to Ellen Oman saying: "Mother, there is a widow who would like to cross the plains; she is helpless, unable to walk. Somebody will have to make room for her in the wagons. I said nothing tonight."

She answered immediately, "You go right back and tell her that she may have my place!" At her insistence, he did so, and Ellen walked with her husband the whole distance of 1,000 miles across the plains!

Father spoke of his grandparents in loving remembrance: "Reference has been made to Granddaddy and Grandmother McKay, and to 'Dacky' and 'Mangy' our Welsh grandparents. It is with these four grand people that our interest in Ogden began; when Daddy McKay settled down in the corner of 28th Street and Lincoln, and Mother's parents settled on 28th and Adams. We are indebted to the virtues and nobility of those people, and those who succeeded them.

"Yes, I remember the jokes of the Scotch granddaddy. . . . I also remember that when the immigrants came from Europe and stopped here at the station, that granddaddy would take his basket filled with fruit and cakes cooked by Aunt Mary and treat the immigrants at the station. If there were any Scotch among them, he would invite them home to lunch and find joy in that service. David McKay, his son, was not wealthy, from the standpoint of worldly estimate, but he was comfortable, and rich in character, and in independence of thought and action, rich in a loving family, in affectionate service, virtuous. His was an intensely noble character, and the atmosphere of the home was impregnated with that nobility."

DAVID MCKAY

Father of David O. McKay

David McKay, youngest of the boys of William, was born May 3, 1844 at Janetstown (Thurso), Caithness County. With his father, mother, and brothers and sisters he walked across the plains to their new home in Ogden.

While still a very young man David fell in love with his future bride, Jennette Evans. She was a lovely, attractive girl with large, brown, laughing eyes. He knew he could never forget her after first observing her in a gingham dress and sunbonnet as she stood by the family covered-wagon in which the Welsh family had just arrived after the long trek across the plains.

Even before any settlement was made in Ogden Valley, David with his brother Isaac and sister Williamena went in June, 1860 to cut and put up hay in Huntsville. The following year (1861) his father secured land in the valley, and a small log house was built in which Williamena cooked for her father, David and Isaac.

David felt a duty to participate in the newly organized Utah Militia and consequently volunteered. The commander, Samuel Glascow, looked at him and said: "Your height is all right, but there is no hair on your face." Since he was eighteen years old, he was accepted just the same, and remained a faithful member, working himself up to a commission as captain and finally as major in the 5th Battalion under General Chauncey W. West. He maintained this rank until the Utah Militia was officially disbanded. During this military affiliation, he was called to active duty, and participated in the Black Hawk War.

IN HUNTSVILLE

There was something about Ogden Valley which magnetically drew the McKay family to enjoy its invigorating air at an elevation of 672 feet above the city of Ogden. The challenge of hard work, the invitation of good, rich soil, and the green pasture lands between the middle and south forks of Ogden River seemed to beckon. Furthermore, Ogden Valley is a most picturesque spot containing three hundred fifty-two square miles of fertile farm land, ranges and forests.

David and Isaac went into partnership and bought land as their father had done. They began to farm and to buy stock which helped to furnish meat for their father's butcher shop in Ogden. After David's return from his mission the partnership was dissolved.

In the meantime, Jennette Evans—she with the large brown eyes—had grown into a beautiful young woman and was popular with the young set of Ogden. After a loving courtship, David asked her to become his bride and on April 9, 1867, they were married. David took his bride to Huntsville to settle and work for the future. From this time on both David and Jennette took an active part in the interests of the growing community, contributing to the constructing of canals, irrigation ditches, building roads, bridges, and public buildings. He gave many hours in the construction of the first school building and the first church in the valley. When the school building opened, there were many families who could not afford the tuition. Hence, with Angus McKay and William G. Smith a plan was drawn up whereby a system of taxation could take its place. The plan was adopted by all families of the community. Consequently Ogden Valley has the distinction of possessing the first free public school in the West.

From the time of the organization of the first Sunday School, David took an active part and continued without interruption. He was given a medal for twenty-five continuous years in Sunday School service. Francis A. Hammond, one of the early bishops, chose David counselor, but shortly thereafter a bishop was needed in the Eden Ward, and David accepted the responsibility. He drove back and forth from Huntsville to fulfil his obligations. After a few years he was called to take Bishop Hammond's position in the Huntsville Ward (1885) where he remained as bishop for twenty years. During this time the present meetinghouse was built, and a new brick school-house was erected under his guidance and direction.

Bishop McKay always found time to participate in municipal and state affairs. He became trustee of the Huntsville school district, was county commissioner, and was twice elected justice of the peace. In 1893 he became a member of the lower house of the legislature and began an unceasing campaign for woman suffrage until it was passed November 5, 1895. He was elected as a state senator. Other activities included his service as one of the presidents of the 75th Quorum of Seventies, a member of the high priest quorum from 1885 on, a guiding leader of the board of education of Weber Stake Academy, and a lovable and respected patriarch of the Church after his ordination to that high office by President Joseph F. Smith in 1905. He was president of the high priests' quorum of Ogden Stake when he died in 1917.

I recall him first of all as a lovable personality, devoted to righteous endeavor, tolerant, genial, and always an outstanding example of dignity. He used to take us children on his knee in the evenings and sing lustily: "Billy Boy, Billy Boy" and other songs which delighted us. Four o'clock in the morning was his time of rising, and invariably the old pump (under the sleeping porch where we boys slept) would begin squeaking at that hour. For two hours before the rest of the household began its duties, Grandpa would finish a new milk stool, have a new gate made, or have completed the weeding of his straight-row garden. What Grandpa did, he always did right—second best was never good enough. I am sure it was he who imparted this ideal of perfection to father.

Grandfather's influence spread throughout the country and touched many lives, one example of which is told by Ernest Wilkinson (President of Brigham Young University):

"As one example of the way in which he (David McKay) has influenced the lives of people, let me recite the following simple incident: As a very young boy I recall riding the Bamberger electric train to Salt Lake City to attend a general conference of the Church. I was fortunate enough to sit behind Patriarch McKay who, during the entire trip to Salt Lake, was discoursing with his associate on the many marvelous instructions contained in the gospel. At that time he recited, which was the first time I had heard it, the advice given in the Doctrine and Covenants 'to retire to thy bed early, that ye may not be weary; to rise early that your bodies and your minds may be invigorated.' The enthusiastic and positive manner in which Patriarch McKay recited it made an imprint on my mind in an impressionable age, and what little success I have had in my profession has been due, I am sure, in large part to the fact that I generally get started much earlier in the morning than most men in my profession."

JENNETTE EVANS MCKAY

Mother of David O. McKay

When speaking of his Welsh lineage on his mother's side, father often relates the following incident:

"I visited Malad soon after I was called to the Council of the Twelve. The grandfather of Brother Ralph Richards, one of our secretaries who drove us down, was president of the Malad Stake and just before the Saturday morning session of that quarterly conference began, I whispered to President Richards that I had Welsh blood in my veins. He, of course, was a pureblood Welshman. With a toss of his head or an expression on his face, I don't remember just which, he implied that I was making that claim simply because I was in Malad, a town principally of Welsh people.

"When I arose to speak to the congregation, I told them, 'Just before this service began I whispered to President Richards that I have Welsh blood in my veins, but by the shake of his head or the expression on his face, he implied that I made the claim merely because I am here with you Welsh people. But I wish to say to President Richards and to you that my mother was born in Plasagon House, Cleydyfagwyr Cefn Eved Cwmer, near Merthyr-Tydfil, South Wales, and her name was Evans.'

"An old lady sitting in the front seat rose and said, 'That's it, that's it, you are, you are.'"

Jennette Evans McKay was born August 23, 1850, the daughter of Thomas and Margaret Powell Evans. The Evans family was well-to-do, owners of land and several houses which brought in a comfortable rent. Shortly after Thomas Evans became converted by missionaries to the Church, he was disinherited by his family who refused to have anything more to do with him. His interest turned all the more to the Church which he had joined, and he was made president of the conference within a short period of time.

Anxious to settle in Utah, Thomas sold his possessions for a fraction of their worth and sailed May 22, 1856, from Liverpool on the packet ship Horizon. When the family reached Iowa (July 8, 1856), the news of the hardships in crossing the plains and of several tragedies which had occurred caused Thomas to hesitate taking his family on the long trek before he was prepared. Consequently, he worked for three years, gradually buying supplies and needed clothing for the long journey. In 1859 he joined the company of Captain Philip H. Buzzard, and with a good team of horses to pull the wagon, a cow tied behind to furnish milk, the trip began.

The company arrived in Salt Lake August 18, 1859, and after a short stay of two weeks in Salt Lake, Thomas moved on to Ogden where he purchased a farm and began to build a home.

It was upon the arrival of the Evans family in Ogden that David McKay first saw Jennette and decided then and there to court her and wed her as soon as he had sufficient funds.

Jennette attended school (under Harriet Brown and "Aunt Rose" Canfield) and later taught school until her marriage to David McKay, April 19, 1867.

David was very proud of his beautiful wife who was considered one of the prettiest girls in Ogden. He was extremely solicitous of her welfare; he refused to let her work in the fields, and insisted on obtaining help for her in the house—particularly because he so admired her beautiful hands and lovely, clear complexion.

Jennette, however, was not at all vain, and did all that she could to help, applying the strictest economy to save money to pay for the house and to make plans for future additions.

WEBER ACADEMY

Before father left his mission he received a contract to teach at Weber Academy. After his release in August 1899, he took up his duties as a member of the faculty, and soon his name became synonymous with idealism, worth-while character, tolerance, and goodwill. His nobility of aims, the fervor of his convictions, his depth of friendship, and his winning smile soon gained for him the love and confidence of students and colleagues.

Weber became a symbol of ideals for scholarship and for character building. In a letter to the students he wrote:

"My attachment to Weber is rooted in the fact that not a few years of my life are interwoven in its history and growth. As a youth of sixteen I was a student in its first rented home in the Second Ward meetinghouse. Three instructors of that year stand out in memory—Principal Moench, Professor Haag, and Professor Pedersen. Later I was a student when it entered its first new home on Jefferson Avenue.

"As I search for the source of my affection for the good old school, I find it not in its architecture, not in its brick walls, its beams and rafters, not even in the classrooms that connote so many fond memories, nor in the scholastic courses of study and the efficient instruction of the professors who compose the excellent faculty, but in the personal integrity and worth of the hundreds and thousands of students who in their lives in this old workaday world exemplify the ideals for which Weber Stake Academy, Weber Academy, and Weber College has ever stood.

"These ideals are the eternal verities—(1) individual freedom to choose one's life as long as one does not deprive another of that same right; (2) integrity, fair dealing, unbroken pledges whether spoken or written; (3) faith in God and belief that there is still good in our fellow men."

He reiterated these ideals at the dedication of a plaque which was unveiled, April 9, 1953:

"Let us ever keep in mind the ideals for which the founders of Weber College stood: not only must we teach the three Rs, but we must also cherish above all the ideals of character which are higher than the intellect."

Father has always maintained that people become interested only when they themselves help to make or to build, so he became a zealous and courageous leader for building a great school for the future. One of his visions was to procure a gymnasium for the physical development of the students, and he set about early planning for such a building. Aaron W. Tracy, president of Weber, stated to the students upon the final completion of the gymnasium, November, 1923:

"David O. McKay created the vision away back in 1903 or 1904. He caught the glory of it all. He with his faculty and little band of students of those years raised the standard for its consummation. That standard has never been laid down by him or them. Every succeeding faculty and student association has caught the spirit of the originator of the idea and has pressed forth to this day. Therefore, David O. McKay, together with a long line of loyal students and friends who have imbibed his spirit and enthusiasm from that day to this, is responsible for the gymnasium. He has pointed the way, and he and they have maintained the spirit which has brought to us a consummation devoutly to be wished. We are now to enjoy the fruits of his and their labors. We are greatly indebted to him and them."

From a faculty member he became president of the institution with the following faculty (1908): Mr. Porter, Jeanette McKay, Wilford M. McKendrick, Joseph Ballantyne, William Z. Terry, LeRoy E. Cowles, Eva Farr, John G. Lind, Sarah T. Evans, Sylvester D. Bradford, and D. Ray Shurtliff.

His personal interest in the students continued, and with their support and with the confidence of his faculty he began to establish new departments of domestic arts, domestic science, department of music, a school paper, The Acorn, and he ushered in new standards for good teaching.

The school grew so rapidly that housing facilities soon became inadequate. A plan was presented before the board for a new building, but these board members had already mortgaged homes and property to establish the facilities already at hand. The verdict: "Your cause is just, but there is no money!" Undaunted, he explained the situation to the faculty. Each one consented to solicit funds personally throughout the community. A plan was drawn up to visit every ward in the stake. Finally father's goal was reached, and a sixty-thousand dollar building was erected that has since been a central meeting place for cultural activities of Ogden. The students said of him in The Acorn:

"Fortunate indeed are the students who have been registered in his classes; for when he taught religion, he gave truths he believed and had proved in practice. His lessons in literature were interpreted in the light of love and charity for all mankind, and his moral teachings had behind them all the force of a perfect, moral life."

LESSON PLANNING FOR THE SUNDAY SCHOOLS

Immediately upon his return from his mission he accepted the position to become a member of the Weber Stake Sunday School board. In 1900 he became second assistant to Thomas B. Evans and was delegated the responsibility of reorganizing and vitalizing classwork. Convinced that the success or failure of Sunday Schools was centered in the classroom, he began a plan whereby every teacher should outline his lessons and obtain guidance for illustrative material and be instructed in the best ways of presentation. Thus the union meetings were established to which all teachers of each grade level met with a coordinator who assisted them in outlining the lessons for the following month. A definite course of study was defined for each group so that students would obtain a gradation of learning. Often father would be called personally to a ward or to a teacher's home who had difficulty in reaching the desired goal, and many times he traveled in horse and buggy to give help where needed. Mother would usually accompany him on these many trips, holding a warm blanket around her baby. The high ideals of the superintendency, Thomas B. Evans, Charles E. Ross, and David O. McKay, soon resulted in Churchwide acclaim, and the pattern of the Ogden Stake was eventually adopted by all the Church Sunday Schools.

After six years of working in the stake, he was made second assistant to the general superintendent of Sunday Schools, President Joseph F. Smith (1906). In 1909 he became first assistant, and in November 1918 he was made superintendent, with Stephen L Richards and George D. Pyper as assistants. Hence his work in the Sunday Schools was unbroken. During this time no call was too great, no task was too arduous.

AN APOSTLE

His faithfulness and consistency brought a call to the apostleship, April 8, 1906, at the same time as Orson F. Whitney and George F. Richards. Father was then only thirty-two years of age.

Although his new duties demanded most of his time, he continued to be active in Weber College affairs and guided its destiny as president of the board. His family saw little of him, for he left early in the morning and returned late at night. On one occasion as he kissed his children good-bye, his little daughter, Lou Jean remarked: "Good-bye, call again." The next years brought many trips to outlying stakes, many of the journeys requiring miles of slow travel by wagon during storms, blowing sands, and in hot and cold weather. Usually two Authorities traveled together, and when distant trips were made to such centers as Panguitch, Kanab, St. Johns, Snowflake, Parowan, St. George, or the Canadian Stakes and Bighorn, two or more weeks were needed in order that the visitors could attend meetings in wards along the way. At that time a full day was needed, for example, to go from Marysvale to Panguitch and another day to travel from Panguitch to Kanab. Deep sand caused many a delay between Orderville and Kanab, and later when autos were used the travelers had to get out and dig the wheels of the car from the deep sand. Photos show the travelers wearing dusters and eating their lunch at the halfway mark between Orderville and Kanab. In the wintertime, it was so cold that hot bricks were placed at the bottom of blankets which were wrapped around the legs to prevent frozen toes.

In 1919 father was made Church commissioner of education in which office he set up standards of efficiency. He vitalized teaching in the Church schools and seminaries, setting character building as the ultimate goal. The eloquency of his talks to the leaders of the educational system was sustained in the becoming dignity of every act. He instilled the spirit of humanitarianism so that all pupils and students would be reached with an understanding heart.

WORLD TOUR

With Hugh J. Cannon father began a tour of the missions December 2, 1920. As an ambassador of goodwill he visited all missions with the exception of South Africa, traveling 62,500 miles. One of his admirers said of him:

"I see in this friend an exemplar whose genuine and constant desire is to encourage, uplift, and strengthen the weak, the erring, the stiff-necked, the skeptical. These people can partake of his accomplishments though they cannot follow his example, just as they can enjoy a performance at the piano but are helpless to produce such music themselves. The most estimable quality is that he bears with the failings of the weak. He has no desire to cast them aside."

His warmth of greeting in each country, his ease in the presence of world leaders, (just as he is at ease in the company of little children), his invincible spirit, and humble sincerity, together with his love for all men of goodwill, won for him, the Church and the state, lasting friends throughout the world. He kept a day-by-day diary of the trip that are poetic gems.

EUROPEAN MISSION

Not long after his world tour father was again summoned to travel to Europe to take over the affairs of the European Mission, succeeding Elder Orson F. Whitney.

It was rather heartbreaking for us children to see the home sold in which we were born and where we spent a happy childhood in Ogden at 676-21st Street. David Lawrence was already on a mission in France, and after spending a few weeks at Durham House in Liverpool, I was sent to Germany on a mission. I was a homesick lad for awhile and wrote a sad letter about my feelings. Father took the time as he was riding from London to Liverpool to pen the following poem, which I deeply treasure:

Dear Llewelyn:

"'I'd give part of Germany; yes, all of it, too,

For just one wee hug of dear Bobbie and you';

So runs your letter to Mother this day,

The first she's received since you sailed away.

"You'd have thought that a rainstorm had burst, as she read,

So fast down her sweet face the large teardrops sped.

'Twas her love sending answer in reciprocal joy,

Saying, 'I'd give the world to hug you, my boy!'

"Now if some kind fairy should grant you your prayer,

And transport your Mother from here over there,

And drive from your heart every trace of distress

As her and bright 'Bobbie' you'd fondly caress,

"Do you know what would transport her soul in pure bliss,

As she sealed the reunion with a pure, loving kiss?—

The assurance she would have as she looked in your eye

That your life is as stainless as Baby's, near by.

"Old Time passes quickly—too quickly, my lad,

As into our lives he throws good and bad;

'Twill be but a span ere your wish you'll possess,

And Mother and 'Bobbie' you'll fondly caress.

"Be yours then to say, in that moment of bliss,

As loved ones you greet with a pure loving kiss:

'Though waves of temptation around me did roll,

They but tempered my manhood; untainted's my soul!'"

During these two years, every minute was a busy one. He held 525 meetings exclusive of personal calls, private consultations, responsibilities of administration, and official visits. Deducting an average of two days each week for correspondence and editorial work on the official publication The Millennial Star, he averaged a meeting every day in one of the eight missions of Europe. These summed up to sixty-eight total hours of meetings with an equal number of hours on trains. He traveled 2,000 miles and addressed 7,000 people. Every conference in the British Mission was visited twice during each of the two years.

The largest gathering of the German Mission was held in Berlin in the City Hall, the first time that a public building had been granted for such a purpose. All missionaries from Germany, Austria, and German-speaking Switzerland were in attendance.

A VISION OF FUTURE TEMPLES

Even at that time father had the vision of a temple being erected for the European members of the Church. I recall asking him if missionaries should persist in encouraging members to leave their homes and move to Zion. "No," he answered, "it is important that the branches be built up, and members should remain and work toward that end. Someday we shall have temples built for them which will be accessible to all, so that the desired temple work can be done without uprooting families from their homelands."

Father's life since his release from the European Mission Presidency has been filled with the cultivation of righteousness in the life and activity of mankind. His breadth of interest and activity has been almost boundless. Following the White House Conference on child welfare, he was elected chairman of the Utah council, February 18, 1932, to organize Utah for the promotion of child health. On October 6, 1934 President Heber J. Grant called him as Second Counselor in the First Presidency. Until the following year he had continued as general superintendent of the Sunday Schools, but at that time (1934) his new multiple duties necessitated his release, yet his support of the Sunday School work has continued wholeheartedly. He was made chairman of the Utah State Centennial Commission in 1938 and organized one of the greatest celebrations, held in 1947. Many commissions have come to Utah to study this planning in order to model their own celebrations after it. As a member of the Board of Trustees, Utah State Agricultural College (1940-41) and as chairman of the Utah State Advisory Committee of the American Red Cross (1942) he worked unceasingly. He continued as Second Counselor in the First Presidency under George Albert Smith, and upon the latter's death he was sustained as President of the Church, April 8, 1951.

The National Boy Scouts have honored him with the Silver Buffalo. Four colleges have bestowed upon him honorary doctor degrees, and he has become the president of banks and other Church-owned institutions which demand his wise counsel and decisions.

Church history may evaluate his contributions from another light, however. No Church President has traveled so extensively nor so far to bring peace, happiness, and goodwill to members beyond the boundaries of the state. On June 1, 1952, he left New York to visit the European Missions including Scotland, Wales, England, Holland, Denmark, Sweden, Finland, Germany, Switzerland, and France. Again in August, 1953, a trip was taken to dedicate the temple site at Bern, Switzerland, and at New Chapel, County Surrey, in England. Following this came a 37,000 mile tour of Europe, South Africa, and Latin America. Then, in 1955, a tour was made of all the Pacific Islands, including New Zealand and Australia. Finally, in August and September, 1955, another trip to Europe during the tour of the Tabernacle Choir was made. At this time the ground-breaking ceremony for the temple in England was conducted, and the temple at Bern, Switzerland was officially dedicated and opened. All missions have received a visit from their President.

Thus a new era has started in which the Authorities of the Church are going to the members of the Church to encourage, help, and advise them, rather than encouraging them to gather to the Church's central headquarters. Progressive and forward-looking, father stimulates the members to build up and strengthen the wards, branches, and missions in their own home lands, and encourages them to accomplish their Church work by building temples within a distance where all can go. Consequently, the spirit of world citizenship is being fostered with a broad understanding of all nations and of their individual problems, and with a sympathetic attitude. A finer sense of life's values, a betterment of human conduct, leading to a fulness of the gospel can be nurtured by each individual no matter where he lives in the world. Truly father has been able to feel, to grasp, and to understand the heartbeat of the world!

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] 1. Reprinted from The improvement Era, October, 1953
