Llewelyn R. McKay, David O. McKay, Home Memories of President David O. McKay ( 1956)

Section Two

WORLD TOUR DIARY

AROUND THE WORLD WITH HUGH J. CANNON

A SENSE OF HUMOR WITH SEASICKNESS

BROTHER HUGH J. (CANNON) was in prime condition, I thought, when we boarded the Empress of Japan, a Canadian Pacific Ocean Steamer in the Royal Mail Service, on the evening of December 7, 1920. Kind friends had showered us with good wishes and blessings, had feasted and dined us for weeks previous, and had sent along with us boxes of the choicest cream chocolates to make our journey sweet and delightsome.

"No voyage, therefore, was ever entered upon with more appreciation in one's heart for farewells given or more hopeful anticipations for a delightful trip.

"It was storming when we went to bed, and the movement of the boat was keenly perceptible even when we went to sleep.

"The pitching of the vessel in the night awoke me. The roar of the wind and the dashing, splashing sound of water told me that we were in a gale at sea. Sleep from then until morning was only intermittent. Every nerve and muscle in my body responded to every movement of the boat. As this movement became more pronounced and intense, the contents of my digestive organs joined in unison with nerves and muscles. Twenty-one years ago, one morning on the Atlantic, I had experienced a similar feeling, so I knew I had better dress carefully, and get up on deck.

"At that moment Brother Cannon jumped out of bed as bright and pert as a ten-year-old boy. He could steady himself as though he were anchored. With no apparent difficulty, he dressed himself, and even shaved—an operation, which though ordinarily simple enough, seemed to me under the circumstances, almost marvelous. I concluded to take his advice when he said:

"'If you aren't feeling well, I suggest that you don't look in this mirror.'

"He invited me to breakfast, but I couldn't think of anything that this ship could put on a table that was worth eating, so begged to be excused. It was a dismal sounding gong that called us to breakfast anyhow—a fitting accompaniment to the gloom of the weather. However, before attempting to dress, I ate an apple Brother Hugh J. handed me.

"Without hurried exertion, I put on my clothes and started for the deck; but the swaying staircase and the madly moving world of water stirred my feelings with a yearning desire for solitude. Yielding, I hurried to my room, where in less time and seemingly with less effort than it takes to tell you, the apple and I parted company forever. I threw myself on the berth, and wondered what there was in common between a Jonathan apple and Jonah that could produce such like effects. Though I arrived at no definite conclusions about the matter, one thing was most certain: My sympathy was wholly with the whale. I understood, too, how Jonah escaped being thrown into the sea. If I could entirely have followed the whale's example, I, too would have swum for land.

"Hugh J. returned from breakfast looking as robust and rosy as an athlete, and smacking his lips in appreciation of an excellent meal. What a blessing health is! I was feeling pretty miserable, and I hated myself for getting sick so early in the game. As he looked at me, I fancied I saw spreading over his countenance indications of a laugh he was trying hard to suppress. I said something which enabled him to lift the lid and let off his mirthful steam. Limp and dejected, I looked at him, healthy and happy, and began, right then and there, to doubt the wisdom of the Revolutionary statesmen who declared that 'all men are created equal.' However, he gave me the comforting assurance that only a few passengers were at breakfast.

"Feeling somewhat better, I started again for the deck and was not a little consoled when I passed a poor Chinaman with perspiration standing in beads on his jaundiced-looking face, and sitting holding his knees, looking, as I'm sure he felt, the most forsaken, limpy lump of humanity in existence.

"At any rate, I had company in furnishing gratuitous amusement for the 'chosen few.' This time I reached only the top of the stairs, when that intense yearning to be alone drove me back to my cabin. Good-bye last night's dinner! Good-bye yesterday's Rotary luncheon! And during the next sixty hours, Good-bye everything I had ever eaten since I was a babe on Mother's knee. I am not sure I didn't even cross the threshold into the pre-existent state.

"In the tossing and heaving of the ship, as well as of internal conditions, there was no respite. She would mount the crest of a huge wave and then plunge head-on; but before hitting the bottom of the trough, she would take a plunge to 'port,' then instantly veer to 'starboard'; hesitating a moment, she would give a 'shimmy'-like shiver and plunge again—turning, veering, 'shimmying' in endless repetition, until it seemed that life was made of nothing else.

"And all this rough sea was on the placid Pacific! Truly, Balboa was not in a ship but on the sunny side of a California hill when he named these waters the Pacific Ocean. Heaven be merciful to me if we sail a tempestuous sea!

"In the afternoon (December 18th) another blizzard swept down from the north. I believe it is the worst yet. The waves on the port side look like the hills on our Huntsville range, and rolling almost as high. The foam, the billows, and the wind-driven spray give the ocean today the coldest, bleakest aspect I have ever beheld. Every once in awhile a tremendous wave strikes the ship with a boom, breaks over the top, and pours down in a torrent on the colored glass skylight in the center of the roof of the library where I am writing. The old boat is strongly built, but she quivers when she gets a real body blow.

"One woman talking to another, said, 'You've been awfully sick, haven't you?'

"'No,' replied the other in all seriousness, 'I haven't been sick, but I couldn't keep anything on my stomach.'"

APPRECIATION OF BEAUTY

December 26—From Tokyo to Kofu

"The fields plotted off in rectangles, squares, and circular forms, and dotted with green grain planted in hills, with cone-shaped stacks of rice straw with every blade in place, the old thatched-roofed houses—all presented a rural scene which for picturesqueness would be difficult to surpass.

"The morning was perfect. Old Sol never shone brighter on any land (Huntsville excepted); the sky was cloudless; and the air, after sunrise, delightfully pleasant.

"All this, of course, added to the enchanting beauty of the mountain scenery through which we passed during the succeeding four hours.

"The hills dotted with groves of thrifty pine trees, often planted in rectangular groups, and terraced with little variously-shaped fields, or gardens, bordered by mulberry bushes, the quaint, old-fashioned villages crowding the foothills, the shrines marking some beautiful spot, a remarkable tree, or impressive scene, the gate and stone steps and winding pathway leading to each important one—all combined to make this a most intensely fascinating ride.

"Nor did it lack in grandeur. There were deep gorges through which tumbled the mountain stream being harnessed now by the enterprising Japanese; mountain ravings, pine-topped peaks, clear, graceful waterfalls, and in the distance, the far-famed Fuji, snow-covered and majestic, standing, king-like, above the smaller mountains surrounding him!"

AT NIKKO

December 27

"'Until you have seen Nikko, never say splendid!' is the interpretation of a common Japanese expression regarding this beautiful place; and I accept it as being most applicable.

"I have never seen a more beautifully interesting spot, nor can I imagine any other where may be combined in such an array of resplendent beauty the grandeur and sublimity of mountain scenery, the skill of exquisite art in carving and painting, and the mystic worship of past ages.

"When I turned from all the splendor and consummate skill man had put forth and then beheld the groves, the forests of the graceful Cryptomerias and pines covering the rolling hills and majestic peaks, when I listened to the streams rippling down gentle slopes, or the dashing waterfalls plunging from step to step toward the river below, when I saw the luxuriant vegetation filling the hollows and covering every embankment, I could not help exclaiming, 'It's Nature's touch, after all, that makes Nikko splendid!'"

RESPECT FOR FOREIGN CUSTOMS

"From 9:00 a.m. until noon we lived in the mystic world of ancient Shintoism and Buddhism. Though the weather was cold and raw, we obeyed all regulations by removing our shoes before entering either a temple, or hall of relics, and in the sanctum sanctorum, we took off our overcoats."

POLITENESS

"Courtesy and politeness are inborn in the Japanese people. It is my opinion that they are excelled in these qualities by no other people. Their politeness is not a veneer, either; it is a spontaneous expression of the desire to serve as well as to please. Time and again we have been astonished at the unexpected regard for our comfort and convenience shown by these people."

RECOGNITION OF GOOD QUALITIES IN OTHERS

"The Japanese people, as a nation, are strong, virile, and eager to learn; but they will not be impressed by shilly-shally methods, nor with indifferent work.

"Among the laboring class, men work like animals. They pull jinrikishas and run for several miles, some even running forty miles a day. They are sturdy, husky fellows, inured to exposure and capable of great endurance.

"Then there are the laborers who pull heavily loaded carts, exerting sometimes a strength that seems entirely beyond them. But on they toil, either pulling or pushing hour after hour, and day after day; and through it all keeping up a vigor that attests a strong vitality.

"Among this class, too, the women work side by side with the men and bear their babies meanwhile.

"The soldiers and policemen are nearly all fine specimens of physical manhood—short in stature, it is true, but well-proportioned, alert, keen, and well-disciplined.

"And the babies! What they can endure! Cuddled on their mother's backs, they seem comfortable enough, but when they begin to run around, they are barelegged and barefooted in the coldest weather. Indeed, they object to having their feet covered. I have heard a two-year-old youngster yell until his mother removed his slipper-like stockings and let him down barefooted on the cold oilcloth covering the floor, and I was none too warm with my overcoat on! I saw one baby's bare feet sticking out behind his mother's back during a winter blizzard in Amori! Kiddies were barefooted, excepting the sandal, when snow covered the ground!

"That Japan is a growing nation, and a nation of men and women capable of physical endurance, and withal possessing a keenness of intellect and sturdiness of character that puts them at least on an equality with other civilized peoples, there can be no doubt in the minds of those who visit among them."

COURTESY

"We have observed that no man (in Japan) ever gives up his seat in a street car to a woman, unless it be an old woman, or a woman with a baby on her back or carrying bundles. No aged person is ever permitted to stand.

"The first time Brother Cannon and I were given seats, we were carrying satchels, and the kindness of the gentlemen who stood up for us made us deeply grateful. The next time, we concluded it was because we were foreigners, and were even more grateful; but about the fifth or sixth time, it suddenly dawned on me that these people were giving us seats because they thought us two old men! It seems that Brother Cannon had surmised as much before, because when I said,

"'Do you know, I believe I understand why these men give us their seats in the car?' Brother Cannon smiled and said,

"'Has it just dawned on you?' And then for his personal comfort only, he added:

"'And I've noticed that you've always been the first to be given consideration.'

"Well, though this realization somewhat lowered my appreciation of the kindness, I still maintain that the Japanese are second to none in true courtesy and hospitality."

A SUMMARY OF JAPAN

"The splendor of Japan—pine-clad hills and flower choked dells.

The staple crop of Japan—not rice, babies!

The autocrat of Japan—the four-year-old boy.

Beast of burden in Japan—laboring women.

The abomination of Japan—crowded streetcars.

The canary of Japan—the crow.

The most reliable thing in Japan—failure to keep a promise.

The excellency of Japan—hospitality and courtesy.

The heritage of Japan—loyalty.

The most impelling force in Japan—curiosity and imitation.

The charm of Japan—simplicity, beauty, and art combined.

The most interesting thing in Japan—everything."

IN A KOREAN BARBERSHOP

"The first thing I did was to hunt a barbershop and succeeded in finding what appeared to be a fairly respectable one. The Japanese running it seemed to be exceptionally short of stature, and their lamps and other appliances attached to the ceiling were hung for their convenience. I created surprise when I entered, but when my head came in contact with a globe, the chatter, laughter and exclamations were vociferous! The chair I occupied could not be raised and lowered, so I had to screw myself down in it so the little fellow could cut my hair conveniently. True to the Japanese custom of doing everything backward, he started to cut the top first, but on the whole made a very good job of it. He then gave me a shampoo. Evidently that operation is his forte! Shaving came next. I could only indicate what I wanted and then trust to fate for the outcome. His shaving of the face was about the same as that of any other barber, except that several times he pushed the razor instead of pulling it; but when he started to shave my ears, I began to get interested. I submitted, being determined to accept everything he had to offer. But, having finished my ears, when he lathered my nose and shaved it, I concluded he had gone far enough! What if he took my eyebrows, as I saw another barber take off a Japanese maiden's! I had permitted him to shave below my eyes but was prepared to jump if he started above. But he was satisfied with having shaved my face, my neck, my nose, my ears, and so was I!

"The whole operation took nearly one hour and a half and cost one yen (50 cents) which I concluded from the first price he indicated with his fingers was just 33 1/3 percent more than he charged his fellow-countrymen. But I had been given full value for my yen!"

AN EXPERIENCE WITH COOLIES

Peking, China, January 8

"Having had no opportunity to secure accommodations ahead, we found ourselves in, what appeared to be in the darkness, and what undoubtedly it is, the strangest city in the world. Relying upon the hope that the ticket agent could understand a little English, we followed the crowd along the platform to the station. In vain we sought for some officials who could tell us where to go or at least could tell where to check our luggage. Despairing in this, we walked from one side to the other, and from the other side back, all the while followed by a pack of jabbering coolies.

"I had proposed that one of us stay in the waiting room while the other secured rooms in a reasonably priced hotel. We knew the names of two, but preferred not to go to either with our luggage until we knew the price of each.

"But Brother Cannon thought we had better check the baggage, and both stay together. And he was right!

"Finding no check room, I said, 'Come on, let's get out of this; maybe we can find a hotel near here!'

"What we met and saw and heard in front of that station, I shall never forget! Human beings swarming and squirming, horns blowing, gongs ringing, and human voices yelling! As soon as we moved from the station, it seemed to me that this whole human avalanche moved toward us! Jinrikisha men came on the walk directly across our path. We wabbled along for perhaps a hundred yards, and then realizing how hopeless it would be for us to think of finding a hotel amidst such a bedlam, we sat in a rikisha each and said 'hotel.' Just as we started, somebody at my elbow said in what seemed to be English.

"'Where you goin'?'

"Thinking it was none of his business, I ignored him.

"Out into that mass of seething humanity and vehicles, our coolies trotted. How they avoided collisions was surprising to me.

"'Where you goin'?'

"Again that voice. I turned and saw that grimy face. He was trotting along, the beggar, just to get a tip. It seemed to me by this time that a thousand coolies wanted tips; so again, with a look intended to annihilate him and his straggling crowd, I ignored his question.

"By this time we were going through some pretty narrow streets—streets literally jammed with Celestials of all ages, sizes, and expressions!

"Again: 'Where you goin'?' Then the voice added, 'Rikisha man, he no savee!'

"Then it began to dawn upon me that this would-be 'interpreter' had ordered our drivers to go in the wrong direction. Realizing that if he had, we were entirely at the mercy of his whims, I turned to him and said:

"'We are going to the Grand Hotel de Peking.'

"'You want me tellee him? I speak Angleesh.'

"'Yes,' I answered, 'you tell him.'

"One word from that scheming little rascal brought us to a halt; and in a second, we were retracing our steps.

"Brother Cannon's man had followed all the way, and of course, turned and followed back.

"Well, I became pretty provoked. The thought of these rascals 'sizing me up' so quickly and correctly as a 'greenhorn' made me angry; and when after twenty minutes in the cold, we came again to the station from which we started, I gave my man a poke in the back that he seemed to understand. Jumping from his old 'rikisha,' I shook my fist in his face, and then in the 'interpreter's' face, and in good English told them we knew they were trying to play a trick on us.

"In three seconds there was a crowd around us; in the midst of it all, I heard a jinrikisha man say 'hotel,' and believing he understood the situation, I jumped into his keeping, and away we went, Brother Cannon following. He had quite enjoyed the whole farcical affair.

"'I telle him Grand Hotel.' There was that 'interpreter' trotting along as usual.

"In less than ten minutes we were at the hotel. Brother Cannon went in and secured some change, paid the four coolies including that pestering 'interpreter,' and we were soon in elegant rooms, enjoying together our first hour's experience in the old historic capital of the Celestial Empire."

COMMENTS ON CHINA

January 16

"I.) China is a disintegrating nation. Faded is the glory of her past, impotent the power of her once mighty government.

"The art and splendor of her picturesque temples, like the Great Wall, are permitted to go to decay; so are the manhood and the womanhood of the nation.

"China needs another Confucius, another Kubla Khan, to lead and inspire the young Chinese who are glimpsing the light.

"II.) China is a mercenary nation. Everybody's sole aim, seemingly, is to get money; and the system of 'squeeze,' operating from the central government to the provinces, and then from the Mandarins down through the various castes and classes until the poor wretched producer who cannot squeeze is crushed hopelessly and sometimes lifelessly to the ground.

"Before China can redeem herself, this mercenary spirit must be supplanted by the spirit of loyalty and unity.

"III.) China is a land of beggars and parasites. If there are more hideous, loathsome creatures to be found on the globe than we have seen in Peking, in Tien Tsin, or even in Shanghai, I hope I may avoid the sight of them.

"Beggars here are organized, with a King of Beggars at their head. Individuals even resort to self-mutiliation in order to prey more successfully on the sympathies of the public.

"How indifferent and careless and impotent that government which permits such human parasites to ply their trade on every street.

"IV.) China appears to be made up of not a religious but a superstitious people.

"Their so-called religion is a mixture of Taoism, Confucianism and Buddhism. This will not be an insurmountable obstacle in their way of accepting the gospel, once their superstition regarding evil spirits can be overcome.

"V.) The Chinese are a polite, courteous people.

"This admirable trait is almost as evident among the better classes as it is among the Japanese. Nice distinctions and considerations in deportment show a sense of true refinement.

"VI.) The Chinese nation needs the friendship and protection of the United States; and I hope Old Glory may ever be seen waving in the breeze at every port, and in all the principal cities of the Celestial Empire, now the struggling young Republic of China, the future 'Arena of the world's great struggle for supremacy, the coliseum of its heroes, the forum of its legislators, and the emporium of its trade.'"

IN JAPAN

WHEN YOU GET TO KNOW A PEOPLE, YOU APPRECIATE THEM

"Thirty days in Japan and China have completely changed my views hitherto entertained of the Orient and Oriental people.

"These people are certainly winning my admiration and true esteem. The refinement and courtesy so manifest at nearly every turn, the taste in dress, and the beauty of many of the better class of women, the charm and beauty of young maidenhood and sweet young girlhood, the luxuriance of foliage and the graceful, well-preserved trees in the groves and forests that abound everywhere, the splendor of Nature in gorges and waterfalls, and everything else, all combine to attune a man's sense of appreciation to the highest pitch.

"In the afternoon, Brother Cannon when alone in the heart of Tokyo, had one of the most striking demonstrations of the many so far experienced of the genuine and courteous treatment the Japanese people seem delighted to render visitors. By signs and language combined, we had made a policeman standing at a busy street intersection understand where we wanted to go and had received direction accordingly. Mistaking his instructions, we passed the street down which we should have turned and continued straight on toward the next. The policeman, who evidently had kept his eye on us, left his duty and ran three-quarters of a block, halted us, and led us back to the right street. He did it too in such a dignified, gentlemanly manner that we bowed our acknowledgments and then simply exclaimed to each other in astonishment."

NEVER JUDGE A MAN BY WHAT HE SAYS AND DOES WHEN HE IS SICK

From Tokyo to Honolulu

"It was very evident from the pitching and rolling of this big boat (The Russia) that we encountered, some time in the night, a pretty rough sea. If we need for further proof, the dashing of the waves against our porthole, and the swishing of the water out on deck would have been sufficient.

"I arose with a pretty fixed determination to pay no attention to the rolling boat nor the heaving sea. I went on deck, took a brisk walk, and wrapped myself up in my deck robe. When the breakfast call came, I responded, though very reluctantly, Brother Cannon assuring me that he always felt better when 'he had something on his stomach.'

"I felt quite proud of myself when, upon entering the dining room, I saw so many vacant seats. Ordering a cup of hot water and some milk toast, I sat in misery until the waiter returned. I was impatient to get that 'something on my stomach.'

"With one swallow of hot water and one bite of toast, I excused myself with as much dignity and leisure as I could command and walked out. My deck chair and I met each other just in time; though for the next few minutes it was very doubtful whether I or the fishes would have that one bite of toast! Though I won out, I felt pretty miserable and sat for an hour or two wondering what good an ocean is anyhow! Why couldn't the Lord have made just beautiful lakes, rivers, and dry land?"

January 28

"Life on the ocean, this morning, is not only bearable but really pleasant. The water is good-natured, and the boat and the waves on perfectly good terms and play with each other in genial and commendable manner. The angry, tempestuous mood, so disgracefully in evidence yesterday, evidently has spent itself. The same commendable harmony seems to exist between my much-enjoyed breakfast and certain well-known juices in my digestive organs, and this fact is responsible for the only disquieting thought I have this morning: that the proper functioning of my internal organs is so dependent upon the ever-changing whims of this restless sea! Aside from this somewhat humiliating feeling, I am in prime condition and excellent spirits. Even the old ocean looks beautiful with its blue expanse covered with gentle white caps rising to kiss the rays of the morning sunlight. I'm almost sorry for what I did yesterday about wishing for only lakes, rivers, and dry land!

"Moral: Never judge a man by what he says and does when he's seasick."

APPRECIATION OF NATURE'S BEAUTY

Island of Hawaii, in auto to Hilo

"The tropical trees and plants abounding everywhere seem to be more luxuriant here than in either of the other two islands we have visited. Rainfall is so frequent and plentiful that sugar cane grows without irrigation. Hundreds and thousands of acres of it stretch over the hillsides and country for miles and miles around.

"We were driven at a thirty-mile gait along a macadamized road, lined with sugar cane higher than our auto top, to the Akaka Falls.

"As we stood on one side of the chasm below that gorgeous though graceful crystal stream, plunging precipitously over a cliff 500 feet high, and being caught on its way by the breeze that changed it to a bridal veil, I thought of my childish dreams of fairyland. The deep, dark cave back of it seemed a fitting hiding place for the gnomes and goblins. At either side the precipices are covered with maidenhair and other small ferns, and around the basin high trees accentuate the altitude of the fall."

February 11—From Hawaii to Honolulu

"The boat ride on our return to Honolulu was a delightful one. Before retiring, we saw the eclipse of Venus by Luna, a beautiful crescent, and watched the two play hide and seek among the fleecy clouds until they retired for the night below the horizon."

RELATIONSHIP OF AMERICAN INDIAN TO POLYNESIANS

Honolulu

"Today, Brother Wesley (E. Wesley Smith) took us over to Dr. Louis R. Sullivan's office in the Bishop Estate Museum, and introduced us to this gentleman, who is associate director in the Department of Anthropology. He has been engaged several years with the American Museum of New York, which has made a special study of the American Indians, especially the Sioux. Dr. Sullivan is now studying the natives of the Polynesian Islands, and may be accepted as authority.

"'Doctor,' I asked, 'is there any relation between the Hawaiians and the American Indians?'

"'Undoubtedly,' he promptly answered. "There can be no doubt but they have have come from the same source.'

"'How about the Japanese?' I asked.

"'They, too, are of the same blood, but the Japanese are a mixed race; but all the natives of Polynesia have undoubtedly sprung from the same ancestry. But whether these Hawaiians, and Samoans, and Maoris came to America from Asia, and from America to these islands as you people believe, or whether they have drifted direct from Asia is a question yet to be determined. Anthropology, however, has demonstrated the close relationship between the American Indians and the natives of these Pacific Islands. They are the same people.'"

AN EXPERIENCE WITH NEPTUNE

En route from San Francisco to Tahiti

"The following letter written to little Emma Ray (daughter) will give an idea of what took place this morning:

"'This morning we crossed the Equator, an imaginary line that passes around the middle of the globe, and separates the north half of the world from the south half. You are now in the northern hemisphere, but I am now in the southern hemisphere.

"'Last night it was told among the passengers that when the ship crossed the line old Neptune, the ancient god of the sea, would rise out of the ocean, and perhaps come aboard. Of course, I didn't believe what was said, because I knew that Neptune was only an imaginary god, so I went to bed and slept and didn't even dream about him.

"'When I awoke this morning, we had crossed the Equator, and I heard someone say that Old Neptune had come aboard. Still, I didn't believe it, because I knew Neptune did not exist.

"'Pretty soon a man came to me and said,

"'"Mr. McKay, you are wanted."

"'"By whom?" I asked.

"'"By Neptune," he answered.

"'And then he suggested that I take off my collar and tie, and coat and other things I did not want to get wet.

"'This began to sound as though old Neptune was really aboard, because I had heard that he ducked everybody who came across the Equator for the first time.

"'Though I determined not to be thrown in the water, I walked aft along the deck, when suddenly I saw coming toward me Old Neptune himself, and what do you think was by his side? Mrs. Neptune! He had long white, rusty-like hair that was so thick and long that it covered half his naked breast. On his head he wore a crown with pointed tips that looked like a short, stubby pitchfork. His arms and legs were bare and looked for all the world as if he had been living in the sea for ages and ages.

"'Mrs. Neptune was a big, fat, jolly-looking creature, with very red cheeks and lips, and a white tip on the end of her nose. She wore a blouse-like skirt, and had a lei around her neck.

"'There were some nymphs with them who looked like policemen with big clubs in their hands.

"'Well, we all wondered what these strange people would do to us!

"'Pretty soon, after they had walked around the deck, and ordered everybody to follow them, Old Neptune and Mrs. Neptune sat on a high place on the deck, and began to pick out the passengers who had entered his dominion for the first time.

"'One man was called up, and when he refused to go, the gnome-like policemen grabbed him, hit him over the head, and dragged him before Neptune, who now sat as a judge.

"'The man was quickly found guilty, sentenced to be shaved, and thrown into the "Bath."

"'With a large whitewash brush, the gnomes besmeared his face with a paste-like lather in a large bucket and then with a wooden razor about the size of a turkey's wing they shaved him, and then dragged him to a tunnel made of benches, and forced him to crawl through it.

"'As he did so, they turned a stream of water on him all the way through, completely sousing him from head to foot. When he came out, bedraggled, Old Neptune and Mrs. Neptune and all the others laughed, and said, "That's what you get when you cross the 'line' into our sea!"

"'Next, they accused a young lady. The old sea rascal sentenced her to be shaved, and "thrown into the bath." She fought and wouldn't be shaved, but she had to crawl through the tunnel-like bath and be doused with water.

"'"Mr. Cannon," he called out. Instantly the gnomes caught Brother Cannon, and dragged him to the feet of Old Neptune.

"'"You're charged with not having crossed this line thirty-five years ago; guilty or not guilty?"

"'"Guilty," said Brother Cannon. So old Neptune sentenced him to have his face shaved with the big wooden razor, his feet and legs also, and to crawl through the bath and be ducked, all of which was duly administered to him.

"'"Mr. McKay," cried Old Neptune. I didn't answer but remained quiet in the crowd.

"'"Find Mr. McKay," he said to his old policemen.

"'"Mr. McKay is in his room perhaps," I said; but the old ancient rascal was not to be fooled.

"'"You're Mr. McKay," he cried. "Seize him!"

"'Then as I stood a prisoner before him, he said:

"'"You are charged with crossing the line to go to New Zealand to win the hearts of the fair Maori maidens; are you guilty or not guilty?"

"'"Guilty," I answered. This rather surprised him, and seeing that I had my coat on, my collar and tie, white trousers and white shoes, and my kodak in my hand, he concluded not to duck me, but asked:

"'"Do you smoke?" "No."

"'"Do you drink?" "No."

"'"Well, I sentence you to come into dinner with your hair parted in the middle."

"'I thanked him for his leniency and stepped back into the crowd, and watched about ten others get sentences, most of whom had to get ducked until they were as wet as Neptune himself is supposed to be.

"'I took a picture of him and his wife and court attendants. If it turns out well, I will send it to you so that you may see what this make-believe god of the sea really looks like.'"

TOO INQUISITIVE ABOUT A SHARK

Island of Raratonga

"About 8:30 a.m., passengers heard the cry, 'A shark; they've caught a shark!' Brother Cannon yelled to me to 'come see this shark.' Nobody needed a second invitation. I saw him just as the sailors had pulled him over the deck railing. A hook, the size of a bailing hook was in his jaw, a lasso rope around his tail, and he was flopping and writhing in a last, futile effort to free himself. They tied both ropes, stretched the monster out, and struck him a blow on the nose which was supposed to kill him instantly. However, it failed, and so the shark was hammered on the head and stabbed in the brain.

"Thinking he was dead, I began to examine him, and took hold of his fins. He gave a sudden lurch that loosed his tail with which he gave me a blow on the legs that gave me a sensation I shall not soon forget. It's rather an unusual experience to come in contact with a live shark!"

RED TAPE CAUSES INEFFICIENCY

At Wellington

"After disposing of our satchels and suitcases, and having secured the custom official's check upon them, President (George S.) Taylor and I began to make a search for my trunk. To tell the truth I had very little hope of finding it and had in my pocket a cablegram written to send to San Francisco to institute legal proceedings.

"The result of our first inquiry was to be directed to the Union Steamship Company's office in Warehouse I. A walk of about a quarter of a mile took us to an upstair office where the clerk had a list of luggage which evidently was to be called for.

"'There is nothing listed here for Mr. McKay. Perhaps it is over in the 'Lost Luggage' department.'

"We retraced our steps and went about an eighth of a mile farther on, and after a little inquiry found the clerk who had a list of the lost luggage. Thinking that a definite, tactful statement would insure more, I said, 'You have a trunk here belonging to David O. McKay. It came on the S. S. Tahiti which sailed from San Francisco March 3rd.

"While he and President Taylor scanned the lists, I looked among the piles of trunks and valises. But neither search revealed the trunk.

"'Have you inquired at the custom's examination office?'

"'No,' we replied, 'we have gone only where we have been told to go.'

"'The custom's examination office is in Warehouse A in yon building undergoing repair.'

"Finding no trace of it in Warehouse A we received instructions to go to H. I am sure the clerk did not have in mind the sulphurous place usually designated by H . . . but I thought of it when he said 'Go to H!' And, really, I was about ready to conclude that hunting a trunk in Wellington warehouses was very much akin to the torment of that notorious lower region.

"At H another quarter of a mile in the direction of I and then to the right, along the wharf where the Tahiti docked, with the last spark of hope flickering if not entirely out, I walked up to the office window, and asked for a trunk belonging to David O. McKay.

"While he was looking among his lists, Elder Madsen, who had joined us, cried from a corner in the warehouse—

"'Here it is!'

"Sure enough, there it was; and the sight of it after six weeks' inconvenience and despair of seeing it again made me pretty happy. We extricated it with the view of sending it up to the office, when we were told by the clerk that he could not let it go until we had given him 'a written order from the Union Steamship Company.' We retraced our steps a half a mile, and after a little explaining, and a short, useless tilt in words, as to who should pay the storage, we secured the order, and returned to H.

"Then we were told that we should have to go to the 'Harbor office and obtain a receipt for the storage.' This consumed another half hour, and necessitated another walk of three quarters of a mile.

"Returning to H and handing the receipt for storage, the clerk said, 'Did you call at the customs office?'

"'No, we thought the customs office was here.'

"'There is none here, and, of course, you should get him; but I'll call him for you,' and he turned to the telephone, thus saving us one more trip along the docks, for which we tendered him our sincere 'thank you.'

"After a fifteen minute wait, that official appeared to examine the trunk. Not until we began to pull back the clasps on the trunk did I remember the fact that my keys were in my satchel. The trunk could not be opened.

"It was then seven minutes to twelve. Brother Madsen said, 'I can get those keys and be back here in seven minutes.'

"He did it; but we had to wait another ten minutes for the government officer, who had just stepped into the office.

"I have recorded this merely as an example of how government and official 'red tape' may delay and inconvenience a 'stranger in a strange land.'"

HONGI—A WAY TO CHOOSE A MATE?

(Wellington)

"Hongi is the Maori mode of salutation. It consists in grasping the right hands, which are held down, and a gentle pressure of noses with a gradual increase of pressure, the intensity and prolongation of which express the intensity of feeling of persons greeting each other. I soon noticed that it is more convenient to Hongi with some than with others; and the thought occurred to me that it is not unlikely that this queer custom might prove helpful to natives choosing their mates—on the principle that 'opposites attract.' I found that the point of my nose slipped off some but stayed on others. When I looked at those whose noses mine fit, I had no inclination to be guided wholly by the possible rule mentioned above."

A TRUE MAORI WELCOME

"At 1:30 we arrived at the little town of Huntly. As we approached the spot chosen for the Hui Tau (conference), we saw two large tents, surrounded by a number of smaller ones, and stretching between the two and facing a green stretch of pasture land, were assembled several hundred Maoris.

"As soon as we are recognized, a native comes running to greet us, and requests us to wait just a few minutes until a company of Maoris that has just been welcomed, take their places in the crowd.

"As we advance slowly toward that assembly, we suddenly hear the shrill sound of women's voices coming from the group stationed near the east tent, and at the side of the refreshment stand.

"'Here, Brother Christy, you tell us what to do,' said I, feeling that we were facing an entirely new experience.

"'Don't do anything now, just walk slowly toward them. They are giving you a Maori welcome,' he says assuringly.

"'Haire Mai! Haire Mai!' rings out shrill from a hundred voices above which are those of the feminine variety. Then begins a dance in which the men lead in a rhythmic chant, and yelling a challenge which is answered in harmony with the swaying movement of body and the uniform swinging and beating of arms. Their eyes roll until one can see nothing but the whites; they roll their tongues and make horrible grimaces.

"A woman at the right of the group is dancing the haka or hula-hula and looking into a hand mirror that she holds in her hand, with all the coquetry which the Maori women of the past could possibly display when they gave this dance to entice and please their warrior husbands returning from battle.

"On the left is a short, deformed, little woman with only two teeth in her mouth, and these on the left side of her superior maxiliary. She sumps and writhes and wriggles, rolls her eyes, lolls her tongue first on one side of her mouth, then on the other and draws the most horrible grimaces of which she is capable, and yet all are jumping, singing, and shouting in wild but uniform gesticulation.

"At the conclusion of this haka or war dance, the leading man steps forward and begins his speech. In this instance, he is the king's uncle, the king being too ill to come in person. In his right hand he sways a cane, takes eight or ten steps to the right speaking most vociferously as he walks, then turns and walks an equal distance to the left, bidding us welcome in tones that seemed to me to be as defiant as he could make them. His speech ended, he was followed by another, and he, by two or three more.

"In the meantime, we were standing like a group statue in the middle of the green. From what we had read we knew we ought to do something, and deliver our mad orations in response to this cordial, impassioned welcome; but we are an ignorant set of pakehas, so we stand and await instructions.

"Soon, Brother Christy suggests that instead of our making speeches, we are asked to shake hands with the multitude. Starting at the big tent and on our left, and being pretty well filled with the Maori spirit, we found ourselves not only shaking hands, but Hongi-ing one by one (rubbing noses) and one after another, the several hundred people in line from one end to another. What an experience! What a variety of noses! You who think Maori noses are all alike, have never hongied a multitude!

"At 5:00 p.m. fifteen young women, dressed in native costume, entertained us by a beautiful presentation of the Poi dacem, and I wish to record here that I think it one of the most beautiful dances in the world. In it are combined in a most charming manner, rhythm, beauty, grace, and skill. Following this, several of the Maori men gave an arousing exhibition of the haka or war dance. It was most thrilling, and explains the mad fury with which the Maoris in olden times entered into their battles."

ORIGIN OF POLYNESIANS

(Docked at Nukualofa, Tonga. Cannot get off ship because of Measles Quarantine)

"Met Professors Gifford and McKern, of the Ethnological and Anthropological Expedition under the immediate supervision of the Bishop Museum, Honolulu. They are studying the Polynesians with the view of ascertaining their origin.

"Professor McKern told me that he discovered a kind of feathered cloth woven by a tribe of Indians in California which seemed to be identical with the same kind made by the Hawaiians. He knows of no other people who make it. However, he desires to make further investigations."

A POET APPRECIATES NATURE

Vavau, Tonga

"The quiet movement of the boat and the low, playful splash of the water told me as soon as I awoke that we were in a harbor.

"Many small conical-shaped, verdure-clad islands rose abruptly out of the ocean on both sides of us, and stretching far ahead, with its bays and inlets and projecting capes, was an arm of the sea leading up to Vavau. The sun was sufficiently near the horizon to tinge the floating clouds with crimson and pink. The islands in the near distance seemed still to be sleeping under their mantle of green, while around some of them, lapped by the gentle waves of a rippling sea, nestled white sand beaches that looked like a long stretch of pongee silk. As we drew closer to the islands, we could discern first the coconut palms, struggling boldly and successfully to raise themselves above the dense forest of vine-covered trees that battled for soil and sunshine. Among these lower trees were some laden with luscious, yellow and green oranges, growing large though rank and wild. That tree laden with white blossoms is the male pawpaw, or mummy fruit tree, and the unadorned leafy ones standing near are the 'mama' 'Pawpaw' trees which produce the delicious fruit. Others in that dense, verdure clad wood, are the 'candle-nut' the Foa and a common, willow-like shrub. Undoubtedly a score or more trees of different varieties grew in the tangled verdure that contributed so much to the beauty of this island-dotted harbor, and all of them, by the overclimbing, overhanging convolvus vine were united in strong bonds of wedlock.

"The little villages, which look like summer cottages set in the garden of Eden, are peeking out from palm trees, and hedges of the blooming red hibiscus and other less pretentious flowers. An old brown brindled cow, standing in the foreground lazily chewing her cud, and some chickens following a strutting rooster, boasting he will find food for the whole flock, and then making every hen scratch for herself and him, too—some pigs munching coconuts, and a horse tied or staked to a palm tree—all give signs of a domestic life that seems absolutely disturbance-proof.

"Two lifeboats were lowered, and passengers were rowed across an inky-blue, rippling sea toward a cavernous opening in an island near by. That opening was the mouth of the famed 'Swallows' Cave.' The water changed to a beautiful turquoise blue, and the stalagtites above were streaked with emerald green! Crabs were scampering along the cliffs just above the splashing ripples on each side of the entrance. Above us was an opening covered with the intertwining branches and leaves of green trees and vines, through which the sunlight tried to gain admission to the hidden nook.

"Both lifeboats were in the cave at the same time, and as we rowed to the dark end of it, the officer in charge lit a torch. The many-colored surface of the grotesquely shaped sides and tops of this grotto changed into so many varying hues and spookey-like shapes, that, involuntarily, we gave a shout of surprise and admiration. As we moved back to the sea, the little disturbed swallows twittered their fear and displeasure at the intrusion upon their domicile.

"The reflection of the afterglow of sunset upon the peaceful surface of the sea this evening was most splendid. The sky was tinged with pink, and the clouds lingering around the horizon were fringed with various hues of crimson and purple, while the heavy cloud farther to the west was sombre purple and black. These various colors cast varying shadows on the water. Those from the cloud were long and black, those from the sky, clear as a mirror, while those from the rose-tinted, reflected a faint pink that merged into the clear blue of the ocean. Gradually the shadows became deeper, and heavier, and all merged into a beautiful twilight which made the sea look like a great mirror upon which shone the faint light from the crescent moon."

A SAMOAN BANQUET

"In the chief's reception house, the most pretentious in the village, were seated on mats twenty-five chiefs. Brother Cannon and I were seated at the head of the table with Ex-King Malietoo Tame between us, and U. S. Consul, Mr. Quincy Roberts and his wife, Dr. Roberts on my right, also a Mrs. Nelson; and the ex-queen on President Cannon's left. Sitting next to the U. S. Consul was the Hon. J. Ahlo, the Chinese Consul, a very fine gentleman.

"For the feast, a most sumptuous affair, there were prepared in native fashion:

"One hundred and five beast pigs, 1 beef, 2748 tare, 25 chickens, 153 parcels of fish, 4 bunches of bananas, 4 cases of salmon, 50 dishes fassi (grated tare, mixed with cocoanut oil), pudding—a rare dish, made only on special occasions—and cakes, salads, cocoanut milk, etc.

"To my right and forming part of the circle sat a very beautiful Samoan maiden, mixing, or rather purifying the kava. She is a virgin and was then performing one of the most favored duties and occupying the most honored position among the women of the village. She dipped a bark-like sop into the bowl of kava, then wrung it with both hands, and whipped the sop behind her until it was free from particles of bark that would cling to it. This, she kept up continually during the ceremony leading up to the passing of the cup.

"After a few words of welcome spoken by one of the chiefs, there was a moment of unbroken silence. Then the chief, holding what appeared to me to be a huge shillalah, tossed it in the center of the ring.

"'That is the greatest mark of distinction they can show you,' whispered our interpreter.

"'What is it?' I asked.

"'It's the root of the tree from which the kava is made. The larger the root the greater the honor bestowed. That is the largest root I have seen.'

"While we were conversing, another, a little smaller was added. It was almost as large as the first; and this was followed by several pieces, each given by a chief as a special tribute to their guests of honor. Then they considered among themselves who was the highest in rank, and the best orator, for he it was who should give the speech of welcome. One after another several chiefs deferred to the man from Palauli, Savaii, the town recognized as the home of the highest or purest of ruling families. This chief, Fiso, graciously accepted the honor, and, remaining seated, cross-legged, delivered the following, which at my special request has been written for me:

"'This is a blessed day. It is as a fragrant and beauteous flower. The spirit of love prevails. No wonder, as has been said, a certain Gardener was highly pleased when he visited his garden and found it filled with fragrance from many different flowers. In delight, he ordered the wind to blow to all parts of the world bearing this sweetness. Such an instance is to be compared to this blessed day in which we have met. Our hearts are filled with joy and thankfulness to the Almighty King for permitting us to meet on this memorable occasion. Solomon said, "Hope deferred maketh the heart sick; but when the desire cometh it is a tree of Life." We welcome you, Apostle McKay and President Cannon, and it is a pleasure to meet you in these Samoan Islands. Thankful are we to heaven that your trip was a pleasant one and that we who awaited your coming have been blessed. Let us love, not alone with words and lips, but with hearts and action. This is a little tribute, Brothers McKay and Cannon, we would like to give you so you may realize that we appreciate seeing you. May your Excellencies and this people whom you are visiting be blessed.'

"It was then my duty to reply which I did expressing myself in as choice phrases as I could extemporaneously.

"One other chief then expressed appreciation of our visit, and of the words spoken.

"Arrangements having been previously made, the officers of the Tofua kindly furnished a launch to take the band out to the ship. While we assembled on deck, the band played and received hearty applause from the interested passengers."

"The call, 'All visitors ashore' came all too soon, and I shall ever remember with tender feelings that sweet song 'Good-bye, my Feleni.' As the launch and two boats moved toward the shore, the harmony was wafted back to us as we stood on the deck waving good-bye to men and women whom we may never meet again in this world:

"Oh! I never will forget you

And sadly repeat my fond adieu,

Oh! I never will forget you,

To Samoa I bid adieu.

Good-bye, Feleni, my barque now sails away,

Away from fair islands where all is bright and gay,

But I'll not forget you, nor this beloved land

When far, far away upon my native land!"

REFINEMENT AND ENVIRONMENT

June 10

(It was learned when the boat was in the harbor of Vavau that passengers were prohibited from landing because of a reported case of measles in Apia and the Tongan government was determined to keep measles out of its territory. A quarantine on a small island was necessary for the duration of fourteen days. Rather than miss the Tongan Mission, it was decided that Brother Cannon should continue to New Zealand and father would go into quarantine.)

"At 12:30 noon (June 11th) we bade good-bye to our fellow passengers. I felt pretty lonesome at parting from Brother Cannon and gloomy at the prospects ahead. However, we decided to make the best of a bad business, and huddled amidst trunks, satchels, suitcases, bundles, and all other kinds of luggage in the 'Cargo Lighter' that lay bobbing up and down at the wharf awaiting to be towed out to quarantine island.

"There were thirty-one of us marked for seclusion, the majority being white persons, and the others, half-caste Tongans, two Tongan women, four Japanese, and two jet-black, curly-haired Solomon Islanders. There were five white women and four children.

"At 1:15 we were anchored on the east side of Makahaa Island, an isolated but tree-covered spot containing about five acres. It is only a short distance from Nukualofa, but with the quarantine restrictions between us that little town seemed a long way off.

"To get to shore, we had to enter a 'punt' or little boat rowed by two natives. The women and children went first, and as there still was room on the prow for one man, I was given the privilege of occupying that seat.

"Before the 'punt' reached the water's edge, it stuck in the sand, and we were carried to land on the backs of the two natives. One or two of the women protested against getting on their backs, so the Tongan stalwarts picked them up in their arms and carried them ashore.

"For the accommodation of these supposed-to-be thirty patients, there was one frame house, containing a large room at each end, and two small ones between; also four native huts. Two of the latter, the doctor had told me upon landing, would be turned over to the Japanese and Solomon Islanders respectively, the others we might apportion among ourselves.

"At 2:30 all passengers had been carried ashore, excepting the two Tongan women who waded.

"From the pile of mattresses and pillows scrambled on the porch, each one selected his or her own and began tentatively to choose a space in one of the rooms on which to sleep. However, nobody knew what to do, so lunch being called, we gathered on the West Veranda, and sat down on the very crudest of wooden benches to eat our lunch off an uncovered table made of four 1x10 boards nailed together and supported by trusses.

"For lunch there was spread before us an abundance of yam, boiled beef, bread, butter, jam, and papaya.

"It is surprising how quickly some men's manners, and women's, too, comport with their surroundings. The bare boards on which were placed the cheapest kinds of dishes—large galvanized mugs for cups, bone-handled knives and forks, thick plates, tin spoons, etc., the absence of even paper napkins, the crude benches on which we sat, each kind of food piled in one dish—all presented a picture of real crudeness; but the manners of some of the patients were soon just as crude.

"'This tea is too strong!' complained one. 'Isn't there any hot water?'

"Her husband or some other man jumped up, hurried to the shanty used as a kitchen, returned soon and shouted to all:

"'There's no hot water!'

"'Where's the meat?' came from another part of the long table.

"'Down at the other end,' was the answer.

"'Please pass the jam!' yelled a big sandy-complexioned man who, receiving the answer from the fifteenth man on his left, 'Jam's all gone!' arose hastily and darted toward the kitchen for more.

"They would reach in front of each other, and even stand up and reach the full length of their arms.

"It was gratifying to note, however, that the truly refined natures were unaffected by their crude surroundings.

"The true gentleman is a gentleman always, the true lady, a lady.

"All the time since landing, the big, sandy-complexioned man had been loud in his protests against the treatment to which we were subjected, and he now proposed that we appoint a committee to lay our grievances before the doctor when he returned to which we agreed.

"The temporary chairman, the secretary, and I were chosen a committee of three to present our complaint when the doctor returned with the soap, for I knew that in his mind, soap was the only article lacking to make us supremely comfortable. The purpose of the committee was to have the crowd properly represented, and our needs stated in as kind but forceful a manner as possible, and to avoid everybody's expressing haphazard complaints.

"When, after dark, the doctor arrived with the soap and some mail, the whole group surrounded him, the committee of three next to him. The chairman presented the situation clearly, kindly, and forcibly, and the secretary read the list of needful articles as it had been submitted and approved.

"As soon as the doctor began to express astonishment that so many mattresses were short, and mosquito nets needed, the most loudly protesting sandy-complexioned man, whose scanty hairs on his half-bald head had stood up in such terrific defiance of the indignities to which his corpulency had been subjected, blurted out:

"'Now, we're not blaming you, doctor—we've no kick against you—it is only against the caterer. We know you've done all you could for our comfort; but we want better menu.'

"He was all thunder and no rain; and when after all his noise we expected at least a shower, behold a little puff of wind, and we were left high and dry without even a drop! Not only that, but he lessened the protest of the committee!

"The world is full of such loudly braying heroes before the sound of battle is heard, then they're never around to answer 'present.'"

MAKING THE BEST OF A BAD SITUATION

Makahaa Island in Quarantine, June 11

"What a farce this quarantine business is, and the lack of furnishings and necessary conveniences is simply an outrage!

"It had been decided to give the two small rooms to the five women and four children, and the others to the men to utilize most conveniently.

"Into one of these bare rooms, the south room—and that word bare is written in its full significance—President Coombs, Elders Parkin, Phillips, Henderson, Robinson, a Mr. Edwards, and I placed our mattresses, pillows, and sheets, my trunk and suitcases; and the other men occupied the north room and the native hut. Brother Coombs and I each had single mattresses, but the others doubled up, literally 'doubled up' before morning, and Brother Phillips and Brother Robinson shared their mattress with Mr. Edwards who had none.

"All beds were on the bare floor. As we each began to crawl into his corner for the night, the humor of the situation struck Brother Phillips in the funny spot, and he broke out into one of his prolonged, contagious laughs that put us all in good nature as we stretched out with the sincere hope of a good night's rest.

"I slept very uncomfortably over the thin mattress!

(In spite of the hardship, it is interesting to note the recording in the diary of the beautiful coloring of the ocean and of the appreciation of Mother Nature's wonders.)

"To supplant one's disgust over the whole affair by more pleasant feelings one has only to look at the ocean when the tide is in. The coloring truly defies description! Between the shore and the deep blue a mile out are the most exquisite shades of green imaginable—the emerald, and the jade predominating, and a very delicate light green merging into a cream where the water is shallow over the sandy beach helps to make the varying hues simply exquisite! I wish I could name the different colors of the choicest gems, for I am sure I've seen them all reflected in the sparkling hues of these south seas! Even the fishes and bugs are highly colored.

"It is truly surprising how many interesting things one can find around this little island! I find interest in searching for beautiful shells when the tide has gone out. Then Brother Coombs and I began to examine the various forms of life hiding or crawling around the coral, some evidently in their native habitat, but others left stranded by the ebbing tide. I have never before realized with what myriads of forms of life the old ocean must team! Crablike things of all sizes, shell fish, jelly-like creatures, some beautifully colored like poppies, and others black, snakelike, and loathsome, starfish, some with a center smaller than a one cent piece, and thread-like tentacles, two or three feet long! Little fish stranded in pools among the coral reef, some gasping on the sand! How gratefully they swam when I helped them back into the ocean!

"Writing articles, reading Shakespeare and other books, strolling the beach for shells after the flood tide, singing hymns in the moonlight on the sandy shore—these are my chief occupations on the island Makahaa.

"To one interested in bugs, ants, lizards, rats, and various kinds of sea life, there is sufficient on this little island to keep one engaged for years.

"From my shady retreat under a large scraggy, gnarled fotulona tree, I look out west over the sea, and watch the poor little fish scramble and jump, sometimes in shoals, clear out of the water in their frightened efforts to get away from their larger enemies. If they succeed in escaping from the fish, a white bird hovering above them is likely to swoop down and catch one in his beak with every dive. He seldom fails to get his fish.

"Men sometimes get stranded, but the current of life flows on without them!"

DESIRE TO SHARE BEAUTY WITH OTHERS

"The nights are beautiful, the beams from the half-full moon in the northwest, casting on the ebbing waters around the shore a mellow dreamlight that fills my soul with a longing to have my sweetheart and kiddies around me to share the romance and beauties of these ever-satisfying and pleasure-giving south seas."

ON READING GOOD LITERATURE

"I read to four of the elders who were sharing my shady nook on the west beach, poems from A Heap o' Livin' and half of As You Like It. One of the boys 'never liked Shakespeare,' so after I had read one or two scenes, I stopped and inquired, 'Are you getting tired?'

"'No, go on,' they answered.

"When the lunch rap rap was sounded, Brother Phillips said:

"'Please finish it tomorrow, Brother McKay, will you?'

"'I think I heard one of you say,' I replied, 'that he did not like Shakespeare.'

"'Well, that's the first time I ever liked him," confessed Brother Parkin.

"Just another example proving that interest can always be awakened by producing mental pictures of personality and action.

"The following afternoon I read Hamlet to the elders."

HOMESICK

"I'm really homesick this morning. This monotonous life in the month of June is beginning to tell on my nerves. Last night and this morning I've thought almost continuously about the folks at home—wondering if they have moved to old Huntsville and whether Llewelyn has made his venture with the dairy investment. I can even now see the kiddies playing on the lawn, Mama and LouJean on the summer porch, and Llewelyn on his way to the Dry Hollow farm. June 15th I imagined him coming home with feet soaked and trousers wet to the hips, but happy because he had caught four fish. June is the most delightful month in the year in Ogden Valley; and truly, it seems more delightful than ever as I picture it in mind as I count the lagging hours here in quarantine on old Makahaa.

"'If I were home, I should be in a better place,

But Travellers must be content.'"

A SONG OF GREETING

(Tune: "Come Go With Me Beyond the Sea," by Sterling I. May to David O. McKay on his visit to the Tongan Mission, Kolomotu's Tonga Tabu, June 21)

"We greet you here with hearts sincere,

Apostle of the Lord.

Thankful for health and strength and cheer,

To listen to your word,

And may your stay, amongst us here,

Be filled with tho'ts, lofty and clear;

That we may all be stronger, for

Your visit to us here.

"Long have we waited in this land,

To grasp you by the hand;

For since the work was started here,

Your like's not crossed the strand.

Of Elders we've had not a few, and Seventies some three or four;

But now we feel our joy is full,

And we'll not ask for more.

"It may look queer and strange appear,

The hue our Saints here show;

But underneath the copper sheath,

Their true white hearts do glow.

So if their language you don't know,

No reasons why the teardrops flow;

Remember that the day will come,

All tongues will be as one.

"Some time again, we hope to meet,

On Zion's gilded streets;

Then may we share in joys sublime,

With these with whom you meet.

And in your travels far and wide,

For Jesus Christ the crucified;

May you remember and revere,

Our joyous meeting here."

A VISIT TO ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON'S GRAVE

Apia, Samoa, July 7

"At six o'clock, we were all astir, preparing to climb to the top of the hill, where rests the body of the Scotch poet, Robert Louis Stevenson. When we reached the lodge gate, at about 7:30 a.m., it began to pour; but we sought shelter in the lodge, so escaped getting wet. We continued in the cart as far as the stream that runs at the foot of the hill. From there, only 'Shanks' ponies' served to carry us.

"The ascent is not precipitous now, but the trail cut by the natives who carried or dragged the casket to the top was almost perpendicular. They truly had to climb on their hands and knees. The higher we climbed, the more beautiful became the view of the surrounding country.

"How typical of intellectual and spiritual experiences as well!"

Left Apia, Samoa July 7. In kindness and thoughtful and attentive courtesy, Samoa is unexcelled! The TOFUA stopped at Suva, after a 658-mile trip and arrived in Auckland, New Zealand, July 18 where a joyous and reciprocal greeting with Brother Hugh J. Cannon took place. On July 20 a small boat was taken to Kaikohi, Bay of Islands District. Four were placed in one cabin. It was so crowded that Brother Cannon remarked that they would have to go outside to change their minds. After a welcome at Onerahi wharf at 5:30 a.m. by Gordon C. Young a train took the party to Whangarei.

NEEDLESS DESTRUCTION OF TREES

"We traveled through the sunny north, with rugged country on all sides. Stumps of trees charred with fire stand like tombstones on every hillside, bearing mute evidence to man's ravages on the magnificent kauri forests that once grew majestically all over the northern part of New Zealand. Only an occasional kauri could now be seen from the car window, and these are poor remnants of the mighty trees of the past. We were told of one that still stands on a Mr. Hedger's ranch, twenty-seven feet in circumference and contains 20,000 feet of lumber and varies only six inches from root to first branch.

"At 4:00 p.m. Brother Percy S. E. Going and I, Brother Cannon and Brother Kennard took a stroll to the top of a nearby hill, on the top of which is a monument erected in memory of Hone Heke, the great-grandson of the warrior so famous in New Zealand early history, 'Hono Heke I whanau i te 60 Hune I suate Ki 1879 Poneke Pepuere, 1909.'"

(The party was taken by Ei Duncan, a native well-conversed in Maori legends and ancient customs, to Maori Agricultural College at Kronogata where a reception under the supervision of the school was held. The students were so enthusiastic, that after the program father and Brother Cannon were lifted on their shoulders while "For he's a jolly good fellow" was sung to them. At this program, the following poem, composed by father, was read):

"The New Zealand Flag and the Union Jack

And the Star-Spangled Banner so true—

Three flags that lead in the Forward track,

With colors of kindred hue.

"Tonight,' neath these banners, we're honored with joy,

By students, so jolly and free.

Their welcome, pure gold, is free from alloy

As the hearts of the M. A. C.

"Your own stainless banner is waving here, too,

Unsullied, triumphant, and free;

For Purity, the White; for Loyalty, the Blue—

True ideals of the M. A. C.

"We'll make our lives like the field of white,

Chaste as the lily and pure as clean gold;

With the royal Blue we'll defend the Right,

And be numbered in Christ's true Fold."

AN ADMONITION

At Auckland where tickets on the ULIMAROA were secured for Sydney. Before leaving, the following letter of praise and admonition was sent to the elders and Saints in the New Zealand Mission:

"In a few hours the boat on which we sail to Australia will heave anchor. As it sails from New Zealand, the distance each succeeding day will widen between us. But no matter how far apart we may be, as measured in miles, we hope we shall always be near each other in spirit and cherished memory.

"Our visit has been made enjoyable by your courtesy, thoughtful consideration, and many loving acts of service. Our hearts have been made to rejoice by expressions we have heard and manifestations we have seen of your devotion to the Church. We have met men and women in this mission, as well as in others, whose integrity, faith, and nobility of spirit are unexcelled by any other people in the world. This assurance, with a sincere appreciation of having associated with you in hui taus, socials, feasts, and home devotions, we shall treasure as long as memory lasts.

"And now as we say farewell, may we express the more earnest desire and prayer of our hearts that we all remain true to the faith. Difficulties may come, and clouds of discouragement may often hover over us; misunderstandings may sometime spring up, and enemies to the truth may heap upon us scorn and ridicule; but if our hearts are truly anchored in a firm testimony of the divinity of the restored gospel of Jesus Christ, all difficulties will be overcome, clouds of discouragement will be dissipated by the sunshine of the Holy Spirit, misunderstanding will be supplanted by confidence and love, and enemies who scoff will be led to pray.

"Perform regularly and constantly your various duties in the Church. Pray continually—in secret and with your household. Pay your tithes and your offerings to the Lord. Speak well of each other. Sustain the priesthood. Be honest in your dealings with your fellow men, and be kind even to your enemies. Observe the Word of Wisdom, and keep yourselves 'unspotted from the sins of the world.'

"If you will all observe these things, no power on earth can deprive you of your membership in the Church, and of your fellowship with Christ our Redeemer.

"There is a great work yet to be done in this mission. May the Lord speedily open the way for its accomplishment! Under the able leadership of President Taylor the work is in excellent hands, and he is most ably assisted by his estimable wife and companion. May the blessings of heaven attend them and their daughters as compensation for their devoted and unselfish labors.

"'Let virtue garnish thy thoughts unceasingly, then shall thy confidence wax strong in the presence of God, and the doctrine of the Priesthood shall distill upon thy soul as the dews from heaven.

"'The Holy Ghost shall be thy constant companion, and thy sceptre an unchanging sceptre of righteousness and truth, and thy dominion shall flow unto thee forever and ever.' (D. C. 121:45-46.)

"The memory of our associations with you, of our inspirational assemblies, kind friends whose hearts are pure as gold will ever be cherished among the glorious experiences of our lives.

"God bless you, one and all, until we meet again."

STORMY SEAS ON THE WAY TO AUSTRALIA

August 3, 4

"Very stormy days, and the sea most tempestuous. So is my stomach!"

August 5

"I feel better and really enjoyed seeing the mountainous waves from the crest of which the swift gale would blow the water and fill the air with blinding spray. Sometimes the waves strike the vessel with such tremendous force that she almost stops and fairly quivers; yet she plows ahead, doggedly and determinedly fighting both wind and sea! This may be a rougher sea than the one we were in between Nukualofa and Haapai, in that sailing vessel, but it doesn't seem so.

"It's a joy to watch the albatross sail against the breeze without any apparent movement of its wings. This bird is larger than our sea gull—white-breasted, with gray back and long slender gray wings. Some are all white with tips of wings and tail grayish brown."

August 6

"About 4:00 p.m., the gale from the southwest increased in intensity and lashed the sea into a frenzy! As darkness approached, we were in the midst of the worst storm of the voyage. It became impossible even to sit on deck, let alone walk on it. As I sat in the music room, a steward came in swaying and staggering with a four-month-old baby in his arms. He came directly toward me and said, 'Please hold this baby while I get the mother!'

"Returning to the deck, he soon came in again leading the mother, who was thrown, however, on a sofa before she could cross the room.

"Although the railing was on the table at dinner, some plates and the vegetable dish with contents were thrown pellmell to the floor. As I came out of the dining room, I was thrown against the door which swung open, and I dashed against a young man, pinning him to the staircase. It's with difficulty that one walks along the passage ways! The old vessel reels and rocks as though she were drunken; she squeaks and creaks and trembles but battles bravely forward! Now her prow is toward the sky as she grapples with an oncoming wave! Now she plunges toward the bottom of the sea, throwing the propeller completely out of the water, now she reels to starboard, then balances again to port!

"Though my stomach is growling, I'm not sick. I'm neither tired nor worried, but I'll be glad when we reach Sydney. We shall be at least twenty hours late arriving there."

August 7

"At 10:00 a.m. I caught my first glimpse of the hazy outline of the northeastern shore of the Australian continent. Its rugged, precipitous cliffs withstanding the dashing waves seem formidable enough in comparison with some of the low coral islands of the South Seas. These cliffs are the foundation of a continent.

(After the first meeting at the mission house, while shaking hands with people, the following occurred):

"One young man accosted me by saying, 'Well, Brother McKay, you're just a man after all, aren't you?'

"'Why, I hope so,' I replied. 'What did you think I am?'

"'Well, you know, we think of the old Apostles as being different.'"

APPRECIATION OF ONE OF NATURE'S WONDERS

August 9

"We met at the appointed hour (to take the three-day excursion advertised by the N.S.W. Government Tourist Bureau) only to learn that the Government Bureau must have twenty-four hours' notice in order to make out the tickets.

"'Let's go on our own hook,' I said. And we did.

"The railway journey from Sydney to Mount Victoria in the Blue Mountains is seventy miles, thirty miles across open country and forty over rolling mountain ranges. We traveled along the edges of deep ravines and yawning chasms, over hills wooded with eucalyptus trees that seemed so dejected looking as they stood with dropping leaves and falling glimpses of extensive views not unlike the great expanse of timber-covered mountains in Yellowstone.

"At Mt. Victoria we took an auto transportation to the caves. We were driven over an excellent road, over picturesque dugways, through the old penal town of Hartley where early prisoners were first kept, over rugged mountain ranges, at one point reaching 4200 feet above sea level; then down a circuitous hillside roadway to the Grand Arch.

"We secured good rooms, unheated, at the Caves House. Before dinner we strolled up a path commencing close to the Caves House and, ascending, caught our first view of The Carlotta Arch, an opening about fifty feet high, bridged by a limestone formation fringed with stalactites. Following the path in its descent, we entered the Easter Cave or Devil's Coach House.

"At 7:00 p.m., we joined a party and visited the Nettles Cave and Arch Cave. I was not anticipating seeing much, consequently would not have been disappointed if the caves had proved to be commonplace; but happily, I was agreeably surprised! Those subterranean passages with their groups of grotesque forms, their stalagmites and stalactites, their massive pillars, and curiously shaped figures—all reflected by electric lights most favorably placed—present surprises and thrills at nearly every turn, that make one feel as one emerges after a two-hour inspection tour that they are truly fit to be classed with the great attractions of the world!"

September 16

"I was very greatly interested in the Rock Wallabies, diminutive kangaroos, that were hopping around at the entrance to the Grand Arch.

"The Cookaburra, or Laughing Jackass, was also an attractive feature, as indeed are all the other birds in these trees. They are so different, especially in their whistling—even the magpie is different from ours, has a blacker and a wider tail, flies about the same and seems to be just as cheeky and inquisitive as magpies at home.

"Visited the Left Imperial, not so picturesque in general outline as the Arch but abounding in beautiful and wonderful chambers, grottoes, and charming details, chief among which are the Shawls and the Mystery.

"During our tour of two hours, I heard everything described by two overworked adjectives. Women would look in admiration at a mass of amber-colored crystals and say, 'Aren't they pretty?' They would look at the Madonna with its daintily festooned recess named Minnie's Grotto as a background, and exclaim, 'Oh, isn't it pretty?'

"In admiration of a cavern extensive and majestic in outline and abounding in grotesque shapes and spooky formations, they would say, 'Isn't it pretty?' One girl said, 'Isn't it dear?' The men would express their exultation by saying, 'That's fine!'

"Since no words can picture the wonders and beauties of these labyrinthian, subterranean passages, grottoes and jewel-bound statues and draperies, pretty, dear and fine will perhaps serve as well as any other words. No one can emerge from one of them, such as the Left Imperial, without being overwhelmed with the exquisite beauty and sublime grandeur!

"But the crowning glory of all seems to have been centered in the Orient Cave, to see which 1400 steps must be trodden, through tunnels and low caverns, across yawning chasms, over underground waters, and up precipitous flights of stairs!

"But it's worth it all and more. I came out of it this afternoon feeling that I had seen one of the most gloriously decorated, most lavishly draped, most artistically jeweled caves in the world."

From Sydney father and Brother Cannon and President Rushton traveled to Melbourne, sitting up all night (August 12). On August 15 on the U.S.S. OONAH, they traveled to Burni, a distance of 216 miles, an eighteen-hour journey, and from there by train to Hobart, thence to Launceston to take the S.S. NAIRANA back to Melbourne.

"The ride down the river Tamar in the beautiful sunshine was most delightful. The wooded landscape on each bank, sheltering comfortable houses, well-kept lawns and orchards or green fields and paddocks, made my farewell impression of Tasmania a most favorable one.

"The sunset made the horizon and the ocean look like old Kilauea, Hawaii. Just as the sun sank from view in the northwest, the full moon arose in the northeast. The night, though keenly cool, was clear and beautiful, and the sea as calm as a peaceful lake.

Sydney—

"We drove twenty-five miles out to Warumbul National Park and spent a very delightful day. The sky was cloudless, and the sun just slowly returning from its visit to the north, is still near enough south to be comfortable. Evidence of spring were seen on every hand. The wattle in various varieties spread its golden beauty, flowers of all colors blooming on shrubs and plants of all designs and shapes brightened the usually somber eucalyptus landscape. The brightest of all, however, was the coral tree, which put forth its brilliant red blossoms in such glory and rich profusion that it seemed in the distance through the eucalyptus trees to be a cluster of rubies."

FLOWERS GALORE

"The next morning the St. George Hall, where meeting was to be held—was beautifully decorated with choice and fragrant flowers, and green twigs, the result of the thoughtful and artistic labors of the Sunday School officers and teachers. Mingling in rich, harmonious colors were the wattle, the national flower, the lily, the dilmynia (orange whorl), the grevillia (variously colored), the honey flower, the rhicinicarpuo, the baronia, the areastenun, the Australian rose, etc."

WHERE THERE'S A WILL THERE'S A WAY

Port Darwin, Australia. Passengers had half-day on shore September 16

"In the evening Brother Cannon and I walked out to the compound, where the aborigines are quartered. We had heard that the natives were giving a corroboree, or native dance, so inquiring our route, we walked out there alone.

"The night was perfect. The full moon shone in the northeastern sky in all her silvery beauty, making the stars look few indeed in the blue southern sky. The air was balmy and the woods on each side of the road quiet and peaceful.

"Arriving at the village, we saw groups of natives lying around enjoying the pleasant atmosphere. Approaching one of them, we inquired about the corroboree, a word which they understood; we were disappointed to learn that it was over.

"However, a group of men were still lying around the open space in which it had been given, so we walked over to them. But the Corroboree was over.

"We had come out two miles to see it, and I disliked very much to return without doing so. To a young fellow who could understand English, I said, 'How much money do you want to show us the Corroboree?'

"'You want us to Corroboree?'

"'Yes, how much will you take to Corroboree?'

"Then followed a 'Goo-bul-oo-good-bul-oo-oo' such as I've never heard—all the twenty men talking at once.

"'Three of us dance the Corroboree for three bob.'

"'You mean one bob each?'

"'Yes, one bob for each.'

"'All right,' I quickly answered, go ahead.'

"Then the twenty began a rhythmic clapping and a chanting and a typical old aborigine—as naked as a monkey in a tree—worse, because the monkey has hair—began a contortive dance that was as interesting as it was grotesque. Two others followed when he had finished, we clapped our hands, cried 'bravo,' paid them their three shillings and two extra besides, and left them in fine spirits as they cried, "Goo-nit-goonit!'

"Thus on this our last night in Australia, we had seen not only the real aborigines, but the Corroboree as well!"

CRUELTY TO ANIMALS

Leaving Port Darwin, Australia, September 18

"After dinner Mr. B told us of his encounters with Bengal tigers, herds of elephants, the black panther, and the wild hyena-like dog. For one thing, though, I could hardly forgive him. It shows truly how wickedly cruel man is. He and his companions saw a deer swimming in a lake. Surmising the reason, they frightened the animal back to the opposite shore. There the tiger, which had been pursuing it, sprang out, and the deer again turned towards the men. Once more they prevented it from getting on land, and in desperation the poor animal swam back to the tiger, evidently preferring the ferociousness of that beast to the savagery of human beings!"

A GLIMPSE OF SINGAPORE

September 27

"Arrived at Singapore at 4:00 p.m., our vessel being only one among hundreds of sailing craft of all kinds and sizes, lying in the harbor.

"There was no delay by haughty officials. As soon as an officer put his stamp upon our passports, we were ready to go ashore, no customs regulations or requirements in this open port.

"The town itself ranks in interest second only to Pekin, not that there is anything of very great historical interest, nor that the city has anything very extraordinary about it architecturally or otherwise, but the motley tribe of human beings representing as they do so many different nationalities heightened my enthusiasm to a degree it hasn't attained since we left the islands. There are Chinese, Japanese, Mananese, Indians, Javanese, and Europeans, all retaining native dress and customs, jostling and trading and scheming among one another in this seaport town of the Orient. Jinrikishas, oxcarts, dogcarts, and automobiles crowd the streets during the business hours, and natives offering their wares for sale line the sidewalks at night. Life is really more like China than Japan, and one can purchase almost anything here which he can either in China or Japan.

"A significant feature was the entire absence of women from the streets. Men there are by thousands and of all kinds and classes—including those with long black hair, sometimes hanging loosely over their shoulders, and sometimes done up in braids on top of their heads, but women were conspicuous by their absence."

A CHINESE TEMPLE

"Georgetown"—Prince Edward Island, September 30 Penang

"My most interesting experience here was a short visit to the Chinese temple at Ayer Itam four miles from town. The auto drive was most delightful. Every turn of the road presents some beautiful view of large, spacious houses, in the midst of beautiful lawns and gardens.

"The temple itself is only of passing interest to one who has seen more magnificent ones in China; but the scores, perhaps hundreds, of tortoises here add an interest not experienced at other temples. The large goldfish and other varieties contribute to the interest.

"The Chinese temple is really a series of temples, built upon the sides of a hill. Looking up the hill one sees, stretching up and up continually, the ramping roofs, the raking gables of Chinese temple architecture. On the walls are lettered tablets in royal blue. The boulders of the hill are incised with Chinese characters in red. On every hand are shrines. Brass blazes in sunlight, or warms the shadows, in urns and jars and gongs and vessels of all shapes. Temple surpasses temple. In one a solemn figure broods and compels reverence. In another laughs a jolly god. Side by side sit hideous and gigantic demons crushing the wicked under foot. Everywhere is BUDDHA. Each race of Buddhists has here its own temple, Siamese, Japanese, Chinese, Burmese, Singhalese.

"Returning from the temple by a different drive, I was soon again on board the Bharata."

THE FAMOUS PAGODA

October 3

"Landing at Rangoon at 8:00 a.m. Brother Cannon and I went ashore before breakfast in order to visit the famous pagoda at this place, the golden dome of which we had seen as our boat came up the Rangoon River.

"Securing a jinrikisha, both of us in one, with the assistance of a kind policeman, we directed the rikisha man to take us to the pagoda.

"I endured watching the little wiry man pulling us two large fellows, until we were within half a mile of the pagoda, then I jumped out and walked.

"The Shwe Dagon Pagoda is built on an eminence, the summit of which has been leveled to a sort of platform 900 feet long, 685 feet wide, and 166 feet above the city. No wonder the jinrikisha man had more than he could do to pull us up the incline.

"At the southern entrance, which is one of four facing the cardinal points of the compass, we removed our shoes and stockings, and began our ascent of the stone steps leading 800 yards up to the pagoda. The steps were lined with sellers of flowers, trinkets, candles, food, pictures, etc., with little children whose parents are teaching them to beg, and with old decrepit and deformed professional beggars. The limit was reached, I thought, when we saw dogs and chickens running around! Why we should go barefooted amongst dogs and chickens was more than I could comprehend.

"Images of Buddha greet the visitor or the devout worshipers at every turn. In some niches, he is sitting, in some reclining, and in others standing. Exquisite carvings and colored glass colonades abound. Resonant Burma bells are sounding, almost continually, and occasionally one of the large bells sends forth an appeal. The Great Bell, the third largest in the world, is 14 feet high, 7 1/2 feet in diameter, 22 1/2 feet in circumference, 15 inches thick, and over 42 tons in weight.

"The perimeter of the base of the pagoda is 1,355 feet, its height, 370 feet above the platform. It is covered with gold leaf from top to bottom. It is supposed to have been founded 585 B.C. This is an error undoubtedly; for Buddha was not born until about 557 B.C."

A FUNERAL SERVICE

"About 9:30 p.m. we were strolling leisurely through the crowded streets, swallowed up, so to speak, in the populace, when we came upon a multitude of people, most of whom, if not all, men, sitting on benches placed along the sidewalk, or standing on the edge of the street. A band concert, we thought at first, but there was no band. Convinced that something extraordinary was going on, and determined to find out, if possible, what that something was, we approached a group of young men and ventured in English this question, 'What is this?'

"As they began to edge away from us, we were made to understand that they understood no English, and were about to despair, when a stately young fellow came forward, and, answering our question said, 'This is a death service.'

"Thinking he said debt service, I asked if these people were assembled for the purpose of contributing to pay the bankrupt's debts.

"'No,' explained our friend, 'the man not in debt; he has expired.'

"Relieved to learn that the unfortunate man was better off than we first surmised, we ventured to ask about the nature of the service.

"'The gentleman was buried last Wednesday,' continued our informant, 'and his friends have assembled to pay their respects to him. He has left a wife and three children. We read the Koran, that is our Bible, for one hour. They are doing that up in the room now.'

"We looked up, and saw a well-lighted room—a group of men, some of whom held manuscripts in their hands, either reading intently or listening attentively.

"'We then pray for the departed soul, that he may be at peace.'

"'Do you all pray?' I asked, 'every one of you here on the street?'

"'Yes,' he replied, 'everyone of us.'

"'And then what do you do?'

"'Then all the poor are fed,' he said.

"'Do you all contribute to defray the expense?'

"'Oh, no, the widow bear all the expense,' he informed us.

"'Why, I exclaimed, there must be a thousand people here!'

"'Yes, she feed a thousand people. She very wealthy. That building,' pointing to a three-story business block, 'is his mother-in-law's!'

"He explained that all assembled were Mohammedans, and that Mohammedans worship, not Buddha, but God."

HINDUS HOLD FAST TO THEIR RELIGION

October 4

"We slept last night aboard the S. S. Arankola, and steamed down the river across the bar at about 5:00 a.m.

"Mr. Cyril Gore, a fellow passenger, who has spent twenty years among the Hindus as a tea gardener and who employs over 1,000 of them continually, told me this morning that the Christian religion has made practically no headway among the Hindus. Generally only the outcasts accept it. He knew a minister, a German Lutheran, who had spent thirty-four years in missionary work who told him that he, the minister, did not believe he had made one genuine convert."

UNWELCOME BEDFELLOWS

Calcutta, October 6

"When I entered the bathroom this morning, I noticed some little black things around my right ankle, which I thought to be cinders, but as I started to brush them off, they began hopping and crawling! I stripped and found my clothes alive. The things seemed smaller than fleas, and yet related to them. I called Brother Cannon who said they were the genuine breed. I asked him if he had been troubled through the night, but he had not. I caught thirty on my body and clothes, and lost about eight or ten for everyone I caught. Brother Cannon came in from his room with the report that he had undressed and caught 120. About noon he had captured 157!

"In the afternoon we had secured a room at the Great Eastern Hotel, where we hope to be free from bedfellows!"

ON GOOD MANNERS

Leaving Agra, India, October 10

"At the station, we and a European were ushered into a first-class compartment. But no sooner were our satchels and parcels placed, and we comfortably seated than we were informed by the conductor that, 'This compartment is reserved for another party.'

"We answered, 'The guard unlocked the door and let us in.'

"'It doesn't matter, the names are written on the car for whom this has been reserved.'

"'Well, find us another compartment, and we'll leave this one.'

"He left, but before he returned the 'party' for whom the reservation had been made entered. They were a Persian gentleman (merchant), his two grown sons, their servant, and baggage galore.

"Before they had arranged their luggage, tipped the coolies, and tried to get seats, the train had started. In the meantime the merchant had begun addressing us in his native tongue, telling us, as we thought, that this was his compartment, and we should get out. Our European companion had called a guard, who had come to our rescue just as the train pulled out of the station; so we were seven besides the servant who had withdrawn to the washroom.

"Imagine our surprise when the guard, interpreting, told us that the Persian gentleman was not asking us to leave but hoped that we would not be too much inconvenienced by the crowded condition of the compartment, that he was glad to have us share it with them, and wished us to choose the most comfortable seats and so forth. Talk about a gentleman! Although we were where we had been led by one who we thought knew what he was doing, and, therefore, were really not intruders, yet I began to feel like one.

"We thanked him graciously, and bade him and his sons be seated. A few moments later he asked if his servants making coffee in the wash room would offend us in any way.

"'Certainly not.'

"When it was prepared, the merchant offered it to us first. When we thanked him and told him we did not drink coffee, he served orange.

"About this time, the European took out his pipe and began to fill it with tobacco. In striking contrast to the gentlemanly consideration of the Persian in regard to the making of coffee, the European did not deign to ask whether his smoking would be offensive!

"And worse than that. When at the first station, this 'refined' European gentleman ordered lemonade, he ordered three. Anticipating an embarrassment, I quickly said, 'This is my treat,' and ordered six.

"We and Europeans assume a haughty, dignified air towards the Orientals, but, by goodness, the Orientals are far ahead of us in courtesy and good manners!"

SPLENDOR AND SQUALOR

At Delhi, October 11

"One of our most interesting visits was to the Jama Masjid or Great Mosque, from the top of the tower of which, just at sunset of the 11th, we obtained a magnificent view of the city and surrounding country. This is another monument to the famous Shah Jahan's ability as a builder for the centuries.

"Another was to the Ivory Palace where we saw the most exquisite workmanship in ivory carving and skilful woodwork—tables of all sizes, screens of various designs and uses, lacquer ware, ivory tusks carved artistically—in fact, everything in ivory and woodwork that one might desire we saw in this wonderful place.

"We felt that we were in the heart of India here as we were in the heart of China at Peking."

Bombay, October 13

"Bombay is Europeanized and a very thriving city. But I saw more abject poverty and squalor here than I have seen in any other city since we left Peking and Tientsin—women half-naked sitting on the stone pavement with naked infants lying by their sides—others with two or three children with them begging on the street—little boys with the left arm cut off just above the elbow, who would hold out the withered stump of naked arms to awaken the sympathy of passers-by from whom they solicited alms—blind men—crippled men—miserable women, little children of all ages, begging, begging, begging!

"At ten o'clock in the morning, I passed one man lying on the sidewalk, whose foot had either been crushed or was being eaten away with disease. There he lay exposed, with the flies covering the festering sore. At 6:00 p.m., I chanced to pass the same place and saw him still there. He had turned on his left side and seemed to be unconscious. The further I walked away from him, the more I began to wonder whether he might not have died during the day. After dinner, I walked back to make sure, but before I arrived at the spot at 10:00 p.m., he had been removed—but whether to the pyre or the river for the crocodiles I do not know."

THE CASTE SYSTEM

"One cannot travel far or remain long in India without becoming intensely aware of the iron-bound system of caste that enslaves all classes.

"'How oppressive and iniquitous this has been and still is,' says the Hindu writer, 'can easily be appreciated if, for the purpose of my explaining the matter, our social organizations were regarded as a huge, colossal, upright pillar of human atoms, encased by iron tubes placed tier upon tier from the bottom till the topmost cornice was reached.

"'At the very bottom of the pillar you have the 'untouchable Sudras.' On their heads place a well-fitting, ventilation-proof, thick iron sheet on which put the (1) 'touchable Sudras,' and on their heads again place a similar sheet. On this sheet put the 'Vaisyas,' on whose heads a similar iron sheet being placed, let the 'Kshatryas' stand on it, and likewise let another sheet rest on the heads of the 'Kshatryas' and on that let the 'Brahmans' stand.'

"'Let there be a flag flying from the topmost cornice of the pillar with this inscription on it: 'Hindu Sumaj.' Now you have a complete picture of our caste system.'"

October 20—Leaving India aboard the S. S. Egypt

ADEN—A BARREN SPOT

"When I came on deck this morning, we were approaching the seaport town of Aden, situated in the southwestern corner of the Arabian Peninsula, near the mouth of the Red Sea. The rugged islands on our left and the mainland on our right were equally barren. Dry and sand-swept, the landscape stretched a parched and naked waste as far as the field glasses could carry our vision. In this practically rainless region, not a tree or blade of grass grows. However, we thought we observed one exception—a clump of scrubby shrubs in the midst of a sand drift on a hillside at the foot of a sort of a ravine. Perhaps a little water seeping out made that spot an oasis.

"We anchored outside the wharf and took on coal.

"A dozen sampans soon ranged alongside, filled with baskets, ostrich plumes, shells, cigars, sharks' jaws, leopard skins, etc., which the garrulous owners, amidst loud hallooing and wild gesticulations, sold to the passengers. The articles were passed up for inspection by means of a basket attached to the middle of a long rope, one end of which was thrown up to the purchaser and the other held by the Adenite. If a sale was made, the money went down in the basket.

"Brother Cannon and I went ashore, but, owing to insufficient time, we did not drive out to the tanks, ancient reservoirs which are now and have been for years entirely dry.

"The camels with ropes and traces hitched to their shoulders and humps, pulling heavily-laden wagons through the streets were the most interesting of all things in this out-of-existence place.

"Aden is the most cheerless, the most barren, the most forsaken looking spot we have seen in our world tour!

"We sailed from this port about 12:30 p.m. and were soon moving pleasantly through the Gulf of Aden, entering the Red Sea about 7:30."

FOOLISHNESS OF WAR

"The barber (on the ship), a Cornish man, is a very interesting character. Though uneducated, he is a very good thinker, and says some very clever things. Speaking of the foolishness of war, he said, 'Nations that fight are like a man and his wife who spend all their money at the seaside—when they come back home they find no food in the cupboard.'"

KEEPING NATURE'S LAWS

"I love nature. She says to everybody: 'If ye love me, keep my commandments.' She gives me a little seed, and I plant it. If I obey her laws, she will repay me a hundredfold for that one seed, but if I keep not her commandments, she will take the seed from me and let me die!"

THE CAMEL—A FAITHFUL BEAST OF BURDEN

Suez Canal, October 24

"On our right through the glasses we can see camels lying lazily in the sun, some of them still carrying their loads on their backs. It may be that they are just getting ready to start out as a caravan because in the distance I can see three camels and a man starting across the sandy waste.

"During the forenoon, we passed hundreds of men, mules, and camels working along the bank, evidently with the purpose of widening the canal. It was an interesting sight to see the camels, the faithful old beasts, lie down while the men shoveled the sand into the boxes attached to the backs of these ships of the desert, and then rise and wobble out of the pit, climb the hill, and go deposit their burden by again lying down."

CAIRO

October 25

"We arrived at Cairo at 1:00 p.m. and secured rooms at the Continental. Cairo is said to be the largest city in Egypt, containing about 750,000 inhabitants. The oldest town, there are really four of them, was built on the eastern bank of the Nile and was known as Babylon. This was captured 641 A.D. by Amr, the general of Caliph Omar who built the part now known as Old Cairo.

"Modern Cairo was founded 969 A.D. following the conquest of Egypt by Gohar, the general of the Moslem Army. Heliopolis, the new, is just a wealthy suburb founded in 1906.

"Napoleon Bonaparte established headquarters here in 1798, following the battle of the pyramids.

"Mohammed Ali Pasha, the man who massacred the Mamluk Beys, was the founder of the latest ruling family, and the man who instituted modern institutions, which being improved upon by his successors, have made Cairo what it is today.

"Cairo is a city of mosques, there being 366 scattered throughout the town, the citadel and the dome and minarets of the Sultan Hassan Mosque, the finest Arabian monument in Egypt, towering above them all."

A TRIP TO THE PYRAMIDS

"With 'Abdul' as our dragoman, at 5:30 a.m. we stepped into an auto which he had waiting for us in front of the hotel and started our seven mile drive to the Pyramids. It was just breaking day. The air was cool and delightful except for the abominable smell arising from the refuse on the streets.

"As we reached the outskirts of the city, scores and scores of camels, donkeys and men, walking in line one after another, were strolling into market. Occasionally, we saw a woman with a heavy load on her head, but these were more common later in the day.

"We crossed the historic old Nile, and saw the flooded plain from which in three weeks all the water will be drawn, absorbed or evaporated, and the farmers will begin to prepare the soil for crops. Our drive through the long beautiful vista of acacia trees was glorious, and it was through these just as the eastern sky was tinged in rosy hue that we caught our first glimpse of the pyramid of Cheops.

"As we approached nearer, and saw half-covered in mist the pyramid of Cheops standing near, I felt much the same sensation that I had when I first glimpsed the Grand Canyon of the Colorado—a realization that I was not comprehending its magnitude. But as we climbed up the sandy incline and listened to Abdul and stood beside the massive stone in this wonder of wonderful tombs, its massiveness began to dawn upon me.

"It was built by Kheops of Khufu about 3733 B.C. In its construction, 100,000 men worked three months each year for twenty years.

"It is 450 feet high. Each of its sloping sides is 568 feet long and 764 feet wide. Our guide Abdul said it originally covered thirteen acres. Eight feet of marble blocks, covering this entire pyramid, have been removed.

"The pyramid of Khephren stands near Cheops, and the third largest of the group of nine stands just beyond.

"This pyramid is 204 feet high, and may be ascended without much difficulty. From its summit we obtained a magnificent view of the surrounding country, just beginning to stir with life on this peaceful October morning.

"The Sphinx, or Aboul-Houll (The Father of Terror) was built about 3,000 B.C. It represents a lion in body and has a man's face and a woman's head. It is 60 feet high, and 187 feet long. The paws of this animal are now covered with sand.

"East of the pyramid of Cheops and fifty yards southeast of the Sphinx stand the ruins of an interesting old temple which was originally connected with the Sphinx.

"In this we were shown a granite block 16 feet long, 5 feet thick, and 4 feet high, and other blocks, tongued and grooved, of almost equal size lie perfectly in place in the original wall. Its six chambers occupy 147 square feet, and its walls rise 46 feet.

"Camels were placed at our disposal, and we rode from one structure to another.

"We spent several hours visiting these huge monuments to the tyranny as well as to the greatness of the ancient Pharaohs."

A DAY IN EGYPTCAMELS—PYRAMIDS—EGYPTIAN MARRIAGE CUSTOMS

October 28

"My dear Llewelyn:

"Thinking that you would like to spend a day with me here in old Egypt, I have risen at five o'clock in the morning to tell you briefly of our trip yesterday.

"As we were returning the day before from the Great Pyramids and the Sphinx, Abdul, our dragoman or guide, had aroused our interest in a visit to the ancient city of Memphis, promising a 'better time more as you had today than fifty times!' So with this promise, inconceivable of fulfilment, in view, we told him to make all arrangements, and we would put ourselves in his hands with the express understanding that for the price stipulated he must pay all expenses, including tickets, camels, entrance fees to tombs, tips and baksheesh, and also keep off all the persistent parasites who with their begging make tourist trips a nightmare. 'You just leave it to Abdul,' he answered, reassuringly, 'Abdul know how to take care of his people.' (We are 'his people.')

"Accordingly, we left Cairo, by train, yesterday morning at eight o'clock. One hour's ride brought us again to the base of the Great Pyramid of Cheops, where two camels, a donkey, and three servants were in readiness to convey us for a two and one half hour's ride across the northern part of the Sahara Desert.

"My camel's name is Karosa. With a groan that sounded not unlike the first long note of a donkey's bray, and which indicated to me that Karosa seemed to know what was ahead of her, she obeyed her master's word, and knelt down on the hard road for me to mount. The saddle was well-cushioned, and decorated for the occasion, but had only one stirrup, so I sat with my right leg over the front horn of the saddle. This proved to be a very convenient position.

"As we started out, I thought Brother Cannon had much the better camel, but Karosa bore acquaintance.

"Abdul rode a white donkey, and the three coolies carrying lunchbasket and kodaks trotted behind.

"As we passed the pyramid of Cheops, with its 2,300,000 blocks of stone each of which is 40 cubic feet in size and weighs on an average about two and one half tons, I thought the huge structure seemed even larger than it had seemed the day before. The old Sphinx was just the same. There he or she or it or they stood, wearing even in its or their defaced face the same benign and enigmatical expression that has characterized those features for over 5,000 years!

"Soon these wonders of the world were behind us, and we were being joggled along the northern rim of the Great Sahara! For one hundred and fifty miles or more it stretched on our right a barren waste, the home of the jackal, the lion, the tiger and other famed African animals. Abdul said if we would go camping with him, he would show us a lion 'in one day or he would give a thousand quid'—($4,000). A flooded area of the Nile lay a short distance on our left, extending north and south for many miles.

"Just before we started into the desert proper, we came upon an Arabian girl and her younger brother herding a flock of sheep. She had good features and was probably fourteen or fifteen years of age. The scene was so typically an Arabian one that I concluded to get a snapshot of it. 'Abdul, do you think that girl will permit us to take her picture with her little flock?' I asked.

"'O yes, shall I take it?'

"'Yes, please, but I want to be in it, too,' so, without waiting for Karosa to kneel, I jumped down and realized for the first time how much higher a dromedary is than an average horse.

"In the meantime Abdul had ridden his donkey towards the girl, had dismounted, and was adjusting the camera.

"I suppose the poor, ignorant maiden thought it was a pistol, and that we were going to abduct her and steal her sheep; for with wild screams in which her brother joined, she started for the water! Dashing into the pond, nearly up to her armpits, she continued to run and to cry to her father for help. In her terrific fright, she abandoned sheep and everything else! The more Abdul called to her, the faster she splashed through the water, and the louder she screamed!

"'Let's go,' I urged, 'or we'll frighten her to death. Either that, or she'll get drowned!' They finally reached an island where some reeds half-shielded them, and their cries became less piercing, and at length died in the intervening distance between us.

"Though we obtained no kodak print of her, I shall ever retain a mental picture of that wild, frightened Arab maiden and her young brother!

"Karosa and her fellow-travelers had paced along in the hot sun for about another forty minutes, when we saw off to our left and coming towards us, an unusual group of camels, donkeys, and people. The leading camel carried a bright-colored tent or canopy, richly decorated; the second was bearing three women, sitting in a triangular position; and behind these came the rest of the train consisting of mounted camels, a donkey or two, and a number of men and women and young girls walking and singing.

"'What's that, Abdul?' I eagerly inquired.

"'That,' he said, as indifferently as if it were an everyday occurrence, 'that is a Bedouin marriage. They are coming to the bride's house to fetch her to her future husband. You see that bright-colored canopy on the camel? That is for the bride. She will sit inside that on her way to the bridegroom.'

"'The bridegroom isn't in the procession now, then?'

"'No, he not see her until she brought to him.'

"'Why, do you mean to tell me that he hasn't seen the girl he's going to marry?' I asked in surprise.

"Abdul laughed, gave his donkey a rap on the neck with his stick, to make him come closer to Karosa, and explained a Bedouin marriage as follows:

"The father of the girl offers her for sale to the young man for one hundred or one hundred fifty pounds stirling ($400 to $600) when the bargain is made, the young man's mother or sister or some other woman relative goes to see the young woman. (This is done, I believe before the bargain is finally completed). If the mother or sister reports favorably upon the girl's looks, ability, etc., the young man accepts the father's proposition, then part of the money is paid down, and plans for the wedding begin to be made. 'You know,' said Abdul, 'a man that's wise, he not pay all the money down—just half; so if the girl is ugly or dirty or don't suit him, he can say to the father, 'I pay you the rest of the money, and you take her back.'

"'Can a man send a girl back that easily?' I said earnestly.

"'Sure he can!" said this Arab with a tone that seemed to say why not? 'I've divorced two of them already!'

"'You have?' I exclaimed.

"'Divorced the first one first day! Ugh, she ugly!' he said with a grimace. 'I wouldn't have her. She cost me one hundred pounds too!'

"'Well, what does the girl have to say about all this business?' I inquired.

"'Nothing—not a word, she just can cry and go back to her father."

"'Oh, that isn't fair to the poor women," said I in sympathy.

"'No,' he agreed. 'That's the dammit! And pretty girl maybe get mean, lazy, ugly man—not matter, she have to stay with him.'

"'No,' he answered, 'some men, he do that, but that too cruel. Kind man, he say nothing—just laugh and have a good time all day, as though everything all right. Let her stay in house two or three days, so neighbors think all fine. Then he say, "Let's go visit your folks, they will want to see you. We stay two or three days with your family." Then when he visit at father's house, the young man say: "Now I pay you the rest of the money, but you keep your daughter. I no want her." If the father not take money, then the young man throw it at his feet, and walk away, and that's the end. If he think father not give him written receipt for money the young man take two neighbors as witnesses, then he all right.'

"'How much did your second wife cost, Abdul?'

"'One hundred fifty pounds, and I keep her only two or three months.'

"What was wrong with her?" I queried, seeing he was in a talkative mood, and unsecretive, and I determined to take a peep into Arab life.

"O she ugly, too, and cross! Abdul unlucky; I tell you last night Abdul unlucky!'

"'Going to try it again?'

"'Try it again!' he exclaimed. 'You think Abdul one fool? No it's too expensive! You know how much money I spen?—not just what I paid for the women, but I gave big feast to many friends, and it cost many hundred pounds.'

"'Let me tell you, Abdul, try it once more, but pick your own wife. Go see her, talk to her, court, and tell her if you love her and she loves you that you will get married, and live together happily. I courted my wife three years before she would marry me.'

"'Yes, I know,' he said somewhat sadly; 'I know you court your girls one year or two; but we are bloody fools—we not educated.'

"'But some Arabs getting wiser now,' he continued. 'Young man want a wife, he go to the town and make acquaintance of a merchant at a main street where all the women pass. He stay there all day—all night and day, and make friend of merchant. When he see nice, beautiful young girl pass, he ask whose daughter she is, and then he find the father, and make bargain.'

"'But you didn't do that either time; you just traded "unsight and unseen" as the Yankees say.'

"'Yes, Abdul unlucky,' he repeated somewhat sorrowfully. But he soon became cheerful again, and told us about an incident that showed how keenly was his disappointment over his second bride. Among the guests invited was an American lady, who came the day following, bringing an 'arm full of beautiful flowers.' When she came out of the room after having given the bouquet to the bride, Abdul noticed disappointment on her face even before she exclaimed:

"'Abdul, is she your bride?"

"By this time Abdul's disappointment had broken all bounds, so he said, 'No, she my sister—she, my brother's bride.'

"'Why, is this your brother's wedding?' asked the lady very much disappointed.

"'Yes, this my brother's wedding—she his bride.'

"'But Abdul, I thought you invited us to your wedding.'

"'Yes, I did," replied the artful rogue; 'but I postponed it yesterday!'

"When he was narrating this, we were standing with candles in hand around the huge, richly polished sarcophagus of the ancient king who built the Apis Tombs.

"We had groped along underground passageways, and the flicker of the three candles in that dark sepulcher did not contribute much to the banishing of darkness and solemnity around us, but as I listened to Abdul relate the above incident and pictured him trying to tell such a falsehood in order not to own his bride, I laughed until those old corridors and passageways fairly resounded! It's fortunate that the twenty-four mummies found in this tomb as well as the remains of the 'sacred bull' had been removed, or they certainly would have stirred at so unusual a noise!

"Abdul promised me that he would make one more effort, in the proper way, and then write to me and inform me as to the result.

"We had already passed the Step Pyramid, the tomb of King Zozer—said to be more than 6,000 years old, the oldest pyramid in Egypt.

"We had also been down into the Tomb of Ti, with its ancient and well-preserved hieroglyphics still on the walls.

"At Mariette's house, we ate our lunch—prepared by the head waiter at the hotel that morning. From where we sat we had a beautiful panoramic view of the Great Desert.

"When we came out to resume our journey, Karosa and her associate were both down on their knees in the sand waiting for us.

"We passed Sakkara on our right, and paced or rocked or reeled—whatever term best describes Karosa's gait—across an embankment that stretches through an overflow of the Nile, and soon found ourselves on the site of the ancient city of Memphis.

"By the side of a mud house, we again dismounted in spite of her camelship's protests and ascending a flight of wooden steps, we found ourselves on a platform overlooking the reclining colossal statue of old Ramses II, the Pharaoh who held the Israelites in bondage.

"In the palm grove and near this statue is another statue of the same king, and also a large sphinx of alabaster, 26 feet long, 14 feet high, and weighing about 80 tons. Of course, this sphinx seems small when compared to the Father of Terror, which is 66 feet high and 187 feet long. The latter's ear is 4 1/2 feet long, and his nose, before Napoleon shot it off, was five feet seven inches, and his mouth 7 feet 7 inches across, and he is 5,000 years old! But this old sphinx of Ramses II is 'no spring chicken' either in size or age!

"We now rode leisurely through a dirty, dingy Arabian village, in which half the people we saw seemed to be afflicted with sore eyes, or some other ailment, and at four p.m. Karosa, whom by this time, I called 'Corroder,' knelt down on the ground to let me dismount for the twentieth and last time. Promptly at 4:30 p.m., we boarded the train for Cairo.

"Just before we entered the city, we looked across the Nile toward the pyramids and the desert. Behind the great Cheops, the sun was just sinking below the horizon, which was bathed in a flood of light yellow and blue. Everywhere, the streets and lanes of the villages and fields were lined with trains of donkeys, camels, small flocks of sheep, and men, women, and children dressed in the varying modes of Arabian costumes. Corn fields stood in rich and luscious green color, testifying in their luxuriant growth to the validity of the claim that the valley of the Nile is the salvation of the East in times of famine. And through this quiet, and quaint pastoral scene flows quietly and serenely, as it has for time immemorial, the old historic and fruitful Nile.

"It was the end of a most delightful and memorable day; but I wished as I saw the sun sink behind the desert that I might get just a glimpse of what he has seen in his daily course over Egypt since the beginning of civilization in this coliseum of the ancients!

"'And so you think, Abdul,' said I as we paid our guide and was bidding him good night at the hotel, 'that in the marriage business you're unlucky?'

"'Well, rather,' was his characteristic reply.

"'Well, you've been very lucky as a dragoman, have given us a most interesting trip, and we wish you every success in the future, especially in courting your third bride.'

"'Thank you,' and he walked away smiling, promising to meet us again in the morning.

"Thus, Llewelyn, I have tried to take you with us over part of the experiences of one day in Egypt. But you must remember you have made the trip in ten minutes or less which took us ten hours; so if it has seemed 'dry, stale, and unprofitable' to you, just be thankful that I haven't detained you longer.

"Good-bye, they are urging me to come to the train!

Affectionately,

Your loving

Daddy."

"P. S. I accept as absolute facts every plague of Egypt named in the Bible, and add to them the plague of fleas, which Moses forgot to mention."

Your pestered

Daddy."

WELL BY THE VIRGIN'S TREE

"In the afternoon, we went to Matarieh, and visited the 'Virgin's tree.' This is a very old fig tree, near some ancient wells. Its old branches are gnarled and dying, but one part still bears fruit. Under this tree, Joseph and Mary and the baby Jesus are supposed to have rested when they came to Egypt to escape from Herod. The boy Jesus is supposed to have made the water in the nearby spring sweet for the use of his parents during their stay here. Other wells around it are brackish. We tasted the water and found it excellent; but thoughtlessly did not test the water in the other wells to see if they were not exactly the same.

"The Dead Sea is 129 feet below the level of the sea, and 3786 feet lower than Jerusalem. Its shore line is the lowest part of the earth's surface not covered with water.

"I was not disappointed in the Jordan Valley, although it is dry and barren of all vegetation except a shrub that resembles our greasewood and rabbitbrush.

"The Dead Sea is a beautiful body of water, and this day exceptionally so because the surface was sufficiently stirred to make the waves high and boisterous as they splashed against the pebbly shore.

"We tried to secure a boat to row on it, but a man at a little station on the northern shore said it was too rough. I hired a native to swim out and secure two bottles of the clean water as specimens. It contains twenty-five percent mineral salt.

"Across the sea to the east and running north and south are the Mountains of Moab. There stands Mt. Nebo from which Moses viewed the Promised Land. (Deut. 34.) I was near Mt. Nebo where Elijah was taken up to heaven.

"Leaving the Dead Sea, we drove north through high dense weeds or shrubs, the name of which we did not ascertain, to the traditional place on the Jordan River where the children of Israel crossed into the Promised Land. Perhaps in that same vicinity the Savior of the world was baptized 'to fulfil all righteousness.'

"Between the Jordan and Jericho, we were shown the place where at Gilgal, Joshua erected the pillar of twelve stones. (Joshua 4.)

"As we stood near the tree which marks the spot, our guide pointed out the site of the ancient Sodom from which Lot and his family fled (Genesis 19); also where Lot's wife was turned into a pillar of salt."

JERICHO

"Jericho of today is a fertile spot standing near the site of the ancient city. Soudan Bedouins are the principal inhabitants of the small, dirty town. Orange and banana trees flourish here. Here we were shown the beautiful pools known as 'Elisha's Fountain.' (2 Kings, 2:19-22.) They are just below the excavated ruins of the old Jericho, down the walls of which Rahab assisted Joshua's spies to escape. (Joshua 19.) A portion of the walls of her house may still be seen. Jericho was the home of little Zaccheus and of the blind Bartimaeus.

"The lofty mountain in the southwest is known as Mt. Temptation. Here is the supposed scene of the Savior's fasting and temptation."

TOMB OF LAZARUS

"Upon our return in the afternoon, we visited the tomb of Lazarus at Bethany and the ruins of the two rooms in which Mary and Martha so often entertained their Lord. Mohammedans now own the place, and a dirty, dingy place it is, too, but I was all the while picturing in my mind the happy scenes that occurred here 2,000 years ago, so did not mind the debris and filth. I recognized no Marys nor Marthas in any of the women we passed in this much visited place by the Master."

GARDEN OF GETHSEMANE

"We visited the Garden of Gethsemane, now the property of Franciscan Fathers. As at every other sacred spot in Jerusalem there are too many modern things around here to realize at first that this is the garden to which Jesus and his disciples repaired so frequently for prayer; but the rock—thank heaven they can't change that—on which the three disciples sat and 'watched,' is sufficiently natural to make one partly picture the scene as it was on the fatal night when Judas betrayed his Lord."

CHURCH OF THE VIRGIN

"Although it was nearly 3:30 o'clock, we concluded that we still had time to drive to Bethlehem, six miles south of Jerusalem. Before starting, however, we visited the Church of the Virgin, which marks the spot where the mother of the Savior was buried. An auto was waiting for us near the place where Stephen was martyred, so before taking my seat, I stood a moment on what might have been the very spot from which, just before he died, he saw the heavens open.

"We passed the hotel on our way to Bethlehem, drove by the Jaffa Gate, and entered the Valley of Hinnim, a deep ravine which bounds Jerusalem on the south. This was the ancient boundary between Judah and Benjamin. On the south side of this is the Hill of Evil Counsel where the Jews counseled how to put Jesus to death, and where Solomon had built an altar to Moloch."

A DANGEROUS TRIP TO MAKE A SMALL GROUP HAPPY

November 6

"We arrived at Aleppo at 6:00 p.m. and at once realized how helpless we should have been in this Turkish Arabian-Armenian town without the aid of Brother Booth.

"The three of us called on the U. S. Consul. We thought the road between here and Aintab not so dangerous now because of Turkish brigands as it has been, although frequent depredations are still reported. The British Consul, who came in while we were still there, said he thought we could get through to Aintab all right, 'because while the Turks make raids every three or four days, we might strike the lucky day when they didn't come out!'

"We visited one of the fourteen orphanages in the city. One girl with tattoo marks on her sweet young face had been taken by the Arabs after the death of her parents. The Arabs tattooed her. Several others showed by the same indications that they had shared a similar experience.

"We met about forty fine members of the Church and friends, with whom we held a very impressive service. They are all poor and have suffered bitter experiences during the last few years. They have been sheep without a shepherd for twelve years, but their interest in and integrity to the Church seem genuine and sincere.

"At nine o'clock this morning (November 8), in a Ford car, we left Aleppo for Aintab. We had no trouble and encountered no brigands. A skeleton of an automobile which had been burned on the side of the road in the brigands' district and the presence of mounted soldiers (French) patroling the dangerous part of the highway were the only reminders of the fact that we were traveling through a danger zone. We had arrived (at Aintab) at 2:30 and the news spread literally like wildfire. At 5:15 p.m. there were assembled in a room prepared for the purpose seventy persons who had gathered for the meeting.

"Never were people more delighted than these to meet again their old friend and missionary, Brother Booth! Their joy was unbounded. One kind woman with her face aglow and her eyes filled with appreciation, held my hand in both hers and said: 'We have been in hell for seven years, now we are in heaven.'

"We were more than amply repaid for our effort to meet them and for any risk that we might have run in coming thus far on our own responsibility.

"The French this day gave official notice by placards on the streets of their intention to withdraw from Aintab! This means that the Armenians must leave also or run the risk of being massacred. Having fought with the French against the Moslems, they will expect no mercy from their Turkish enemies who have already threatened that 'four hours after the French evacuate the town, not an Armenian will be alive.'

"Out of 25,000 Armenians who came here ten years ago, there are now only 5,000. All the others have died, been killed, or died of starvation and exposure during the terrible exodus of December.

"We concluded to remove our people from here within the next ten days. The few who have homes will just abandon them. The Turks will not purchase them because they know they will possess them anyway."

CRUELTY TO ANIMALS—THE RETURN TO ALEPPO

November 9

"We returned to Aleppo, making the journey in four and one half hours. We must have passed hundreds of camels and donkeys traveling in large caravans, and all heavily loaded with various kinds of produce, hides, lumber, poles, wheat, etc. Oh, how the poor animals suffer under the cruelty of these hard-hearted, unmerciful people!"

DAMASCUS

November 12

"Damascus, said to be the oldest town still in existence known to history, was this day in holiday attire. It is the birthday of Mohammed. Cannonading awoke us at 4:00 a.m., and bands began to play at seven. Streets are all decorated with French flags and Syrian colors and, what is unique, with costly rugs and rich plush cloth. Beautiful Turkish rugs adorn sidewalks, hang from houses, and form canopies in the streets.

"In the afternoon, we turned our attention from the populace acclaiming Mohammed as Allah's prophet, to the persecuted Saul of Tarsus. We visited the old house in which Saul, blind and humbled, met Ananias, and in which by repentance and faith, Saul regained his sight.

"From this little underground house of two rooms, now used as a church, we walked through the Eastern Gate, and saw the window or opening in the old wall through which the persecuted and enthusiastic Saul escaped in a basket from his enemies. These are two mean, unadorned spots, but they seemed far more sacred to me than the great, spacious, richly embellished mosque, which stands but fifteen minutes distant.

"There were only a few Christians in Damascus in Paul's day, and, if we may judge from appearances and actions, there are fewer today, after a lapse of nearly 2,000 years."

NAZARETH

November 15

"The drive to Nazareth was very pleasant. On the way we passed through Kafr Hattin; the mount of the Beatitudes was on our right, and Mount Hermon, the Mount of Transfiguration, away over the lake to the north.

"When we reached the brow of the hill at a point east of the Jabel es-sikh, we obtained a fine view of the boyhood town of our Savior. Its white houses, nestling closely together on the south slope of the hill named above, stood out in charming contrast to the green olive trees and fig trees that dotted the scene in many places.

"After lunch, we visited:

"(1) Mary's Well, one of the most interesting spots in Palestine, because undoubtedly Mary and her son Jesus often came to this well with other inhabitants of the village to draw water. It is the only well or spring in the town. It is one of the few spots unprofaned by a gloomy old church.

"(2) The Church of Annunciation, built upon the supposed spot where the angel visited Mary and promised her that she should become the mother of the Son of God.

"(3) The Workshop of Joseph, where he 'became subject to them.' A carpenter shop nearby interested me more than the church, for it was undoubtedly just such a shop in which Joseph worked when Jesus was growing to manhood.

"(4) The synagogue in which Jesus preached his first sermon.

"(5) We did not ascend the rocky promontory from which his angry townsmen intended to thrust Jesus, but we had it pointed out to us, not quite but nearly in the direction and position I had pictured it in my mind.

"Though our visit to Nazareth was brief, I think I enjoyed being in the home town of the Savior more than having been in any other town in Palestine. The people seem to be just the same as I think they were 2,000 years ago. The old carpenter shops are probably little changed from Joseph's day. The well or spring is gushing forth the same pure water that filled Mary's jug every morning, and, as a mere coincidence, as we approached this well, we met three women, one of whom was the most beautiful woman we have seen on our tour. I pictured her as the madonna. The little children playing and prattling in the street reminded me of the words,

"He played as little children play

The pleasant games of youth;

But he never got vexed if the game went wrong,

And he always spoke the truth."

VALUE OF INSPIRATION

Leaving Port Said on S.S. ORMONDE bound for Naples, November 17

"We were sailing on the Mediterranean Sea—fair weather—excellent voyage. Sunday the 20th, we passed Fair Havens, Crete, where Paul nearly two centuries ago advised the commander of his vessel to remain for the winter. But the skipper thought he knew more than the little, unattractive missionary-prisoner, and put out to sea.

"This island Melita (Malta), on which they were wrecked after battling many days in a storm-tossed sea, is on our left near Sicily.

"Inspiration is always superior to man's judgment. Fortunate and blessed is he who knows the voice of inspiration!"

ROME

November 24

"With all the fascination of a historic past, with the accumulated art treasures in sculpture and painting, with the attraction of its own present beauty and progress, Rome is an intensely interesting city.

"Our time being limited, we took occasion to visit with a guide only the following historic places:

"(1) The Coliseum where gladiators of old fought to the death either with each other or with animals, where Christians suffered mutilation and martyrdom, while blood-thirsty, voluptuous spectators gloated and yelled in fiendish approbation. Forty-five thousand people could be seated in this vast arena at the same time, and ten thousand others could stand.

"2) The Pantheon, built as a pagan shrine by Hadrian, on the side of Agrippa's threefold temple. It is now known as the Santa Maria ad Martyres. Originally the building was covered with marble and the dome of the roof with gold and silver, but this has all been removed. It now contains the tomb of Raphael.

"(3) Part of the Circus Maximus, formerly lying between the two hills.

"(4) Several triumphal arches."

November 25

"We drove out to the catacombs, visiting which was wonderfully interesting. These underground passageways impressed me most forceably with the tremendous difficulties under which the early Christians lived and worshiped. There were two stories of tombs below the one which we visited. The tombs of the third and fourth centuries bear the marks of the introduction of pagan superstition into the simple religion of the early followers of the Redeemer.

"From here we drove to St. Peter's, thence to the Vatican where we spent several hours in the picture gallery, and the Sistine Chapel with the wonderful paintings.

"Late in the afternoon, I visited the Forum, where the Roman orators swayed the populace, and where beautiful temples were erected to pagan gods."

HAPPINESS OF PARENTHOOD

Lausanne, November 26

"David L. (missionary son), President Ballif, and others had been at the station to meet the 8:15 train, but were disappointed at not meeting us. They were also informed that the next train from Milan would not arrive before 4:50 a.m. tomorrow. Consequently when we stepped off the train, there was no one to meet us. However, David L. had felt impressed to come down to the station to ascertain whether there might be a train some hour earlier than reported.

"The result was that just as we stepped out onto the sidewalk and began to wonder where we should go, I saw a straight, dignified, young man walking down the hill about a block away, whom I recognized as my boy! In a moment or two we were in each other's embrace!

"Seldom, if ever, have I felt purer joy than that which I experienced in my son's company that evening and succeeding days.

"The happiness of parenthood, indeed, success in life depends upon the honor, integrity of our sons and daughters."

PREDICTION OF GERMANY'S FUTURE

Frankfurt a. m., November 29

"We were entertained at dinner by the foreman or manager of the Esund K. Henlie factory which employs sixty-five men in the manufacture of taps, piping, wrenches, etc. In twenty-five minutes the entire factory can be changed and operated for the manufacture of bullets and cartridges!

"There is an embargo in the United States against German-made goods, but Germany sells to Holland (and other countries) and these sell to the United States, thus giving employment to the Germans, enriching the other countries, and bleeding the consumer in America.

"It seems to me that Germany is in pretty good condition after the war. Within five years she may be the strongest and richest nation in Europe."

HOMEWARD BOUND

Liverpool, December 10

"After dictating a few letters, and partaking of our last meal on foreign shores, we were driven to the wharf where lay at anchor the S. S. Cedric, on which we have secured passage.

"President Whitney, Sister Whitney, President Wetherspoon, Brother Morton, and all the elders accompanied us, and came aboard to see us comfortably situated.

"At 2:30 p.m., we bade them good-bye, they to go to Sheffield to attend conference, we to sail for home, home!! Blessed place always, but especially after twelve months' absence!

"Since leaving Bombay, I have traveled 5,928 miles by land and 3,180 by water, making a total since leaving home of 21,277 miles by land and 34,619 miles by water a grand total of 55,896 miles!

IT'S GOOD TO BE BACK HOME AGAIN

"It's good to be back home again;

It's great to come back West,

Where sun and snow make flowers grow

In the choicest land and best.

"It's good to be back home again

Where men are what they seem,

Who give their hands in loving grasp,

Whose eyes true friendship beam.

"O it's joy to sail through Norway's fjords

And on Mediterranean blue;

To stroll along the Sieges Allee,

The Champs Elysees, too.

"But their grandeur yields to mountain peaks

As moonbeams, to the sun

Statues show the skill of man,

The peaks, what God has done.

"We've met keen minds and sincere souls,

Formed ties that will outlast time;

But the dearest friends in all the world

Are in Zion's favored clime.

"It's good to be back home again

It's great to come back West;

To enjoy the glorious sunshine

With hearts we love the best."
