Llewelyn R. McKay, David O. McKay, Home Memories of President David O. McKay ( 1956)

Section Three

SELECTED STORIES AND QUOTATIONS

LOVE FOR ANIMALS, PEOPLE, FAMILY

IN THE LIFE of a great religious and educational leader there result numerous influences upon many people.

During his life, father has visited many countries and has met the humble as well as the influential men and women of different cultures. Hence, his moral force has resulted in multiple meanings and values to different individuals.

The following section demonstrates the impact of his personality in various ways in a wide variety of situations. As is the case with a truly noble man, the depth of his consistent devotion to mankind is reflected in the relationship which he has to those who are closely associated with him. The magnanimity of a person can be measured by the day-by-day practical application of the broad principles and values of human relationships. The healthy, well-balanced living, as exhibited to the world, is mirrored without distortion in the personal and intimate family sphere. Perhaps it is in this latter realm of father's life that we may obtain our most valuable and profound appreciation of those values which he teaches.

In the selection of some of the following instances, the attempt has been made to portray his genuineness in his attitudes and actions in his personal family life, and in his friendships and experiences. In addition, a number of fundamental concepts taken from his writings demonstrates his convictions of right living. In particular, the attributes of love and devotion to his fellow men are emphasized in personal poems and letters to members of his family. A glimpse into this intimate side of his life reveals that he practises in all sincerity and devotion the virtues which he always advocates.

In this instance, a prophet is not without honor in his own home!

LOVE FOR ANIMALS

Father hates to see an animal mishandled, or to know that one is suffering or killed unnecessarily. As a small boy, I observed my first lesson in this regard. We were walking up the hill on 21st Street, Ogden, and were halfway up the block after leaving Washington Avenue. There we observed a man whipping his horses unmercifully as the team vainly attempted to pull a wagon load of coal out of a rut in the road. The driver swore and cursed as he cracked his whip over their heads and cut the creatures' backs. Father watched only for a second before he strode up to the driver and said, "Hold on there a minute, young man; you can't expect these horses to pull with their heads held up so high!" And without waiting for an answer, he unhooked the checkreins, loosened them several inches, then turned to the driver who was still swearing—but in lower tones: "Now turn your team to the left, keep a tight hold on the reins, and command the team sternly—but without the whip!"

The man was about to answer but thought better of it after looking into father's determined eyes and did as he was told. The faithful horses lowered their heads and pulled the load out of the hole. Father came back to where I was standing on the sidewalk and said, "Some people shouldn't be allowed to drive horses, because they don't show as much sense as the horses!"

STAR

Star was a gentle mare with a lot of horse sense. Father liked her particularly because the children could do anything with her without getting her upset, and she was always trustworthy. When father was called to preside over the European Mission in 1922, it was deemed advisable to sell the surplus stock, but father couldn't bring himself to part with any of the horses. As time went on, however, the horses were eating expensive hay and were not being used, so father gave authorization to sell all but his favorite team. Star was among those to go. After his return from his mission, he spotted Star in a strange field, got out of his car, and called to her. She came up to him immediately and nuzzled her nose under father's arm. That did it! "You know," he remarked, "I think she's lone-some. She ought to be back in our pasture." The next day he made negotiations to buy her back, at a price, by the way, which was higher than he received for her. In no time at all she was again back on father's "hayroll."

CAESAR

Caesar was a full-blooded boar. We children were a little apprehensive of him because he was large and had ferocious-looking tusks. He responded to father's kindness and took every opportunity to stay by him in hope of having his back scratched with a stick.

On a Sunday morning, just as father was leaving for Ogden to catch a train, Caesar broke out of his enclosure. There was no time to repair the fence, and not wanting him to run loose, father put him in the chicken coop with the intention of writing a note of instructions to one of us boys.

That night at two a.m. the telephone rang incessantly, waking up the whole household. Uncle Tommy answered the phone and was told that a telegram had arrived for Lawrence, my older brother. Lawrence was called out of bed. By this time everyone was alerted to the fact that a telegram was to be read over the phone. Naturally all were concerned, wondering what had happened: sickness? an accident? a death? All members gathered around the phone as Lawrence wrote down the following message:

"Caesar in chicken coop. Water him!"

Even though we lost a lot of sleep, we had a good laugh.

This is what had occurred: As father sat on the train he began worrying that his note of instructions would not be read, and he couldn't go peacefully on his way worrying that Caesar might suffer from thirst. Needless to say, Caesar was well cared for by his boys the next morning.

PAT AND MIKE

Pat and Mike made a beautiful team of horses, and father was proud to drive them hitched to the tassletopped surrey or with jingling bells to the bobsleigh in winter. Whenever we would leave Huntsville, I would ask, "What time shall we be home?" and looking at his watch, father would give me the time to the minute. This became a game, and at intervals through the canyon, I would ask the time, calculating in my mind the possibility of father's missing his guess, but invariably we arrived home exactly as predicted. He knew his team and their speed.

No matter at which time we arrived, the horses were washed and groomed before they were tied in the barn.

[Today, father always washes his car before it is placed in the garage, even in bad weather. Often I have asked: "Why are you washing your car tonight? It will be dirty in five minutes on your trip tomorrow." "Well," he has always answered, "it will be clean when we start out."]

Pat and Mike were always clean "to start out" and the harness was always polished and shiny. "A man is judged by the way he keeps his house in order," father reminded us as we boys were put to work shining the wheels of the surrey, and indeed, father was the envy of many a horseman when they observed him driving along the street.

Father "broke" both horses to ride as well as to pull any vehicle. It was a joy to watch him break horses, for he did it with kindness and with good results. "Never let a horse buck," he said, "make it mind without making it mean; if it learns you are master and at the same time its friend, it will always respond."

One day father hitched Mike to a buggy (Mike backed into the shafts; we didn't have to pull them onto him). Some wires were down on the "range" fence, and we were out to fix it. Of course there was no road or path along the fence, and the hillside was covered with many rocks. Distances were long between the broken spots in the fence, and Mike succeeded in pulling the buggy over rough places from one repair job to another. As we were driving, half-tipped, across one steep hill, we hit a rock which turned the buggy completely over, sending me flying through the air. Father landed in some brush with the buggy on top of him. He had lost the reins and hence had no physical control over the horse. Just as the buggy was tipping over, however, father called to Mike, "Whoa there, Boy!" and Mike obeyed.

As we got to our feet, neither of us hurt, father patted Mike and remarked to me, "Now you see what it means to have a dependable horse; many animals would have run away under these circumstances. Good horses are like good people: train them right when they are young and they will know how to act right when the going gets tough, and in emergencies!"

From that moment on, Mike was my favorite horse!

THE BADGER

One morning I was helping father irrigate a patch of potatoes at the Dry Hollow farm. Duke, my large Belgian police dog, was scouting around the neighboring field and suddenly set up a loud barking. I left my work to investigate the cause and discovered that Duke had cornered a badger. The poor little fellow was standing his ground, and his sharp claws kept the dog at a distance. Unwittingly, I walked behind the animal to get a better look at him. Afraid I was about to attack him, the badger turned quickly to face me. That off-guard turn was all that Duke needed. In a flash, he pounced on the poor little creature and, with a firm grip on its neck, shook it to its death.

I carried the dead animal back to father. His face fell as I showed him the animal, and he said, "Why did you let your dog kill it? It is a harmless creature, and there was no need to take its life. Who knows, it may even have some babies which now will starve to death in their hole!"

I have never needlessly killed an animal since that time!

SCOTTY

Scotty was more sheep-dog than anything else, but undoubtedly there were several strains in his ancestry. His greatest joy in life was to go with father to Huntsville, and father never went without him. He was as devoted to his master as a dog can be, responding to every word of command and anticipating moods and actions. He was excellent with cattle and became a buddy of the horses. No wonder he won father's heart. At home, however, he was a menace to the postman and to delivery men. Many of the latter finally refused to come to the house unless Scotty was tied. Although he never bit anyone, he showed his teeth menacingly to strangers who, he thought, should not come onto the porch. He refused to let the laundrymen carry off bundles—these belonged to father!

Whenever father arrived home, Scotty sat up and smiled! At least his expression looked like a smile. The upper lips were drawn up, and Scotty appeared to be grinning. No one else (except mother) merited a grin from Scotty!

But old Father Time caught up with Scotty, and in his old age he became feeble and rheumatic. When father and mother left on trips, Scotty was miserable and, hating to be left alone, he would seek out the homes of one of us boys, even when it took all his strength to walk long distances. On an extended trip, my parents left Scotty in my care, and not wishing to let the poor old fellow run around and be hit by a car (he was nearly blind), I tied him up and stopped at the house three times a day to care for his needs. He became weaker and weaker, and I became alarmed lest he would not last until the folks returned. My fears were well founded. One evening I stopped by to give Scotty his supper. He was lying on the grass in a rather listless state, but he wagged his tail at my approach. I placed his food in his pen and called to him. With great exertion, he crawled over to me, put his nose in my hand, and looked up at me with sorrowful eyes as much as to say: "Tell my master 'hello,' and that I tried to wait"—then he collapsed at my feet.

Father recorded his feelings in his diary:

"Scotty died while Ray and I were on appointment in Arizona, November 13, 1945. Poor old fellow! I believe that he got so lonesome that his aching heart hastened his death. He was so rheumatic that he couldn't stand two minutes at a time; yet notwithstanding the pain he must have suffered, he wobbled up to the university presumably in the hopes of finding one of the boys. Lying in front of the cafeteria door, he frightened the students until they called the dog catcher to remove him. Two days later he repeated the act. This time a policeman took him in charge. A humane officer whose attention had been called to Scotty's decrepitude, suggested that the poor old dog be put out of his misery. However, neither the policeman nor Llewelyn, in whose care we had left Scotty, would end his canine existence while we were away.

"The day following the second episode, when Llewelyn came up to feed the poor fellow, Scotty stood on his feet a moment or two, looked pitifully into Llewelyn's eyes, then fell over dead. It's mighty lonesome around the yard now; and Ray insists that she doesn't want another dog to worry about and mourn over. My favorite horse got poisoned; so with riding horse and dog both gone, my trips to Huntsville have lost their zest. Worst of all, the boys are all away or too busy to go up with me."

BABIES

I have yet to see father fail to get a smile from a baby! Many a time the rest of the people gathered in a room have attempted to obtain a response from a babe in arms without success, then father has taken it in his arms and with a twinkle in his eyes and a broad smile on his lips, he has brought forth a delighted grin from the youngster. Perhaps it is because father's love for babies is so sincere, for they respond by putting out their little arms to go to him. His grandchildren adore him and toddle to him in order to be taken on his knee or to be tossed into the air.

His love for babies has been expressed in this choice verse gem:

TO A BABY DRESSED IN WHITE

"Sweet, innocent, heavenly treasure,

Spirit offspring of God from above,

Gift of an All-Wise Creator,

Expression of heavenly love!

Thou stirrest my soul with emotion,

I feel nearer God and the right;

For nothing is half so inspiring,

As a baby dressed in white.

"When you left the bright regions of glory

And your spirit playmates so fair,

Did you realize what would await you,

As a mortal surrounded by care?

Did you know that your mem'ry of heaven,

Would vanish as morning's light dew?

To environment you would be subject,

Dependent on circumstance too?

"Did the heavenly choirs sing praises,

As earthward you vanished from sight?

Did you know what kind parents would rear you,

Love you, and dress you in white?

Only a smile is my answer,

Yet radiant with heaven's pure light;

Eternal thou art and e'er shall be,

Sweet, baby, now dressed in white!

"Daisies adorn the fresh meadow,

Lilies gladden the field;

Roses make bright every wayside;

Each twig hath some beauty to yield—

All are expressions of goodness,

And praises to God invite;

But the glory of all creation,

Is a baby dressed in white."

CHILDREN—UNDERSTANDING

During the trip to Europe to dedicate the temple sites at Zollikofen, Switzerland, and at Chapel Hill, England, I noticed that no matter how fatiguing it was for father, he always shook hands with everyone present. I groaned inwardly, however, when someone would ask for his autograph because other people then took up the idea and within a few minutes a long line formed. After the dedication at Chapel Hill I observed that father looked tired, and I decided to spare him the autograph signing if at all possible. As soon as the final prayer ended a queue formed in orderly fashion. (The English are always orderly and polite in queuing up and awaiting their turn.) The first in line was a sweet little girl about nine years of age.

"May I have President McKay's autograph?" she inquired of me.

I began to find excuses, not knowing that father was just behind me overhearing the conversation. He put his hand on my shoulder and said, out of the children's hearing distance, "My boy, never hurt or disappoint a child. Children are more sensitive to praise, to criticism, and to recognition than we realize. I can take the time to sign these few autographs—it means a lot to these youngsters and I wouldn't disappoint them for anything."

He turned to the little girl and jokingly asked, "Do you think I can write plainly enough so you can read it?"

The young girl wasn't sure whether or not father was in earnest and became flustered. At that moment, President Reiser interrupted to ask a pressing question, and a minute or two of conversation between the two men ensued. When father turned to the table to begin writing autographs, the girl had disappeared.

I have never seen father more upset. "Llewelyn," he called, "please find that little girl in the blue dress. I'm sure she has the impression that I didn't wish to sign her book. She misinterpreted my remarks. You must find her. She must not go home with this false impression!"

Before long branch presidents and mission presidents were looking for a little girl in blue, but all search was in vain.

During the drive back to London, father mentioned the incident again. One of the elders riding with us said, "We think we know who the little girl is, and the branch president in the village where she lives is going to inquire and will phone you tonight in London."

Sure enough, a telephone call came that night, and this is what father instructed:

"Tell that little girl I am sorry I missed her at New Chapel, and that I have asked the branch president to send her book to me by mail to Salt Lake City; I will sign my autograph and mail it directly back to her."

And he did!

"HOW DID HE KNOW, MOTHER?"

Little six-year-old Margo Morgan (daughter of Gertrude Brody Morgan) was standing with her mother in front of a downtown store when a large black car drove to the curb and parked.

"Margo," said her mother, "that is President McKay getting out of that car."

"Is it, really?" Margo had heard about the President of the Church, but she had never seen him. She stood like a statue gazing at the tall man with the white hair, and to her astonishment and delight, he came straight to her, took her hand and asked, "And how are you today, young lady?" Margo was overcome with surprise, but managed to answer politely, "I'm very well, thank you."

After father went on his way, Margo turned to her mother and asked, "Mother, he could tell we are Mormons; he must know we belong to the University Ward; he came right up and spoke to us. Mother, how did he know?"

Yes, how did he know? He saw the look of admiration and awe in the child's eyes and responded to her as he does to all children because he understands them, and he knew the delight it would bring to her to say a word of greeting. He knew it would make her happy, and he never passes an opportunity to bring joy to others!

As father loves children, so children love him, and they respond to his understanding and affection. Not long ago a poem appeared in the Children's Friend (September, 1954), which reflects the thoughts of tens of thousands of these children:

"He stands as straight as any king,

And he is good and wise;

We love him for his noble looks,

His merry, twinkling eyes.

"He speaks of Jesus and his Church,

And what he says is true;

We love him for the kindly way

He tells us what to do.

"He helps our Savior on the earth

As President today;

Now would you like to know his name?

It is David O. McKay."

Mabel Jones Gabbott

DETERMINATION

When father was president of Weber Academy, a student came into his office and said, "President McKay, it looks as if I shall have to withdraw from school for awhile, for I am unable to make ends meet financially. I shall return again later, however, because I am determined to get an education. For the time being, I shall have to find full-time work."

That lad was Aaron W. Tracy, and father learned that he was an orphaned boy who lived alone in a small back room. He walked many miles to school and kept himself in food, clothes, and tuition costs by accepting all available, odd jobs.

"My boy," father said, "you are absolutely right in wanting an education, and if you are determined to continue until graduation, let us see if we can't work something out. Now my wife needs someone to help out around the house, and we have a spare room upstairs in our home where you can sleep and thus save room rent. Why don't you move in with us?"

Aaron seemed grateful for the opportunity, and the next day he became one of the family.

"I have never had anyone who helped me out so much," mother has often stated. "On Saturdays, Aaron turned the washing machine for me, and I usually had seven to ten fillings. I often asked Aaron, 'Aren't you getting tired?' and he would always answer in the negative, even though I knew he was quite weary after doing the outside chores."

In the summer Aaron worked on the farm from early until late. Father said of him, "I like that boy; he always does a job right!" He is determined to make good; you mark my word, he will reach his goal with such determination."

And he did. The inspiration he received from sitting in father's classes gave him the desire to become a teacher also, so after he was graduated from Weber, he continued on with his education.

I was a member of the student body at Weber Normal College when he became president of that institution, and his leadership and inspiration gained the respect and love of all students.

All of his students are thankful that this young orphan boy had enough determination to continue on to his objective against many odds. We shall always remember him as one of our great teachers!

EDUCATION

The numerous speeches advocating more and better education would fill volumes. Father has spent his life as an educator and in teaching and stressing its fundamental principles. One principle of education which he invariably adheres to is: He backs up the engine to the cars.

His first students at Weber appreciated his understanding of their problems and his ability to make classes living experiences. In the Weber yearbook of 1908 we find: "Students thrilled to his lessons in literature, since they were interpreted in the light of love and charity for all mankind."

His teaching was not completed at the end of his school day, for he then took the responsibility of going to outlying towns surrounding Ogden to help Sunday School teachers in the process of preparation and outlining of lessons. Mother reports of those days:

"After teaching all day in Weber, he would go around to the various towns surrounding Ogden and teach them how to outline lessons, and then how to teach them. Of course he'd want me to go with him, so I'd bundle the baby up in a shawl, and we'd get in the buggy and drive by horse and buggy through the mud out to these towns to teach these lessons. It might not have been so good for the baby, but the father and mother were very happy in doing it."

THE STATE UNIVERSITY

"There appears to be an evidence of antipathy in some circles toward the University of Utah," I said to father, "and some statements are being made to the effect that it is a Godless institution, an unfounded accusation. What place does the state university have in the eyes of the Church?" I asked.

"The Church has always been a staunch supporter of education," replied father, "the future moral and intellectual standards are dependent upon proper training of youth; education is our most precious asset. The majority of the students who attend the University of Utah are members of the Church; consequently, from the standpoint of the Church we are as much interested in the welfare of the state university as we are in any other educational institution."

Ernest H. Linford, Editor of Editorial Page, Salt Lake Tribune, April 17, 1952, wrote:

"I salute you for the wonderful things you have done for education throughout your long service to the Church and mankind. . . . Though there is nothing new about it, I am impressed from time to time with the philosophy and discernment of a Church which enthusiastically encourages its members to get all the education they can, secure in the knowledge that their learning can only strengthen their faith."

"No one in the west has helped more to keep schools better aware of their aims. No one has come out as courageously in favor of education in Utah during its darkest hours than he, and no one is more devoutly beloved and revered in the educational profession." H. Aldous Dixon.

ENCOURAGEMENT

"I'll Go along with you."

While I was student body president at Weber Normal College, the idea was formulated to place a steel flagpole on the top of Mount Ogden. After talking over the plan with President Aaron W. Tracy and obtaining permission to make the hike an entire school affair to the top of the mountain, I approached father with the question, "What do you think of the idea of placing a flagpole on the top of Mount Ogden, and thereby initiating an annual trek by the whole student body to unfurl 'Old Glory' there?"

"It seems like quite an undertaking to haul sections of a steel pole besides cement, sand, water, and other necessary equipment to the top of that mountain," stated father, "but if the administration is behind the project and the students are enthusiastic, I am sure it can be done successfully."

After our board of control organized the plans on paper, and we had completed assignments of duties to the various classes in the school, prepared a tentative program, and taken care of the numerous details of organizing a hike for over 1,000 students, a terrific disappointment awaited me. The editor of the school newspaper resigned unexpectedly, and it was through this newspaper that we had intended to disseminate all the instructions, as well as to arouse enthusiasm for the project. I had depended so much on it!

That night at dinner father asked after looking at my downcast face: "What's the matter, you act as if you had lost your last friend?" I told him of my predicament and my fear that I would have to give up my objective relative to the Mount Ogden trek.

"Never give up, my boy," he said, "difficulties will always come in your way. With the help of your classmates put the paper out yourself. You know . . .," and a twinkle was in his eye, "I rather look forward to going with you to participate in the event!" That was all I needed. The next day I rounded up my best friends, and we got busy writing the needed edition of the paper. We even put the resigned editor's name in it, hoping that it would encourage him to come back on the job for the following issue; and this turned out to be the case.

I think every riding horse from all surrounding towns was brought in for the occasion, and the hundreds of students who could not obtain horses hiked to the top of the mountain, led by Dr. Lind.

How happy I was when the signatures of the faculty and of the student officers were added to a document which was placed in a bottle and sealed in the cement at the bottom of the flagpole, because father's name headed the list. At that moment I came to the realization that had father not stated: "I'll take part with you," I would have given up the venture.

The flagpole still stands on the top of Mount Ogden. It is nothing more than a steel flagpole to many people, but to me it is a symbol of how important are a few appropriate words of a father to his son, and especially of how significant is the encouraging statement: "I'll go along with you!"

FACTS

Give the True Facts

If anyone could follow father on one of his trips, as I have done, he would be astounded at the pace he would have to set in order to keep up. I get tired in a day just running at his heels without doing any of the work. As "secretary" I often planned, or at least anticipated, upon arrival in a city that an hour or two of rest for father could be obtained at a hotel before a scheduled evening meeting. This never happened. Invariably reporters, photographers, and newsmen would be on hand asking for an interview. I often asked: "Why not let me tell them you wish to rest before you must meet your appointment in the evening?" "No," he would answer, "they undoubtedly have distorted ideas about the Church, and they are entitled to know the true facts."

Without exception, the reporters would begin with a question such as: "Is it not rather indiscreet of your church to be talking about building churches in Europe in view of the present scandal in Utah concerning polygamy?" (The "Short Creek" Cultist story had made all the newspaper headlines.) With great patience, father would sit down with the reporters and, with his enticing smile, he would begin with absolute honesty to explain the stand of the Church. His explanation of the Church's ideals in regard to its devotion to righteous endeavors and its ultimate objectives soon won the respect of his listeners. Father never hurried them, but in a dignified and gracious manner he answered all questions and clarified all doubts. Without an exception, the following day brought praiseworthy accounts of his visit, and threw a clear and just light on the Church. It was then I realized that as an ambassador of goodwill, father's time spent with the press did more for the good of the Church than could many other means. His sympathetic and dynamic personality impressed favorably every person whom he met!

FOREIGN CULTURES

Look at Other Peoples from Their Points of View

While walking along the sidewalk in London, I made a remark to the effect of how foolish I thought it was for autos to drive on the left side of the street.

"My boy," father replied, "you are just used to another custom. English laws, English habits, English culture, and their way of doing things may be just right for the English, even though these things do not seem right to you. When you are in a country other than your own, it is wise to attempt to view life from that country's point of view!"

I have always noted that rather than pick out the seeming faults of foreign peoples, father always praises their virtues. He continuously speaks of the high culture of European countries and points out particularly the "politeness" found everywhere among the people. This courtesy is a lesson, he says, which Americans can well afford to copy, for courtesy has a moral basis. It has its roots in consideration for others and in reverence for God. He refers also to the pride of all Europeans in keeping their waysides clean, and points this out as another lesson we could learn with resultant improvement to ourselves and to our country.

Learn Foreign Languages

At the April conference 1953 father quoted from the Salt Lake Tribune: "Modern languages are not as widely or as successfully taught in United States schools as they should be to meet the requirements of the nation's position. . . . The need to learn foreign languages should be accented and the acquisition and use of such languages stimulated. When men can talk together, they can get together." Then he added, "It seems now that the time has come when we must do something. . . . In the Church there are men and women from every country in the world, in which there are missionaries. I should like to encourage our young men and young women, young men particularly, to include in their high school and college courses some of these languages."

At one time, after quoting from a professor, G. Muko, who wrote concerning travel in foreign lands, father was emphatic in his advice to all Americans who go abroad, and he pointed out four important factors which should be kept in mind:

"(1) To learn another language is to learn that nation's way of thinking. We must have some knowledge of the religious and philosophical thoughts of the nation.

"(2) A good teacher must be conversant with the foreign life, individual, social, and political aspects. He should be well informed of the virtues and vices.

"(3) To understand European authors thoroughly, one should equip himself thoroughly with a knowledge of Greek and Roman mythology, Bible stories, fables and anecdotes, Arabian Nights, etc.

"(4) One should study and know the history of their literature."

In reading father's diary, one is aware that he puts this advice into practice. He takes the time to read about the country to which he is going—its history, its people, its religion and philosophy, and he gets as much of the language as possible. One runs across, for instance, such a sentence as "I'm enjoying reading The Sayings of Confucius," or "I continued reading Japanese history today—have completed Feudal and Modern Japan by Knapp. On his way to Tahiti he writes, "Am reading History of New Zealand; have just finished Tahitian Days. Again: "Finished reading Shibushawa, or the Passing of Old Japan, concerning the feudal system written by Adams." On his way to Australia he records: "Completed Tollis' Agriculture and Rural High Schools for Australia." Other books such as Marcus Clarke For the Term of his Natural Life, Florence Marryat There is no Death, Lew Wallace The Fair God together with many others are mentioned.

Furthermore we are impressed by his willingness and delight in observing the customs of other nations, such as removing his shoes upon entering sacred places, as natives do. He describes with delight a Japanese wrestling match (Sumro) and of watching a Japanese show, or of partaking with the populace the fun during a New Year's celebration.

At all stops, time permitting, he enjoys a visit to the city's colleges and universities, to its museums and art galleries. He mingles with the people on the streets and discusses state problems with the leaders. "Before you can understand a people," he says, "you must know how they think!"

One cannot miss these observations when one travels with father. Stayner Richards mentions this in one of his talks:

"Between the time of the two dedications in Scotland . . . the President with the members of his party . . . took a bus tour up through the highlands of Scotland, around the Trossicks, around Loch Lomond, Ben Lomond, the Brig o'Kirk, and those places made famous by the immortal words of Sir Walter Scott and other great poets. During that tour the President delighted all of us by reciting from memory stanza after stanza from 'The Lady of the Lake' and other great poems. He made us all feel that as visitors in foreign lands, we should study the history of those countries; we should learn of their poets and their artists and secure all of the cultural value that we could from such visits."

GOOD DEEDS

"There is lingering light after the sun has set,

There are lighter hearts after friends have met,

Though eyes be filled with tears;

There's memory of deed after the deeds are done,

There's a halo of honor after laurels are won

That lingers throughout the years.

"Every act we perform, every word we say,

Radiates something which may last for aye,

Giving peace or pleasure or pain;

And simple things which today seem naught

May live through the years, so with memories frought

They supreme importance attain."

"LET US GO BACK"

The strain of shaking hands with hundreds of people on a tour of missions and branches is tremendous. With the purpose in mind of saving father from overexertion, the mission authorities suggested to the people of Frankfurt, Germany, that handshaking be withheld. After the meeting, the people lined up on both sides of the sidewalk to greet father and mother as they walked from the meeting hall. True to their instructions, not one person put out his hand, but only smiled and nodded as the visitors walked by. The disappointment on their faces, however, was evident, and father had the impression that they were very unhappy to miss the opportunity of shaking his hand. When he got to the end of the line, he said, "I'm going back to the beginning of the line, and even if it takes more than an hour, I am going to shake hands with every one of these good people." His guess of an hour was correct. He was tired after strenuous travel, and the hottest day recorded for many a year had descended upon Frankfurt, but he left all members happy in the realization that they had shaken the hand of their President.

NO MALICE

The Stolen Saddles

The only recreation for which father can find time is an infrequent drive to Huntsville where he can enjoy a ride on one of his horses.

It was a shock, therefore, when on an early Saturday morning, he found the door open to the "harness shed" and discovered that all his saddles had been stolen. Since father gives everyone the benefit of being honest, I was enraged that some person, or persons, had not honored that trust. I so expressed myself, to which father answered, "No one in Huntsville has done this; there must be roving thieves about who ship their loot to distant cities."

He was perhaps right, because I am sure as soon as the news appeared in the newspapers that every admirer of father was on the lookout for stolen saddles. But no trace of them was found.

Although he felt the loss keenly, no malice toward the thieves was shown either in word or action.

His joy was sincere when, two weeks later, thoughtful presidents of eleven LDS stakes of Weber and North Davis paid him a visit at the Huntsville home and presented him with a new, custom-made saddle. Despite the rain, father desired to drive immediately to the farm in order to try out the saddle on Sunny Boy, his favorite mount. President Rulon P. Peterson who made the following presentation, attempted to dissuade him because of the inclement weather but father insisted.

President Peterson made the following presentation:

"President McKay: We who live in this Ogden area have long felt a great admiration and love for you. You seem to be just part of us here in these stakes around Ogden. We rejoice in your successes and your goodness and in the very high esteem in which you are held by the people in the Church and by all who know you. We seem to feel that we share in the great honors accorded you.

"Of course in the same manner, we share in your adverses and losses, and when we read some weeks ago that some person who I am certain did not think about the terrible thing that he did, had stolen four saddles from your barn, we truly sorrowed with you.

"Now, we have long felt that we should like to do something nice for you through which we might show our great love and appreciation. When this word came about your loss, the thought occurred to us that we could give you something you needed most if we should present to you a nice saddle to take the place of at least one of those that you lost.

"Part of this idea originated with a member of the North Davis Stake, Brother Jesse Barlow, who is president of the high priests quorum of that stake, and so we invited North Davis to join with the eleven stakes of Ogden in the presentation of this gift to you.

"President Haslam and President Tanner, will you present the saddle to President McKay?"

Father records in his diary:

"No gift could have pleased me more—but aside from its value, the thoughtfulness, the planning, and the true brotherhood of these noble men thrilled my soul. I was deeply touched by this event and shall ever hold their visit this morning as one of the precious events of my life."

At the pasture, a whistle brought Sunny Boy on the run, and with pride, father placed the newly acquired gift on his back. With a smile, he mounted the horse and exclaimed, "This saddle is perfect—even to the length of the stirrups."

Undoubtedly, each stake president felt a glow of happiness in his heart, and thought to himself, "May the President have many, many joyous rides for many, many summers to come!"

MISSIONS—A NEW ERA

One of the greatest innovations, I believe, which father has initiated, is a new attitude toward the missions. For many of us, the missions have seemed far off and somewhat separated from the main body of the Church. One of father's objectives has been to bring the members throughout the world in closer contact and to unify the feeling of oneness, no matter how far distant a member may live. To this end, his keynote address in the April conference, 1955, urged that spiritual and educational opportunities be brought to these people through means of new temples, new schools, and by frequent visits of the Authorities, thus bringing to every mission the same privileges as those members possess who live in large centers at home.

"(There is an important) need to put forth every effort within reason and practicability to place within reach of Church members in these distant missions every educational and spiritual privilege that the Church has to offer.

"It is only recently that some of these missions have been visited by a General Authority. With modern means of transportation available, it is now possible and very practical to have these far-off missions visited as the missions here in the United States have been visited. Accordingly, and this you will be pleased to hear, at a meeting of the First Presidency and Council of the Twelve held March 17, 1955, it was unanimously decided that these distant missions should be included with other missions in the annual appointments of members of the Council of the Twelve.

"Besides these visits, educational institutions are being made available for the young people. . . .

"Thus will the branches be strengthened in far-distant lands with visits of the Twelve, whose duty it is to set in order the affairs of the Church in all the world, with educational advantages to prepare students for the preaching of the gospel, and finally, with a temple within easy reach of those whose influence in the mission field will become a strength to the branches, and a means of proclaiming peace."

MISSIONARIES

Advice to Missionaries

Father suggested throughout the missions that each missionary make it a definite aim to have at least two genuine gospel conversations with new acquaintances every day during six days of every week of his missionary labors. "If all elders would do this, and get out of the pernicious practice of staying in their room, the work would be more progressive."

* * * *

"There is a certain dignity about presiding which must not be merely assumed; it must be a natural consequence of the relationship of the importance of the office."

On Helping the Needy

"Dear Llewelyn,

"Your experience with the poor is certainly heart-rending. In rendering relief, Llewelyn, be sure to do it through the regularly established channels of the Church. There is always a tendency on the part of warm-heated elders to put their hands into their personal pockets and give money to the needy. This is all right for the elder who can afford it, but it is not all right for the elder who succeeds him, who cannot afford it. It is the duty, therefore, for every presiding officer in the mission field to have fast offering funds (or tithing funds when necessary) on hand to be distributed properly to those who are worthy of such aid. In this way, those who are helped, think of the Church as the benefactor and not of the individual."

POLITENESS

Mother relates an incident in Armenia which impressed her and father because of the courtesy, politeness, and culture exhibited:

President and Mrs. Wilford Booth, father and mother were guests in an Armenian home. Before entering the dining room, the children brought pitchers of water and poured the water over the hands of the guests. It is considered more sanitary in Armenia to wash the hands in this manner rather than in a bowl. The guests were seated at a low, legless table with benches for chairs. These benches were covered with handmade rugs. The main meal was brought in a large bowl from which each guest ate. The food was thin, savory stew made of rice and various meats, eaten with unleavened bread. Although the customs, so different from ours, were new and interesting, the thing which impressed the guests most was the politeness of the children, as well as of the parents. The children were quiet and spoke only when spoken to; their manners at the table were of the very best. The host had to leave the room several times to answer questions of urgent business at the door. Each time he came into the room, he bowed to the guests and excused himself for the interruption. At the end of the meal, the children again brought pitchers and poured water over the hands of the guests, then they were excused, and moved into the next room so as not to disturb in any way the conversation of the "grown-ups." Besides being a well-read man, the host spoke several languages, and it was discovered that the children could also speak Armenian, French, and English with fluency. As the company left this rather modest foreign home, father remarked:

"Here in this foreign land and in a strange home, we can learn a good lesson of culture, good manners, and especially politeness, which we would do well to emulate!"

A SCOTCH ANSWER

To President Rudger Clawson:

"Your letter's before me awaiting reply—

The ane to the 'Scotchman sometimes called McKai.'

I'm sure that you think I've neglekit you sairly

An' I'll no say mysel' that I've treated you fairly.

"I beg ye'll forgive this unseemly delay—

Ye ken weel that I've traveled for months far away;

Then, besides, ye have been in this auld British land,

So ye realize truly hoo much wark there's in hand.

"Ye ask for a rug wi' good pattern an' brown,

Wi' a bouncin' good discount for cash paid right down:

But do ye no ken hoo the Scots lo'e the penny?

A discount! My word! It's gay hard to get any!

"But I found a true friend wi' rugs good and new,

Whom I telt 'twas a present—I'm buyin' for you.

Said he: 'Here's a tartan, the real, real McKai;

Since it's you, I'll gi'e discount.' Said I, 'It's a buy.'

"Sae, noo, beloved brither, accept frae us twa,

This Scotch steamer rug. When frosty winds blaw,

Just wrap yersel warmly frae feet tae yer thigh,

An' gie a kind thought tae yer friends called McKay.

"David O. and Emma Ray"

"If Ye Do It unto the Least of These . . ."

When the travelers to the South Seas were at Suva (Fiji Islands) Jan. 8, 1955, word was received at the office that a Mrs. Sally Skipps, a patient of the Leper Colony (two miles from the city) was anxious to see father. She had met him when she was a little girl in Samoa thirty-four years ago when father and Brother Hugh J. Cannon were touring the missions. Of course it was impossible for her to leave the colony. Although other plans had been made, and father's appointments were full, he remarked:

"This lady has as much right as anyone else to speak with me, and since she has expressed the desire to see me and cannot come to us, then we shall go to her."

Subsequently a taxi was called which took father, mother, and Brother Murdock to a group of cottages on a hillside. The matron in charge of the colony sent an assistant to fetch the afflicted woman, but he soon returned with the explanation that Mrs. Skipps was too ill to leave her room.

"Well," said father, "if it is permitted, we shall go to her cottage."

Just off a corridor in a small ward waited a middleaged Samoan woman sitting on her bed, and as she greeted her visitors, tears streamed down her face. Ever since she had heard on the radio that President McKay was coming to Suva, she had hoped and prayed that she might see him.

"I knew you would come, if it were at all possible," she said in good English.

After receiving a blessing from father, she gratefully waved farewell, but now a smile had replaced the tears, for she was confident that she would soon rejoin her family in New Zealand.

THE VALUE OF A SMILE

There Is So Much Good in Everyone

One day I stopped at father's house just as he arrived home from a drive to Huntsville. He was unloading oranges and fresh vegetables from his car.

"You didn't get these in Huntsville; where did they come from?" I enquired.

Then he told me about Mamacita, an Italian woman, who sells vegetables on the highway. "It is a delight to stop there," father said; "she always has a smile for everyone, and I am sure she has a heart of pure gold!"

I am always reminded again and again when I am with father of how much good he finds in people; whether they are kings or diplomats, or persons in the most humble circumstances, he finds attributes worthy of emulation.

So I was curious to meet Mamacita and sought out her stand with the sign "Fresh Fruits and Vegetables," just north of Salt Lake on the road to Ogden.

And I was greeted with a smile!

This was no business smile merely assumed for the purpose of selling more produce, it was rather the natural reflection of Mamacita's code of living. She loves people, trusts them, and enjoys work diligently from early morning until late at night. She allows her customers to pick out and place their purchases on the scales, never questioning their word concerning weight. On the contrary, she usually adds two or three apples or a handful of peas, as the case may be, before the customer leaves, never forgetting to say "Thank You!" accompanied by that big smile!

I always stop now when I am in the vicinity, not because Mamacita sells fresh and tasty produce, but mainly to hear her friendly, "An' how are you today?" and to watch her beaming face. Then my spirits are lifted, as father said they would be, and I become somewhat ashamed of myself for worrying or fretting about anything.

A day in September, Mamacita loaded me down with fruits and vegetables, a birthday gift for father whom she so much admires. "But you can't give so much away," remonstrated father when he stopped to thank her, "you can't afford it!" To this Mamacita's husband, Ricardo Remigi, answered as he filled another sack, "We're getting old; pretty-the-soon we die,—so whata-the-heck!"

When I become discouraged or downhearted, I think of Mamacita's fine children whom she reared to successful adult sons and daughters, of the hot days in summer when she perspires under the boiling sun, of the cold days in winter when she rubs her hands to bring back the circulation—with never a complaint—and at all times practicing what she sincerely believes in her heart to be true: "Do unto others as you would have them do unto you."

Yes—when you ride away from Mamacita's place in your car, you wonder just what it is that makes the world look a little brighter, and then you remember the friendly, twinkling eyes, and that enticing smile!

Now I begin to see why father points out the fine attributes of others, and finds so much good in everyone he meets!

INDEPENDENT THINKING

"The question repeatedly arises by some Church members," I said to father a short time ago, "as to whether groups of people interested in doctrine and in Church policies should meet together independently of Church functions to discuss questions of importance, wherein there appears to be differences of opinion in interpretation."

"What is there to be afraid of?" he replied. "It must ever be kept in mind, however, that there is a difference between destructive and constructive criticism. The former can become harmful, not only to the individual, but also to others as well. It is easy to fall into a habit of negative criticism without offering a solution or substituting something better to take the place of that which the critic would destroy. Pure negativism does not reflect a sound thinker. On the other hand, careful, logical analysis, coupled with a sincere desire to find truth, is praiseworthy. Sound, independent thinking should be encouraged rather than be condemned. The gospel embraces all truth; and the search for, and the acquisition of knowledge is a prime purpose of our existence. Independent thinkers who are well-balanced and who possess the sincere desire to know truth are needed in the Church; so again I ask, 'What are we afraid of?'"

THE PEOPLE'S TITHES

When our party arrived in Switzerland for the dedication of the temple site, father immediately called a meeting at the Mission Home in Bern. Present were President Hamer Reiser of the British Mission, President Bringhurst (mission president), President Perschon (newly appointed mission president), Edward O. Anderson, Church architect, William Zimmer, Swiss architect, and I. Father conducted the meeting and asked for a report from William Zimmer concerning the plans of the temple. After an import-material from Germany, a terra cotta, was decided upon as being most feasible in the structure, the cost of the temple was discussed. The Swiss architect said the closest estimate possible amounted to $650,000.

"Brethren," father stated without hesitation, "the money to be used for this temple comes largely from the tithes of the Church. Other temples will be built in other lands, because members in other parts of the world have as much right to the ordinances as do members here. We cannot afford to pay such a high price under these circumstances. Now, I want you, Brother Anderson, and you, Brother Zimmer, to go to Brother Zimmer's offices, and there to sharpen your pencils and cut that figure down to $350,000; but we want the temple to be just as beautiful and spacious enough to accommodate as many people, as in the original plans!"

I went along as "interpreter" although I was not needed, since Brother Zimmer speaks English adequately. I was glad of the opportunity, however, because I thought to myself: "Now you will see some fur fly! Here is a European architect with definite ideas who will clash with an American architect with other set plans!"

Certainly I never have been so wrong in my life! As I sat with mouth open, I watched corridors changed, rooms shifted, pipelines altered, and intricacies of architecture discussed that were way over my head. The two men brought up various problems and gave each other answers that sounded as well-rehearsed as a schoolboy who has prepared and knows perfectly all the answers to an assigned lesson. I was astounded at the smooth cooperation and speed with which these two masters of their field worked.

Within a week, Brother Anderson brought the finished plans to London where father was awaiting him. The plans were complete to the last detail and depicted a temple with even more space than the original, and at a cost that amounted to almost half of the original estimate!

TOLERANCE

In a letter to his grandson, Richard L. McKay, who was a missionary in the Swiss-Austrian Mission, father wrote (July 25, 1950) some good advice.

"Dear Dick:

"The latest direct word that we have from you is a card from your grandfather, Heber C. Smith, reading as follows: Steamship America just leaving as I pen these few lines. Left Dick a few moments ago looking and feeling fine; . . . I am returning to Vermont a little sad—farewells are a little difficult. Love. Heber C. Smith.'

"Over fifty years have passed since I sailed from Philadelphia for my first mission. . . . Among the passengers were the Fiske Jubilee Singers, going abroad on a concert tour. They were a famous colored chorus. As we were standing aside getting our assignments to dining room tables, word passed among the missionaries that we were going to be seated at the same table with the Negroes. One unwise member . . . spoke out in loud tones so that the Negroes could hear: 'I'll not sit at the table with any nigger!' It was a very disrespectful remark, and . . . it wounded the feelings of our colored friends. I noticed before we were very far out at sea, that the leader of the Jubilee Singers was an honored guest at the captain's table, and that the night before landing at the usual concert given by the passengers, the soloist of that group indicated, I thought, a good rebuke to the elder who made the unwise remark. The soprano, a beautiful mulatto, had been sick nearly all the way across, but she came to the concert that night and sang a lovely song, the chorus of which is this:

"'If you want to know a Christian,

Just listen how he talks;

If you want to know a Christian,

Just watch his acts and walks.'

"Switzerland is a picturesque country. The people are substantial, upright, and freedom loving. Be respectful of their beliefs, and forms of worship, as you expect them to be tolerant with you and your teachings."

UNDERSTANDING OTHERS

"What difference does it make, Colonel?"

"The writer and Colonel Samuel Eck, an Air Force Colonel, who was a staunch Christian Scientist, went together to call on President David O. McKay. Mr. McKay talked with such kindness and understanding that the colonel, after leaving Mr. McKay's office, said, 'That man is one of the deepest thinkers, the greatest philosophers, the most intelligent and rational persons that I have ever met.'

"With the kindness shown by President McKay, the colonel came to think that Mr. McKay was accepting him as a member of the 'Mormon' Church, and was anxious to set him right, so he announced bluntly:

"'I am not a member of your Mormon Church.'

"The answer he received from the President of the Mormon Church, was:

"'What difference does it make, colonel? You belong to the nobility of souls.'

"The writer had flown to Salt Lake with the colonel, and that was the last time he ever had the pleasure of talking with him, for one week later the colonel met death in a plane wreck. But the writer will forever be appreciative to President David O. McKay for the kind reception given both, but especially the kindness shown his closest friend and companion, Colonel Samuel Eck."

National Tourist News, October 1952

A WIDOW'S MITE

After the dedication of the temple site at Bern, Switzerland, the spectators gathered around father to shake his hand and to ask for his autograph.

One sweet, old lady came up to him and placed a small purse in his hand. Father beckoned to me to act as interpreter. With tears in her eyes, she said: "President McKay, ever since I learned that a temple was to be built in my land, I have saved a ten-centime piece each week. I am quite ill and very old, so I shall never be able to do work in the temple when it is built, but I wish to do my part in helping the great cause."

The actual amount in the purse, figured in dollars and cents, was not much, but each week's savings meant less food for that dear, old soul. She was giving all she could with a deeper sincerity than is perhaps felt by many others who offer more—and even when she knew that no return in the use of the temple would ever come to her, she was happy in the thought that she was helping her fellow men.

This is why, I am sure, that father put his arm around her, and with tears in his eyes, thanked her in behalf of all her fellow Church members throughout the world, and added: "You are true gold; I am sure God is pleased with your sincere heart and worthy soul; and in behalf of the Church I accept this gift in the spirit in which it is given!"

The old sister hobbled away, lame and decrepit in body, but with a smile which reflected the happy sparkle in her eyes and of her beautiful soul!

WORD OF WISDOM

In regard to the eating of meat, father explains the Word of Wisdom as follows:

Unfortunately there are books printed which have a tendency to influence people to become extremists in regard to diet. And some in our own Church put a wrong interpretation upon the revelation known as the "Word of Wisdom." If we follow what the Lord says, we shall not go wrong. Verses 12 and 13, Section 89 read as follows: "Yea, flesh also of beasts and of the fowls of the air, I, the Lord, have ordained for the use of man with thanksgiving; nevertheless they are to be used sparingly, And it is pleasing unto me that they should not be used, only in times of winter, or of cold, or famine."

That does not mean that man should abstain entirely from the use of meat, indeed, in Section 49 the Lord says definitely that: ". . . whoso forbiddeth to abstain from meats, that man should not eat the same, is not ordained of God; For, behold, the beasts of the field and the fowls of the air, and that which cometh of the earth, is ordained for the use of man for food and for raiment, and that he might have in abundance."

KEEPING A COOL HEAD

An Accident in Dry Hollow

On a mid-September afternoon, father decided to spend a few hours dragging some fallen, dead trees from the grove in Dry Hollow, his beloved Huntsville farm, The horses, pastured in the meadow, came up to him as usual when he whistled to them, and they were soon harnessed. After procuring a long chain from the shed, I followed father with an ax to help clear paths where necessary and to chop branches from the fallen trees. The horses were nervous and excited because they had done little work during the summer, and they pulled anxiously and hard at the bits. It was no easy task for father to hold them when the first log was dislodged because they became frightened at the noise of crackling dead wood and brush. Taking the small logs first, we worked up to the largest and heaviest of the fallen timber.

"I don't think the team can pull this one," I remarked.

"Let's saw off this top end," replied father, "then I believe the horses are equal to it."

This largest tree was water-soaked and very heavy, but the team buckled down and pulled with all their strength. As father guided them into an opening, I suddenly heard a destraught yell of "Whoa!" and glancing up, I saw father fall to the ground. The tree had rolled toward him as he was making a turn and caught him at the back of his legs, throwing him face downward. The momentum carried the tree squarely across the calves of both legs. Fortunately, the horses responded to father's good training, and remained standing at his command of "Whoa." Had they continued pulling, the heavy log would have been dragged over his body, crushing him. I jumped for the reins, unhooked the doubletrees, then grabbed a long pole with the intent of using it as a lever to roll the tree from father's legs. A multitude of thoughts raced through my mind: "How to get him to a hospital?" "Could I lift him into a car?" "Should I try to remove his high leather boots from mashed legs?" "Will he faint from the pain?" And while these and other ideas kept coming, I frantically worked at the tree but was unable to budge it.

"Keep a cool head," remarked father. "Turn the team around and pull the tree away from me." As I did so, I had visions of the heavy log tearing the flesh of the legs, but I did as instructed.

"Are you in much pain?" I asked after the tree was off his legs.

"I think I'm all right," he said as he rubbed his legs for a few minutes, and then to prove it, he got to his feet. It was one of the biggest surprises of my life to see him do so, for I was positive both legs had been broken.

"We had better go immediately to the hospital in Ogden and have your legs looked at and X-rayed," I suggested.

"No, let's finish our job, I can take care of my bruises tonight; it is only the right one which pains, and I think it is not seriously injured."

So continue to work we did, and after three more hours of dragging out dead trees, father was satisfied that his objective of the afternoon had been reached.

The next day father was in the hospital. Blood vessels in both legs had been broken, and his right leg particularly was swollen and black. Instead of complaining, he remarked,

"I was lucky to have had high boots on,—and it pays to have a team with 'horse-sense'; if they hadn't stopped when I yelled 'whoa,' I would have been a goner."

"Yes," I thought to myself, "what if father had been alone, pinned beneath that tree. He was unseen from the road, and no one could be summoned to help him; the team would eventually have moved forward, and he would have been crushed beneath the tree. He must never do such things when he goes to the farm alone." But I knew as I came to this conclusion that such thoughts were futile because if father decides to do something, whether he is alone or not, he will carry out his plans.

COURAGE

Father has always had the courage to stand up for his convictions. Even when a boy, his determination to hold his ground when he was convinced he was right was always evident. An incident is told by Thomas E. McKay that happened during a Fourth of July baseball game between Huntsville and Eden. Keen rivalry had always existed between these two teams, and on this holiday the grandstand was packed, and feelings were tense. During the seventh inning one of the Huntsville players was forced to leave the game because of an injury, and David O. was drafted to take his place although he was much younger than the players on the regular team. It was an exciting moment for him because the score was tied and had been for several innings. David O. was a good batter and received a cheer when his turn came around. As the playing proceeded, the umpire called the second strike. The pitcher on the Eden team, however, claimed that it was the third strike. He was a large, burly fellow with a quick temper, and he was known to be a bully and quite a pugilist. He picked up a baseball bat, and coming up to David O. he waved the bat menacingly and demanded, "Get out of their, kid or I will crack this on your head!"

Immediately a hush came over the spectators who anxiously awaited the outcome. Thomas E. claims that he was shaking in his boots to see his brother in such a predicament. However, his older brother was up to the situation. In a cool tone he said, "The umpire called only two strikes; so go back to your pitcher's box and try to get me out; you have one more chance!" By this time John Allen, one of the best players, came strolling over with a bat in his hand as though he were waiting for his turn at the plate. The pitcher looked at the determination on David O.'s face and at John Allen's warning glance and decided to continue the game. His next throw was a swift straight ball, David O. connected and made a two-base hit. The next batter hit a single, and father was able to make home plate safely. This brought a thunderous applause from the spectators because this was the deciding run of the game. Although father's friends congratulated him on making the run, the true congratulations were in their hearts because he stood up to a bigger man in spite of all odds and because he refused to be bullied when he knew that he was right.

COURTESY

Stayner Richards records some impressions regarding courtesy: ". . . I observed that throughout the tour in Europe as we got on and off the bus, as we walked to the one place of interest and back to the bus, there was in President McKay the perfect gentleman; always as he approached a lady he removed his hat, not to show that beautiful stand of white hair that he has, but through the natural tendency on his part always to be courteous.

"And then I observed how kind and considerate he was of his lovely companion, how he was always there to assist her on the bus, to help her off the bus, to make sure that she had a proper vantage place in looking over the different sights, and then I observed that he always seemed happiest and most contented when he was sitting next to her.

"They have been married for over a half century, but time and the passing of years has not dimmed that great love that he has for his wife, not only love, but the tendency also to show every consideration and every attention, as he did during his courting years."

GETTING FACTS STRAIGHT

En route to Syria, Alexandria, Egypt

"The other day aboard this ship, a very clever and fairly charming Scotch woman with whom your mother and I had had several conversations, approached me with the startling news that the young woman who shared her cabin believed that 'Mrs. Booth is a Mormon agent, and the young girl believes Mrs. Booth has marked the young woman for a Mormon victim.'

"'Dreadful,' said I.

"Then seeing my interest, the garrulous Scotch woman launched out into an extended narration of 'facts' about Mormon elders 'infesting' a particular district in Edinburgh, and ferreting out women whom they shipped to Salt Lake City never to be heard of again.

"I listened as long as I could with propriety, then said:

"'Now Mrs. MacClellan, do you really believe what you say? Have you ever stopped to think how foolish those Mormon elders must be to come way over to England to get girls when they could get all they wanted in any large city in America? They go to Japan as well; and to the South Sea Islands, to Australia, New Zealand, and to India. How foolish to spend all that money to travel so far if they want only girls!'

"'Well,' she answered, 'it does seem strange that they would do such a thing, doesn't it?'

"Then, I told her the facts—as gently as I could, because when she learned that I am one of those very Mormon elders, she began to sizzle in her embarrassment."

A SENSE OF HUMOR

"Don't be afraid to laugh," father has said. "A person without a sense of humor misses much of the joy of living!" Perhaps this is one of the main reasons why people delight in being with him, for he is always a cheerful and entertaining companion. His charm which awakens friendship includes a sparkling wit, and he is always ready to tell and to hear a good story. One example occurred in Scotland when we arrived on an early morning at the railway station at Glasgow. Here we had to change trains which necessitated our taking a taxi to the Bucannon Street station.

"So you're going to Aberdeen?" said our taxi driver "You'll find the town absolutely deserted, because it's Flag Day today in Aberdeen." I bit at that—after all, it was only six in the morning, and I was still sleepy. "Why," I inquired, "will the streets be deserted on Flag Day?" "Because," he answered with a twinkle, "the flags sell for thrupence!"

Father laughed for several minutes—probably more at me than at the joke.

A good laugh is a panacea for many ills. Father has often said: "Every time a man laughs he takes a kink out of the chain of life."

LITERATURE

A good book is father's friend. He constantly rereads Shakespeare, Robert Burns, Sir Walter Scott, Charles Dickens, and other favorites. He reads for relaxation, for enjoyment, for knowledge. He reads rapidly, widely, and in many fields, and he reads constantly when I have thought he should be sleeping. He gleans the nectar from each book and files it in his astounding retentive memory to be used in his humor, poetry, and pathos in his teaching.

As a companion he is ever interesting and delightful and draws on his storehouse of knowledge to discuss in a most stimulating manner any subject at hand.

A trip through Scotland is illustrative, for we sat enthralled as reminiscences of his youth were told or when a landmark reminded him of Scotland's history or when a landscape recalled a poem of Burns. As we passed Sterling Castle, he remembered stories in history of King James, Mary Queen of Scots, and the story of the beheading of Wallace. He related to us in such a way that history became alive how Wallace stood defiantly before the judges who accused him of treason and answered: "I cannot be a traitor, for I have never pledged allegiance to the English King!" Then he was beheaded and quartered and parts of his body distributed as a warning to others who opposed the king. Father related these stories and recited poetry as if he had just completed reading them, though I'm sure it has been years since he read them.

A writer for the National Tourist News (October 1952) wrote of father in regard to literature:

"The writer has never met a more interesting person than David O. McKay. In English literature there are none better read than David O. McKay. In all high-class literature there is no greater master. Mention Robert Burns, and Mr. McKay can quote poem after poem by memory. The spirit and philosophy of Shakespeare still live in the mind of David O. McKay and can be quoted by memory. The rhythmic lines of Longfellow can pour in an unbroken stream from his storehouse of memory. Five years study of literature in two different universities did not bring the writer in contact with a teacher as well versed in literature as Mr. McKay."
