Llewelyn R. McKay, David O. McKay, Home Memories of President David O. McKay ( 1956)

Section Four

GLIMPSES INTO FAMILY LIFE

WIFE AND SWEETHEART, EMMA RIGGS MCKAY

FATHER maintains that June 23, 1877, was the most fortunate day in his life because it was then that mother was born, the daughter of Emma Louise Robbins and O. H. Riggs. The parents named her "Emma Ray" because she was a little ray of sunshine. Both her father and mother taught at the university and O. H. Riggs was the first territorial superintendent of schools in Utah.

At seventeen, after completing a teaching course under Dr. George H. Brimhall, she taught Primary in the 17th Ward and became so popular that her class grew to ninety children.

In 1898 she was graduated from the university, one of six in that year's graduating class, after which she went to Cincinnati to study music at the College of Music.

Her teaching career at the Madison School in Ogden lasted only a year because father won her for his bride, and they were married January 2, 1901, the first couple of the century to be married in the Salt Lake Temple.

In Ogden, mother became active in the Relief Society and in Religion Classes; she was particularly busy when working in the stake presidency of the Relief Society.

Besides rearing six children (a seventh died at the age of three), she went with father on his numerous trips whenever she could get away. Father was never happy when he had to go alone. Since 1922 when she accompanied him to Europe where she presided over the Relief Societies of the European Missions, I believe she has been by father's side on all his major trips. Father is lonely when she is not with him, for she has always remained his sweetheart since he first fell in love with her.

His eyes beamed when he proudly marched with her in cap and gown when she received an honorary doctorate from the Utah State Agricultural College (May 29, 1954) and after the following presentation was made by Dr. Ethelyn O. Greaves, and the doctor's hood was placed on her shoulders, father arose and placed a loving kiss on her cheek.

"A graduate of the University of Utah with the class of 1898, Mrs. McKay has exemplified the highest traditions of Utah womanhood. First and foremost, it has been her pride to be a devoted wife and mother. In this capacity she has reared a family of four sons and two daughters in a home atmosphere where the refinements of art and music and the spirit of religious faith and high moral character were paramount.

"She has also been the companion and inspiration of her husband, whose services as a teacher and religious leader are known throughout the Christian world. All through her busy life, Mrs. McKay has been the constant friend, counselor, and companion of young people and continues to inspire and guide the youth of her acquaintance in adjusting to the perplexing conditions of modern life.

"To her as an exemplar of the highest qualities of American womanhood, the state of Utah accorded the distinction of Utah Mother of the Year for 1954; and to her the college is honored in awarding this degree."

The affection, love and devotion of father for his sweetheart, are expressed to her on birthdays, Christmas, and on other occasions in words, actions, and in writing. Usually he writes a beautiful poem, some examples of which follow.

To my Sweetheart on our Golden Aniversary

Old Time leaves his mark by wrinkling the brow,

And by turning dark tresses to gray;

Many changes he makes between Then and the Now

As he silently rolls on his way.

But some things grow sweeter as years come and go,

For in essence they're really divine;

That this is a fact I assuredly know,

For these virtues transcendent are thine.

Your sweetness and love, refinement of soul,

Have been enhanced by each passing year;

With loved ones around you, yours is the goal

That brings heavenly joys very near.

What I'm trying to say in this slow, limping verse

Is, you're fifty times dearer as Sweetheart today

Than when you consented "for better or worse"

To be my companion for aye!

"MAMMA RAY"

HAPPY BIRTHDAY AT SEVENTY-SEVEN

Three score years plus ten and seven,

A sweet darling spirit came from heaven

A wee, wigglin' baby, from one home to another,

Love, perfect Love, filled the heart of the mother.

A bride at the altar at one score and three,

A modest, young Beauty, fair and charming to see.

As wife now she went from one home to another

Love, perfect Love, filled the heart of her lover.

At two score and three, five boys and two girls

Made busy each hour for stories, dresses and curls.

More queenly this period than in any other

Her children, her life;—the one perfect Mother.

No wonder the state by unanimous score

Crowned her "Mother of Utah for year Fifty-four."

From the U she had earned Diploma A.B.

Now Honorary Doctorate from U.S.A.C.

Three score years plus ten and seven!

Children around her—a score plus eleven!

And I whom she's blessed will love her alway,

The sweetest of sweethearts our own Mama Ray.

TO MY SWEETHEART

Fifty-two years we've travelled together,

Through many fair days and some stormy weather,

Crossed the wide oceans, and o'er mountains high

Traveled strange highways and flown in the sky.

Thousands of miles you've been at my side,

Grown dearer each day than when as a bride

You vowed to be true and devoted alway

Ever my sweetheart, my own darling Ray!

Fifty-four years!—How the years speed away!

But each makes more precious our own "Mama Ray."

This morning I greet you with prayers in my heart

That through Time and Eternity ne'er shall we part!

The deep and tender love which father expresses here is, of course, always reciprocated by mother, as exemplified in the following poem:

FATHER'S DAY

"How much have I remembered you?

As much as night and day!

Not any thoughtful moment have you

Ever been away.

From sunlight to moonlight and

From darkness to the dawn Your image and my love for you

Have always lingered on.

What more could I have done, dear one,

To show my feeling true?

What more is there in life, my love,

That I can offer you?"

Father calls his youngest daughter, Emma Rae, his "Ray of Sunshine" and when she left home for the first time in order to accept a teaching position at McCammon, Idaho, her cheerful laugh was missed very much around the house. Father wrote her the following poem:

EMMA RAE'S AWAY

"Lonesome seems the home to-day, yet four of us are here!

The sun is shining brightly, yet there's an absence, sure, of cheer!

Mother—tearful—still is smiling, and the boys pretend to play,

But home is not the same—now that Emma's gone away!

"Yesterday, I thought I heard the front door open wide,

For a moment, I'd forgotten, and in ecstacy I cried

'Back so soon, my sunbeam! We've missed you all the day!'

Then the shadow settled o'er me, for Emma's far away.

"It isn't at the mealtime that we miss your features fair,

(To speak the truth full freely, you were seldom there:)

Nor is it at the telephone where one must always stay,

To answer friends and schoolmates, 'Emma Rae's away.'

"It's in the mind, the thought, the feeling,

In every heartbeat an appealing

For a merry voice that brightened all the day—

Still remains that lonely yearning, for Emma Rae's away.

"Twenty happy summers! why do years so quickly fly!

Why do circumstances challenge our wish to have you nigh?

Your cheerful soul and laughter made home a summer day,

But now the leaves are turning—Emma Rae's away.

"Hasten the day, old Hand of Time, when our children no more roam!

Bring back each as sweet and pure, as each left the childhood home!

Till then, pass, Time, like lightning; as arrows speed the day!

E'en then weeks move as oxcarts, while loved ones are away."

IT'S LITTLE THINGS IN LIFE THAT COUNT

The old barn opposite the Huntsville home had not been in use for some time, and father called it an eyesore because it had not been kept in repair. He mentioned several times that he was contemplating having it torn down.

On a Saturday afternoon in late May, 1947, a family reunion was held in Huntsville, and the smaller kiddies found great delight in playing in the barn, particularly by swinging on a rope which was tied to an iron reinforcement. More than once, father watched at the barn door, delighted with the laughter, whoops, and mirth of the children.

This was eight-year-old Bonnie's first introduction to this fun in the barn, and she was so enthusiastic that she talked about nothing else the following morning. At noon she sat down and wrote a note of thanks to "Papa Dade" for the good time she had had.

As is always the case with father, a child is as important to him as (what many would consider) more pressing affairs, and he immediately answered her note, (June 4, 1947) expressing appreciation, first of all, for a letter received in his granddaughter's own handwriting; then he wrote:

". . . You say you enjoyed yourself in the barn. One reason why I don't like to tear down the old barn is because you like so much to swing on that large rope. I love you, and, therefore, want to make pleasant all your memories of sweet childhood.

Your loving grandfather,

"Papa Dade"

Bonnie has now grown beyond the interests of rope swinging, and so have the other children who participated in the fun on that occasion. And more and more infrequently is the old barn visited. But it still stands, and the rope is hanging from the crossbeam, awaiting patiently for other grandchildren to swing with laughter onto the hay.

I think the old barn, dilapidated as it is, will not be torn down as long as there is a possibility that it might bring some fun and happiness to a little child!

One of father's favorite quotations in regard to children is one from Pestalozzi: "Our home joys are the most delightful earth affords, and the joy of parents in their children is the most holy joy of humanity. It makes their hearts pure and good; it lifts men up to their Father in heaven." Speaking on this subject, father stated: "To all true men as well as women, children are their most precious possessions. Man's most important obligation and duty is the making of a home and the proper rearing of children. It has been truly said that family life is God's own method of rearing children."

Father has always answered the letters written to him by his grandchildren, delighting them often with his poetry. On one occasion his grandson, Douglas R., wrote him to please use his influence and help to persuade Doug's parents to come to Vermont where Douglas was visiting his other grandparents, Brother and Sister Heber C. Smith, who were at that time in charge of the Joseph Smith Memorial Farm. Father answered Douglas as follows:

"We've received your two letters,

Your petitions, and pleas;

You've asked help of your neighbors,

Perhaps been on your knees;

You've a yearning desire,

You persistent young laddie,

To have back in Vermont

Bonnie Jean and your daddy.

"You know very well

That your mother would go

Or have her heart aching

With worry and woe—

"Well, your petitions are answered

You eager young man,

And all three will join you

According to plan.

"Your mother and father

And Bonnie Jeanne, too,

Are as happy as lovebirds

Because soon they'll see you."

One of father's joys was to sit (sometimes for hours) and listen to the trio of his three eldest children who played violin, clarinet, and piano. It seemed to relax him to listen to strains from Il Trovatore, Schubert's Barcarole, Angel's Serenade, or the Sextet from Lucia. When David L. got married and the trio "disbanded," David L. sold his violin on an ocasion of needing money during study at law school, intending to buy another one some time in the future. At the next gathering of the family, however, father missed the trio, and he must have decided right then and there that the next reunion would not be without music from his children. The violin was purchased back again—at a higher price—and David L. was presented with it on his next birthday with this poem:

"As I looked at your old violin tonight,

I heard sweet tunes that you played at sight,

When you were a growing boy;

I saw LouJean, Llewelyn, and you

Playing trios as you used to do—

A memory of treasured joy!

"This viol I know isn't the best of its kind

But its won a place in my heart and mind

Which no Stradivarius can fill;

So I've bought it again for connoted joy,

And the tones it gave forth at the touch of our boy—

I recall them e'en now with a thrill.

"So accept it, dear son, as a memory of youth

(For its purchase, you'll say, if you speak the real truth

Is not an example of thrift)

But we're sending it not for its intrinsic worth

But for memories as precious as any on earth

With love, as a birthday gift.

"O we love you as only fond parents can love

And invoke choicest blessings from heaven above

On Mildred and darling Midean;

May each coming year find you happier than last

With a rich store of memories of incidents past.

There's no greater blessing, I ween."

When the family meets on Christmas Day, father and mother are presented with gifts from the children and from the grandchildren, and all gather around to enjoy the fun of watching while the gifts are unwrapped. Usually a poem or two is read.

A CHRISTMAS GREETINGS TO FRIENDS

"Flowers gladden the spring days,

Fields of promise, the summertime;

Gorgeous colors brighten autumn,

Merry bells in winter chime—

"Each season brings its beauty,

Which smiles awhile, then ends—

But the joy that blooms eternal

Is the love of loyal friends.

"As friend to friend we greet you

And wish you love and cheer.

May Friendship's joys attend you

Throughout the coming year!"

MERRY CHRISTMAS—TO MOTHER

This miniature figurine our love contains,

You would think she'd burst into pieces!

Yet steadfast her stand she ever maintains,

As our love for you never ceases!

We remember so well—it was how long ago?

When we gazed out the window in awe

Watching for Brownies as we stood in a row;

And what glee when a shadow we saw!

It was you, Mother dear, who knowing our joys

Told Daddy to sneak out the door

And snatch our letters with their list of toys,

My, how real was made Santa's lore!

And all Christmas times from that day to this

Have always been symbols of you;

For unselfish giving, with a smile and a kiss

Is your nature—whatever you do!

Such mother-devotion just can't be expressed:

What we feel, we never can say,

So little 'Miss Dalton' in 'Love's Two-Shoes' dressed,

Brings our love to you this Christmas Day!

L. R. M.

A MERRY CHRISTMAS TO EMMA RAE

"Less than a fortnight 'twill be Xmas eve,

With the tree and the sparkles so bright;

I cannot believe it!—and yet it is so—

Dear old Christmas!—two weeks from tonight!

"The chorus will sing its carols so sweet,

And the chimes ring out bright and clear;

We'll join as usual the crowds—but aye wish

That Emma and Edward were here.

"Robert will switch the electric lights

On the garlanded, sweet-scented tree;

But it's going to be lonesome next Xmas Eve,

With just Bobby and Mother and me.

"Be assured, though, our darlings, that love unconfined

Surmounts barriers of distance and time.

As we wait for old Santa to empty his pack

And we laugh at his jingles and rhyme.

"Our thoughts o'er the ocean will fly unrestrained

With this message from hearts that are true

May the Merriest Christmas that ever you've had

And the happiest New Year come to you."

TO DICKIE

(Richard L. McKay)

"'Dickie'?—'Dickie'? O well, happy the day

When I add to my list another McKay!

Here's a blanket, my baby, to keep you quite warm,

As you ride back and forth from the old McKay farm.

"I remember your daddy when he was wee, too,

When all he could do was to gurgle and coo,

And now he's a daddy! How the years have sped by!

To be just like your father, I know you will try.

"I'll be watching you, Dickie, year after year;

In my annals, I'll register all that I hear.

Each Christmas Eve, I will visit you sure,

And note that your life is noble and pure.

"God bless you, wee Dickie, your parents as well!

With fond hope for your future their loving hearts swell.

That the life of our Savior may inspire you alway,

Is the wish for my darling this first Christmas Day.

"Santa Claus"

JINGLE BELLS

Father sent a letter to Mayor Harmon W. Peery of Ogden which read:

"I have several grandchildren who during each holiday season sing 'Jingle Bells, Jingle Bells' when as a matter of fact they haven't had a sleighride behind jingle bells in their lives.

"To give them this treat, I tried to buy some bells, ours on the old farm having been lost, strayed, or borrowed. I have tried harness shops and other stores, but all to no avail. A man told me you have a number of strings of bells.

"I'm writing to inquire if you will sell me a string. I don't want to borrow because I shall use the bells each winter. A bobsleigh ride will delight me as well as my kiddies. It will take me back to my boyhood days."

Mayor Peery answered:

"I'm sorry I haven't such a string of bells, but I am sure some of my many western cowboy friends will come to my rescue, and we'll get the bells for Apostle McKay."

The next day father's letter appeared in several papers.

Within a few hours, father had his "jingle bells" and his children and grandchildren had the bobsleigh ride!

TO PAPA DADE AND MAMA RAY

What makes our Christmas full of cheer,

With all the love we hold so dear,

And makes so precious this holiday?

Why—Papa Dade and Mama Ray!

What brings us all together now,

And when we leave, to all avow

To live much better each coming day?

Why—Papa Dade and Mama Ray!

Who gives us overflow of gladness

And drives away all signs of sadness;

Who welcome arms around us lay?

Why—Papa Dade and Mama Ray!

Where to go when troubles brew,

Hope and faith then to renew;

When we feel blue, who makes us gay?

Why—Papa Dade and Mama Ray!

Where to find our inspirations

To continue in our aspirations;

Where to come and long to stay?

With Papa Dade and Mama Ray!

Whose love to us comes from the heart,

A love from which we ne'er shall part;

Can we in eternity such love repay

To Papa Dade and to Mama Ray?

L. R. M.

* * * *

Sgt. Robert R. McKay

180th Malaria Control Unit

APO 901, P.O. San Francisco

"Dear son Bob:

". . . As I stated to you in my latest letter, Mother was operated upon Saturday night the 15th for an appendectomy. Tuesday morning, the third day, she was very sick, and I felt somewhat worried, but since that time she has improved gradually and favorably, and on Monday, December 24th at 5 p.m. she came home. She felt well enough to take a drive through Main Street, and hear the Christmas music and to see the Christmas lights.

"At about 6:30 p.m. Lawrence, Llewelyn, Emma Rae and Conway, and seven grandchildren gathered in the parlor and sang Christmas carols. LouJean wasn't with us; Mamma Ray couldn't play, so who do you think played the piano?—Teddy Lynn! and you would have been thrilled to see how she played those songs. Some of them were new, and others she played by note and by ear. When the kiddies sang 'Jingle Bells' and 'Silent Night,' Mama Ray couldn't stay in bed any longer and came downstairs notwithstanding she had just come from the hospital. Llewelyn and Dick carried her back upstairs after awhile so she did not exert herself too strenuously. Though it was not like our family Christmas Eve when we had our whole family here for dinner and they all joined in singing songs, yet we had a real joyful time nonetheless. So much of the joy of this Christmas was in anticipation of a family reunion next year when you and all the others we hope will be here in the old home to have a real joyous Christmas Eve.

"You would enjoy a glimpse into the living room with the flowers, the lighted Christmas tree, the wreaths at the windows and door—just like old times.

"There is plenty of snow in Huntsville this year, but as yet we have had no sleighrides. I am hoping to have one during the holidays.

"All the family join in sending truest love and prayerful wishes for your health and happiness throughout the coming year."

TO MY SWEETHEART

"Remember Old Santa of childhood—

The reindeer, the stockings, the tree?

All the year, we looked forward to Xmas,

And were happy as children could be!

"Remember those parties in youth, dear,

The sleighrides, the dances, the games?

Even now my heart thrills as in mem'ry

I recall happy faces and names.

"Well, long live the Christmas of childhood!

I tell you I'm speaking the truth—

May life's river bear onward forever

In mem'ry, the joys of our youth!

"And to-day, may the stream Recollection

Bring you peace, sweet contentment, good cheer;

I wish you the merriest Christmas,

And the most successful New Year!"

CHRISTMAS OF '38

"If a million stars were diamonds

In a necklace of azure blue,

I would take it from the heavens,

And present it, dear heart, to you.

"E'en then 'twould express but lightly,

My love for my darling Ray,

Who in sunshine or turbulent trouble

Has kept me face-front alway.

"But stars in the heavens aren't diamonds,

Wealth ne'er will be mine, I fear—

So, here's my love and 'A Merry Christmas,

And many a glad New Year!'"

A MERRY CHRISTMAS TO MY SWEETHEART

(To Whom Every Hour Adds Charm)

"In youth I dreamed of a sweetheart,

Who would ever remain young and true;

On whom time could leave but few traces

As in beauty and wisdom she grew.

"'Twas only the dream of the lover,

Rose-adorning his young hopeful life

But in you that dream has come true, Dear,

My Sweetheart, Blessed Mother, True Wife!"

ACCOMPANYING A GIFT OF SILVER AT CHRISTMAS TIME

"This silver they claim is Genuine—

And so are you!

This silver, they claim takes Polish—

That's natural to you!

This silver, they claim lasts a lifetime—

So will my love for you!"

TO MY SWEETHEART

"Forty-two yuletides together we've seen,

(Save one when I sailed upon the South Sea);

To us and our children Old Santa has been

Generous, light-hearted, and free.

"Though years make us older, our hearts are still gay

And sweeter, the nectar of life;

Because, forty-two winters you've turned into May,

My sweetheart, my true patient wife.

"As a bride, so today, you are still fair and true,

With graces like gold twice refined—

A lady more gracious more thoughtful than you

No one in this world will e'er find.

"For children and home you've toiled day and night,

Seven darlings now love you as mother;

Their husbands and wives, nine grandchildren say:

'Like sweet "Mama Ray" there's no other.'

"Now, once again, on a bright Christmas Day—

Please believe what we say, we implore you:

'Sweetheart, dear Mother, our own Mama Ray,

With undying love, we adore you!'"

TO DADDY ON FATHER'S DAY

"Dearest Daddy:

"Once again there are miles between us, and I must write my Father's Day greeting instead of being able to kiss you and tell you personally how dear you are to me. I do not know what fascinating European city you will be visiting next Sunday, but wherever you are, I hope you have a very happy Father's Day.

"There is not a father in this whole wide world who is loved as much by his daughter as you are, Daddy dear. It is true I admire you intensely and am so very, very proud to call the President of this great Church father, but it is because you are you that I love you so dearly. You have never been too burdened with your own affairs to pause to help me with whatever task which has become too difficult for me. You have never been too busy with your countless responsibilities to smile and cheerfully to encourage me. You have always been ready to advise me wisely, and you have given me the secure knowledge that at home there is the dearest, sweetest, most thoughtful daddy who will give help if I need it. Yes, I am indeed a most fortunate girl to have such a perfect father. I love you so very much!

"Affectionately,

"LouJean"

THE LOOK IN HIS EYE

(As related by Mother)

"Last summer on reaching Los Angeles, we decided to have our car washed by one of those 'Quickies' on Wilshire Boulevard.

"As I was watching the last part of the operation from a bench, to my surprise a tiny voice at my elbow said, 'I guess that man over there loves you.'

'I turned and saw a beautiful little curly-haired child with great brown eyes who looked to be about seven years of age.

"'What did you say?' I asked.

"'I said, I guess that man over there loves you.'

"'Oh, yes, he loves me; he is my husband. But why do you ask?'

"A tender smile lighted up his face and his voice, softened as he said, 'Cuz, the way he smiled at you. Do you know I'd give anything in this world if my pop would smile at my mom that way.'

"'Oh, I'm sorry if he doesn't!'

"'I guess you're not going to get a divorce,' he questioningly remarked.

"'No, of course not; we've been married over fifty years. Why do you ask that?'

"'Cuz everybody gets a divorce around here. My pop is getting a divorce from my mom, and I love my pop and I love my mom. . . .'

"His voice broke, and tears welled up in his eyes, but he was too much of a little man to let them fall.

"'Oh, I'm sorry to hear that!'

"And then he came very close and whispered confidentially into my ear, 'You'd better hurry out of this place or you'll get a divorce, too!'

"Then he picked up his papers and walked disconsolately down the street."

MY MOTHER

(Mrs. David O. McKay)

"Why, when we look back upon our home, does it seem like a bit of heaven to us?

"Because that quiet, uncomplaining, encouraging angel we call mother was there with her understanding heart.

"She it was who kissed us when we fell, who helped us with our lessons, who made it a point to visit places where we took part whether singing, debating or acting, who listened to our love affairs, and comforted us in our childhood woes. She it was who had many sorrows but who never advertised them or worried her children with them, who never raised her voice angrily or in a severe manner blamed us for some slight accident, and who always counseled us with gentle reproofs.

"Mother is an accomplished woman, a singer and a pianist. One day I said, 'Which of all the compliments you have received do you cherish most?' She smiled and answered, 'A gentleman once said to me, "I greatly admire you because you are as much a lady in the kitchen as in the parlor."' Evidently she preferred a compliment to her refined nature rather than to her accomplishments. She felt that small kindnesses, small courtesies habitually practiced, gave a greater charm to the character than the display of great talents.

"Poise, self-control, patience, cheerfulness, kindness, and unfeigned love are ever present virtues in the ideal home."

To present father's home life without mother, or for that matter even one moment of his busy days, would be like viewing the reflection of a man in a distorted mirror. One would see only a caricature of the original. Mother is father's constant companion; they are inseparable; and he is happy only when she is by his side. Mother is the vitalizing influence in the home. Without her, the picture of home life would be like showing the wrong side of a beautiful tapestry. Love and affection for her usually is expressed on her birthday, on Mother's Day and at Christmas time in the form of a poem.

MOTHER'S DAY

"Our children, God bless them,

Are a credit and true—

I marvel to think how

You mother'd them through

Measles and mumps

Scarlet fever and cold—

And the hundreds of rhymes

And fairy tales told!

"Ever patient, untiring,

Devotedly true—

Every virtue of mother,

God has given to you.

Oft alone, without husband,

Your family to raise,

The world of your training,

Speaks only in praise."

YOUR MOTHER

(A letter written to his children by father)

"Aptly it has been said that, 'Often a woman shapes the career of husband, or brother, or son. A man succeeds and reaps the honors of public applause, when in truth a quiet little woman has made it all possible—has by her tact and encouragement held him to his best, has had faith in him when his own faith has languished, has cheered him with the unfailing assurance 'you can, you must, you will.'

"I need not tell you children how fittingly this tribute applies to your mother. All through the years you have seen how perfectly she fills the picture. There is not a line or a touch but is applicable. For over thirty-three years, I have realized this, and each of you has known it to a greater or less degree as many years as your ages indicate; but like the Scotchman who 'cam' near tellin' his wife ance or twice' that he loved her, we have not told mother of her loving worth and inspiration to us.

". . . I want to acknowledge to you and to her, how greatly her loving devotion, inspiration, and loyal support have contributed to whatever success may be ours.

"Willingly and ably she has carried the responsibility of the household.

"Uncomplainingly she has economized when our means have been limited.

"Always prompt with meals, she has never said an unpleasant word or even shown a frown when I have kept her waiting, sometimes for hours.

"If I had to take a train at midnight or later, she would either sit up with me or lie awake to make sure that I should not oversleep.

"If duty required me to leave at five o'clock in the morning, she was never satisfied unless she could prepare me a bite of breakfast before I left home.

"It has been mother who remembered the birthdays and purchased the Christmas presents.

"Since January 2, 1901, the happy day when she became my bride, she has never given me a single worry except when she was ill and that has been, with few exceptions, only with the responsibilities of motherhood.

"Thus my mind has been remarkably free to center upon the problems, cares, and requirements incident to my duties and responsibilities.

"In sickness, whether it was one of you or I, her untiring attention night and day was devotion personified; her practical skill, invariably effective; and her physical endurance, seemingly unlimited. Many an ache and pain she has endured in uncomplaining silence so as not to give the least worry to the loved one to whom she was giving such tender care.

"Never to this day have you heard your mother say a cross or disrespectful word. This can be said truthfully, I think, of but few women in the world.

"Under all conditions and circumstances, she has been the perfect lady.

"Her education has enabled her to be a true help-mate; her congeniality and interest in my work, a pleasing companion; her charm and unselfishness, a lifelong sweetheart; her unbounded patience and intelligent insight to childhood, a most devoted mother;—these and many other virtues combined with her loyalty and self-sacrificing devotion to her husband, impel me to crown her the sweetest, most helpful, most inspiring sweetheart and wife that ever inspired a man to noble endeavor.

"To her we owe our happy family life and whatever success we may have achieved!"
