Llewelyn R. McKay, David O. McKay, Home Memories of President David O. McKay ( 1956)

Section Five

FROM FATHER'S TALKS AND WRITINGS

Excerpts from Addresses

CHARACTER

GOOD character does not consist in the mere ability to store away in the memory a collection of moral aphorisms that run loosely off the tongue. Character to be good must be stable, must have taken root. It is an acquisition of thought and conduct which has become habitual, an acquisition of real substance as firmly fixed in the conscience and indeed in the body itself as to insure unhesitating rejection of an impulse to do wrong."

CHASTITY

"In this day when modesty is thrust into the background, and chastity is considered an outmoded virtue, I appeal to you to keep your souls unmarred and unsullied from this sin, the 'prostitution of love,' the consequence of which will smite and haunt you intimately until your conscience is seared and your character sordid. A chaste, not a profligate, life is the source of virile manhood, the crown of beautiful womanhood, the contributing source of harmony and happiness in family life, and the source of strength and perpetuity of the race."

PARENTS' RESPONSIBILITY TO CHILDREN

"There are three fundamental things to which every child is entitled: (1) a respected name, (2) a sense of security, (3) opportunities for development.

"The family gives to the child his name and standing in the community. A child wants his family to be as good as those of his friends. He wants to be able to point with pride to his father, and to feel an inspiration always as he thinks of his mother. It is a mother's duty so to live that her children will associate with her everything that is beautiful, sweet, and pure. And the father should so live that the child, emulating his example, will be a good citizen, and, in the Church, a true Latter-day Saint.

"A child has the right to feel that in his home he has a place of refuge, a place of protection from the dangers and evils of the outside world. Family unity and integrity are necessary to supply this need."

TRAINING CHILDREN

"Not to give a child happiness by proper guidance along the road of the gospel of Jesus Christ is to deprive oneself and the world of a blessing. A child misdirected may be a loss to mankind of an eminent scientist, a discoverer of new truth, a man whose life and vision might have hastened that future day of universal brotherhood and peace. Most truly is a child 'a fragile beginning of a mighty end.' One of the greatest of life's tragedies is to see such a possible ending shattered in its early beginning.

"Such a shattered soul crossed my path recently. He is only seventeen; but he is thankless, disregardful, disgraceful in his attitude toward his mother and others who love him. He is tempestuous in his temper, unrestrained in his appetites, dishonest in his dealings, defiant of all restraint, a violator of civil law, and of laws of morality. Though brilliant in mentality, and gifted in music and art beyond most if not all of his associates, he bids fair even before he sees his twentieth birthday to join that wreckage of humanity that make up the flotsam and jetsam of human society.

"In contrast consider two men standing at the Brigham Young Monument near the Temple Square. One is the president of a leading Teacher's College in the United States; the other, a Mormon boy, the son of a pioneer woman who pulled a handcart across the plains. It was this thought which caused the college president to exclaim, 'What a consecration to a great ideal!'

"'An ideal,' answered the Utahn who was then State Superintendent of Public Instruction, 'that makes true manhood and beautiful womankind.'

"Why this master of self, this leader of men in one case, and the despoiler of self and the despair of his loved ones in the other instance? Perhaps we cannot rightly say, so many elements enter into the forming and the shaping of a life. However, in these two instances we do know that it is a matter of training and self-control.

"One got the ideal, the other failed to see it.

"Until your boys and girls get the true ideal as set forth in the gospel, never leave them! Your duty, your life's work is 'to train them to virtue; habituate them to industry, activity, and spirit. Make them consider every vice as shameful and unmanly. Fire them with ambition to be useful. Make them disdain to be destitute of any useful knowledge. Fix their ambition upon great and solid objects, and their contempt upon little, frivolous and useless ones.'"

MOTHER'S EXPERIENCE WITH CHILDREN

"My experience has taught me that a mother's control over a child is lost or gained during the first few years of its life. Proper guidance in youth will prevent undesirable tendencies and encourage confidences in later life. Wise direction is not arbitrary, but kind and firm. Children should follow their own desires so long as these desires do not prompt them to be destructive, do not impose upon others, or do not injure the children's characters."

THE RIGHT TO CHOOSE

"Freedom of thought, freedom of speech, freedom of action within boundaries that do not infringe upon the liberty of others are man's inherent right, granted him by his Creator—divine gifts 'essential to human dignity and human happiness.'

"The opposite of freedom is bondage, servility, restraint, conditions that inhibit mentality, stifle the spirit, and crush manhood.

"Attempts to control the consciences of men have always resulted in conflicts. To decide one's own relationship to the Creator and to his creations is the natural and inalienable right of all."

CHRISTMAS

Christmas Symbols

Some people have claimed that Church members should not use the Christmas tree, the holly wreath and evergreen as decorations at Christmas time because these things are heathen in origin. Father is not in accord with this attitude.

The fact that the evergreen tree antedates Christianity as a symbol of fertility and also of everlasting life does not lessen its appropriateness to be used by Christians. The giving of gifts on a particular day likewise goes back to early historic time, for instance, a day was set apart in Rome during which time honey was given to one another by the people that life might be sweeter. Father thinks the giving of gifts probably dates back to the Wise Men. The legend of St. Nicholas is also highly appropriate for Christmas for its symbolizes the spirit of giving.

"Actually we do not know when Christ's birthday occurred. It has been celebrated in January, in April, in May, and in December. The important thing is that we realize that Christmas, the day which has been generally set to celebrate Christ's birth, is recognized as a day that should 'change all grief into love.'

"The danger which arises in our celebration on Christmas is the possibility of subordinating the real purpose of commemorating Christ's birth by permitting the spiritual to be overshadowed by the material. The true spirit of giving happiness to others, the fellowship of good friends, and the satisfying knowledge that Christmas reminds us of Christ's promise of a new and better life must always be uppermost in our minds. The heavenly host message gives us the keynote:

"1. Faith in Deity is the first essential to happiness and peace.

"2. Friendliness (brotherliness) is the second essential by which this happiness and peace can be maintained."

Christmas and Christ

"Christmas is a time in which to remember Christ. It is a day in which to fortify our faith, and draw near to the Father of the Babe of Bethlehem.

"He lived for us, that we might live; he died for us, that we may sometime escape the bonds of sin and death. He pointed the way which leads into the very presence of him to whom Christ prayed upon the cross: 'Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do.'

"Yes, Jesus is the Prince of Peace, but he will not bring peace to the world in any magic way. As he has always done, he will grant it only according to the law upon which it, like all blessings, is predicated. Hate breeds hate; love begets love; kindness invites more kindness; and kindness and love beget peace.

"When mankind learns this simple lesson, peace will come to them as a natural result. Predatory interest will fade away. Men will see each other as brothers, each one created in the image of God.

"They will understand that to love God, they must first love their neighbors as themselves."

CHURCH WELFARE

"Any system, government, or organization which takes away individual initiative is not founded on sound principles," father has often stated, "therefore any 'dole' system which hands out support to the individual without requiring anything in return, tends to instill a habit of laziness and takes away self-sufficiency."

Hence, father is a staunch supporter of the Church welfare system, because it is based upon the principle that each participant in that plan shall not lose his independence but shall give something in return for that which he receives, except of course in cases where sickness or infirmity prevents him from doing so.

In stating the basic concept upon which the plan is founded to bring about individual initiative, father maintains that the following principles must ever be kept in mind:

"The welfare plan was established for the benefit of the individual just as the Church is established for the restoration of the individual. This program functions:

"(1) By rendering material help to those in need,

(2) In rehabilitating members temporarily without means of livelihood,

(3) In developing in them a sense of self-reliance,

(4) In all, both the contributors and the recipients receive an added spirituality 'to make us all real servants of God.'"

COMMUNISM

"Conditions that give cause for concern and apprehension are the insidious influences, as well as the blatant heralding of ideas that undermine century-tried principles of peace, of justice, and of advancement towards the day of universal brotherhood. We are grieved when we see or hear honest men and women, looking with favor upon the pernicious teachings of these groups, especially communists.

"These credulous, misguided people claim to be advocates of peace and accuse those who oppose them as advocates of war. They should remember, and all should ever keep in mind, that there are some eternal principles more precious than peace, dearer even than life itself.

"Free agency is a divine gift, more precious than peace, more to be desired than life. Any nation, any organized group of individuals that would deprive man of his heritage should be denounced by all liberty-loving persons. Associated with this fundamental principle is the right of individual initiative, and the right to worship how, where, or what one pleases, and the simple privilege, for example, to leave a country if one chooses without having to skulk out as a culprit at the risk of being shot and killed.

"At heart, communism is atheistic, and fascism is equally antagonistic to freedom and other Christian principles."

DEPENDABILITY

"I made a special trip to-day," records father in his diary, "to one of our conferences for the express purpose of choosing a conference president and a secretary for the mission. Excellent young men were at the meeting. One seemed to fill every requirement; he had good personality, a fair education along the particular lines required. Before proceeding further, however, I consulted his conference president, only to learn that the young man is careless about keeping his word. Several times he has failed to keep his appointments with branch members.

"That settled him with me so far as keeping books for the mission is concerned.

"Dependability is one of the fundamentals of character, as it is of success."

DIVINE COMMUNICATIONS

"There are some divine communications given to individuals, particularly to leaders of the Church, which are not for the public. There are others which may be given as a means of helping others to be 'partakers of the divine nature.'

"With respect to personal manifestations, and their importance, I wish to quote the following from John, 20th chapter. Thomas, as you remember, had said: 'Except I shall see in his hands the print of the nails, and put my finger into the print of the nails and thrust my hand into his side, I will not believe.

"'And after eight days again his disciples were within, and Thomas with them: then came Jesus, the doors being shut, and stood in the midst, and said, Peace be unto you.

"'Then saith he to Thomas, Reach hither thy finger, and behold my hands; and reach hither thy hand, and thrust it into my side; and be not faithless, but believing.

"'And Thomas answered and said unto him, My Lord and my God.

"'Jesus saith unto him, Thomas, because thou hast seen me, thou hast believed: blessed are they that have not seen, and yet have believed!" (John 20:25-29.)

TRUE EDUCATION

"Our nation is facing stupendously critical problems, not the least of which is the present-day indifference toward the need of better training and proper education of youth—America's most precious asset, her greatest safeguard, her most important, most potentially profitable enterprise!

"Education for economic advancement is a good investment for the individual as well as for the state. The United States as a nation is still young, but its brief history is replete with striking examples of the value of its free public school system even as a financial investment.

"But let us face clearly and forcefully the fact that the paramount ideal permeating all education in the grades, the high school, through college and the university, should be more spiritual than economic.

"I am but repeating what we all know and feel when I say that our country's greatest asset is its manhood. Upon that depends not only the survival of the individual freedom vouchsafed by the Constitution and Bill of Rights, and all other ideals for which the founders of the Republic fought and died, but the survival of the best that we cherish in present-day civilization throughout the world.

"Only through proper education can these fundamental principles become fixed and guilding influences in the lives of human beings. Our educational system will radiate such principles just to the extent that we employ in our public schools, high schools, colleges, and universities men and women who are not only eminent in their particular professions, but also loyal to the Constitution of our land, influential as leaders, noble in character.

"I look upon all recipients of true education as individuals and groups radiating an influence that makes less dense and ineffective the darkness of ignorance, of suspicion, of hatred, of bigotry, avarice, and greed that continue to envelop in darkness the lives of men. . . .

"In my opinion the highest, noblest purpose in all our education, from the grades to the university, is to teach citizenship and noble character. I believe that thousands of students have been made to sense, by absorption and by inference, that a man's character is greater than intellectual attainments or social privileges. That every thought creates character. That every act is an incarnation of character. That every decision is a revelation of character. That habit is a pillar in the edifice of character. The aims of education must at all times be more spiritual than economic."

At Temple University, June 14, 1952, father said:

"With all the earnestness of my soul, I feel that the people of the United States must make education, the greatest of industries in our republic, pay dividends in character and true citizenship or face inevitable failure and possible catastrophe."

* * * *

"The contribution of general education to the industrial and commercial greatness of the country is obvious on every hand—in research laboratories, in increased production of farms, in achievements of electrical, physical, chemical, engineering sciences, in harnessing, either for the benefit or destruction of man, the boundless force of atomic energy—but what true education has done, and may do to awaken in the human heart a sense of the end and aim of human existence on this earth, what it has done to raise the standard of citizenship, how it has helped to make living happier by contributing to the prosperity, peace, and security of our country are beyond evaluation!

* * * *

"Courses required of all students in our public schools should include all the important areas of study that directly or indirectly provide the student with opportunities for spiritual growth and religious inspiration. From such study it is reasonable to expect that our students will better understand how vital has been the role of religion at critical moments in history; how important spiritual insights in religious faith can be in the lives of men and women; how closely related are true human greatness and such qualities as honesty, integrity, humility, generosity, compassion. We may expect in our students more idealism and less cynicism, more wholesome courage and faith in the future and less pessimism and foreboding fear. We may hope for increased tolerance of racial and religious differences, increased respect for those of opposite political views or of lower social and economic levels, increased awareness of basic and inviolable dignity of the individual man or woman. We may contribute to the development of a more sensitive social conscience, a greater sense of responsibility for the less fortunate in our society. We may even, perhaps, without knowing it, bring a boy or girl closer to God."

FAITH

"Faith is the eternal light that will dispel threatening clouds. Faith in man is the power that leads to brotherhood; faith in God, the ladder by which men climb toward perfection.

"It was faith that braved Columbus to sail on and on into the unknown horizon until he discovered a new land. It was faith that brought to America the 'Mayflower, freighted with the destinies of a continent.'

"It was faith that impelled President Brigham Young and the Utah Pioneers to establish permanent settlements in a forbidding, defiant western desert. Notwithstanding the warnings of the desolation of the country, and the plea to go on to more productive climes, there was that assurance in President Young's mind which had greater influence upon him than the trapper's experience of unproductivity and of monthly frosts, and more influential than the glowing description of the California coast.

"Greater than human judgment, towering above man's experience, was the great leader's trust in God. In the hearts of the pioneers was a faith triumphant—a faith that had nourished in them 'confidence, hope, love, and a sentiment of the infinite value of existence.'"

FREE AGENCY

"Freedom of choice is more to be treasured than any possession earth can give. It is inherent in the spirit of man. It is a divine gift to every normal being.

"Man's responsibility is correspondingly operative with his free agency. Actions in harmony with divine law and the laws of nature will bring happiness, and those in opposition to divine truth, misery.

"Individual freedom is threatened in the world today by international rivalries, interracial animosities, and false political ideals. Unwise legislation, too often prompted by political expediency, if enacted, will seductively undermine man's right of free agency, rob him of his rightful liberties and make him but a cog in the crushing wheel of regimentation, which, if persisted in, will end in dictatorship.

"He who tramples under foot one of God's greatest gifts to man, who would deny another the right to think and worship as he pleases, propagates error.

"No greater immediate responsibility rests upon members of the Church, upon all citizens of this republic and of neighboring republics, than to protect the freedom vouchsafed by the Constitution of the United States."

GOVERNMENT

Government and Freedom

"Next to life itself, free agency is the greatest gift of God to man.

"The two most important documents affecting the destiny of America are the Declaration of Independence and the Constitution of the United States. Both these immortal papers relate primarily to the freedom of the individual.

"Honesty in government is essential to the perpetuation and stability of character in the individual.

"Governments were instituted of God for the benefit of man. Man was not born for the benefit of the state. No government can exist in peace, except such laws are framed and held inviolate as will secure to each individual the free exercise of conscience, the right and control of property, and the protection of life.

"The founders of this great republic had faith in the economic and political welfare of this country because they had faith in God."

GRATITUDE

"As the years come and go, I experience an ever-increasing wonderment for life itself, and a deep sense of appreciation for the opportunities and blessings it affords.

"First, I am grateful for the wise and careful guardianship and training of noble parents—guardianship and training—two qualities of parenthood wisely and discreetly applied during the extremely active, somewhat reckless days of youth—a guardianship which kept me from turning to paths that would have ended in an entirely different kind of life! Every year increases my appreciation and love for an ever watchful, precious mother, and a noble father.

"Second, I am grateful for nine brothers and sisters, five of whom still survive, who made up a home environment—now a cherished memory—which as an influence in character building was second only to the ever kind and discreet parental family guidance.

"Third, I am grateful for the sacrifices made to permit us children to enter the field of education.

"Through that opportunity I met my life's companion, who has ever been an inspiration, the mother, and wise guardian of our seven children and the heart and center of a second lovely home.

"Fourth, I am grateful to my friends. He is truly blessed who has experienced the peace and richness of soul that spring from true and loyal friendship. I love my friends and true associates as one of the most priceless possessions of life.

"Fifth, I am grateful for citizenship in this great land where the Constitution guarantees freedom. I denounce any ideology, any attempt of man to change the fundamental principles of this great American republic. The clouds of enmity and suspicion aroused by the two conflicting international forces look dark and forboding. Unfortunately the communists seem to be willing to yield only to force. Honesty and reason and fair dealing seem to be unknown virtues to the leaders of that false idealism.

"Sixth, I am grateful most of all for the gospel, the true philosophy of a happy life, which sanctifies and makes operative all other blessings."

HAPPINESS

Sources of Happiness

"I do not see why we should be gloomy when we want to worship the Lord. We should be happy. Some sources of happiness are:

"1. A sense of being free. Free agency next to life itself is the greatest gift to mankind.

"2. A sense of self-mastery. He is a slave who will be led by his appetites.

"3. The privilege of work. Idleness does not bring happiness. The right to work is a blessing to mankind.

"4. The possession of health. To possess health is a a great blessing. The gospel helps us to have health. Keep our bodies clean and wholesome. Debauch them, and we lose happiness.

"5. The ability to see God's beauty about us. The gospel teaches us to see the beauties of nature. Never fail to thank God for these blessings.

"6. The desire to serve, to do things for one's fellow men."

Ten Rules For Happiness

"1. Develop yourself by self-discipline.

"2. Joy comes through creation—sorrow through destruction. Every living thing can grow; use the world wisely to realize soul growth.

"3. Do things which are hard to do.

"4. Entertain upbuilding thoughts. What you think about when you do not have to think shows what you really are.

"5. Do your best this hour, and you will do better the next.

"6. Be true to those who trust you.

"7. Pray for wisdom, courage, and a kind heart.

"8. Give heed to God's messages through inspiration. If self-indulgence, jealousy, avarice, or worry have deadened your response, pray to the Lord to wipe out these impediments.

"9. True friends enrich life. If you would have friends, be one.

"10. Faith is the foundation of all things—including happiness."

THE HOME

"One of the highest ideals of life is to keep secure and free from sorrow the homes of the church and of the nation.

"Would you have a strong and virile nation?—then keep your homes pure. Would you reduce delinquency and crime?—lessen the number of broken homes. It is time that civilized peoples realize that the home largely determines whether children shall be of high or low character. Home-building, therefore, should be the paramount purpose of parents, and of the nation.

"Instruct the youth of both sexes that the foundation of a happy home is laid during pre-marital days. Keep the spring of life pure by conforming their youthful lives to the single standard of morality.

"Teach the young people that marriage is not merely a man-made institution, but that it is ordained of God, and is a sacred ceremony, and should receive their gravest consideration before they enter upon a contract that involves either happiness or misery for the rest of their lives."

The Home and Good Citizenship

"We are living in a most momentous age. We see on every hand manifestations of commotion. The world seemingly is stirred as it has never been stirred before.

"In the midst of this world commotion, the home, the fundamental institution of society, is also threatened.

"The home is truly the cell-unit of society and parenthood is next to Godhood. The relationship of the children to the parents should be one which would enable those children to carry out ideal citizenship as they become related to the state and to the larger forms of society. The secret of good citizenship lies in the home.

"Church schools, Sunday Schools, Mutual Improvement Associations, Primary, and priesthood classes are all helps in government, established here to assist in the upbuilding and guidance of the youth, but none of these—great and important factors as they are in the lives of our youth—can supplant the permanence and the influence of the parents in the home."

* * * *

"Young girls should be instructed in the fundamental arts of housekeeping so that when responsibilities of wifehood come they may be free from the difficulties and perplexities which arise from ignorance and inexperience."

Influence of Home

In answer to an inquiry by Bryant S. Hinckley of "What has been the greatest factor, other than your religion, in shaping your life?" father wrote the following:

"Unhesitatingly, I affirm that my home life from babyhood to the present time has been the greatest factor in giving me moral and spiritual standards, and in shaping the courses of my life. Sincerity, courtesy, consistency in word and deed, unselfishness are dominant virtues exemplified in the lives of my parents and others in the two homes that have proved a safeguard and guidance."

Importance of Family

"The dearest possession a man has is his family. In the divine assurance that family ties may transcend the boundaries of death, and may continue throughout endless ages of eternity, I find supreme consolation and inspiration. When the union of loved ones bears the seal of the Holy Priesthood, it is as eternal as love, as everlasting as spirit. Such a union is based on the doctrine of immortality and eternal progress of man."

Ten Conditions Which Contribute to a Happy Home

"1. Ever keep in mind you begin to lay the foundation of a happy home in your pre-marital lives. While in courtship you should learn to be loyal and true to your future husband or wife. Keep yourselves clean and pure. Cherish the highest ideals of chastity and purity. Do not be deceived.

"2. Choose your mate by judgment and inspiration, as well as by physical attraction. Intellect and breeding are vital and important in the human family.

"3. Approach marriage with the lofty view it merits. Marriage is ordained of God. It is not something to be entered into lightly or to be dissolved at the first difficulty that arises.

"4. Remember that the noblest purpose of marriage is procreation. Home is children's natural nursery. Happiness in the home is enhanced by having children at the fireside.

"5. Let the spirit of reverence pervade the home. Have your home such that if the Savior called unexpectedly he could be invited to stay and not feel out of his element. Pray in the home.

"6. Let husband or wife never speak in loud tones to each other.

"7. Learn the value of self-control. We are never sorry for the word unspoken. Lack of self-control is the greatest source of unhappiness in the home. Children should be taught self-control, self-respect, and respect for others.

"8. Fasten home ties by continued companionship. Companionship fosters love. Do everything to cement love for all eternity.

"9. Make accessible to children proper literature and music.

"10. By example and precept, encourage participation in Church activity. This is fundamental in developing a true character. Church activity should be led, not directed by parents."

HOLY GHOST AND SPIRIT OF GOD

"The Holy Ghost is a Personage of Spirit and is the third member of the Godhead. His mission is to guide and inspire those who sincerely obey the first principles of the gospel—those who manifest sincere faith in the Lord Jesus Christ, who repent of their weaknesses and sins, and who are baptized by immersion by one divinely commissioned to officiate in this ordinance, and who is confirmed by one who holds the priesthood and has conferred upon him the Gift of the Holy Ghost.

"The Holy Ghost is not the same as the Spirit of God. In the scriptures the terms Holy Ghost, Spirit of God, Spirit of the Lord, Comforter, Spirit of Truth, are used with different meanings, referring in some cases to the person of the Holy Ghost, and in other instances to the influence that radiates from the Father. The context of the passages in which these terms appear must be studied in order to know whether the term refers to the Personage of the Spirit or merely to the influence.

"The Spirit of God permeates all living things. It is by that spirit that 'we live and move and have our being,' but the Holy Ghost is especially assigned to guide and to inspire those who, by obedience to the principles of the gospel, are entitled to his companionship.

"Today the radio discloses the fact that sound and other vibrations permeate the atmospheric realm surrounding the earth; but to hear these sounds one must get in tune with them by properly adjusting one's radio instrument. Analogously, so the Spirit of the Lord permeates all nature and influences it and may inspire all human beings; but to receive the guidance, protection, and inspiration of the Holy Ghost one must put oneself in tune by obedience to eternal principles of conduct and by authoritative confirmation. To carry the analogy farther: As the radio instrument may by excessive use or misuse become impaired and useless as an intermediary, so may a person by neglect of duty, by wrongdoing, or by sinful indulgence 'cut off' the channel of communication between himself and the Holy Ghost."

INFLUENCE OF ENVIRONMENT

"I want reverently to express appreciation of the environment with which I was blessed—the environment of the country—those old grand mountains, the bubbling brook, the song of birds, the chatter of the magpie, the meadowlark singing in the morning, the daybreak over the eastern hills.

"We must not forget how we are indebted to those early influences. Today I want to mention the environment here in Ogden, particularly of the old Weber Stake Academy and the friends who supported us. The friends of other churches who came and participated in our socials, a spirit of goodwill and brotherhood. One cannot recall those days without feeling indebted to friendship and associations that are treasures. Heart petals! You never get away from the friendship and loves of your youth. To love and to be loved is the truest happiness in the world."

IDEALS

High Ideals

"The noblest lives are those which are inspired by high ideals. To your parents, to your teachers, to your country, to your Church, you are indebted for the ideals you cherish. Men who are true to high ideals are most contented in their private lives, and contribute most to the advancement of righteousness. Cherish your ideals as you cherish life itself."

High Thinking

"What you think about in your own secluded moments will radiate from you when you stand in the presence of others.

"The Spanish have a proverb that 'He who sows thoughts will reap acts, habits, and character,' for destiny itself is determined by thinking. Life is won or lost by its master thoughts. As nothing reveals character like the company we like and keep, so nothing foretells futurity like the thoughts over which we brood. It was said of John Keats that his face was the face of one who had seen a vision. So long had his inner eye been fixed upon beauty, so long had he loved that vision splendid, so long had he lived with it, that not only did his soul take on the loveliness of what he contemplated, but the very lines of the poet's face were also chiseled into beauty by those sculptors called thoughts and ideals. When Wordsworth speaks of the girl's beauty as 'born of murmuring sound,' the poet indicates his belief that the girl's long love of the sweet briar and the thrush's song, her tender care of her favorite flowers, had ended in the saturation of her own face with sweetness.

"Swiftly do we become like the thoughts we love. Scholars have noticed that old persons who have 'lived long together, 'midst sunshine and 'midst cloudy weather,' come at length to look as nearly alike as do brother and sister. Emerson explains this likeness by saying that long thinking the same thoughts and loving the same objects mold similarity into the features. Nor is there any beauty in the face of youth or maiden that can long survive sourness in the disposition or discontent in the heart.

"'Here also is the carpenter's Son rising before each earthly pilgrim like a star in the night. A man of truly colossal intellect, incomparable as he strides across the realms and ages, yet always thinking the gentlest, kindliest thoughts, thoughts of mildness as well as divinity. His thoughts were medicines for hurt hearts. His thoughts were wings to all the low flying; his thoughts freed those who had been snared in the thickets; his thoughts set an angel down beside each cradle; his thoughts of the incarnation rendered the human body forever sacred; his thought of the grave sanctified the tomb. Dying and rising, his thoughts clove an open pathway through the sky.' Taught by him, the people have learned to think—not only great thoughts, but good ones, and also how to turn thoughts into life."

JESUS CHRIST—THE ONE PEERLESS PERSON

"Jesus is revered and worshiped by all Christian nations and classes of individuals. This is really a wonderful fact after the lapse of nearly two thousand years, because, from a human standpoint, we know so little about him. What we have of his teachings is so little that we can put it into a vest-pocket edition.

"Yet, no being has ever been on the earth who has wielded a thousandth part of the influence that this Man of Galilee wields throughout the world.

"Wherein lies the secret of his greatness? We do not honor him as a great discoverer nor as a scientist, nor as a literary genius, nor as one noted in the realm of art, nor as one distinguished in the realm of invention, in statesmanship or war; in fact, in none of the realms in which the men and women of the world have won their laurels do we pay deference to Jesus.

"We revere him because his wisdom and spirituality comprehend and exceed that of all others.

"Consider for a moment his example in regard to the following fundamental principles:

"First, reverence for God; second, peace; third, goodwill toward men, or to express it in another way, Godliness, happiness, brotherly kindness.

"The first principle, Godliness, Jesus exemplified every hour of his earthly existence.

"The second principle, peace, has been defined as the happy, natural state of man, the 'first of human blessings.' Without it there can be no happiness. Peace as taught by the Savior is exemption from individual troubles, from family broils, from national difficulties. Such peace refers to the person just as much as it does to communities. A man cannot be at peace when he is untrue to his better self.

"The word that expresses goodwill towards men is brotherliness. Though Jesus gave his message particularly to the chosen house of Israel; he knew no nationality, neither was he a respecter of persons. Not only toward the poor and helpless, but also toward the rich he manifested brotherliness.

"Fundamental in all of Christ's teachings was the crime of wrong thinking. He condemned avarice, enmity, and jealousy in the mind as vehemently as he did the results that avarice, enmity, and jealousy produce. Modern psychology proves the virtue of such teachings. It confirms also his teachings regarding the injury that follows the harboring of hate. He who harbors hatred and bitterness injures himself far more than the one towards whom he manifests these evil propensities.

"Equally applicable to present conditions are his teachings regarding the value and sacredness of human life, the virtue of forgiveness, the necessity of fair dealings, the crime of hypocrisy, the sin of covetousness, the saving power of love, the immortality of man. His teachings regarding arbitration as a means of settling difficulties if applied by warring nations, would do away with war.

"'A cathedral without windows, a face without eyes, a field without flowers, an alphabet without vowels, a continent without rivers, a night without stars, and a sky without a sun—these would not be so sad as a world without a Bible, or a soul without Christ.'"

ON GOOD BOOKS

"Throughout the nation purveyors of illicit literature and of obscene pictures have become so defiantly active that progressive citizens are making an appeal for congressional action against the distributors of pornography.

"As there are good companions and bad companions, so there are good books and bad books. Our characters are formed largely by the company we choose. We 'catch' virtues and vices as well as diseases from our associates. Noble companions inspire uprightness of character, but evil associates lead to moral debasement.

"As with companions so with books. We may choose those which will make us better, more intelligent, more appreciative of the good and the beautiful in the world; or we may choose the trashy, the vulgar, the obscene, which will make a refined soul feel as though he has been 'wallowing in the mire.'

"The value of good reading consists, first, in selecting good books and, second, in seeing clearly what is therein written. Reading affords the opportunity to everyone—the poor, the rich, the humble, the great—to spend as many hours as he wishes in the company of the noblest men and women that the world has ever known. No matter how bashful, how reserved, or how poorly dressed the reader may be, he will feel right 'at home' in the presence of these greatest leaders and thinkers of all time!

"It is interesting to note how, undoubtedly, Abraham Lincoln's early reading affected his future life and character. Of course, we know from his own words that the memory of his angel mother influenced him profoundly. She died when he was but nine years old, yet in after years he said: 'All that I am or hope to be I owe to my angel mother.'

"It is true that our mothers 'make us most,' but good companions and good reading are wonderful, supplemental helps. So I think it was with President Lincoln. Early in life he chose good reading. Chief among the few books available to him were the Bible, Bunyan's Pilgrim's Progress, Aesop's Fables, and Shakespeare's plays.

"From another of his early books, The Life of Washington, by Weems, the lanky lad, lying outstretched in the flickering light of a crude fireplace, would read and treasure such sayings as these:

"'Our private deeds if noble are the noblest of our lives.'

"'My son,' his father is reputed to have said, 'I would ride fifty miles to see the boy whose heart is honest and his life so pure that we depend upon every word he says.'

"In hours thus spent much of the greatness of George Washington was instilled into the character of Abraham Lincoln.

"On the other hand, a person develops the baser side of his nature if he finds himself enjoying a racy joke or a book that emphasizes immoral situations; if he finds himself not offended by profanity or vulgarity, or by nude pictures as printed in magazines that appeal to the appetites and animal passions in man.

"Youth is the time in which to store the mind with thoughts that will elevate, with sentiments that will lift the soul from the mean, the sordid, and the low."

LOVE

"Love, as the body, must have nourishment or it will starve. There is no great thing the man or woman can do to keep love alive and healthy, but there are many little things given daily, and, if possible, hourly—a kind word, a courteous act, a smile, an endearing term, a sparkle in the eye, an unexpected service, a birthday greeting, a remembering of the wedding anniversary—these and a hundred other seemingly insignificant deeds and expressions are the food upon which love thrives.

"On the other hand, looking at each other's frailties, exaggerating each other's weaknesses, going about sulkily, or moodily, making an indiscreet remark, are little drops of poison that cause love to sicken and possibly to die.

"William George Jordan says: 'Love rarely dies a sudden death. It is usually ailing a long time before its decease. Little ills that could readily be cured in their early stages are permitted to run into more serious conditions; complications set in; and love, with its vitality exhausted through longsuffering, finally dies. Love's neglected colds often develop into consumption. Prompt treatment with a little unselfish care, tender watchfulness, and cheerful, patient nursing may restore love to perfect health.'"

MARRIAGE

Advice to Bridal Couples

"Marriage is something not to be entered into lightly, nor terminated at pleasure, or at the first difficulty that might arise as you journey down the highway of matrimony.

"There is something besides an instinct which is far more beautiful and holy in your lives that is uniting your souls in one, and that something is love, the divinest attribute of the human soul. There is no difficulty, there is no sorrow, there is no success, there is no fame, there is no wealth, there is nothing in the world that can separate two hearts that are bound by the golden clasp of love and sealed by authority of the Holy Priesthood.

"The older I grow, and the more experience I have, the more convinced I am that there are three fundamental conditions which every couple should keep in mind—not only those who are beginning on the road of married life, but those of us who are pretty well along on it.

Kindness

"The first condition which contributes to love, the feeding of it, the nourishing of it, is associated with that little simple word kindness. It is significant that the first sentence in the Psalm of Love is this: 'Love suffereth long, and is kind.' What a world of philosophy in that one sentence! I know of nothing which a bride appreciates more, particularly during the first few months and years of what I may call the amalgamating period, than kindness and gentleness on the part of the husband.

Continued Courtship

"Growing naturally out of that feeling come gentle tones and thoughtful acts. The voice has a great deal to do with happiness, with harmony, with congeniality. I think it was that thought which prompted someone to say that a married couple ought never to speak in loud tones to each other unless the house is on fire.

"But more important than gentle tones are those gentle acts of consideration for each other; in a word, continued courtship after marriage. We should remember to be courteous to each other, for sometimes in this workaday life the husband forgets, and the wife forgets to extend little courtesies in the home. This is particularly important when there are children in the home, for they observe these things, and will be greatly influenced by the actions of the parents.

Trust

"But more important than the feeling of kindness, even more important than the courteous, thoughtful acts of the lover, is the third condition which is associated with this sentence: 'Love believeth all things.' That confidence, that trust, is the element in which love thrives. Perhaps you do not realize it now, as you will in later life, but that sweet confidence which you have regarding this lovely girl is the most glorious possession that a husband can cherish—more glorious than wealth, lands, houses, station, fame—the utmost confidence that she is just as pure as the bridal veil that falls over her shoulders, as spotless as the sunbeam. And she should have the same confidence in you, because she knows that you are just as worthy of fatherhood. That confidence is the supreme, the sublime element in which love thrives. I submit that there is no higher ideal in all the world, and I wish every young person could realize just what it means to future harmony and happiness to begin married life in purity, and with a covenant binding each to loyalty and fidelity supreme.

"Remember always that love is a tender flower, the roots of which are in the human heart. It thrives in the element of confidence and trust, as the rose thrives in the sunshine and morning dew. But in an atmosphere of mistrust, suspicion, or doubt of each other it will wilt, it will fade. Fidelity and constancy are to that little flower of the soul what the sun is to the rose."

BE NATURAL—BE CLEAN—BE OF SERVICE

"Always be yourself—your better self—no matter under what circumstances or in whose company you may find yourself. Then you will always be a gentleman.

"Keep your blood untainted; your name untarnished.

"Try always to be of service to your fellow men through the divine organization of the Church of Jesus Christ.

"Adherence to these suggestions will make you rich in friends and in heaven's choicest blessings."

* * * *

"Teach only that which you feel to be true—things about which you are in doubt, keep to yourself until your doubt is removed.

"Proceed from what is known to what is unknown with respect to doctrine and Church policies. God will lead you to greater light."

* * * *

"One of the greatest needs in the world today is intelligent, conscientious motherhood. It is to the home that we must look for the inculcation of the fundamental virtues which contribute to human welfare and happiness."

"Woman's mission and throne is the family, and if anything is withheld that would make her more efficient, useful, or happy in that sphere, she is wronged, and has not her rights."

INFLUENCE OF MOTHER

"A happy home is heaven on earth, and it is made such by the presence of an intelligent, loving mother. Father with his directing influence, persuasive discipline, exemplary conduct, and 'wrestling thews that throw the world' holds, of course, his rightful and essential place in the family unit; but it is mother, with her 'childward care' who contributes most to the joys and sweet contentment of the ideal home.

"Motherhood is the greatest potential influence in human society. Her caress first awakens in the child a sense of security; her kiss, the first realization of affection; her sympathy and tenderness, the first assurance that there is love in the world. Thus in infancy and childhood she implants ever-directing and restraining influences that remain throughout life.

"In more than one instance, the silent influence of an ideal mother has proved a safeguard in the hour of temptation—an influence greater as a restraint than the threat of law, the frowns or ostracism of society, or even the fear of violating a command of God. In a moment of recklessness, the youth might defy any or all of these forces, and do what his hot blood bade, but the flash in his memory of a mother's confiding trust, the realization of her sorrow if he fail to be true to it, have given him power to refrain from indulgences that might have blighted his entire career.

"'Thus mother, in her office, holds the key

Of the soul; and she it is who stamps the coin

Of character, . . .

Then crown her queen o' the world.'"

A GOOD NAME

"'A good name is rather to be chosen

Than great riches,

And loving favor rather than silver

And Gold.'

"The responsibility of keeping in favorable repute an inherited good name is one of the greatest in life. To discharge this responsibility involves more than mere ordinary effort.

"Your name should connote loyalty to high ideals; it signifies a dignified attitude and self-control; it reflects the fortitude to bear heavy burdens uncomplainingly; to receive without retaliating intended slights from inferior though jealous associates. Your name stands for a high sense of honor and a noble soul."

THE NEGRO QUESTION

"Since, as Paul states, the Lord 'hath made of one blood all nations of men for to dwell on all the face of the earth,' why is there shown in the Church of Christ discrimination against the colored race?

"This is a perplexing question, particularly in the light of the present trend of civilization to grant equality to all men irrespective of race, creed, or color. The answer, as I have sought it, cannot be found in abstract reasoning, for, in this case, reason to the soul is 'dim as the borrowed rays of moon and stars to lonely, weary, wandering travelers.'

"I know of no other basis for denying the priesthood to Negroes other than one verse in the book of Abraham; however, I believe, the real reason dates back to our preexistent life.

"This means that the true answer to the question (and it is the only one that has ever given me satisfaction) has its foundation in faith—(1) faith in a God of justice, (2) faith in the existence of an eternal plan of salvation for all God's children.

Faith in a God of Justice Essential

"I say faith in a God of justice, because if we hold the Lord responsible for the conditions of the Negro in his relationship to the Church, we must acknowledge justice as an attribute of the Eternal, or conceive him as a discriminator and therefore unworthy of our worship. In seeking our answer, then, to the problem wherein discrimination seems apparent, we must accept the Lord as being upright, and that 'justice and judgment are the habitation of his throne,' (Psalm 89:14), and we must believe that he will 'render to every man according to his work,' and that he 'shall bring every work into judgment, with every secret thing, whether it be good, or whether it be evil.' (Eccl. 12:14.) Accepting the truth that God is just and righteous, we may then set our minds at rest in the assurance that 'whatsoever good thing any man doeth the same shall be received of the Lord, whether he be bond or free.' (Eph. 6:8.)

"I emphasize justice as an attribute of Deity because it is the Lord who, though he 'made of one blood all nations,' also 'determined the bounds of their habitation.' In other words, the seeming discrimination by the Church toward the Negro is not something which originated with man but goes back into the beginning with God.

"It was the Lord who said that Pharoah, the first Governor of Egypt, though 'a righteous man,' 'blessed with the blessings of the earth, with the blessings of wisdom' . . . 'could not have the right of priesthood.'

"Now if we have faith in the justice of God, we are forced to the conclusion that this denial was not a deprivation of merited right. It may have been entirely in keeping with the eternal plan of salvation for all of the children of God.

The Peopling of the Earth Is in Accordance with Great Plan

"Revelation assures us that this plan antedates man's mortal existence, extending back to man's pre-existent state. In that pre-mortal state were 'intelligences that were organized before the world was; and among all these there were many of the noble and great ones:

"'And God saw these souls that they were good, and he stood in the midst of them, and he said: These I will make my rulers; for he stood among those that were spirits, and he saw that they were good.'

"Manifestly, from this revelation, we may infer two things: first, that there were among those spirits different degrees of intelligence, varying grades of achievement, retarded and advanced spiritual attainment; second, that there were no national distinctions among those spirits such as Americans, Europeans, Asiatics, Australians, etc. Such 'bounds of habitation' would have to be 'determined' when the spirits entered their earthly existence or second estate.

"In The Blue Bird Maeterlinck pictures unborn children summoned to earth life. As one group approaches the earth, the voices of the children earthward tending are heard in the distance to cry: 'The earth! the earth! I can see it; how beautiful it is! how bright it is!' Then following these cries of ecstasy there issues from out the depth of the abyss a sweet song of gentleness and expectancy, in reference to which the author says: 'It is the song of the mothers coming out to meet them.'

"Maeterlinck's fairy play is not all fantasy or imagination, neither is Wordsworth's Ode on Intimations of Immortality wherein he says:

"'Our birth is but a sleep and a forgetting;

The Soul that rises with us, our life's Star,

Hath had elsewhere its setting

And cometh from afar;

Not in entire forgetfulness,

And not in utter nakedness

But trailing clouds of glory do we come

From God, who is our home.'

for, as we have already quoted, it is given as a fact in revelation that Abraham was chosen before he was born. Songs of expectant parents come from all parts of the earth, and each little spirit is attracted to the spiritual and moral parentage for which the spirit had prepared itself.

"Now if none of these spirits were permitted to enter mortality until they all were good and great and had become leaders, then the diversity of conditions among the children of men as we see them today would certainly seem to indicate discrimination and injustice. But if in their eagerneses to take upon themselves bodies, the spirits were willing to come through any lineage for which they were worthy, or to which they were attracted, then they were given the full reward of merit, and were satisfied, yes, and even blessed.

"Accepting this theory of life, we have a reasonable explanation of existent conditions in the habitations of man. How the law of spiritual attraction works between the spirit and the expectant parents, has not been revealed, neither can finite mind fully understand. By analogy, however, we can perhaps get a glimpse of what might take place in that spirit world. In physics we refer to the law of attraction wherein some force acting mutually between particles of matter tends to draw them together and to keep them from separating. In chemistry, there is an attractive force exerted between atoms, which causes them to enter into combination. We know, too, that there is an affinity between persons—a spiritual relationship or attraction wherein individuals are either drawn towards others or repelled by others. Might it not be so in the realm of spirit—each individual attracted to the parentage for which it is prepared. Our place in this world would then be determined by our own advancement or condition in the pre-mortal state, just as our place in our future existence will be determined by what we do do here in mortality.

"When, therefore, the Creator said to Abraham, and to others of his attainment, 'You I will make my rulers,' there could exist no feeling of envy or jealousy among the million other spirits, for those who were 'good and great' were but receiving their just reward, just as do members of a graduation class who have successfully completed their prescribed courses of study. The thousands of other students who have not yet attained that honor still have the privilege to seek it, or they may, if they choose, remain in satisfaction down in the grades.

"By the operation of some eternal law with which man is yet unfamiliar, spirits come through parentages for which they are worthy—some as Bushmen of Australia, some as Solomon Islanders, some as Americans, as Europeans, as Asiatics, etc., etc., with all the varying degrees of mentality and spirituality manifest in parents of the different races that inhabit the earth.

"Of this we may be sure, each was satisfied and happy to come through the lineage to which he was attracted and for which, and only which, he or she was prepared.

"The priesthood was given to those who were chosen as leaders. There were many who could not receive it yet who knew that it was possible for them at some time in the eternal plan to achieve that honor. Even those who knew that they would not be prepared to receive it during their mortal existence were content in the realization that they could attain every earthly blessing, progress intellectually and spiritually, and possess to a limited degree the blessings of wisdom.

"George Washington Carver was one of the noblest souls that ever came to earth. He held a close kinship with his Heavenly Father and rendered a service to his fellow men such as few have ever excelled. For every righteous endeavor, for every noble impulse, for every good deed performed in his useful life George Washington Carver will be rewarded, and so will every other man, be he red, white, black, or yellow, for God is no respecter of persons.

"Sometimes in God's eternal plan, the Negro will be given the right to hold the priesthood. In the meantime, those of that race who receive the testimony of the restored gospel may have their family ties protected and other blessings made secure, for in the justice and mercy of the Lord they will possess all the blessings to which they are entitled in the eternal plan of salvation and exaltation."

OBEDIENCE

"Parents should not fail to teach obedience to their children. Within the last decade there have been rampant some wild theories about the self-determination of children and the preservation of their individuality. Some of these theorists believe that children should be permitted to solve their own problems without guidance from parents. There is some virtue in this, but there is more error. This theory has gained momentum in practice because of reaction to arbitrary government by parents.

"The best time to teach the child obedience is between the ages of two to four. It is then that the child should learn that there are limits to his actions, that there are certain bounds beyond which he cannot pass with impunity. This conformity to home conditions can be easily obtained with kindness but with firmness. 'Train up a child the way he should go, and when he is old he will not depart from it.' In this old adage the word train has great significance.

"The best lesson that a child can learn is self-control and consideration for the rights and feelings of others."

PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY

"Parents who do not know where there children are at nights are recreant to the sacred obligation of parenthood, and untrue to the high ideals of the Church regarding home life."

* * * *

"The gospel of peace should find its most fruitful effects in the homes of Church members. Flowers in our gardens require good soil and a favorable climate. So children, to be healthy and happy, should have a favorable mental and emotional atmosphere in the home.

"The greatest trust that can come to a man and a woman is the placing in their keeping the life of a little child. If a man defaults who is entrusted with other people's funds, whether he be a bank, municipal, or state official, he is apprehended and probably sent to prison. If a person entrusted with a government secret discloses that secret and betrays his country, he is called a traitor. What must the Lord think, then, of parents who, through their own negligence or wilful desire to indulge their selfishness, fail properly to rear their children, and thereby prove untrue to the greatest trust that has been given to human beings? In reply the Lord has said: 'The sin be upon the heads of the parents.'

"Let us begin at once as parents to maintain the kind of influence or home atmosphere that will contribute to the normal, moral development of the children, and eliminate from the home those elements which cause discord and strife."

ON PEACE

"Essential to a permanent, lasting peace, either in the individual or a nation is a recognition of the existence of ever-operating laws in the universe. Retribution follows the violation of them as inevitably as compensation follows compliance thereto. Though it appears that only force rules the world today, eventually righteousness will triumph.

"Another essential to peace and spiritual progress is the acceptance of a unifying ideal. The surest, safest foundation for such is the first principle proclaimed at the birth of Christ—'Glory to God in the Highest.'

"It augurs ill for the future that men's hearts all too generally are turned from and not toward God. Self-interest, not God's glorification, is the motivating factor in most people's lives. Irreverence is all too manifest.

"Peace demands more godliness, more self-discipline, more power to say with Jesus, 'Father . . . not my will, but thine be done.'

"As long as God is only 'a noble and beautiful thought,' and not a reality in the minds and hearts of men, their efforts will come to naught who strive to avert war and to establish peace."

How to Obtain Peace

"We believe firmly that the basis upon which world peace may be permanently obtained is not by sowing seeds of distrust and suspicion in people's minds; not by engendering enmity and hatred in human hearts; not by individuals or nations arrogating to themselves the claim of possessing all wisdom or the only culture worth having; not by war with resulting suffering and death from submarines, poison gas or explosions of nuclear bombs. No! The peace that will be permanent must be founded upon the principles of righteousness as taught and exemplified by the Prince of Peace, our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, 'For there is none other name under heaven among men, whereby we must be saved.'"

SACRAMENT

"Associated with the partaking of the sacrament are principles fundamental in character-building and essential to man's advancement and exaltation in the kingdom of God. Too few communicants attach to this simple, though sublime rite, the importance and significance that it merits. Unfortunately, the form of worship is frequently an outward compliance without the true soul acknowledgment of its deep spiritual significance.

"Members of the Church should strive very earnestly to reflect in their daily conduct those ideals which on Sunday they profess to cherish.

"Everybody present should think of the virtues of the Christ life, for the sacrament is 'blessed and sanctified' that they each may partake of it 'in remembrance' of the Son of God.

"There are few things in life more sacred than one's word of honor. Truthfulness and honesty are fundamental virtues without which it is impossible to build a noble character.

"Every partaker of the sacrament gives evidence of his willingness to assume three very great obligations, to which he becomes bound in sacred honor:

"To take upon himself the name of the Son,

That he will always remember him,

To keep his commandments.

"How far-reaching! How comprehensive! It excludes from man's life, profanity, vulgarity, idleness, enmity, jealousy, drunkenness, dishonesty, hatred, selfishness, and every form of vice. It obligates him to sobriety, to industry, to kindness, to the performance of every duty in church and state. He binds himself to respect his fellow men, to honor the priesthood, to pay his tithes and offerings and to consecrate his life to the service of humanity."

SELF-CONTROL

"That teaching in the Church which teaches the husband to control his temper develops character, which enables a husband to hold his tongue when he could offer a criticism to his wife, and perhaps feel a joy in doing so, but the ideal of the gospel, the ideal of the home, its stability, and its contributive influence to a successful nation, gives him power to control himself.

"This applies also to the wife, and especially to the children who may be prompted to disobey the father's or the mother's wish. Fundamental in a home is self-control!"

SWEARING

"Never should we hear in a home from a boy, a girl, and especially from a father—never from a mother—a profane word or even a swear word. Rise above it and follow the example and instruction given by the Father of our country, who deplored the report that profanity was being used among some of his soldiers."

SCANDAL

"The surest method against scandal is to live it down by perseverance in well doing and by prayer to God that he would cure the distempered mind of those who traduce and injure us."

SERVICE

"'Whosoever will save his life shall lose it; and whosoever will lose his life for my sake shall find it.'

"Is the truth in this paradoxical statement, so illusive that mankind cannot grasp it? Or is it so in conflict with the struggle for existence that men consider it impractical?

"Specifically stated, this law is: We live our lives most completely when we strive to make the world better and happier; it is to deny self for the good of others.

"I am convinced that only in its application can true happiness be found or a truly great character be developed. The safety and perpetuity of any nation depend upon the character-building, law-abiding individual.

"Jesus' declaration is a principle the application of which promises to supplant discouragement and gloom with hope and gladness; to fill life with contentment and peace everlasting. This being true, its acceptance would indeed be a boon today to this distraught, war-torn world. Why then, do men and nations ignore a thing so precious?

"Let sincere men and women the world over unite in earnest effort to supplant feelings of selfishness, hatred, animosity, greed, by the law of service to others, and thereby promote the peace and happiness of mankind."

SERVICE TO OTHERS IS SERVICE TO GOD

Highest Ideal of Religion

"The true way to serve God is through service to man. This is the highest ideal of religion ever given. It is the antithesis of pure nature. Nature's law is the survival of the fittest. God's law is, use your personal power and possessions for the advancement and happiness of others. Jesus saw clearly that before the kingdom of God could be realized, men must give up their cynical indifference and unbelief and become reconciled to God and to one another. Jesus, in short, marked out a new way of life for men and for all humanity—the way of genuine love."

SINCERITY

Example Greater Than Sermons

"Children are quick to detect insincerity, and they resent in their feelings false pretension. Parents, of all people on earth, should be honest with their children. Keep your promises to them and speak the truth always. Children are more influenced by sermons you act than by the sermons you preach. It is the consistent parent who gains the trust of his child. When children feel that you reciprocate their trust, they will not violate your confidence nor bring dishonor to your name.

"The most effective way to teach religion in the home is not by preaching, but by living. If you would teach faith in God, show faith in him yourself; if you would teach prayer, pray yourself. Would you have them temperate? Then you yourself refrain from intemperance. If you would have your child live a life of virtue, of self-control, of good report, then set him a worthy example in all these things. A child brought up under such home environment will be fortified for the doubts, questions, and yearnings that will stir his soul when the real period of religious awakening comes."

The Infinite

"Is there something within us which is superior to this old house of clay or are we just mere mechanisms that become lifeless when the heartbeats stop?

"My reason will not let me doubt the existence of something within which is superior, which controls, which lives in this body. Physically, our sight, our hearing, our smell, our tasting, are limited to certain distances. In the rainbow, for example, we see only the violet on the one side, and red on the other. But do you doubt that there are vibrations beyond the violet, that there are vibrations slower than those we interpret as red, violet, indigo, blue, green, yellow, and orange that we see? That is our range. Not one of you doubts that there are more rapid vibrations which we cannot interpret, that there are slower vibrations which make no impressions upon our eyes. Is it difficult to believe that there might be a spiritual relationship existing out there to commune with your spirit within—just as there are vibrations beyond that violet ray with which we can come in harmony if we can become in tune?"

TEACHING

"Five things which characterize the successful Sunday School teacher are:

"First, implicit faith in the gospel of Jesus Christ, and a sincere desire to serve God. This condition of the soul will merit the companionship and guidance of the Holy Spirit.

"Second, unfeigned love for the children, guided by a determination to deal justly and impartially with every member of the class. Honor the child, and the child will honor you.

"Third, thorough preparation. The successful Sunday School teacher studies the child as well as the lesson.

"Fourth, cheerfulness, not forced, but natural cheerfulness, springing spontaneously from a hopeful soul.

"Fifth, power to act nobly, for

"'If you want to be a teacher, just watch

your acts and walk;

If you want to be a teacher, be careful

how you talk.'"

The Unheralded Teacher

"There is a possible never-ending influence of a word or deed. Therein lies the compensation and joy of the unheralded teacher, whose name is not emblazoned before the public gaze; but whose instructions, like echoes, 'roll from soul to soul, and go forever and forever.'

"During the summer months Temple Square has been a landscape of beauty. Flowers, 'sweet letters of the angel tongue' planted in picturesque designs, have been blooming on every hand. Into the hearts of some of the more thoughtful visitors, the flowers may have sent tender messages of nature's love of life and beauty. This gorgeous display of 30,000 blossoming plants are the result of the daily labor and attention of ten men to whose constant effort—indeed whose existence—the hundred thousand tourists give scarcely a passing thought.

"So in the garden of humanity there are millions of men and women whose lives are contributing to the betterment of the world and from whose characters are radiating virtues that might still be lying dormant in their souls had it not been for the noble, unselfish influence of teachers of whom the world has never heard.

"Of what infinite value to the community are these guides and trainers of youth who carve and shape the moral atmosphere in which the people live. Flowers shed beauty and fragrance for a brief time then fade and die and are gone forever, but children who through instruction from noble teachers become imbued with eternal principles of truth radiate an influence for good, which, as their own souls, will live forever."

Qualities of a Good Teacher

"Let us recall one or more of the men and women who have wielded an influence for good; let us, for our own profit, think of the qualities or attributes that made them our chosen guides.

"(1) Sincerity. What they believed to be right they defended with invincible resolution, and their earnest feelings radiated with a silent force that fairly enveloped their classes.

"(2) Studiousness. They knew what they were teaching. If they told an experience, they spoke with candor, without exaggeration. When they taught eternal principles of truth, we knew they felt even more than they expressed.

"(3) Cheerfulness. They radiated cheerfulness which, like the sun, sheds its light upon all, yet does not lose in beauty or splendor. Behind the smile there might have been hidden sorrow, but we saw only great souls who possessed the ability to carry heavy burdens cheerfully.

"(4) Self-Forgetfulness, Love of Others. They were willing to forego personal pleasure and convenience for the guidance, enjoyment, and comfort of their pupils.

"May such noble teachers find encouragement and comfort in the fact that for them the law of compensation is eternally operative. It holds as Emerson says—'with equal sureness for all right action; love and you shall be loved.'

"Paraphrasing a well-known stanza, we say,

"'You are loyal hearts; you are spirits brave;

You are souls that are pure and true;

You gave to the world the best you have;

May the best now come back to you.'"

THANKSGIVING

"As Thanksgiving Day approaches, I am thankful to know that members of the Church and so many people generally, realizing the fact that material possessions alone do not give happiness, are appreciating more than ever before those things which are of most value. I am happy to enjoy with my friends, these most worth-while possessions. To name only a few, I would say that I am most grateful:

"(1) For a noble parentage and a worthy name;

"(2) For an abiding faith in a supreme being and in the divinity of Jesus Christ;

"(3) For the ability and opportunities to enjoy the gifts of God as manifest in nature—all the beautiful things of creation are mine merely for the seeing and the seeking;

"(4) For affectionate family relationships—loved ones, and loyal friends. He who has even one friend is rich, and I have many who have proved themselves true and loyal.

"(5) For opportunities to render helpful service in the Church of Christ; and above all, for the knowledge that a kind and loving Father will give helpful guidance to all who seek him in sincerity.

"For these and many other blessings which no depression, nor drouth, nor loss of money can take from me, my heart is full of gratitude."

THEOLOGY AND RELIGION

"Theology is the science that treats of the existence, character, and attributes of God and of his laws and government. Theology, therefore, may be entirely objective—merely intellectual. An atheist may be a good theologian.

"Religion denotes those influences and motives in human conduct which are found in the character and will of God. Religion is subjective, designating the feelings and acts of men toward one another and toward God.

"Youth need religion to satisfy the innate longing of the soul. Man is a spiritual being, and some time or another every man is possessed with a longing, an irresistible desire to know his relationship to the Infinite. He realizes that he is not just a physical object that is to be tossed for just a short time from bank to bank, only to be submerged finally in the ever-flowing stream of life. There is something within him which urges him to rise above himself, to control his environment, to master the body and all things physical and live in a higher and more beautiful world. There is in man a divinity which strives to push him onward and upward."

THOUGHTS

"Thoughts make us what we are. As definitely and surely as the weaver shapes his flowers and figures out of the warp and woof of his loom, so every moment the shuttle of thought moves back and forth forming character and even shaping the lineaments of our features.

"The handsomest youth or the most beautiful maiden may mar his or her beauty by a morose, cross-tempered disposition, or by nursing dissatisfaction in the soul.

"What subordinate things one seeks will have less bearing upon the formation of one's character and upon the direction of one's life than does that dominant, paramount first choice.

"If it is your purpose to get worldly gain, you may obtain it. You may win in this world almost anything for which you strive. If you work for wealth, you can get it; but before you make it an end in itself, take a look at those men who have sacrificed all to the accomplishment of this purpose, at those who have desired wealth for the sake of wealth itself. Gold does not corrupt man; it is in the motive of acquiring that gold that corruption occurs.

"Is it your purpose to have pleasure in life, and are you going to have that satisfaction at any cost? I would ask you to pause before deciding, and look at those in the world who have spent their lives in the world of personal indulgence. Pleasure, as the uppermost aim, eventually brings disappointment. 'In diving to the bottom of pleasure, we bring up more gravel than pearls.'

"Instead of selfishness, men must be willing to dedicate their abilities, their lives, if necessary, to the alleviation of the ills of mankind. Hate must be supplanted by sympathy and forbearance.

"The world today is in a state of confusion and unrest. Poverty, suffering, cruelty, crime, treachery, and war afflict the human race. Why? Because men seek first their own selfish aims—seek first the subjugation of others—seek first aggrandizement and domination. The source of it all lies in the dominating thoughts harbored by rulers and leaders who reject the kingdom of God and seek first personal and national gain, at the cost of subjugation and, if necessary, the extermination of other persons and nations.

"Our spiritual culture lags so far behind our material culture in its development that we have no adequate control over the latter. Our science, our education, and our government can do much to help correct this lag. We must devote ourselves to the education of the nobler emotions, the development of pity, sympathy, and love, not limited by the barriers of class, nation, or race, but as wide as humanity itself. Religion is the creator and the conservator of our social ideals; and the Church is their chief propagator."

TRUTH

"There are two helpful ways of becoming acquainted with truth, namely: (1) by experience, and (2) by observing its manifestations in the lives of others.

"If you would discover truth by personal experience, study yourself introspectively. Realize that every thought will affect your progress, every act be a contributing factor to success or failure. There are two things with which you should always concern yourself—motive and method. Know the thoughts of your own soul. Never think for a moment that you can deceive yourself. Be honest in your thoughts, clean in your thinking, and clear-cut in your conclusions. In years to come honesty of purpose and sincerity of soul will be the chief sources of satisfaction.'

"It is the privilege of every sincere soul to be conscious, that is, to have an awareness of being in harmony with this spirit of truth. Every intelligent person knows, also, when he is out of harmony with the truth. A consciousness of wronging is just as real as the sense of being in accord with right. Truth manifests itself through personality. Though ever-existent, it is recognized only as it manifests itself through intelligent entities.

"Throughout all ages truth has been first perceived by a few heroic leaders who, in defense of it, frequently sacrificed their lives. To the clear perception and the courage of these intrepid leaders of men is due the progress of mankind. At sometime or other, they have had to make a choice whether to deny, modify, or defend truth—a choice between personal ease and preferment, ostracism, punishment, or even death.

"These defenders of truth have received from the ignorant and prejudiced populace only rejection and persecution. The reward for their courage has been stones for the martyred Stephen, prison for Paul, the scaffold for Savonarola, the fagot for Hugh Latimer, the hemlock for Socrates, the assassin's bullet for Lincoln, martyrdom for Joseph and Hyrum Smith, and crucifixion for Jesus.

"The world needs believers and teachers who, with sincere convictions and unflinching courage, will defend truth and declare to an unbelieving world the existence of an intelligent personal Being.

"We need men of courage to defend the children of truth, which spring from the eternal source of truth, as leaves and fruit upon a living tree. Among these we name honor, fair dealing, sacredness of contract—whether between persons, cities, states, or nations—temperance, loyalty, reverence. Springing from the source of evil are lying, backbiting, thieving, confiscation of property, subjugation of unoffending nations—miserable spawn that are born in hell itself."

VULGARITY

"I name as an unwise condition those parents who pollute the home atmosphere with 'vulgarity' and 'profanity.' I use the term vulgarity in the sense used by David Starr Jordan: 'To be vulgar is to do that which is not the best of its kind. To do poor things, in poor ways, and to be satisfied with that. . . . It is vulgar to wear dirty linen when one is not engaged in dirty work. It is vulgar to like poor music. . . . To find amusement in trashy novels, to enjoy vulgar theatres, to find pleasure in cheap jokes, to tolerate coarseness and looseness in any of its myriad forms.'"
