Llewelyn R. McKay, David O. McKay, Home Memories of President David O. McKay ( 1956)

Section Six

TRIBUTES

FROM FAR AND NEAR COME TRIBUTES

THE magic in his eyes is but the reflection of the goodness of the man inside. It is but an outpouring of his perennial spirit of optimism, confidence, and faith in the goodness of everything around him."

National Tourist News, October, 1952, wrote of father:

". . . David O. McKay is master of . . . cultural subjects of higher learning. This is especially noticeable in a discussion of philosophy, for in all of Mr. McKay's philosophical views he adheres to a criterian of reason and justice. He is a true philosopher in his own nature. Bring up any intellectual subject and the reflections from his mind seems as a flower of thought, giving out a wholesome fragrance. He says that 'Mind cannot be likened unto merchandise, which decreaseth in using, but is richer when compared to its companion, Love, which rejoiceth and expandeth in exertion. In giving his philosophy of the value of learning, together with the process of learning and of living, he gives the soundness of his own reasoning when he declared that 'Man should not live wholly by his own ideas, lest they lead him astray, for in spirit, as in substance, man is a social creature; and if man leans alone on his own self, he is in danger of rejecting a more perfect guidance; and it is better to read little with thought than much with levity.'

"In evaluating the cultivation of memory, his philosophy is that 'Memory is the true daughter of genuine Attention, and is the teeming mother of Wisdom.'"

Tribute to a Friend, David O. McKay, by Stephen L Richards:

"For more than forty-five years I have had a great man as a friend. I don't know how I have deserved his friendship as he has given it to me. His friendship has been one of the main factors of encouragement in my life. My association with him has brought more richness into my life and my experience than any other association outside that of my own flesh and blood.

"This great man has stimulated me in times of discouragement to go forward and give the best I could to this work. I shall never live long enough to pay the debt of gratitude I owe my friend. I respond to his call [to the First Presidency] with the deepest humility, with a great sense of inadequacy, but with an obligation to give him my best."

The Deseret Book Store employees sent father a card expressing their joy at his recovery from an operation, each of them signing his or her name with "Mc" attached to the surname. They called themselves the "Clan of the Deseret Book Store."

Father answered them by writing this rhyme from his bed at the hospital:

"Old Scotland is proud of her clansmen brave,

Wallace and Bruce and e'en Roderick D-hu,

Of Sir Walter Scott, and the poet Burns,

A line of men loyal and true.

"She is proud of her mountains and wonderful lakes,

Of her wealth in history and lore—

But now of more honors the fair land can boast—

The loyal Mc's at the Deseret Store!

Dr. William B. Giles, President of the Men's Club of the American Church in Buenos Aires, in a letter of June 25, 1954, wrote:

". . . You embody everything we all measure in the ideal Man, the ideal Father, the Seer, and the Prophet. Thus, my dear Doctor, my dear President, please do take good care of yourself because your people and our country were never since 1776 in such great need and urgency of a man of your calibre and wisdom to advise them as now!"

Letter Sent by Council of the Twelve, September 8, 1951:

"Throughout your eventful life you have been an inspiration to young and old in the Church. Your humble yet brilliant career in the Lord's work has been a literal fulfillment of the Savior's injunction in the Sermon on the Mount which guided a poet to say:

"Hold thy lighted lamp on high,

Be a star in someone's sky.

"Your great devotion to the truth has instilled faith and confidence in the hearts of all who have followed you. Your tenderness and sympathy in times of trial have lifted dark clouds from those bowed down. Your courage to carry on the work in spite of all hindrances has been like a helping hand to many who otherwise might not have endured to the end.

"On this your natal day we pledge to you our love and devotion, our willingness to follow your inspired leadership, our gratitude for the privilege of serving the Lord in fellowship with you.

"STEPHEN L RICHARDS "SPENCER W. KIMBALL

J. REUBEN CLARK, JR. EZRA TAFT BENSON

JOSEPH FIELDING SMITH MARK E. PETERSEN

JOHN A. WIDTSOE MATTHEW COWLEY

JOSEPH F. MERRILL HENRY D. MOYLE

ALBERT E. BOWEN DELBERT L. STAPLEY."

HAROLD B. LEE

A PROPHET NOT WITHOUT HONOR IN HIS OWN HOME TOWN

Special Services to Honor President McKay, September 30, 1951, Huntsville

Samuel Johnson once said, "The value of every story depends upon its being true. A story is a picture, whether of an individual, or of human nature in general; if it be false, it is a picture of nothing."

None of us here could say anything but truth about President McKay. His life itself is a life of truth.

Francis Bacon said, "Certain it is heaven upon earth, to have a man's mind move in charity, rest in Providence, and turn upon the poles of truth."

So it is heaven upon earth to have had such a man come out of Huntsville.

To President David O. McKay, president of a million Latter-day Saints all over the world, the people of Huntsville, your townsfolk, say sincerely and humbly, we're proud of you and we love you.

The greatest honor that can come to a town is to have its citizens become outstanding, honest, upright men and women in the world. Huntsville has produced the greatest man in the Church today, and as someone said from this pulpit recently, the greatest man, in his estimation, in the world at the present time.

If the leaders of our nation, and of all the nations, had the same humility, seeking God's help, along with the intelligence, kindness, foresight, honesty and strength of character that President McKay has, the world would not be in this chaos.

From his father, Bishop McKay, he was handed a good name, and a good name is rather to be chosen than great riches.

He has kept that good name. His children also, whom we admire and respect, know that they cannot slide on their father's name. They are forging strong characters of their own.

We give credit to his lovely wife, the mother of his children. Huntsville does not publicly see her much since they moved away. She has stayed quietly and unostentatiously in the background of her husband's fame. We love her too.

We pay our respects to his brothers and sisters. We're especially happy to see our former Stake President Thomas E. McKay is improving in health. We love him also and welcome him in our midst.

An elderly neighbor once said to me, "In all my life, I've never heard one unkind remark against David O. McKay or his family."

Another young neighbor said to me recently, "Of all his repeated sayings, one stays with me, 'Tell me what you think of when you don't have to think, and I'll tell you what you are.'"

And still another friend, at the last Fourth of July celebration here in Huntsville, as we sat together and gazed on him with tears of love in our eyes, whispered, "Isn't he wonderful? His clothes are so immaculate. His hair is so beautiful. And his eyes look clear through you. It's like gazing on a person of divinity."

This is not meant for flattery, President McKay. It's our humble feelings.

You have been our leader, ever since boyhood.

In your early youth, you inspired your playmates to live better lives.

As a young man, you were the peacemaker.

This incident was told me by Uncle Hyrum Ririe, now of Lewiston, and the last surviving member of Eden's ball team, who used to play with our President in his early youth. Huntsville and Eden were playing a game of ball. Huntsville won. The Huntsville crowd cheered at great length and perhaps booed the losing team. David O. McKay was then not more than sixteen but when he felt the hilarity had gone far enough, he stepped out raised his hand and said, "Sh!" The crowd immediately quieted down. Such leadership from so young a man endeared him to the hearts of his neighboring townsmen as well as to Huntsville.

The children of those friends of your age, held you and your family as ideals. And now our children of the third generation repeat your name with reverence.

Solomon once said, "Place showeth the man; and it showeth some to the better and some to the worse."

Honor and position and placement among the great of the world has showed President McKay to the better. He has grown with the position, in character, in mind, in love and in humility. "Reading maketh a full man, conference a ready man, and writing an exact man." President McKay has these three.

In his conversation, he has knowledge, a common use of words, imagination, and a presence of mind.

His strength is in the Living God who gave him at his nativity this strength.

But with all these, he has not lost sight of the little things in life. The intimate things are what have made him great among his townspeople.

To President McKay, Huntsville is probably like this:

"Sweet Valley at the end of canyon lane

Where health and plenty cheered the laboring swain,

Where smiling spring its earliest visit paid

And parting summer's lingering blooms delayed;

Dear lovely bowers of innocence and ease,

Seat of my youth, when every sport could please;

How often have I loitered o'er thy green,

Where humble happiness endeared each scene."

He is now in his seventy-ninth year, "cheerful, kind, energetic, and extremely honest; keeps a good house in both town and country; a great lover of mankind and horses. His behavior is such that he is rather beloved than esteemed. All the young women and children are at home in his presence, the young men are glad of his company. His tenants do well. When he comes out to his farm, he calls his help by their first names, and sometimes works all the while he talks, for a visit."

He is never too busy or too great to shake hands with every one who desires to do so, to inquire of our families, or even to make a special stop as he has said, to look at our new babies, as he once did with mine.

Tonight, there has been a common bond among us all. There has been a roadway from the hearts of the people of this valley to the heart of President McKay. Though the years go onward and President McKay travels all over the world from us, his cares and worries perhaps slip from him as he rounds the curve by the dam, takes the road back to his childhood, to the fields of his father, to the splendor of the mountains, and to the peacefulness of this beautiful valley that he loves and those who love him.

LaVerna Burnett Newey

From President Stephen L Richards on the occasion of father's eightieth birthday:

Birthdays may be more than mere indications of age. They should be milestones on the highway of progress in man's ascent to his eternal destiny. As year after year he reaches higher elevations, he may look back and forward with increased perspective, satisfaction, and vision.

We who love our President can think of no more appropriate greeting for his birthday than to ask him to pause for a moment on the eminence of eighty and enjoy some of the soul satisfactions that flow from the decades of Christlike service he has rendered in his long ministry. We ask him in retrospect to recall the volume of holy ordinances he has administered by virtue of the priesthood he holds for the eternal benefit of our Father's children; the encouragement he has given to men and women called to positions of responsibility in the kingdom to learn and perform their duties; the stakes and wards and other establishments of the Church he has created and set in order; the temples in the construction and dedication of which he has prominently participated; the sealing ceremonies he has performed and the thousands of young people he has set on the way for marital happiness and eternal glory; his remarkable missionary labors, literally carrying the restored gospel to and establishing missions for peoples all over the world, and ever maintaining and increasing the efficiency of the missionary system; his incomparable teaching of youth with unforgettable lessons on truth, honor, and virtue; his support for the auxiliary organizations and his invaluable definition of their functions and fields of endeavor; the immeasurable comfort he has brought to the bereaved (could their gratitude find collective expression it would fill volumes); his admirable representation of the Church in governmental and other distinguished circles, making friends for the cause of the Redeemer wherever he has gone.

So we ask our President to accept as a birthday remembrance the gifts which, through the help of the Lord, he has created for himself—his own record of matchless achievement, here so briefly and imperfectly set down. We ask him also to accept that which he has likewise won for himself—the respect, love, and devotion of his people. We know that he desires that the love we bear him be manifest in consecration to the great cause to which he has so perfectly given his fourscore years. We give assurance it will be so.

Thus we tender to President David O. McKay, the chosen of the Lord, our friend, so approachable, so sympathetic, so understanding, so self-denying for others, affectionate birthday greetings, and our prayers and best wishes for the years ahead to be filled with glorious achievement in the consummation of the Lord's purposes, with a full measure of health, happiness, and satisfaction to him we love, our President.

A Tribute from the Grandchildren (at the Golden Wedding Anniversary):

I represent the grandchildren who love you both so dear,

You make us so happy whenever you are near;

Especially at Christmas when at your house we all stay

And give a hug and kiss—to "Papa Dade" and "Mama

Ray"!

You're both an inspiration, and we hope in years to come

We can emulate your precepts, and do as you have done.

In behalf of all the children, I wish this night to say:

May the coming years yet bless you with many a "golden"

day!

Bonnie McKay

TRAINING OF YOUTH

"All sessions of the church, and classes, and methods, and theories and drills and practices are only means to an end—and that end: the winning of the child to a righteous life."

Paramount in the objective of Father's teaching is his interest in youth, for he is convinced that the destiny of the future depends on the opinions and on the character of young men and women. Hence he stresses the need of religious teaching to maintain a proper equilibrium during the formative period of their lives. "Youth are impetuous and, sometimes in trying to formulate their conclusions, have a tendency to look upon parents as old-fashioned but give confidence to the teacher who seems to be leading them into new realms and higher planes."

Father's intense interest in the welfare of youth, his sympathetic understanding of their problems, and his desire to stretch out a helping hand find a responsive chord in their hearts.

Indicative of the admiration, love, and respect which youth holds for him is exemplified in the impressions written by one of them in a diary following a conference at the Salt Lake Tabernacle:

A Little Girl's Story:

About the greatest thing that ever happened in my life was going to conference in Salt Lake City.

. . . It was quite a long line—all those people waiting for a chance to have President David O. McKay sign their programs. The thought of having him sign mine made me tremble, but I didn't have the courage to join that line. It was June conference, 1953. The session that morning had been so wonderful that when it was over, we hated to leave for lunch, so we wandered around to the back and just at that moment President McKay came out of the Tabernacle. There were only a few of us there, and he talked to the group of us for quite a while. We couldn't say a word—we just looked at him and cried. Just to be near him was a great thrill for us. Some of the people were taking pictures of him, and after he and his wife drove away we decided to hurry to our rooms for lunch and bring our cameras back so we could do the same after the next session.

So here we were—Momie was out in back with the other girls, Sandra, Janice and Stella, waiting for President McKay to go out so she could take movies of him. She had sent me in to see if I could get some idea about how long he would be—and I found this long line—all waiting for an autograph.

Sister McKay was patiently waiting for him so I went over by her. Soon Sandra came in to see what was keeping me, and we asked Sister McKay to sign our programs. After we talked to her for a while—and she was so very sweet to us—we got up enough courage to join the others in the line. How glad we were that we did! Soon we were up to him, and we were shaking with the wonder of it all! As he was signing my program, I said to him:

"President McKay, do you by any chance remember Anna Heder? She is my grandmother."

He stopped signing the programs for a minute and put his pen down and looked into my face and then he said:

"Of course I do remember Anna. She was a sweet young girl when I first started teaching school. Of course I remember her. I even remember the seat she sat in. She was one of my pupils. How is she—and please give her my love the next time you see her."

No one can know the happiness that filled my heart. I had never expected anything quite as wonderful as this to happen to me!

I handed Momie's program to him to sign and he wondered whose it was. I told him my mother's and that she was outside waiting to take some pictures of him, and he laughed.

Sandra got her program signed, and we ran out to tell the others about it all. Momie said we were trembling and had tears splashing down our cheeks. Of course Janice and Stella were wishing they had done the same thing, and we were wishing so too, but their turn was yet to come.

Before too long, President McKay and his wife came out, and just as before, at the earlier session, he talked to the people standing around—including us! There were very few people there because this was the end of the last session of the 1953 conference, and everyone was hurrying to be on his way home. He visited for quite a while, and Momie took almost a whole roll of movies of him. At the same time, my cousin, Joe, was taking snaps of him. He signed Janice's and Stella's programs while Momie took movies. They turned out pretty good—to us, just wonderful!

After about a half-hour he and his wife drove away.

Oh, yes; we also went over to their car and visited with Sister McKay. She's so wonderful.

As they drove away, and we waved good-bye to them, we felt as if our hearts would burst—they were so full. We felt like we just couldn't leave the temple grounds yet—we wanted to stay on those grounds—almost deserted now—and hug these wonderful things to our hearts, in these surroundings.

This was not the end of it, either. When we arrived home a few days later, my grandmother came to visit, and we gave her President McKay's message. Then she told us of the times she had known him and his family. She not only had him for a teacher, but also had his brother Thomas, too. His father was her bishop and he confirmed her.

Her whole family and his family were friends and in the years since—when he has seen them, he has greeted them with a kiss. Momie's sister was with them once and he kissed her, too. Maybe I can arrange to be with my grandmother on an occasion like that!

Margaret Ann Andersen

Puente, California

AN AMBASSADOR OF GOODWILL

No other president of the Church has traveled so extensively nor met so many influential people throughout the world as father. These visits have enhanced the prestige of the Church and of the state, and in truth, the nation. At all times he has been met with the utmost courtesy and had the opportunity of clarifying the objectives and purposes of the Church.

The hospitality extended to him in comparison to the treatment received by Church Authorities twenty or more years ago makes up quite a different story; for instance, when father presided over the European Mission (1922-24) it was unthinkable that the President of the Mormon Church would receive an invitation to be received by Britain's king. Anti-Mormon sentiment ran high and bitter attacks with sensational stories appeared constantly in the press. At that time father sent a letter and appeared personally before the editors asking that "John Bull" play fair, and print some facts and unbiased accounts rather than merely scurrilous attacks. His letter appeared in full with the caption "A Daniel Come to Judgment!" From this time on, vilification gradually turned to an attempt at understanding, and completely false, sensational stories disappeared.

In July, 1952, father accepted an invitation to a garden party at Buckingham Palace given by Queen Elizabeth. Such an invitation was symbolic of his arduous campaign to bring understanding among the English. He was invited to a long audience before Holland's Queen, Juliana, the King of Sweden, the President of Finland, the President of Argentina, and to leading figures in every country which he has visited. The results of these visits have been recognized locally and nationally for their worth.

From Stayner Richards:

"President McKay was the greatest goodwill ambassador that could have visited from the United States. His example of love for all, peace, and goodwill had a tendency to make all people look to the future with brighter hope."

From National Tourist News, October, 1952:

"As ambassador of goodwill, even though not officially appointed by the President of the United States, President McKay met officially more than a million and a half people. And while his trip cost the United States government not one penny, he was an envoy extraordinary in bringing about a closer feeling of friendship between this great nation and the nine European nations visited on his goodwill tour.

"Mr. McKay's personality, his understanding, his love of freedom, his strong convictions for personal liberty and individual rights in a democratic government, and his high art as a diplomat in managing and bringing to light a better understanding and closer international relations are all allies of his own sovereign personality. One definite impression of this envoy extraordinary was that both the political and economic interests of the United States and Europe are inextricably interwoven and can no longer be separated by confirming these interests to continental boundaries by erecting political barriers.

"For a man of dignity, etiquette, intelligence, wisdom, and the high power of diplomatic reasoning, the United States could have had no better nor more appropriate ambassador of goodwill sent to our friends across the Atlantic."

From Senator Arthur V. Watkins, February 24, 1954:

"I have been following your tour in the press, and I am sure that you have done a great deal of good in the various countries which you have visited. I am sure that the relations of the United States have been greatly enhanced by your visit. . . . I only wish we had more great men like you who could make visits to the various nations of the world."

From Reverend Henry C. Beatty, Ogden, July 24, 1954:

"With a dedicated sense of vision David O. McKay has endeavored with unique success to build everywhere a community of goodwill, sympathetic tolerance, and creative humanitarianism.

"With calmness rooted in mature faith, a forcefulness animated with vision, and a firmness fortified with an appreciation of the principles of righteousness, President McKay has traveled through the world, as the exponent of a spiritual heritage which alone possesses the historic positiveness, social drive, and spiritual grip sufficient to curtail and crush the atheistic forces of materialism and the dangerous distortions of communism.

"In President McKay's dedicated concern to the promotion of a righteous world community there is a blending of three elements, namely: the latitude of his vision of human need, as a spiritual colonist; the intensity of his motivation, as a steward of opportunity; and the magnitude of his compassion, as a disciple of the Creative Carpenter of Nazareth who insists, 'If I be lifted up, I will draw all men unto me.'

"Five times during the last thirty-four years our esteemed citizen, who once upon a time bridled his horse to the hitching posts at Weber Academy in his quest for culture, has ridden the sea and the sky lanes to remote places to exemplify through his attitude and action the force of his teachings on Christian culture. . . ."

HONORARY DEGREES

Numerous citations and honorary membership in noteworthy organizations have been presented to father, the most significant being the ones listed here. The recommendations made by the introductory speaker in each case reflects the esteem in which he is held.

Utah State Agricultural College, June 2, 1950:

DOCTOR OF LAWS

"Mr. President, I have the honor to present to you President David Oman McKay, Churchman, Educator, Preceptor and Inspirer of Youth, Son of Pioneers and Exemplar of the Pioneer Tradition, Champion of Clean Government and Spokesman for the Christian Way of Life. In recognition of his lifelong devotion to the highest standards for which the institution stands, the Board of Trustees and faculty of the Utah State Agricultural College recommends that he be awarded the honorary degree of Doctor of Laws at your hands."

Brigham Young University, June 4, 1951:

DOCTOR OF HUMANITY

"David Oman McKay, honored and beloved leader of men. From the early years of his life he has progressively become a farmer, student, missionary, educator, father, Apostle, public servant, and now the presiding High Priest, and Prophet, seer, and revelator in the restored Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. In the crowning years of his life he is active in all of these fields of endeavor.

"Gifted in speech, he lends clarity and dignity to the principles of the gospel. His is a nobility of spirituality, a gentleness founded in love, and particularly in love for little children. He has a calmness born of long labor in perfect faith, a forcefulness based on a sure vision of the kingdom of heaven, and uncompromising firmness where the principles of righteousness are concerned.

"Honored by calls to service, he has presided over the Weber Stake Academy, was commissioner of education for the Church, and has been a member of the governing boards of all three of the major universities in Utah. He has been chairman of the Ogden Betterment League, the American Red Cross advisory board in Utah, the Utah Council of Child Health and Protection, and the Utah State Centennial Commission, and an active participant in many other similarly worthy causes.

"In the economic realm he has for years been a director in numerous outstanding business organizations, many of which he will now serve as president.

"Having spent five years in active missionary work, including a tour of every mission in the world and two years as president of the European Mission, he was in 1934 given charge of the entire missionary program of the Church. Fifty-two years of his life have been marked by service to the Sunday Schools, which continue to claim his mature counsel and to enjoy a choice place in his affections.

"Because he has given his life to his fellow men in every part of the world, because he is in his person and character what men everywhere might well aspire to be, because he stands for all that education would make of a servant of all in his Father's kingdom, this university, founded upon the principles responsible for his achievements, confers upon him the degree of Doctor of Humanities honoris causa."

University of Utah, June 9, 1951:

DOCTOR OF LETTERS

"I have the great honor to present David Oman McKay, President of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints; Chairman of the Utah Centennial Commission, former Regent of the University of Utah and the Utah State Agricultural College; Trustee of the Brigham Young University; holder of many other positions of trust through the state; advocate for the promotion and enjoyment of the Arts; teacher, administrator, and patron of education; author, and world traveler.

"In recognition of his devotion to truth, goodness, and beauty; his exemplification of the Master's teachings through his life of love and service—that the leader of men must be the servant of men, and his understanding that the worth of humanity lies in the dignity and warmth of its human relationships; I recommend, on behalf of the Board of Regents and the Faculty of the University of Utah, that David Oman McKay be awarded the degree of Doctor of Letters, honoris causa."

Temple University, June 14, 1951:

DOCTOR OF LETTERS

Dr. Edward R. McKay, son of President McKay and a graduate of Temple University, was given the honor of making the following recommendation:

"Because I cannot evaluate impartially the candidate for Temple University's honors, Mr. President, let me speak only from the record. He is the spiritual leader of a faith numbering about a million persons. His life has been spent in the councils of the Church, guiding its schools, heading its missions abroad, writing books of doctrine and precept, and directing its business concerns. Prayer and practical affairs being indivisible elements for members of this communion, he has been trustee or executive officer of banks, insurance companies, securities corporations, mercantile enterprises, colleges, universities, health and welfare organizations, and community improvement groups.

"With great personal pleasure, Mr. President, and a deep sense of privilege, I present to you for the honorary degree of Doctor of Letters, my father, David O. McKay, President of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints."

International College of Surgeons, Chicago Civic Opera House, September 10, 1954:

Before an audience of 2,000 people made up mostly of doctors from 46 countries, father was made an Honorary Member in the International College of Surgeons. The diploma presented to him reads:

"In recognition of contributions to the welfare of mankind and of devotion and encouragement of education and humanistic endeavor."

Upon his return home, he received a letter from Dr. Harry E. Bacon, internationally famed physician and surgeon, who participated in the ceremonies:

"I shall ever appreciate your kindness, and as I look daily into the face photograph of a great man of God, whose integrity and genuineness is unquestioned, perhaps I may receive additional strength to serve better humanity and the Great Physician above."

ORDER OF PHOENIX

Greek Cross of Commander of our Order of Phoenix, November 29, 1954, Hotel Utah, Salt Lake City

On November 29, 1954, His Majesty King Paul of the Hellenes, through his representative, the Honorable John A. Tzounis, Acting Consul General of Greece, conferred upon President David O. McKay the CROSS OF COMMANDER OF OUR ORDER OF PHOENIX. In presenting the cross, Mr. Tzounis said:

"The purpose of this gathering is to pay tribute, within our limited means, to a man who having chosen as his field one of the greatest instrumentalities of public service, has devoted his whole life to the noble search for better education and moral standards for his fellow men."

This is the highest honor which the government of Greece can bestow upon an individual, except in its military organization.

SILVER BUFFALO AWARD

Los Angeles, California, July 17, 1953

Secretary of Agriculture, Ezra Taft Benson, introduced father upon the occasion of the Boy Scout Jubilee when he was presented with the Silver Buffalo Award as follows:

"I know of no man in all the world who exemplifies more fully all of the noble and manly virtues for which scouting stands. In fact, if I were asked to select the most nearly perfect example for the youth of America and the world to follow, I could not do better than to select our speaker."

Citation:

"DR. DAVID O. MCKAY, Salt Lake City, Utah. Church Official, Missionary, Executive, Educator. President of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

"Ninth President in succession since Joseph Smith, the founder and first Prophet of the Church. Holds Honorary Degrees from several colleges: In his missionary activity he has been world-wide in his travels and service. He has filled important public responsibilities, including the Chairmanship of the Utah State Centennial of 1947, commemorating the arrival of the Mormon Pioneers in the Salt Lake Valley under the leadership of Brigham Young.

"An ardent supporter of Scouting, one of his outstanding decisions as President of the Church was the recommendation that the Cub Scout Program be adopted as the program for younger boys of the Church. He is interested greatly in young people, especially in the organizations of the Sunday School, and the Young Men's and Young Women's Mutual Improvement Associations.

"Virile pioneer, colonist, he maintains and promotes the traditions of the Western country."

A TRIBUTE TO MY HUSBAND

Written by mother:

The first time I was in his company, I noticed how gentlemanly he was toward an old woman and how he entered into an old-fashioned guessing game that she loved as though he was as fascinated with it himself as she was. And how his young eyes sparkled with her older ones!

"This is the greatest charm about him. He makes everyone realize that he is especially interested in that person with whom he is conversing. Even as he addresses an audience, each one feels that President McKay is talking especially to him. How many times I have heard the remark, 'I felt that he was speaking directly to me, for his eyes looked right through me and I have stopped . . .' (stopped this or that—whatever that person felt guilty of doing).

"That charm enveloped me completely as we danced or read together, and when he asked me to marry him, I knew that I would be a faithful and loving wife forever.

"In marriage, a woman's happiness is committed to a husband's tender care. David has given me that care always, trying to make everything as easy as possible in the home. He is neat in his habits, always desirous of getting help when needed, especially concerned with my state of health, never reproaching me for my personal or mental defects, ever making me feel that I am of the greatest importance to him. 'A man never appears to greater advantage than in proving to the world his affection and preference for his wife.' It is a joy to have my birthday and Christmas roll around, not so much for a material gift from my sweetheart as for the 'heart-petals in rhyme' with which he continues to woo me and which always thrill me.

"After the children came, the charm, that is as natural to him as life, was enjoyed by the kiddies who liked nothing better than to climb upon his knee and listen to the story of The Lady of the Lake, Ivanhoe, and other Scotch stories, Burns' poems, and other interesting selections.

"Not only the young but also everyone likes to be in his company because of his delightful personality. Goethe says, 'Anecdotes and maxims are high treasures to a man, for he knows how to introduce the former at fit places in conversation and to recollect the latter on proper occasions.' The President's ability to quote at any time the Bible, Shakespeare, Wordsworth, Burns, Pope, and other authors, helps exceedingly to make him an interesting companion and public speaker.

"The gospel has always meant everything in the world to my husband, and he has ever chosen to sacrifice his own personal financial gains to help others. Indeed, he has truly followed Christ's teaching, 'For whosoever will save his life shall lose it: but whosoever will lose his life for my sake, the same shall save it' (Luke 9:24), a quotation he especially likes and uses frequently.

"Many people have asked us, 'How have you been able to instill enthusiasm for Church work in your boys?' The answer is that the father never asked his boys to do anything that he does not do himself. Example is more forcible than precept. 'A father that whipped his son for swearing and swore himself while he whipped the boy did more harm by his example than good by his correction.' Noble examples stir to noble actions.

"The President is blessed with pre-vision. Many a morning he has told me that certain incidents would happen during the day and invariably the impression would become a reality. This pre-vision has been a helpful guide to him through life.

"As I know him, I feel that Shakespeare must have had someone like him in mind when he said, 'What a piece of work is man! How noble in reason! How infinite in faculties! In form and moving how express and admirable!'

"Yes, he is handsome, he is wise, he is good and kind, he is loyal, he is courteous, he is honest and upright, he is industrious, virtuous, and temperate. And because of these and many other admirable traits, he has the confidence of all who know him.

"I feel that this short character sketch is far short of the good that might be said of my husband; but if by giving you a glimpse of our intimate life I have shown that he has set a shining example of an outstanding character, then I have attained my objective."

The Instructor—September, 1954

A SUMMARY OF FATHER'S PHILOSOPHY OF RELIGION

"Men have been prone to regard Christianity as a mystic power that would transform life irrespective of man's inclinations, volitions and characters. If the mere professing of Christian principles were sufficient to establish Christianity among men then we should have had peace on earth in Christian lands hundreds of years ago. . . . With their lips men have been Christians; in their hearts they have been pagan. No man or nation can maintain right relationship among mankind that violates the principles of honor and truth."

* * * *

"We don't need to be long-faced and pious to be religious. We shouldn't be gloomy when we worship God; we should be happy. Sometimes I'm overwhelmed by the joy to be found everywhere."

Father's religion, in its broad sense, is a cheerful one which brings happiness from abundant living. It encourages everything that makes life richer, full, and effective. Hence, it is not a kill-joy which brings man's activities into a straitjacket; it has nothing forbidding in its aspects. Nor does his religion inhibit anything that will contribute to lasting happiness and peace.

Father lives this religion. He is a kindly man of goodwill with a great and tender heart and with an understanding and love for all mankind which radiates a lifting power based on deep and abiding sympathy. He quickly wins the confidence of others through his sincere devotion to righteous endeavors in his service to church, community, and to all mankind. He is a strong advocate of truth, justice, and fair play. He is sympathetic with the bereaved and the distressed; he is always trusted, for he is loyal to his friends and to his principles. His religion encompasses kindness to the degree that he is interested in every person's welfare with unbounded charity toward all. One's station in life is immaterial; he is as much interested in the humble as in the great.

Father's religion is concerned with large, all-embracing spiritual issues which reach out to include rather than to exclude; it unites rather than divides. It is a source of strength and encouragement, consideration and mercy, and vitality in raising human conduct to a higher plateau.

He is very pronounced in advocating the eleventh Article of Faith which gives everyone the right to worship God according to the dictates of his own conscience, and he declares that there are people in all denominations and religions that belong to the nobility of souls, which after all, is what counts the most.

He recognizes that human weaknesses are inevitable, and he understands them, yet he does not condemn, but rather he reaches out to lend a helping hand. He minimizes the faults of others and magnifies their virtues.

He recognizes that individuals have a right to their own points of view, and he listens to them with an open mind. The older he gets, the greater becomes his capacity for sympathetic understanding. His religion embraces goodness wherever it may be found.

I have never known him to do a dishonest act in any way nor to be guilty of an injustice to his fellow men. He can be accused by no one of resorting to mean or little things or of turning to trickery. On the other hand, he is consistent in maintaining the high moral ideals of his religion. He loses himself entirely, and gives all of his energy, in service to mankind. He is never less than he has been; he is ever greater than he was before.

His religion is reflected in his personality which is peerless, and it has made of him a composite of all we expect to find in a great man.
