How do you answer the question: “Do you take the bible literally?”

One appropriate way to answer: Sometimes, and in context, yes. The context (of the immediate passage, book, and bible overall) usually makes the sensible evaluation and interpretation of a passage clear. In some cases (ie: the 6 ‘days’ of creation mentioned in Genesis), there is more than one way to interpret the language of the text. For some people, the issue of literal interpretation is less about the nuances of translating ancient texts, as it is about one’s inclination (or lack thereof) of wanting to know what God says about life-intrusive subjects. As Mark Twain once said, “It’s not the parts of the bible I do not understand that bother me, it’s the parts I do.” We are not typically inclined to do things God’s way.

Our best answer relates to how one defines “talking something literally”. If by “literally” you mean ascertaining the real meaning, through normal, grammatical, logical understanding of what is intended by an author or speaker (the meaning that is most obvious to the reader/listener), then sure, Christians take the bible literally. Language is filled with figures of speech, and if by “literally” you mean ignoring normal tools of written and verbal expression, then no, Christians do not take the bible literally (except when the context is clear). (Example: What is your ‘literal interpretation’ of “it is raining cats and dogs”? What is your interpretation of the real meaning?) Most of the figures of speech used in Old and New Testament times, require an understanding of the original languages and the context of those times; although many biblical figures of speech have become modern English language idioms (see below).

“Figure of speech” = An expression that uses language in a creative or non-literal way, to convey emphasis or communicate with clarity and/or impact. Most readers/hearers are able to engage their social/cultural/educational background to interpret the intended meaning.

Metaphor: A figure of speech in which a word or phrase is applied to an object or action to which it is not literally applicable. James 3:6 “the tongue is a fire…”

Examples: “I had fallen through a trapdoor of depression.” “All the world is a stage…” “The police detective shadowed the suspect.” “Mary is a cold fish.” Jesus: “Go and tell that fox (Herod)…”

Simile: A figure of speech involving the comparison of one thing with another thing of a different kind, used to make a description more emphatic or vivid. Typically more explicit than a metaphor. James 3:11-12 uses a fountain, fig trees/vines, and salt water vs fresh water, as similes for the words that come out of our mouth.

Examples: “She is as fierce as a lioness protecting her cubs.” If Shakespeare had said “All the world is like a stage.”

Analogy: Shows similarity between things that might seem different, it is a comparison between two things, typically on the basis of their structure and for the purpose of explanation or clarification.

Examples: “The kingdom of God is like a dragnet cast into the sea…” See Revelation 4: John struggles to find the words to describe things beyond his frame of reference. An analogy can also show the relationship between things, a technique often used in IQ tests: “Noodles : Lasagna :: Beak : ________” (choose one: nose, song, bird) In James 3: 4, the analogy is Tongue : Fire :: Rudder : Ship

Idiom: A speech form or an expression of a given language that is peculiar to itself grammatically and cannot be understood from the individual meanings of its elements. Varies by language and dialect.

Examples: in English, we use many biblically-derived idioms, “I can see the handwriting on the wall” comes from the (literal) historical events of Daniel 5 (that took place ~539 BC). “Apple of one’s eye” is another (from Psalm 17:8). Other examples of non-biblical English language idioms: “Don’t pee on my head and tell me that it’s raining” or “She keeps her husband on a short leash.” Try to guess the meaning of this French idiom: “"la moutarde me monte au nez" (literally translated = “the mustard is going up my nose”).

Hyperbole: Exaggerated statements or claims not meant to be taken literally, meant to strongly emphasize a point. James 3:8 “the tongue is a restless evil and full of deadly poison”.

Examples: “The wedding party was a disaster of apocalyptic proportion.” “He is as old as the hills.”

Parable: A simple story (with fictional characters and common themes) used to illustrate a moral lesson or convey a primary teaching.

Example: Jesus told them frequently, eg: Luke 8.
