Página web, de Citavi 4.1 convertida a PDF 27/08/2013 11:18 a.m., es posible que haya diferencias con respecto al original.

Print Subscription | MormonTimes

Brought to you by

SEARCH CHURCH NEWS

Home Articles Features Viewpoint Callings Archives

Home > Articles > LDS among volunteers for Papal visit >

Authorized News Web site of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints

Thomas S. Monson LDS among volunteers for Papal visit Related Content

Conference

Mormon Tabernacle By Twila Bird, Director of media relations Denver Multi-region Public Affairs Council Missions

Choir Published: Saturday, Aug. 21, 1993

Colorado Denver South

Print | Email | Share

Daily index

Dedicatory prayers Craig and Shirley Nelson, members of the Greenwood Village Ward in southeast Denver,

letters First Presidency had been in their new home only three days when they were deluged by the media, This Week's News Articles

Elder Rasband breaks ground for Fort Collins

Humanitarian efforts curious neighbors and Catholic friends.

Colorado Temple

Missions

Nauvoo The interest was generated by the panorama offered from their balcony - a sweeping view Leaders on social media sites: Prophet and apostles

Scriptures of Cherry Creek State Park, site of a Catholic mass which was attended by almost on Facebook, Google+ pages

Sports 400,000 worshipers. The mass was conducted by Pope John Paul II, spiritual leader of Books from Benemerito: New MTC donates learning

Suggestions for almost 1 billion Catholics worldwide. It was the concluding event of World Youth Day, materials

life's challenges held in Denver on Aug. 11-15.More than 180,000 young Catholics from almost 100 'Opportunity is opening for me' -- Refugees learn

English, job skills at Deseret Industries

Temples countries converged in Denver for World Youth Day. The five-day forum was designed to

Ohio Mormon migration: New signs mark trail of

User feedback Transcripts of talks provide religious education, increase faith and offer interaction with Pope John Paul II. Kirtland Camp

The conference was by far the largest event ever held in Colorado. Over 10,000

World events Video volunteers were needed to help with the Catholic pilgrimage to Denver. Its success Church News Most Popular

required many months of intensive planning and preparation and depended in part on 1. New stake presidents help from people of other faiths, including Latter-day Saints.

Contact us

materials

LDS.org "The Mormon community here in Denver has been very helpful," said Cindy Mathews, 3. Leaders on social media sites: Prophet and apostles

locator Meetinghouse spokeswoman for the World Youth Day Committee. "They were one of the first to come on Facebook, Google+ pages

Provident Living forth as a group and offer their services both as host families and with general help." 4. New York Mormon Night includes missionaries and

Muckdogs

Subscribe to Church

News LDS volunteers supplied housing, staffed information centers, passed out registration 5. Niece of Joseph Smith honored

packets and provided office help at World Youth Day headquarters. They prepared press

credentials, gave medical assistance at event sites and put up and took down countless Deseret News stories

chairs, tables and booths. Missionaries from the Colorado Denver South Mission helped 1. Returned Mormon missionaries in 2013 FBS college

prepare the park site for the papal mass. And in the final month before World Youth Day, football

the Aurora Colorado Stake alone provided more than 100 volunteers who gave more than 2. Utah missionary dies after being hit by car in

Malaysia

1,200 hours of service.

One of the most significant services provided by LDS members was interpreting for non- Have a Dream" speech

English speaking pilgrims throughout the week. The language skills of many returned 4. Churches changing bylaws after gay marriage

missionaries were drawn on heavily by conference officials. "We kept busy answering ruling to try to avoid lawsuits

mostly very basic questions," said Spanish interpreter Dan Mathews, who is mission

leader of the Dartmouth Ward, Lakewood Colorado Stake. "People wanted to know MormonTimes stories where to catch a shuttle, where to get water and, of course, where the bathrooms were."

The Denver Multi-region Public Affairs Council coordinated most of the LDS involvement missionary

with World Youth Day. Stake public affairs directors did grassroots work on the stake

missionaries

level.

"Our members feel it is important to reach out into the community in any way that will Colorado Temple

make it better," said Ilene Dibble, community relations director on the council. "We

thought this was a premier opportunity to promote good will by assisting the success of national educator award the conference. What a great goal to bring youth together from all over the world to study about peace and love who would then return to their own countries and spread their enthusiasm and faith to others."

While in Denver, World Youth Day pilgrims participated in religious education experiences and enjoyed the cultural amenities of the city. They helped on volunteer projects, such as picking up litter, cleaning graffiti from Denver's bike paths, pounding nails and mixing mortar for homes for the poor. Enthusiastic crowds went to the big welcome for Pope John Paul II at Denver's Mile High Stadium. Multitudes congregated in the evenings for music events. On Saturday thousands walked 14 miles from downtown Denver to Cherry Creek State Park where they were joined by the remainder who rode buses. Almost 200,000 youth participated in prayer and contemplation through the night and stayed for the concluding papal Mass on Sunday when the size of the multitude doubled as other Catholic worshipers journeyed to hear the pope.

Rene Pechura, a Catholic youth who lives near Frankfurt, Germany, reflected on the conference: "We came together to pray. That's going to make a difference all over the

world, now and well into the future."

A hundred years ago, gold drew thousands to Colorado, but many went away poorer after their searches. Last week, the hundreds of thousands who came to the Rockies searching for more enduring riches returned to their homes rewarded for their efforts. Catholics and Mormons alike demonstrated that solidarity among all people is possible through common hope and faith.

Latest Church News Stories 20 Years Ago... Recent Photo Galleries

New York Mormon Night

includes missionaries and

foundation

of Kirtland Camp

Published: Saturday, Aug. 21, 1993

The Church Historical Department recently

missionaries and Muckdogs

'Opportunity is opening for

me' -- Refugees learn

periodicals, and historic coins placed in a stone

English, job skills at

box in the foundation of the Salt Lake Temple 136

Deseret Industries

years ago....

© 2013 Deseret News Publishing Company | RSS | Site Map | Contact Us | Privacy policy | Print Subscription | Archives
