Ed J. Pinegar, Especially for Missionaries, vol. 3 ( 1997)

Teaching with Power: Wax Strong in the Knowledge of Truth

Now do you think Ammon, Omner, Himni, and Aaron were entitled to any more than we are? You'd better not, because they weren't. Every story you read in the Book of Mormon (except for the 12,000 converts and the fourteen-year missions) can be duplicated in every mission of the Church today. The biggest miracle in the world is conversion, and the missionaries who have this great converting power are the missionaries who pay the price. But if you set your study aside, supposing that you know of yourselves, or thinking that you can wing it or just take it easy, you'll be the missionary who says, "Why is this so hard? My momma didn't tell me it'd be like this. President, I want to go home. I'm not having any fun. Other missionaries told me this would be the happiest two years of my life, and I don't feel much happiness."

I'll tell you something. I sure was happy on my mission and I certainly knew a lot of happy missionaries, because they worked and they studied as hard as they could. They were men and women of sound understanding, and they did wax strong in the knowledge of truth because they had gained this knowledge through diligent work and study.

This knowledge comes through searching the scriptures and good books, but D&C 88 of the Doctrine and Covenants tells us another way we need to learn. We learn by faith. If you want to learn, exercise your faith. I had the joy and the privilege of teaching the Book of Mormon for a long time, about sixteen years. That's only three years less than most elders have been alive! I studied and I taught that book. Oh, how I love that book! Last December, I realized that my old scriptures were crinkled and the back was broken. I'd used the Book of Mormon so much, it just turned open to the Book of Mormon and the Doctrine and Covenants automatically. So I decided that I deserved some new scriptures, and I bought two sets: a set that I carry around with me and a large set that sits on my desk.

In twenty-three days, I read the New Testament, the Book of Mormon, Doctrine and Covenants, Pearl of Great Price, and I marked all of the Book of Mormon, Doctrine and Covenants, and all of the New Testament (except for a couple of the gospels). I didn't just read the book; I feasted upon the words, intensely searched them, and pondered them. Then I would underline and apply a particular scripture to my life. So when I read, I had to go slowly.

After that I went to my wife and said, "Sweetheart, I don't know what's wrong with me." "What's the matter, honey?" she asked. I answered, "I just finished the Book of Mormon again and it's like I read it for the first time." She said, "What do you mean?" I said, "I've never learned so much in my life!" So I prayed and I said, "Father, why? Why am I just learning this now? Why did I learn so much more this time than the last twenty-five times?"

And the answer was, "My son, you were a good boy before and you're still okay, but you see, you read it this time with a different purpose in mind. The last time you read, you were just reading for a little knowledge for a class--like it's just part of the job, something you do because you have to. Now your mind isn't thinking of anything except how you can bless Heavenly Father's children. You are totally consumed with how you can use the book, how you can live the book, and how you can bless lives every minute."

Do you know the beautiful part about a mission? The only thing that you do is missionary work. You go to sleep and you wake up and you do missionary work. And elders (Hallelujah!) don't have to think about girls or dates or ask, "What'll we do tonight, where shall we go?" You don't have to think about any of those things! All you do is eat, drink, and sleep, and pray and ponder, and ask how you can bless Heavenly Father's children so they'll come to Christ.
