Ed J. Pinegar, Especially for Missionaries, vol. 3 ( 1997)

Don't Eat Your Spiritual Feast Intravenously

Have you ever pureed anything? That's where you take the osterizer and chop something up at a very high speed. Have you ever pureed a filet mignon and then drunk it? Doesn't that sound stupid? Who in their right mind would take a filet mignon, medium rare, and say, "Well, it's time for a filet, great!" and toss it in the blender. You wouldn't do that! You'd take a knife and fork, and you'd slice the meat, and you'd put it in your mouth and begin to chew. You might even roll your eyes back, savoring that bite, and in your heart, thank Heavenly Father for food. (Ooh, I can taste it right now!) And you would chew it slowly so you could enjoy it. You would smile between each bite, each chew.

That's the way you need to read the scriptures. You don't speed through like you're on a bullet bike. You don't say, "Oh yeah, I read the Book of Mormon" while you're humming and thoughtfully tapping your finger on your chin. You don't say, "Oh yeah, I took a speed-reading class and I can speed-read an entire chapter in five seconds . . ." That's like getting food through intravenous feedings. You'd get just barely enough to stay alive!

Here is a little parable for you. A rich young nobleman (let's call him Elder Milligan) walked up to Socrates and said, "Socrates, you are so smart." Socrates was a little embarrassed and blustered around a bit modestly, and Elder Milligan continued, " I would like you to teach me all that you know." Socrates said, "You bet I will, I'll teach you. I'll give you all of my knowledge." He invited Elder Milligan down to the river, and they hiked down the path together. When they got to the river, they walked into the water until they were about up to their chests and old Socrates said, "Look up there." The rich young nobleman looked up and as he did so, Socrates (who was unusually strong) pushed him under the water and held him there. Elder Milligan tried to get up but Socrates wouldn't let him. As Elder Milligan struggled to break out of the old man's grip, he felt the air leak out of his lungs until there wasn't any air left. Just when he decided he was about to drown, Socrates let him up and said, "When you wat to learn as badly as you wanted to breathe, you come back and I'll teach you all I know."

My point is that until you have an insatiable desire to gain the knowledge you need, to know your discussions, to know how to find people, and to be able to build relationships of trust, you will never be able to teach with power. How does the Lord teach that same thing in the Beatitudes? He said, "Blessed are all they who do hunger and thirst after righteousness, for they shall be filled with the Holy Ghost" (3 Ne. 12:6). If you want to learn, if you care about these people, then pay the price to learn. Get that knowledge.
