Ed J. Pinegar, Especially for Missionaries, vol. 3 ( 1997)

Open Your Mouth

You won't find people to teach unless you open your mouth, but you've also got to be able to open your mouth in such a way that they'll want to listen to you. Would you rather fight a battle with a machine gun, or a ball and musket? You are probably thinking, "What a ridiculous question! You know that I'd rather have a machine gun." And you would be right. Your machine gun in this parallel is your skills. Until you pay the price to get your skills, you will wonder what's wrong. If you don't sharpen your skills, you'll wonder why you aren't able to do everything you know you need to.

I testify to you that missionaries who hone their skills are the missionaries who baptize. They're in it with all of their hearts. I know that it's hard, but it's like learning to play the piano. I quit playing the piano when I was in the fourth grade, and I can play most of the hymns, but I am far from being a concert pianist. I didn't pay the price so I didn't get the skills, and the same thing is true for missionary work. If you don't pay the price for the skills, you can't do anything the way it needs to be done.

Once you've got the desire, you've been praying, you've been fasting, you have purity, you've got knowledge, your faith is increased, and you're starting to get our skills, the next step is to make your relationship with your companion as one. Otherwise the Spirit won't be with you. You've got to be unified, one in all things. What did the Lord say? If you're not one, you're not mine. When you and your companion are unified, you can build a relationship of trust with an investigator. If they don't trust you and love and respect you, they won't listen to you. The relationship with your investigator must be one of closeness, and kindness, built upon love and faith. Converts have written letters that say things like this: I felt the missionaries' love so much that I had to listen to what they said. While I was listening to them, the Spirit bore witness to the message's truth and I had to be baptized. Love and teach with power so they can feel the Spirit, and then they will choose to be baptized.

With all of this you'll teach with power, and then something important is going to happen. Your investigators are going to say, "I want to be baptized." You will be so happy, you'll want to shout at the top of your lungs: "Brother Brown [or whoever] is being baptized." I want to ingrain a very important doctrine into your heart. In John 15:16, Christ said to his disciples: "Ye have not chosen me, but I have chosen you and ordained you, that ye should go and bring forth fruit. . . ." We have been set apart and called to go out with great converting power to baptize people that they might come unto Christ.
