Ed J. Pinegar, Especially for Missionaries, vol. 3 ( 1997)

Root Them to Christ

As you do this, you must be sure that you teach investigators nothing but the gospel of Jesus Christ. If you teach the gospel of Christ with power, you will root them to Christ. If you root them to Christ, you will root them to the Atonement. If you root them to the Atonement, you will root them to the gospel. If you root them to the gospel, you will root them to faith, repentance, baptism, covenant making, and the gift of the Holy Ghost.

D&C 76:40-43 explains why the Lord Jesus Christ came to the earth: "And this is the gospel, the glad tidings, which the voice out of the heavens bore record unto us--that he came into the world, even Jesus, to be crucified for the world, and to bear the sins of the world, and to sanctify the world, and to cleanse it from all unrighteousness." We call that the Atonement. "That through him all might be saved whom the Father hath put into his power and made by him, who glorifies the Father. . . ."

Now turn to 3 Ne. 27:19-21. "And no unclean thing can enter into his kingdom; therefore nothing entereth into his rest save it be those who have washed their garments in my blood [in other words, repented through the atonement of Christ], because of their faith, and the repentance of all their sins, and their faithfulness unto the end [that means, endure to the end]. Now this is the commandment: Repent, all ye ends of the earth, and come unto me and be baptized in my name, that ye may be sanctified by the reception of the Holy Ghost, that ye may stand spotless before me at the last day. Verily, verily I say unto you, this is my gospel; and ye know the things that ye must do in my church."

In other words, if you teach with power, you teach the gospel of Jesus Christ. You teach the six discussions. You teach only that which has been written. Even in the Book of Mormon, we read that the missionaries taught nothing save it be faith and repentance in Christ.

You can do this, but you must have the gospel of Jesus Christ within your heart. You cannot commit others when you're not committed. You cannot call people to repentance if you don't repent. You cannot require people to make covenants if you're not keeping your covenants. When the gospel is in you, a light will radiate from you. But you must teach the gospel of Jesus Christ and nothing else.
