Ed J. Pinegar, Especially for Missionaries, vol. 3 ( 1997)

Come Unto Christ

How do you come unto Christ? Faith in Jesus Christ, taking upon us the name of Jesus Christ, repentance and baptism through Jesus Christ, and the gift of the Holy Ghost from God--these are the principles of the gospel that allow us to come unto Christ. We apply the Atonement to our lives and to the lives of our investigators as we teach them. This is the most incredible thing you will ever see in conversion. When the power of God is placed in an anointed servant of God, and that servant gives it by the power and authority of God to someone who is honest in heart, you can watch that person change before your very eyes. All of a sudden, their eyes will start to light up. They'll say, "Oh yes, I see, tell me more!" And in this process of enlightenment, guess what they receive? The gift of self-esteem. They recognize where they came from--"I am a child of God and I now understand his plan for me, and I want it. I want to be baptized."

Some of you might say, "Oh President, you make it sound like it's so easy." I know that it's tough, but trust in the Lord and don't ever let fear conquer you. I don't want any of you to fear. I have seen every sin you could imagine and every mortal punishment of that sin, as well as the change that comes into the lives of people who accept the gospel. I have seen alcoholics, atheists, and derelicts reborn as they remembered who they are and where they came from.

It is my prayer that the Lord will bless you and strengthen you to do his will and keep his commandments. Do not fear.

As you build and strengthen your faith, increase your love of Christ, wax strong in the knowledge of the truth, and practice your skills, you will grow in confidence. You will be able to stand and give your first discussion with power and love. And if some of you forget something, don't worry. If you do it with love, people will understand. But you'll become so good when you practice your skills, you'll always have this power. You'll go out and you'll be able to do what is necessary. Your investigators and converts will call you blessed. And the day will come when Heavenly Father will thank you and say, "Well done, thou good and faithful servant; thou hast been faithful over a few things, I will make thee ruler over many things" (Matt. 25:23).
