Karen Lynn Davidson, Thriving on Our Differences ( 1990)

CHAPTER ONE

Insider/Outsider

Many Latter-day Saint women—probably most of us—go through times when we feel that we don't fit in with the rest of the people in our ward. Generally we are able to take those feelings in stride. In a short while, as soon as we get to know people better, or as soon as a few more kindred spirits move into the ward, we find that we are more comfortable.

But for some women the feeling of alienation can be deeper and much longer lasting. As a sense of estrangement and aloneness builds up week by week, a woman may finally decide that her participation in her ward is nothing but routine and pretense. Convinced that she will never feel accepted, she sees no point in continuing to attend meetings where she feels unwelcome or out of touch. She becomes part of the rolls of the less active, that list of people who now choose to stay home but who at one time believed (or at least their families did) that The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints represented for them hope, socialization, and a divine plan for their earthly happiness and eternal salvation. They become the names with no faces on the ward list, known personally only to a patient home teacher or a dutiful visiting teacher.

When a woman reaches the point of thinking "this isn't for me—there is nothing for me here, and I don't belong here," everyone loses. The Church loses the opportunity to share its teachings and opportunities with a daughter of our Father in Heaven; the local ward loses the friendship and talents of a sister; and the woman has cut herself off from the fulfillment and joy that are potentially hers as an active member of her ward.

My aim in this book is to prevent that tragic parting of the ways. This book is not a problem-solving manual, nor is it just a naive "let's-all-be-more-cheerful" book. Its purpose is to remind us that sisterhood does not mean sameness, that commitment does not mean uniformity, and that women of vastly different outlooks and backgrounds can still share a joyful and enriching association as Latter-day Saints.

The reasons a woman might feel alienated, even to the point of opting out of Church activity, are not exactly the same for any two women. But over and over again, certain circumstances or attitudes seem to be at the root. This book focuses on five of the usual situations that might cause women to feel out of the Latter-day Saint mainstream: the single woman, who faces the problem of being "single in a married Church"; the woman who joined the Church or returned to activity only recently and who feels she can never truly be on the same wavelength as the women who have participated for their whole lives; the woman who is rearing her children alone or who is the mother or stepmother of a blended family (this woman has a family, but it does not correspond to the image of the traditional family); the woman who is married to a man who is not a Latter-day Saint or to a less-active Latter-day Saint husband and who therefore faces the task of pursuing her Church callings and activity without her husband at her side; and the woman who is a wife and mother in a traditional Latter-day Saint home, who seems to have it all, but who still feels that some other woman, more fulfilled and contented than she is, is in fact at the real center of things.

Why am I qualified to write this book? Not through any professional training as a psychologist or counselor. My background is in literature (which, frankly, I have always considered quite good training in understanding the quirks and foibles of human nature), and I have spent many years speaking with and observing women in the Church. As a faculty member at Brigham Young University, I knew and spoke with many of our young women. In pondering what constitutes sisterhood and how we can express our individuality in the context of our sisterhood, I am drawing on conversations, readings, and insights gathered over many years.

Undoubtedly my most important qualification is that I myself am an outsider in many ways. I fit into many of the outsider groups I will be discussing. I am a walking, talking, life-size visual aid for the points I am making, a visual aid that says, "The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints can accommodate—in fact, can benefit from—the active participation of many different kinds of women." The umbrella of the Church is a big one; it can welcome and protect many different kinds of women. I've found warmth and friendship there for decades now, and I feel sad when I meet women who don't feel there is any way they can find those same opportunities. I hope in some way this book can help.

Just so you'll know, here are some of the specific ways in which I don't fit the usual pattern for Latter-day Saint women:

I was single until I was thirty-eight years old. Needless to say, that does not fit the usual LDS timetable. Furthermore—and this is where a few people begin to raise their eyebrows in shock—I enjoyed those thirty-eight years very much.

When I did finally marry, I married a man who had been married before. He is a wonderful husband, I love being married, I acquired some wonderful stepsons, and we've had some great times together, but we still don't meet the traditional Latter-day Saint definition of family. Marrying a divorced man doesn't violate any laws. What it does violate is tradition.

I have no children of my own. Womanhood and motherhood are so often equated in our Church that not being a mother is a big distancer from the norm. Motherhood is often described as a woman's greatest mission, and it's a mission I haven't filled biologically.

I can't sew. I am emotionally allergic to that rustling sound a dress pattern makes when you take it out of the envelope. When Ulysses left for the Trojan wars and was absent from home for twenty years and presumed dead, his faithful wife Penelope kept hordes of rowdy suitors at bay by telling them, "I cannot consider an offer of marriage until I finish weaving this shroud for my aged father-in-law." Every day she would weave, and every night she would secretly undo the day's weaving. The weaving served its purpose by remaining unfinished. I too have a piece of Penelope-work, a needlepoint seat cover that I began about ten years ago. Every couple of years I get it out and attempt to work on it, just to reassure myself that maybe I could be a needlewoman if I wanted to. Like Penelope's shroud, my needlepoint serves its purpose by remaining unfinished.

Nor am I famous for my cooking skills. When one of my stepsons asks, "Is this homemade?" he is hoping the answer is no. We are better off with things straight from a box or can. On the other hand, my husband is a superb cook. He is also very artistic, with an excellent eye for interior design, flower arranging, and table settings. It is wonderful to be married to someone with those skills. The drawback is that these talents, because they are his rather than mine, only contribute to our image as the Odd Couple of our ward.

So I represent some great divergences from the norm, and I'm sure that sometimes when I have moved to a new ward I have been viewed at least initially as a suspicious character. My Church experience has taken me all the way from Cambridge Branch in Cambridge, England, where I was given four callings almost the minute I walked in the door, to Pleasant View Sixth Ward in Provo, Utah, where there were not enough callings to go around. Sometimes I had to wait awhile to attain any kind of credibility, especially in the bigger wards. Other times, for instance in England and in Irving Second Ward in Texas, they were so glad to have someone to fill several vacant callings that they were willing to suspend all suspicion and just audition me on the job, so to speak.

Each experience has added to my understanding. As the years go by, I understand more and judge less. In our day, women in vastly differing circumstances are members of the Lord's kingdom as his Latter-day Saint daughters, and two women who have virtually nothing in common except their desire to be faithful keepers of his covenants may have equally valid claims on the blessings of gospel living and Church membership.

No matter what her personal circumstances or her current Church assignment may be, every Latter-day Saint woman age eighteen and over is a member of the Relief Society. All active members of the Relief Society tend to share certain ideals and goals, but within those ideals is a great deal of room for individuality. Certainly the history of the Relief Society shows it to be an organization designed not to exclude nor to limit any woman but rather to encourage and celebrate the individuality and talents of each of its members. Ida Smith, formerly the director of the Women's Research Institute at BYU, noted that when the Prophet Joseph Smith organized the Relief Society in 1842 at the request of a group of Latter-day Saint women, he "taught them that they were responsible for their own salvation, that they had access to every blessing the priesthood had access to, that they had equal access to the Holy Ghost and to every spiritual gift, that they also had direct access to the Savior—to model him, to become like him, to be heirs in his kingdom.

"The Prophet removed some of the excuses afforded woman in her passive, dependent role and made her responsible for herself. In a very real way, he started the modern-day women's movement. Many of the early Mormon sisters caught his vision for women, got in the game, and ran with the ball. Women in Utah and Wyoming had the vote fifty years before women in the United States received it generally. And as we read and ponder the writings of many nineteenth-century Latter-day Saint women, we know that they knew who they were." ("A Woman's Role and Destiny," Woman to Woman, Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1986, p. 45.)

If a woman who feels like an outsider can become an accepted and happy member of her ward, everyone is better off. So who is responsible for this integration? Both sides must play a role in building bridges and removing barriers. The ward members might need to become less judgmental and suspicious, more willing to take the initiative in welcoming a new or returning member. The woman herself might need to be less defensive, less critical of herself, and more tolerant of the human frailties of the ward leaders and members.

Most of the discussion in the following chapters centers on what the woman can do rather than on what the ward members can do because I feel it is better at the outset to recognize an important truth: no one else's attitudes and actions are in your control. You can decide what you will do, but you can't decide what anyone else can do. If you feel that the day-to-day and week-to-week bond between you and the Church is strained and you wish to strengthen it to achieve a higher level of harmony and comfort, your approach, attitudes, persistence, words, and actions are in your control. No one else's are.

"But is all this really worth it?" a discouraged sister may ask. "If I get so little satisfaction out of Church activity, why shouldn't I just forget the whole thing? Why should I spend my energies trying to fit in where I don't seem to belong?" Every ward roster includes some women who are marginally active members on the discontented fringes of the organization. The ward asks very little of them; it's more or less understood that they won't accept a calling and won't fully participate. Others have even lapsed into total inactivity. The temptation just to drift into the ranks of the less active may be very strong.

Before she decides, "I'll give up because I'll never belong," I ask each woman to consider three reasons why it is worth it, even in times of discouragement, to maintain Church activity, to meet the ward and its members halfway—and even more than halfway:

What about a woman who is convinced that the Church and its leadership are inherently flawed? Anyone who expects this book to be critical of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints and its leaders is in for a disappointment. Although Church leaders have been known to make insensitive statements and Church programs have been known to accommodate some life situations better than others, this book will not attempt to catalogue nor correct those perceived shortcomings. It is not directly in our power to rewrite a too-rigid talk nor to do away with ward snobbishness. It is not in our power to control what others do. Each one can, however, decide what she herself will do: she can resolve to be more tolerant, she can resolve to attend her meetings, she can resolve to be a woman of good will. I do not ask any woman to deny her individuality or become something less than her genuine self. But with greater sensitivity and tolerance, the breaking point—the point at which the woman decides, "I just don't fit in here; this isn't for me," or the ward decides, "We just don't know what to do with someone like her"—won't always loom just around the corner, making everyone anxious and unhappy.

If a woman feels that the Church is in some way insensitive to her needs, I am convinced that she does not help her situation when she allows that perceived insensitivity to become the main focus of her relationship with the Church. When she is fixated on the put-downs, she will miss the talks and lessons and programs that will reach out and heal. I knew a woman who watched every session of every general conference, not to receive inspiration and direction, but to keep track of how seldom the Brethren acknowledged the needs of single women. Another woman once said to me, "I know a lot of women in the Church who are really hurting. Don't you?" She was hoping for a strong and bitter agreement from me. I told her yes, I did know a lot of women in the Church who were really hurting. I also knew a lot of women outside the Church who were hurting, and a lot of women who were not hurting, both within the Church and outside it.

I am therefore not willing to point to the Church as the villain each time a Latter-day Saint woman is unhappy. Three researchers who studied the roots of depression in Latter-day Saint women presented their findings in a recent article. They discussed some statistics showing that Latter-day Saint women were not prone to depression in unusual numbers, and the authors noted the danger of attributing personal unhappiness (or even, in fact, personal happiness) to the Church:

"Very few people live without experiencing depressive symptoms at some point in their lives. One reason depression in Utah has been attributed to religious values and norms is merely because religion becomes a factor in all aspects of life when religious involvement is heavy. It would seem wiser not to use this convenient scapegoat or, on the other hand, give total credit for one's emotional well-being to a religious institution (or any other single factor). Giving either undue blame or undue credit to the Church for the quality of one's life will not help in the difficult task of understanding and solving emotional problems." (Harry P. Bluhm, David C. Spendlove, and Dee Wayne West, "Depression in Mormon Women," Dialogue, Summer 1986, p. 153.)

Over the years, I have passed through varying degrees of comfort on the insider-outsider spectrum. I have found that for every remark or event in the Church that depressed me, there was a program, a friendship, a teaching, an assignment, a satisfaction that more than made up the difference. Taken all in all, in is better than out. In fact, many women in the Church find that the teachings of the Church help to focus their thinking and vitalize their creativity, providing them with a background against which they can assess the feelings and experiences that are important to them. Addressing the 1983 BYU Women's Conference, Professor Eugene England, who has studied Mormon literature for many years, stated that in his opinion "Mormon women are more free, more daring, inventive, original in thought and unique in voice than Mormon men. . . . Scanning down a select bibliography of Mormon literature I compiled lately, I find it clear that in every period and most genres more than half of our best, most challenging original work is by women." (Quoted in Dialogues with Myself: Personal Essays on Mormon Experience, Midvale, Utah: Orion Books, 1984, p. 154.)

Women who feel like outsiders tend to assume their feelings are unique. Isolation overwhelms them; they feel no one could possibly understand them. But are outsiders really in the minority? We might at first assume so; an outsider is a woman by herself, on the edge, circling around the fringes of the large, secure group of women who know they belong. Theoretically, all the women in this large group at the center mingle easily in their ward meetings; they blend without stress or fuss into a new ward; they know just what to do to have beautiful homes and happy families. But here is the paradox: these women who fit in so well, who exemplify Latter-day Saint womanhood with such confidence, who never question their roles, may actually be in the minority. It's not the outsiders who turn out to be the unusual ones, in the sense of actual numbers; the outsiders, in fact, prevail, or so I am convinced after many years of observation and discussion.

Each Latter-day Saint woman who feels she is an outsider should recognize that she is not alone. Most Latter-day Saint women would, in honest discussion, acknowledge having felt alienated or distanced at some time in their lives. Women who have served the Church for decades, who have truly paid their dues in every way as faithful members and who have every reason to assume that their credibility is established, can sometimes encounter a circumstance that changes the way others view them. One woman's family was having financial difficulty because the husband's salary as a schoolteacher was not really enough to support the son and the daughter who were both serving missions in Asian countries. The husband, a member of a stake presidency, had already taken on additional part-time work. When an opportunity came along for the woman to do some part-time bookkeeping at a pharmacy within walking distance of their home, she gave thanks in her prayers that her Father in Heaven had provided this means of tiding them over during that difficult time. That's how she saw the opportunity. Imagine her astonishment when a friend told her that some ward members had critized her for "not having enough faith to stay home." The woman said, "It was clear that some ward members now had a whole new feeling about me. I was not setting a good example. The trouble was, I started imagining that most of the ward members were suddenly looking at me differently and treating me differently." That feeling of being the different one is virtually universal among women in our Church, although the causes, the duration, and the seriousness of that alienation will differ with each individual.

Sometimes the feeling of being outside has a rational, identifiable cause; often it does not. Could a woman who grew up in a prominent Latter-day Saint family, married a man from another such family, reared outstanding children while amassing a whole list of professional and Church achievements, still feel like an outsider? Claudia L. Bushman, who meets this description, made these observations:

"One non-Mormon friend told me how much she wanted to be part of a group—to belong. When I replied that everybody felt that way, she said that I couldn't possibly understand, as I had the Mormons. Well, yes and no. It is true that we are all bound together. We have a structure with service built in and we would do anything for each other. At least someone would do it, out of duty, if not out of love. But for all that, we have plenty of tension and troubles. We are bound together by our mutual dislikes, our hurt feelings, and our insecurities just as surely as by love and service.

"People constantly complain of cliques and enclaves, of judgments and inadequacies in our little groups. They feel left out. They have part-member families, they don't live the Word of Wisdom, they are too shy to speak in church, they didn't go on missions, etc., etc. They think some wonderful hidden life is going on without them. I'd estimate that the majority of faithful Church members feel out of it for not measuring up to some idea or other while, on the other hand, some of those who feel most secure have little reason to be so, when measured by the same requirements. I often feel 'out of it' myself, and who is more in it than I?" ("A Celebration of Sisterhood," Dialogue, Summer 1987, p. 134.)

What a memorable sentence—"They think some wonderful hidden life is going on without them." A fact of human nature is that we tend to see others at their best and ourselves at our worst. We tend to idealize other women's lives in every respect. Something fulfilling and significant is happening, and we are not a part of it. We know what a struggle it was to get our own family to church on time, dressed and shining; we know how many impatient words were exchanged, how inadequate everyone felt, how a missing pair of socks was the pivotal issue in the morning's major crisis. But all we see of that other family is the array of beautifully dressed children climbing out of the van and arranging themselves in a neat row in the chapel. We give them the benefit of every doubt without stopping to consider what it probably took to get them there, what happens before or after this satisfying and impressive scene. How easy it is to exaggerate our own struggles and shortcomings and shortchange ourselves on credit for our successes. We are quick to relegate ourselves to the outside.

Each chapter in this book focuses on women in a particular group: single women, women returning to activity, and so forth. To portray something about the women in these categories, each discussion begins with two case studies. In most instances these case studies are composite portraits, not stories of one individual woman but an amalgamation of bits and pieces of my own life, incidents from the lives of women I know well, or just data from random observation. These glimpses draw no real conclusions. They simply describe a hypothetical sister and a little of her background, and the chapter does not seek to resolve these individual questions. But the case studies serve two purposes: first, for a reader in similar circumstances, they emphasize for her that she is not alone; and second, they may help other women to understand this particular woman, her concerns, disappointments, and hopes, and the events that brought her to her present situation.

Because separate chapters discuss separate groups, some readers may be tempted to turn only to the section that pertains to them. I ask you please to read all of the chapters. The point is not only to feel more comfortable with those differences that may belong to us personally, but to learn to understand others as well. We need an integrated sense of the variety of our sisterhood. We should go beyond tolerating our differences; we should rejoice in them, value them, grow because of them.
