Karen Lynn Davidson, Thriving on Our Differences ( 1990)

CHAPTER TWO

The Problem with the Patti Mold

When a woman feels like an outsider, just who is she comparing herself with? By what standard does she fail to be "in"? All of us can describe the ideal Latter-day Saint woman. In fact, we can list so many qualities that soon we start to laugh. No one could possibly have them all.

Two women living in Orem, Utah, Margaret B. Black and Midge W. Nielsen, wrote: "Many LDS women unconsciously compete with an idealized image of the already-perfect wife and mother who successfully incorporates all the demands of family, church, and society into her life. Although we have never met such a woman, we persist in believing she's out there somewhere. We can just imagine what she must accomplish in a day . . .

"Patti gets up very early and says her personal prayers. She zips her slim, vigorous body into her warmup suit and tiptoes outside to run her usual five miles (on Saturday she does ten). Returning home all aglow, she showers and dresses for the day in a tailored skirt and freshly starched and ironed blouse. She settles down for quiet meditation and scripture reading, before preparing the family breakfast. The morning's menu calls for whole wheat pancakes, homemade syrup, freshly squeezed orange juice, and powdered milk (the whole family loves it).

"With classical music wafting through the air, Patti awakens her husband and ten children. She spends a quiet moment with each and helps them plan a happy day. The children quickly dress in clothes that were laid out the night before. They cheerfully make their beds, clean their rooms, and do the individual chores assigned to them on the Family Work Wheel Chart. They assemble for breakfast the minute mother calls.

"After family prayer and scripture study, the children all practice their different musical instruments. Father leaves for work on a happy note. All too soon it is time for the children to leave for school. Having brushed (and flossed) their teeth, the children pick up coats, book bags, and lunches which were prepared the night before and arrive at school five minutes early.

"With things more quiet, Patti has story-time with her pre-schoolers and teaches them a cognitive reading skill. She feeds, bathes, and rocks the baby before putting him down for his morning nap. With baby sleeping peacefully and the three-year-old twins absorbed in creative play, Patti tackles the laundry and housework. In less than an hour, everything is in order. Thanks to wise scheduling and children who are trained to work, her house never really gets dirty.

"Proceeding to the kitchen, Patti sets out tonight's dinner—frozen veal parmigiana that she made in quantity from her home-grown tomatoes and peppers. She then mixes and kneads twelve loaves of bread. While the bread rises, Patti dips a batch of candles to supplement her food storage. As the bread bakes, she writes in her personal journal and dashes off a few quick letters: one to her Congressman and a couple of genealogy inquiries to distant cousins. Patti then prepares her mini-class lesson on organic gardening. She also inserts two pictures and a certificate in little Paul's scrapbook, noting with satisfaction that all the family albums are attractive and up-to-date. Checking the mail, Patti sees that their income tax refund has arrived—a result of having filed in January. It is earmarked for mission and college savings accounts. Although Patti's hardworking husband earns only a modest salary, her careful budgeting has kept the family debt-free.

"After lunch, Patti drops the children off at Grandma's for their weekly visit. Grandma enjoys babysitting and appreciates the warm loaf of bread. Making an extra call, Patti takes a second loaf to one of the sisters she is assigned to visit teach. A third loaf goes to the non-member neighbor on the corner.

"Patti arrives at the elementary school where she directs a special education program. A clinical psychologist, Patti finds this an excellent way to stay abreast of her field while raising her family. Before picking up her little ones, Patti finishes collecting for the charity fund drive.

"Home again, Patti settles the children down for their afternoon naps. She spends some quiet time catching up on her reading and filing. As she mists her luxuriant house plants, the school children come through the door. Patti listens attentively to each one as they tell her about their day. The children start right in on their homework, with mother supervising and encouraging them. When all schoolwork is done, Patti and the children enjoy working on one of their projects. Today they work on the quilt stretched on frames in a corner of the family room.

"Dinnertime and father arrive, and it is a special hour for the whole family. They enjoy Patti's well-balanced, tasty meal, along with stimulating conversation. After dinner, father and the children pitch in to clean up so that mom can relax. She enjoys listening to the sounds of laughter and affection that come from the kitchen.

"With the teenaged children in charge at home, mother and father attend an evening session at the Temple. During the return trip, they sit close together as in courting days. 'Well, dear,' says Paul Perfect, 'did you have a good day?' Pat reflectively answers, 'Yes, I really did. But I feel I need more challenge in my life. I think I'll contact our Family Organization and volunteer to head up a reunion for August.' " (Exponent II, vol. 5, 1979, no. 3; used by permission.)

Most of us realize that when we laugh at Patti Perfect and the notion that such a woman really could exist, we are laughing partly at ourselves—at the way we want to believe, in fact, persist in believing that such a life is somehow possible. We give a crazy kind of credibility to a model that we all know is a joke!

It is intriguing that every time we laugh about Patti Perfect or some other impossibly perfect Mormon woman, our jokes portray a hauntingly uniform model. All of us come up with a fairly similar list of wonderful qualities: this Supersister can cook, sew, decorate, serve in virtually any church capacity, and she is always upbeat: she knows her mission in life, carries out that mission with energy, and never has to deal with self-doubt or depression. We all know what she's like. She's practically the same, no matter who is describing her.

Just one model? Just one way to live that is pleasing to our Father in Heaven? Of course we share some important qualities as Latter-day Saint women. In some respects we are the same: we seek to live righteously and obey the commandments, we support and value the family unit, we value the guidance offered by the principles, the scriptures, and the leaders that help us form our value system as Latter-day Saints. We don't claim the right, in the name of individuality, to be unkind, unchaste, or irresponsible. But to assume that all Latter-day Saint women are intended by their Creator to be exactly the same goes against what we know about our Father and the pleasure he takes in variety.

A trip to the zoo or aquarium, a botany course, or just simple observation will teach us an important truth: our Creator loves variety. It is almost as if he asked himself, "What are all the possible kinds of living creatures there could be? What are the possible ways they could look? What are all the possible colors and combinations of colors they could have in their various forms? What are all the possible ways of gathering food, of defending themselves, of reproducing, of moving through the air or water, of caring for young?" It may seem a little irreverent to use the word game in reference to the creation of our world and its creatures, but that is certainly what it seems to have been: a Divine Imagination stretching to create incredible and vastly different life forms, our Heavenly Creator taking delight in his amazing powers.

To mention only a tiny fraction of the mind-boggling facts of our natural world:

A kind of crab called a decorator crab cuts sea plants into pieces and pastes them on his shell to provide camouflage.

There are probably 1,000,000 species of beetles on the earth, 6,400 species of rodents, 300 species of lizards, and 1,800 species of frogs and toads.

The male bowerbird builds a fancy tent out of vegetation, even painting it with berry juice and other pigments, so he will have a beautiful place to perform his courtship dance.

Some penguins carry their unhatched eggs around on the tops of their feet; after the chicks are born, they continue to ride around on the parents' feet.

A human has a total of 792 muscles; a caterpillar has 4,000; an elephant's trunk alone has 40,000 muscles.

The migratory ruby-throated hummingbird can fly five hundred miles without stopping.

The female gavial (or gharial), a reptile that looks something like a crocodile, lays her eggs under the sands of the riverbank. When the young are ready to hatch, they call to her from inside their shells to let her know it is time to remove the sand from above the clutch of eggs.

There has to be an easier way to do things! Do we need a million species of beetles? Do we need a creature with forty thousand muscles in its trunk? Isn't there a simpler way of engineering the hatching of the gavial babies?

But our Creator expressed himself through these and millions of other instances of natural variety. The conclusion is inescapable: our Father in Heaven delights in variety. He loves to see his creatures fulfill their lives and destinies, whether long or short, in ways that sometimes appear to us even fanciful and bizarre.

And within the species homo sapiens, each creation is unique. Surely it makes no sense, then, to think that a Father who loves variety, who cherishes differences and distinctions, would want all the women of his church and kingdom on this earth to be the same.

On the contrary. He intended us to differ one from another. Imagine a ward Relief Society made up entirely of Patti Perfects. Where is the delight, the humor? Where are the chances to progress? Where are the distinctive contributions made by the women who happen to work outside the home? Where is the spirit of sharing, where each sister looks for opportunities to enrich others' lives with talents she may have that they do not?

It is safe to say, I believe, that as Latter-day Saints we do not have an "anchorite tradition" as part of our heritage. An anchorite is a hermit, someone who lives alone and gives up all worldly pleasures as part of a religious commitment. The closest we can come—and it's not very close at all—is the reports of long periods of time spent in prayer, such as Enos wrote: "I kneeled down before my Maker, and I cried unto him in mighty prayer and supplication for mine own soul; and all the day long did I cry unto him; yea, and when the night came I did still raise my voice high that it reached the heavens." (Enos 1:4.) As Latter-day Saints we do not idealize those who go off by themselves to establish a mystical relationship with their God. Our spiritual heroes and heroines tend to be those who work within a community to serve and lead. We are people who live and work together.

And our differences oblige us to live as a community, to be interdependent, to call upon and appreciate one another. Ward members combine their talents to make good things happen for other ward members. When a ward Relief Society plans a social, they usually want invitations, music, decorations, refreshments. It's not often that one sister has the talent and training to provide everything that's needed. But someone in the group is probably a fine singer or instrumentalist, someone else can plan and produce some outstanding invitations and decorations, and someone else will happily and capably take charge of the food. The Relief Society community orchestrates the abilities of its members to make the event happen, and all of us can take delight in an occasion we could never have brought into being on our own.

None of us by ourselves is Patti Perfect, but in any given ward or branch, when we work together, combining our talents and our virtues, we add up to Patti Perfect and then some. No one person has all talents. Our Father has chosen to give some talents to each individual while withholding or reserving other talents. It then becomes our great blessing to be able to supplement one another.

Sometimes we are too narrow in our definition of talent. Professor Elouise Bell of the English Department at Brigham Young University related this story about a young woman in one of her classes:

"Her name is gone now from my stockpile, but the face is not. She was a very mediocre student in a general lit class—worked hard, tried, came every day, but was just not gifted as a student of literature. One day she came up after class and politely asked if I would do her a favor. I expected a request for some after-class help, a chance for extra credit, a make-up on a low test. Instead, she explained that she was MIA [Mutual Improvement Association, now called Young Women] president out at the American Fork Training School [a facility for the mentally handicapped] and wondered if I would come out and tell stories to the group one Mutual night.

"I couldn't refuse, though I wanted to. I knew myself to be awkward, uncomfortable, useless in such settings. But next Mutual evening, I showed up. And there was my 'mediocre' student, surrounded by dozens of adoring admirers. She moved among those twisted bodies and stunted minds naturally, gracefully, and most of all, lovingly. She enjoyed being with them. She knew their names, their interests, their capacities. Her warmth made them glow. She was one with them. I have never forgotten that evening nor the lesson I was taught. Nor have I ever since been tempted to confuse mediocrity in the classroom with mediocrity of the soul." (BYU Today, Apr. 1984, p. 5.)

Each of us can, in some way, make another strong where she is weak. Each of us also must be willing to play the other role, accepting help from someone else to make up for our own weaknesses. Part of the pleasure of moving into a new ward is that in getting to know the sisters in Relief Society, we can observe how they form one whole. No one woman has all the strengths, but as they work together, there's not much that's missing. Even a small branch usually finds that their talents and resources, when combined, can make the things happen that need to happen and fill the needs that arise.

Especially in small branches, the members can often testify that the Lord sends them the person they need with the talents they need at the time they need them. In the fall of 1971 I arrived in Cambridge, England, to live and study for a year. I did not know one person in all of England, let alone Cambridge, and so I looked forward to Sunday when I could meet the members of the Cambridge Branch.

They were friendly and welcoming, but I was puzzled by the reactions of two people. One said, "Oh, so it's you." What did he mean? He didn't know me or expect me, any more than anyone else in the branch did. The other one said, "I'm happy to meet you, but you're late." Late??? What on earth did she mean? How could I be late, when no one in the branch knew of my existence before I walked in that morning?

But a young woman who saw my bewilderment explained what was going on: "Two weeks ago an American Air Force couple by the name of Jones was transferred from this area. Sister Jones had held five callings [not unusual in that small branch], and we were wondering who was going to arrive to replace her. The Lord usually sends someone our way when a need like this arises, and we're glad to have you here." Almost before I knew what had happened, I was sustained in four of the five callings Sister Jones had held. Even a small branch will usually find, I believe, that it is blessed with the assortment of talent it requires to carry on its essential work at any particular time.

Paul discusses this kind of interdependence when he compares the members of Christ's church to the members of the human body. In all the scriptures, no passage is more relevant to the issues addressed in this book than this one:

"For the body is not one member, but many.

"If the foot shall say, Because I am not the hand, I am not of the body; is it therefore not of the body?

"And if the ear shall say, Because I am not the eye, I am not of the body; is it therefore not of the body?

"If the whole body were an eye, where were the hearing? If the whole were hearing, where were the smelling?

"But now hath God set the members every one of them in the body, as it hath pleased him.

"And if they were all one member, where were the body?

"But now are they many members, yet but one body.

"And the eye cannot say unto the hand, I have no need of thee: nor again the head to the feet, I have no need of you." (1 Corinthians 12:14-21.)

Implicit in this passage is an important message: it is not becoming or appropriate for the ear to complain that it is not an eye, nor for the foot to spend its energies worrying it would rather be a hand. As much as I would like to paint and draw, I will never be able to do so well, no matter how great my desire or how extensive my training. It seems my Creator chose to withhold those gifts. My job is to cultivate the talents I do have rather than to focus ungratefully on those I do not have. I can make other contributions for the well-being of the "body" of the Church. Just as the human body needs every part and organ, so the Church needs me and every other woman.

We can best fulfill our destiny by being ourselves. In his most famous poem, "The Love Song of J. Alfred Prufrock," T. S. Eliot allows us to listen to the thoughts of a pathetic figure who has wasted his life in a futile attempt to measure up to an image he feels others expect. In one of the saddest statements in the whole poem, J. Alfred Prufrock states, addressing himself,

There will be time, there will be time To prepare a face to meet the faces that you meet.

For each new person or situation, Prufrock must don a new mask, a new face. Instead of cherishing his own gifts and cultivating a self based on his own personality, he channels his energies in different directions: attempting to be a false self for each new circumstance with "a hundred visions and revisions." He feels he must reaudition for each new set of circumstances. He has lived without a genuine identity, without spontaneity, without joy: "I have measured out my life with coffee spoons," he says. (In Collected Poems, 1909-1962, New York: Harcourt, Brace and World, 1963, lines 26-27, 33, 51.)

Several years ago, William G. Dyer, a faculty member the BYU School of Management, gave a forum address titled "On Becoming an Authentic, Congruent Person." An authentic, congruent person—the opposite of J. Alfred Prufrock—is someone with inner peace and a confident sense of self. An authentic, congruent person is able to achieve a consistent correspondence between inner values and outward behavior. I have never forgotten one story he shared with us in that talk:

"Some years ago I decided to try to respond more directly to my own warm and loving feelings when it was appropriate according to my values. I realized that when my four sons were younger, I had hugged and kissed them, but as they grew older, for some reason I stopped that most satisfying behavior. I discovered that I still felt like showing my affection, and reasoned that to be more congruent, I should act more directly. I decided to hug and kiss my sons and to share openly this affection, particularly when I left or returned from a trip. I've always been able to share affection with my daughter, but with my sons, as the scripture says, there was the 'fear of men.' I think my boys were a little uneasy at first at this revival of physical affection, but I also think that they liked this response from their father. I know that I enjoyed the reciprocal experience when a son would spontaneously come up behind me and grab me in a big bear hug.

"One day I was faced with an interesting situation. One of my sons offered to take me to the airport as I was leaving on a trip. He invited a young lady to drive with us. When we got to the airport I thought, 'Should I hug and kiss my son as I usually do, or would that embarrass him?' I then concluded that I had the right feelings. He also knew that I was a kissing father, and that was his problem. If he didn't like it, then he would have to be congruent and let me know. So I hugged and kissed my son as usual. There was no apparent embarrassment in him, and I think he would have been disappointed in me had I abandoned our usual practice. At that point, not hugging and kissing him would have been incongruent on my part" (Choices: A Father's Counsel, Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1980, pp. 106-7).

William Dyer knew his instincts were correct, and he knew he should act on them without letting the "fear of men" get in his way. How wonderful to be able to step forward and be ourselves, without seeking to meet false expectations or a uniform model!

"Ye are the salt of the earth," the Savior told his followers in Matthew 5:13. Developing this metaphor, the Christian writer C. S. Lewis suggests that we imagine a person who knows nothing about salt. "You give him a pinch to taste and he experiences a particular strong, sharp taste. You then tell him that in your country people use salt in all their cookery. Might he not reply 'In that case I suppose all your dishes taste exactly the same: because the taste of that stuff you have just given me is so strong that it will kill the taste of everything else.' But you and I know that the real effect of salt is exactly the opposite. So far from killing the taste of the egg and the tripe and the cabbage, it actually brings it out. They do not show their real taste till you have added the salt." In much the same way, each follower of Christ accepts his teachings and then goes forth to act upon those teachings in performing good works and serving as a light to the world in a way no one else can. As C. S. Lewis said about salt when it is added to vastly different foods: "It is something like that with Christ and us. The more we get what we now call 'ourselves' out of the way and let Him take us over, the more truly ourselves we become." (Mere Christianity, New York: Macmillan, 1970, pp. 173-74.)

Our Father in Heaven has created us with differences. He does not expect us to belittle or erase those differences. When a woman auditions for the Rockettes chorus line at Radio City Music Hall in New York City, her goal is to be exactly the same as the other women. Rockettes are supposed to be perfectly uniform, absolutely indistinguishable. The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is not the Rockettes! We do not seek to be the same! We seek to nourish our individual personhood. Our Creator made us different, and it is our privilege and blessing to preserve those differences, develop them in the most positive way we can, and offer them back to him in his service.
