Karen Lynn Davidson, Thriving on Our Differences ( 1990)

CHAPTER THREE

The Single Woman

Marital status is perhaps the greatest marker that divides "insiders" from "outsiders" among Latter-day Saint women. From all around comes the message that happiness means family, and family means a husband plus a wife plus their children. Latter-day Saint girls virtually always envision their future in terms of this happy, intact family. It's a little like Noah's ark: the world is supposed to be arranged two by two. A single woman may feel like the orphan sock left on top of the dryer in the hope that the mate will turn up someday.

First Case History

Charlene grew up in Centerville, Utah, near Salt Lake City. She and her best friend enrolled at Brigham Young University after they finished high school. Within a year and a half her friend was married, but Charlene has continued her studies as an English major. She loves her literature classes and consistently gets high grades. She thrives on the friends and opportunities at BYU. When she looks back at some of the journal entries she wrote as a naive, self-focused freshman, she realizes that her awareness, her spiritual sensitivity, and her self-confidence have grown immensely. Yet every time she returns to her parents' home for a vacation or a weekend stay, the people in her home ward greet her with the same question: "I just can't understand it, Charlene . . . why hasn't some nice young man snapped you up yet?"

And they are not the only ones who had assumed Charlene would be engaged or married by this time. Charlene had thought so, too. That is why she hasn't really made any plans for a career or graduate school. The skills she has acquired as an English major give her a broad competence that would be useful in many professions, but she realizes that employers are not exactly standing in line to offer her a wonderful job. Several of her professors have encouraged her to apply to graduate school. One of them suggested several universities on the east coast, but that would mean uprooting herself to face challenges and people she has not met before. Whenever she starts to think about applying to graduate schools on the other side of the country—or, for that matter, anyplace but BYU—self-doubt wins the day.

Charlene sees a few other young women "writing their own scripts," setting off with a real sense of adventure in pursuit of exciting educational or career plans, and she is disappointed not to find that courage within herself. The question is, what are her alternatives?

Is it possible that Kevin is supposed to be the answer? He is a good, kind-hearted young man, a returned missionary, and a sophomore at BYU, but he has not yet set any definite academic or career goals. He does not share Charlene's interest in literature or the fine arts. They enjoy being together, but when they are with friends Charlene can't help but feel embarrassed once in a while at Kevin's immaturity. She has noticed that Kevin laughs when no one else does, and then, when someone says something she thinks is delightful or funny, he is often the only one who does not laugh. He is tuned in to a different frequency.

Charlene is bothered by what happened one evening as they were driving home from a fireside. Another driver cut in front of them too closely, striking the right front of the car with quite a whack and sending them spinning to the side of the road. Fortunately, no one was hurt, but Kevin's immediate concern was for the damage to his car. Only after he had looked at the damage to his car and spoken briefly with the other driver did he think to see if Charlene was hurt or upset.

But Kevin is security. She is glad when he calls her for a date, and they almost always have a pleasant enough time together. Nevertheless, Charlene feels an immense sense of relief and freedom when midnight finally arrives and it is time for him to go home. She loves regaining her privacy, and she welcomes the chance just to forget about the whole issue of Kevin for the moment. It has occurred to her that if they were married, midnight would arrive and Kevin would already be home. How would she feel then? She doesn't like to dwell on it.

Kevin himself is certain they should get married. He says that the answer to his prayers about their marrying has been a positive yes. Her prayers have yielded no such definite answer. When she really thinks about being married to Kevin one year or ten years or forty years in the future, the foreshadowings of frustration and disappointment seem fairly conclusive. Yet she partially cancels those negative thoughts by saying to herself, "Any marriage is a leap of faith. You have to trust some things to work themselves out. We are very different from each other, but that just means we'll have to be tolerant and understanding, and isn't that how you grow?"

At the moments when Charlene is most honest with herself, she knows that the main attraction Kevin has for her is that marriage to him will mean she will not have to decide what to do with her life.

Second Case History

Barbara is a single woman who has a Ph.D. and a thriving practice as a clinical psychologist. Her specialty is teenagers; when a young person runs into problems with schoolwork, drugs, self-esteem, or the police, Barbara's long-established reputation means that she is likely to be called on to help out. She has a nonjudgmental attitude and a talent for creative approaches, and her clients usually leave her office feeling much better than when they came in. She cannot imagine any work that would give her more satisfaction.

Sometimes she opens a counseling session by saying to the teenager, "I realize that there are things you would rather be doing than sitting here talking to a middle-aged woman." The self-deprecating remark is intended to remove some of the tension and induce a smile, and it usually does, because Barbara at age forty-three is an attractive and young-looking woman. She enjoys being fashionable in dress, hair, and makeup, and she considers fashion one of the rewards of her professional success. She sometimes jokes that the most gratifying moment of her counseling career was the time when a fourteen-year-old girl asked her, in the middle of a counseling session, "Dr. Jones, where do you buy your clothes?"

The Church has always been an important part of her life. She does not, of course, seek to impose her values directly on her clients, but after all, the goal is to help the clients establish satisfying priorities and happy lives, and Barbara has always felt that the gospel, as her anchor for a happy life, gives her a valuable and deeply-ingrained personal point of reference.

She has served in Young Women and has been a Relief Society visiting teacher for many years. Currently she is Social Relations/Compassionate Service Leader in Relief Society. Attendance at her lessons runs very high, probably because the sisters are intrigued with insights and anecdotes from her professional experience.

Yet Barbara feels cut off in many ways from her ward. She has often asked herself about the source of this feeling: is she the one who is defining herself as an outsider, or is that actually the message she is getting from the ward members?

She knows there is no malicious intent in anyone's heart when the computer-addressed ward mailings come to "The Jones Family." She doesn't mind that she is usually not invited to elders quorum or high priests group parties. What bothers her more is that some people in the stake seem to assume that a single woman, no matter what her age and achievements, is not really an adult. One home teacher looked around at her spacious condominium and said, "One thing I could never figure out is why one person would need this much space." He seemed to think a single woman should continue to live in a student apartment. And for many years now, in Barbara's stake, a married couple has been called to be in charge of activities for the single people in Barbara's age bracket.

Occasionally a well-meaning relative or acquaintance will arrange to introduce her to an eligible single man. Obviously they feel she must be lonely. She isn't. The solitude of her condominium is welcome to her after a day of counseling, and she has many friends, both male and female.

She has often sensed that the bishop doesn't know quite what to do with her and the two other single, professional women in the ward. When he talks with any of these three, he appears uncomfortable. They seem so different from the women in his own family; how can he feel confident he knows their needs and wishes? He is always cordial and appreciative, and Barbara knows he recognizes the outstanding way she fulfills her calling, but she has the sense that if she were to go to him and say, "I've bought a new home, so I'll be moving to another ward," he would be secretly relieved.

In Meredith Willson's The Music Man, Mrs. Paroo, the mother of Marian the Librarian, asks her unmarried daughter:

When a woman's got a husband and you've got none, Why should she take advice from you, Even if you can quote Balzac and Shakespeare And all them other high-fallutin' Greeks?

The message of this song is that if you are not married, nothing else about you—no status, no achievement, no amount of high character—can truly establish your credibility and acceptance. Many single women know that feeling all too well.

People with negative views about being single may turn up anyplace, including in the wards and stakes of the Church. We may encounter them as speakers, writers, teachers, administrators. To be sure, most of them are not saying, "Being single is really terrible." They are trying to be encouraging and positive. But consider this parallel:

My stepson, Wes, is a handsome boy. Everything about him is wonderfully good-looking, including his ears. But what if one day I began to reassure him about his ears, in a condescending way, over and over again? "Wes, you know, there's really nothing wrong at all with the way your ears look. Believe me, they're just fine." A few days later: "Wes, I know that sometimes when you look in the mirror you may start to worry about your ears, but I don't want you to give them another thought. They're perfectly all right; don't let anyone tell you otherwise." And again, sometime later: "Wes, you'll always remember, won't you, that there's no reason a person should ever be unhappy just because of his ears." What would happen in Wes's thinking if I were to say those things? My unspoken message is far stronger than my spoken one. Wes learns, once and for all, not only that his ears are funny-looking but also that I expect him to feel unhappy and embarrassed over his ears. That is exactly what I have not said—I told him not to be embarrassed, that his ears looked fine—but because I gave him so many condescending pats on the head with the supposed motive of reassuring him, I've helped him create a low self-image.

Here's the important point: all that would have been necessary for him not to worry about his ears would have been for me to say nothing at all. The more I said, "Don't worry, your ears are fine," the more I convinced him his ears weren't fine after all.

In my many years as a single Latter-day Saint woman, I have heard too many "Wes's ears" talks. One speaker at a stake conference said, "Now, you dear single people, I want you to know that the Lord is mindful of the special burdens you must bear. I want you to know that the Lord really does love you." Those are innocent statements, meant to be kind and supportive, but they imply some troubling untruths. What "special burdens"? Surely married people have "special burdens" too? Not in this speaker's mind. His "special burdens" phrase defines the world of the single Latter-day Saint as a bleak world of struggle and dissatisfaction. It then follows that this (of course unhappy) single person would have reason to doubt the Lord's love and would appreciate the speaker's assurance that he or she was not excluded.

President Gordon B. Hinckley has shown an impressive awareness of the problem. He said to Latter-day Saint singles in a fireside satellite broadcast: "Somehow we have put a badge on a very important group in the Church. It reads 'Singles.' I wish we would not do that. . . . Because you do not happen to be married does not make you essentially different from others. . . .

"You are just as important as any others in the scheme of our Father in Heaven, and under His mercy no blessing to which you otherwise might be entitled will forever be withheld from you. . . .

" . . We do not pity you, for you do not want pity. You want opportunity and challenge and appreciation" (Ensign, June 1989, p. 72).

Unfortunately, not everyone is so wise. By the time a Latter-day Saint woman has passed the usual time for marriage and is still single, a whole host of remarks, interactions, and examples are likely to have taught her that she is expected to be unhappy. The emphasis in our Church upon marriage and family is so strong that it is difficult for many people—single or married—to believe that a life outside that pattern can be a happy one. Married life and single life are two different worlds, and here are the lists that supposedly describe the contrasts between these worlds:

Married life Single life Life at the center Life at the fringe Real life A temporary condition not real life itself Something to preserve Something to be changed as soon as possible The real thing Veneer or imitation Normal life An aberration Progress Paralysis

If a single woman (like Barbara in our second case history) dares to be happy in her life, the message from some ward members is, "Then you had better realize how unhappy you really are and start acting that way!" It is almost as if married people, having chosen to make the inevitable sacrifices that marriage requires, feel threatened when they see a single person who is as happy as they are—maybe even happier.

The fact is that no sociological study has ever shown an automatic correlation for women between marriage and happiness. So the message of this chapter is not the message conveyed so often by well-meaning people like the stake conference speaker I heard: "You single people must be patient and make the best of a bad situation."

Instead, the message of this chapter is this: single life has equal potential with married life to produce happiness, satisfaction, achievement, and spiritual progress. There is nothing inherent in single life that should automatically draw pity from self or others, or a feeling of injustice or unfairness, or low self-esteem. Too many Latter-day Saints accept a strange definition of what single life should be, a definition that requires single people to wait in the wings, looking toward the future for happiness, meaningful relationships, fulfillment, and credibility. This "life on hold" is a false world of our own making, created by people with good intentions, perhaps, but with limited understanding.

So single people don't need to be comforted. What they may need is a reminder that certain negative myths about being single—those cited in the "single life" list above, for example—are very much alive and that whenever such myths begin to influence our speaking, our actions, our planning, and our policies, it is essential to recognize them and avoid being limited by them.

Obviously, certain blessings that are highly prized—a sustained, intimate, loving relationship with one man, the bearing of children—are not options for a Latter-day Saint woman as long as she is single. But she has other options to a degree that a married woman hardly ever has: choices regarding her own education, her career, the level of commitment to that career, and her geographical location. If a woman is throwing her heart into the education or career she loves, with friends and hobbies of her own choice, and still chooses to let the negative voices prevail, the ones saying "but surely as a single you can't really be happy," she should consider whether she is too susceptible to false opinion.

Sometimes the strongest messages of puzzlement and disappointment come from parents whose daughter remains single past the usual age for marriage. What can she answer when they ask her, "When are you ever going to find a man and settle down?" One young woman noted, "It got to the point where my parents were even asking me where they had gone wrong; they were blaming themselves for my being single. So I told them, 'You are wonderful parents, and the proof of that is that you brought me up to be self-reliant and happy. I love you, and I know you'll love me and support me whatever the future brings, whether I'm single or married.' "

All too often a single woman, particularly a younger one, will think, "If I achieve too much, I will price myself out of the market. I will be too intimidating." Here is the paradox: she probably dreams of her ideal mate as a man of wonderful breeding, education, and achievements. But in many cases she doesn't stop to think that unless she also is that calibre of person, their paths are not even likely to cross! The greater visibility and increased contacts that come with professional achievement may enhance her chances of meeting an eligible man of similar background.

Another woman may say, "But if I choose a path in my education or career that requires a commitment of many years, what if an opportunity for marriage comes along and I have to drop everything?" I would answer, "Fine. So you have to alter your plans. What have you lost? You have grown; you have more individuality and experience to contribute to your marriage. And what does 'drop everything' mean? You will have decades of active life in front of you after your last child has left home. Many opportunities are likely to arise for you to benefit from, and ultimately continue, your training and experience." By contrast, if she sets aside the responsibility for her own planning and her own choices, she loses either way—in her happiness and self-esteem as a single woman, and in her contributions to her family and community as a married woman.

What would we think of a man who said, "One day I might be called as a mission president. If that happens, my profession would be interrupted. So I might as well just live from month to month, without any real professional commitment." That is strange reasoning, of course. First of all, he is wrong to let a future possibility drain all the vitality from his present dedication and achievement. And second, years of thumb-twiddling would be the poorest possible preparation to be a fine mission president. By waiting passively for the call, he will probably disqualify himself for it.

A study carried out in 1981 yielded some thought-provoking demographic information about single people in the Church. The study found that for every one hundred active single women over age thirty, there were only nineteen active men. In addition, the single women were more likely to have higher levels of education and employment. One report on this study concluded, "Clearly, marriage to an active male is demographically impossible for many active single females over 30. And even when there are available males, they may possess other personal characteristics that rule them out as potential mates. Marriage is not a universal solution to singleness if the only acceptable marital option is marriage to an active LDS partner." (Kristen L. Goodman and Tim B. Heaton, "LDS Church Members in the U. S. and Canada: A Demographic Profile," AMCAP Journal, vol. 12, no. 1, 1986, p. 89.)

If I had a daughter, I would advise her to set her educational and career goals as if she were going to live her entire life as a single woman. Then, if an appropriate opportunity for marriage should come along, she is that much farther ahead in her own growth and happiness and she has not made the error, in the meantime, of postponing her life on the assumption that someone will someday come along and make her happy. I would feel confident that her marriage would be happier because she had been a happy single woman. I have yet to see marriage, by itself, turn an unhappy person into a happy person. A really happy married person is almost always one who was or could have been happy as a single person.

Sometimes a young woman will obtain her education by acting from a very limited set of motives. She is the victim of what some have called "the mattress theory of education": education merely to give her something to fall back on! Of course it is important for her to be able to earn a living for herself, or for herself and her children, if no husband is present to provide that financial support. But that is only a default reason for education. She should seek the finest education that is within her grasp because she is a daughter of her Father in Heaven and when she returns to him, she wants to be able to say, "I have grown. I have made the most of the talents and gifts you have blessed me with. I have developed these gifts and used them to serve others." That is a far loftier, far more significant reason for education. "I am seeking an education in case the fates decree I must earn a living," as important a reason as it may be, is a pathetic, secondary motive by comparison.

Sometimes a single woman will seem to make a point of living a tentative, uncommitted life. She accepts a rootless, day-to-day routine, a makeshift and temporary existence that, according to her thinking, cannot become purposeful and real until she marries. Only a married person, so the myth goes, can lead a life of commitment and focus. Single people—particularly single women—are only camping, because they have to be ready to pull up stakes and make radical changes in their lives if "it" happens. The myth says that putting down roots not only causes inconvenience if single individuals marry but may actually endanger their chances of getting married or at least make those individuals seem less available. In any case, putting down roots, establishing a real life instead of camping, is (according to the myth) an inappropriate signal. It tells the world that the single person may have given up hope and not be gearing her entire life toward a hoped-for marriage.

In the newspaper one day was a letter to a psychologist-columnist from a single woman who complained that she was just not meeting any single men and did not know how to widen her prospects. The columnist answered: "Every year, you should move to a new city. Find a new job, a new apartment, and a new set of friends." On the surface, this advice seems to have something to recommend it: obviously, meeting eligible men was a high priority for this young woman, and the counselor's suggestions were intended to help her to meet more people. There is just one problem: that is not the way an adult lives. What about long-lasting relationships other than marriage? What about this young woman's career? What about the question of a true "home" (whether rented or bought) if she moves every year? A yearly relocation on the chance of finding a husband would make a shambles of the young woman's job prestige, financial security, and feelings of stability. Whether her chances of marriage would significantly increase with the frequent moves is a question I can't answer, but my guess is that if she were to stay in one place and give her energies to a career she loved, earning the respect of friends and associates, committing herself to Church and community, and developing herself as an individual, she would increase her ties, her visibility, and the quality of her own life. Unfortunately, the columnist, like so many other people, assumed that a single person just wouldn't want to think in such permanent, adult terms.

Two psychologists writing in a book called The Challenge of Being Single had some much more productive and helpful suggestions: "Despite the incontestable satisfactions to be found in a partner of our choice, there is plenty of evidence to suggest that an all-out search for such a person simply doesn't work. In fact, the search for the one-and-only may well be the most handicapping of all the mental 'programs' with which a single saddles himself. Many singles decide what they will do for a living, where they will work, where they will travel, and what they will do for recreation, driven by this search alone." (Marie Edwards and Eleanor Hoover, The Challenge of Being Single, Los Angeles: J. P. Tarcher, 1974, p. 22.)

Please don't misunderstand when I suggest that a single woman should be willing to put down roots, however. Sometimes what a single woman needs is to be willing to move. Each single woman should take a look at her career. Does it give her joy? Does it allow her to feel she has contributed in a significant way to the work of the world? Does she look forward to going to work each morning? If not, would additional schooling give her more meaningful work—a true career rather than just a job? Sometimes it's difficult to leave the security of a known environment. But I don't remember ever hearing a woman say that she regretted deciding to further her education, nor do I remember any woman who regretted relocating to pursue significant career advances.

It is frightening to think of moving to a place where we know no one. But we Latter-day Saints have an advantage—a network of friends who will help us make the adjustment to a new place. Many a Latter-day Saint (me included) has moved to a new location and has waited nervously and gratefully for the first Sunday to roll around, just so there will be some welcoming smiles.

I have talked to many BYU seniors who were reluctant to enroll in graduate school on the east coast or to accept a job offer in a strange city. My advice usually was, "Don't pass up this opportunity, but after you get there, be sure to suspend judgment for two weeks. At first you may well be saying to yourself, 'Why on earth did I ever do this? What was I thinking of?' But I can just about promise you that within two weeks you will be saying to yourself, 'I can't imagine life without these friends and these experiences.' "

I have known too many young women who should have been anxiously engaged in a good cause but who instead were preoccupied with anxiously causing a good engagement. An obsession with "finding the right one" can often paralyze a young woman in accomplishing other goals. My observation is that the best engagements are by-products, the result of truly being anxiously engaged in a good cause. The good cause is then sufficient reward in and of itself, whatever the social results may be. If a strong friendship or romance should happen as well, it is probably a far healthier, more legitimate pairing between two people with goals and interests in common than just "being on the prowl" would have yielded.

One psychologist has pointed out that it is a mistake to equate marriage with maturity, because immature people often seek a spouse just as a way to avoid personal responsibility. "In contrast," he continues, "the singles who lead worthwhile lives have demonstrated their ability to live independent, mature existences. Mature, autonomous single people see life as a varied experience with many possibilities, contribute to others' welfare without making emotional demands, are self-reliant, and offer as much to a relationship as they take from it." (Rolland S. Parker, Living Single Successfully, New York: Franklin Watts, 1978, p. 178.)

One bishop told of a woman who came into his office, troubled and in tears, because the years were passing and she was still without a husband. "I never thought I would be this old and not be married," she told him. "I don't understand this. I have been preparing for marriage ever since I can remember." The bishop asked her to explain what she meant by "preparing" for marriage. It turned out that although she was a fine woman of high personal standards, "preparing" really meant mostly "waiting." She had denied herself opportunities for personal growth and new experiences because she assumed that someone else would make her happy. The bishop suggested that she undertake some new and significant goals on her own that would help her self-esteem and feelings of fulfillment.

In The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, we stress the importance of marriage as an eternal state, as the condition in which all truly righteous sons and daughters of our Father in Heaven will one day live. We are so accustomed to hearing this that we fail to realize that single people not only have equal opportunities for spiritual progress but also in some ways may actually find it easier to pursue certain spiritual goals than married people do. In 1 Corinthians 7:32-33, Paul writes: "He that is unmarried careth for the things that belong to the Lord, how he may please the Lord; but he that is married careth for the things that are of the world, how he may please his wife."

That is a somewhat surprising scripture, and as Latter-day Saints we do not automatically assume that a married person is a second-class spiritual citizen because he "careth for the things that are of the world." But most married women who have child-care responsibilities will tell you that they sometimes think back with longing to their single days when they simply had more autonomy, more jurisdiction over their own time, so that fasting, scripture study, and personal prayer were not so hard to schedule. Paul's statement should not give single people an excuse to flaunt a supposed spiritual superiority, but it is an interesting point to contemplate. With singles' greater autonomy and self-determination, is it possible that some spiritual opportunities available to single people are in fact more difficult for married people to find?

President Spencer W. Kimball often stressed that married people have no monopoly on the opportunity and responsibility for spiritual growth. At one point he said, in speaking to the women of the Church in September 1979, "Sometimes to be tested and proved requires that we be temporarily deprived—but righteous women and men will one day receive all that our Father has. It is not only worth waiting for—it is worth living for! Meanwhile, one does not need to be married or a mother in order to keep the first and second great commandments—to love God and our fellow-men—on which, Jesus said, hang all the law and all the prophets." (My Beloved Sisters, Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1979, p. 41.)

Our Father in Heaven did not send any of us to this earth to feel like half of anything. A true adult, whether she is married or single, establishes as happy a life as her opportunities allow, cultivates a close relationship with her Father in Heaven, and does not wait for another person to make her happy. All the important gifts of life are available to all of us: harmony, delight, increased skills and knowledge, close personal relationships, and spiritual progress. The Lord intends for each one of us to have a life of happiness, service, and satisfaction. But he does not have in mind identical timetables, identical life patterns.
