Karen Lynn Davidson, Thriving on Our Differences ( 1990)

CHAPTER FOUR

The Woman Who's Not a "Lifer"

Does a lifelong, active member of the Church have a special claim on the "insider" designation? Sometimes a newly baptized or newly activated woman may look with envy at a "lifer"—a woman who is the product of a strong Latter-day Saint family, perhaps several generations of such a family—and become very discouraged. The newcomer may say to herself, "I'll always feel like an outsider. No matter how strong my testimony is today, no matter how great my commitment, my past life will always keep me on the outside." She envies the woman who has taken all the appropriate steps (possibly a mission, certainly marriage and motherhood) according to the customary timetable. She has come late to a world in which others seem to feel far more comfortable than she does.

This woman is active in the Church, has a growing testimony, and desires to share Latter-day Saint values with others. The only difference between her and the lifers is that there was a time in her life when she did not accept and live the principles of the gospel. She has now made a new life for herself, and she rejoices in that life. But when she is around women who have always taken a Latter-day Saint life-style for granted, she still feels like a woman with a past.

First Case History

When Anita was growing up, home meant a place of physical shelter, a place to sleep and eat, rather than a place of emotional support. Her parents were divorced when Anita was just a year old, and she knew her father only vaguely. Sometimes on Christmas Eve he had come to the apartment with presents, but more than one Christmas had come and gone without a word from him. Even his physical appearance was a blur in her mind.

When Anita was twelve years old, her father died of kidney failure. Anita attended the funeral, along with her mother and her two brothers. Some of her father's friends from his car club attended, too. When they met Anita after the service, one of them said to her, "Oh yes, your father always carried a picture of you with him. He showed it to us many times. He was so proud of you." But not once had he conveyed these positive feelings to Anita in person.

As she looks back now on her teenage years, Anita feels that her mother probably did in fact love her. The problem was that she was almost always too exhausted or preoccupied to express that love. Rather than talk with Anita or involve her in household tasks, Anita's mother almost always preferred to withdraw to solitary television watching or resting. Her aspirations for Anita were minimal; some warnings about "you know better than to get yourself into trouble" were as far as her counsel went.

Anita was fairly regular in her high school attendance, but she was not a good student. Because she was very quiet, the teachers and counselors paid her little attention. Finally, out of boredom she tried cocaine. She did not become addicted, but more or less on an impulse she agreed to marry a twenty-eight-year-old man who dealt in drugs "only as a sideline." When she asked for her mother's signature on the document that allowed her to marry at sixteen, her mother responded, "Why not?" Anita never knew if her mother gave permission because she suspected that Anita was pregnant (she was not) or simply because she was relieved to get Anita out of the house and be rid of all responsibility for her.

Since that time, she and her mother have communicated only rarely. The marriage lasted only a few weeks. By then Anita was pregnant, and a solicitous social worker helped her through the pregnancy and birth. The social worker presented her with the options regarding the baby, and Anita knew that she would have to decide whether to give the baby up for adoption. After considerable soul-searching, Anita acknowledged that she could offer the baby virtually no security or opportunities whatever, and she gave permission for the adoption. It was the most difficult, heartbreaking decision of her life. Although she has never regretted it, she often thinks about the daughter she never even really saw.

Anita was now almost eighteen years old. The unfortunate marriage and pregnancy were behind her, but what did the future hold? She had no job skills, no niche to fit in. The social worker offered a suggestion: what about the United States Army?

Joining the army was the last thing Anita would have thought of, but she investigated the advantages of enlisting, including the chance to finish her high school diploma. She decided she had nothing to lose. Today, when someone asks her, "Would you recommend the army for young women?" she answers, "In general, no. For the daughters of most of my friends today, the rough life of the army wouldn't represent upward mobility. But for me, it was exactly what I needed."

The series of small tasks and requirements, with daily and weekly successes as she made her way through basic training, gave her a feeling of achievement and self-esteem for the first time in her life. She began to look at the future in a different way, because she began to see herself as a person of worth who could contribute something to the world. She asked her friends to start calling her Anita instead of the series of tomboy nicknames she had always gone by.

The two nicest people she met in the army were a chaplain and one of the instructors who helped her toward her high school equivalency test. She found out both were Latter-day Saints. Because she was feeling proud of the way her life seemed at last to be coming together, she was open to any program or teachings that might help her to grow and mature. She attended a Latter-day Saint service on the base, and eight weeks later she was baptized.

Anita is now married and one of the stalwart members of her small ward in Texas. Though her husband is only partially active, she and her children consider the Church to be the core of their lives. Nevertheless, she feels a great gulf between herself and the other members. Sometimes she feels that her best course is to avoid all mention of her past—it is past, as she reminds herself several times each day. On the other hand, she sometimes thinks that if she were more open, she would feel less like a person with something to hide. What must people think of a ward member who never refers to her background, who never has relatives to visit, who seems to have sprung from nowhere? In any case, it is clear to her that the other women share experiences and assumptions that she will never be a part of. One day, for a lesson on gratitude, the Relief Society teacher had the Relief Society women sing two simple Primary songs. The others were laughing and joining in; Anita had never heard of either "I Have Two Little Hands" or "Thanks to Our Father." She wonders if she will ever truly feel a part of this group. She looks at the Relief Society president, a woman whom she particularly admires, and thinks, "They say it takes seven generations to make a lady. It probably takes about that many generations of Latter-day Saints to make a spiritual giant like her."

Second Case History

Evelyn decided many years ago, "If I can be polite to the people who visit me from the Church, and invite them in, and be friendly, then they can return the favor by not pressuring me to go to meetings." Evelyn's early activity in the Church had been sporadic, and when she went away to college she no longer received phone calls from a dutiful and concerned Young Women leader inviting her to meetings and special events. Accountable to no one but herself, she lost all connection with the Church. If anyone asked her about her religion, her answer was, "Well, I was raised a Mormon," with the intonation in her voice implying, "But I certainly don't consider myself one now."

She married a man who was not a member of the Church, and they moved several times in the years that followed. Each time she moved, her membership record somehow found its way to her new ward. Sooner or later there would be a phone call or a knock on the door, and someone would introduce himself as the home teacher or herself as the visiting teacher. In several instances, members of the bishopric or the Relief Society presidency had also come to visit. She appreciated their friendly intentions and knew that they were faithfully carrying out their assignments, so she was always hospitable.

Most of her home teachers and visiting teachers soon understood that Evelyn did not appreciate constant invitations to "come out to church." On three or four occasions when her husband was out of town for the week, she accepted, just for the sake of the company, her visiting teacher's invitation to homemaking meeting, but each time she regretted it. Her appearance at a church meeting caused what she considered a foolish flurry of fuss and anticipation, with everyone assuming she had resolved to become active. She winced when the visiting teacher kept saying, for weeks afterward, "We missed you at Relief Society!" They had not missed her, she felt; what they had missed, she thought, was the trophy of reactivating a lost sister, the triumph of adding to their attendance numbers.

Evelyn's world crashed in one day when her husband was diagnosed as having pancreatic cancer. His life expectancy was a matter of only a few weeks. Evelyn, always a practical woman, discussed with her husband what funeral arrangements he preferred. The outcome of these discussions was that Evelyn phoned for an appointment with the bishop. She was completely frank: "I am one of your inactives and I have made no contribution at all to the ward, even though I consider myself an 'ethnic Mormon,' if there is such a thing. My husband has no ties to any denomination, but he has decided that he wants a religious funeral service of some kind. He has appreciated the faithfulness of all my Mormon visitors, and he asked me to request a Mormon-style funeral service for him. I know you accept no money. I would make a contribution to the ward or whatever is appropriate. I don't want to impose." The bishop told her she was under no obligation and agreed to do anything he could to help.

The funeral was a dignified and appropriate tribute. Her husband knew and liked the hymn "How Great Thou Art," and Evelyn's visiting teacher and another woman sang it as a duet. Quite a few ward members came, and the nonmember friends who attended were impressed with the service.

Evelyn's situation changed entirely after her husband's death. She needed friends. She began attending church regularly and found that the prayers, hymns, and lessons were beautiful and comforting.

But as meaningful as she found her participation in the ward, she was sure she would never feel completely at home. So many other ward members had lived their entire lives at the center of church activity, proud of their achievements within the Latter-day Saint pattern, supported at every moment by relatives and lifelong friends. One Sunday, when a woman about Evelyn's age introduced a guest at Relief Society, "This is my daughter JoAnne, who is president of her ward Relief Society in Arizona. She is here with her husband and baby visiting me for a few days." Evelyn felt an envious longing for the same kind of firmly established, traditional Latter-day Saint security. Others had paid their dues all their lives; there was no way she could catch up.

To complicate matters, Evelyn's only son moved in with her after his divorce, and he was a chain smoker. The smell permeated everything in the house. No amount of bathing, shampooing, or laundering, Evelyn knew, could remove that smell from her hair, clothing, and skin when she went to church. Everyone continued to be kind and friendly, but Evelyn's feelings of self-consciousness and alienation increased as she continually wondered: How bad was the smell? Was her presence distasteful to other ward members?

The scriptures could not be more clear on the Lord's attitude toward the past sins and shortcomings of a person who has repented: he promises to forget them. He does not say he will discount them by a certain percentage, or that he will note them but not add them into the final account. He says that he will forget them. "Though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be as white as snow." (Isaiah 1:18.) "Behold, he who has repented of his sins, the same is forgiven, and I, the Lord, remember them no more." (D&C 58:42.)

When the Lord says he will forget, why do we think he does not mean what he says? Perhaps we need to create some images that will help us understand his promise:

The page on which our sins are written is shredded and then burned, leaving not even a pile of identifiable ashes.

The blackboard on which our sins were written is washed perfectly clean, leaving not even a trace of what was there before.

Someone at a computer keyboard pushes a "delete" button and the list of wrongs is gone, irrecoverably, from the data.

If the Lord forgets the sins of a repentant person, who are we to be more judgmental than he is? Many years ago a young woman I knew well had a baby out of wedlock. The baby was placed for adoption, the young woman resolved to begin a new life, and a year or so later she met a young man whom she married in the temple. I attended the reception, a lavish and joyful occasion, and as I watched the happy bride, I was shocked at my own thoughts: "She broke a major rule, and here she is celebrating a temple marriage! Is this right? Shouldn't she have to pay, somehow?"

I quickly realized that those thoughts were totally out of order. When I said to myself, "The Lord forgives her and forgets her past wrongs, but I choose not to," I was in essence saying, "The Lord forgives her and forgets her past wrongs, but I choose to outrank him. I am setting myself above the Lord because I presume I have the right not to forget."

A true understanding of the Atonement means not having to live with past mistakes. The Lord's forgiveness is real. The difficulty we have in truly dismissing forever our own past sins, and those of others, is a weakness in our testimony. If we continue to point the finger, to carry a grudge, to give a repentant person only tentative credibility, we are out of line with Latter-day Saint teachings concerning the extent to which blessings are restored to us after repentance: "It shall come to pass that every soul who forsaketh his sins and cometh unto me, and calleth on my name, and obeyeth my voice, and keepeth my commandments, shall see my face and know that I am." (D&C 93:1.)

What if our sins marked us forever? A famous verse from The Rubaiyat of Omar Khayyam shows the tragedy and despair of a world in which the past forever casts its shadow over the present:

The Moving Finger writes; and, having writ, Moves on: nor all your Piety nor Wit Shall lure it back to cancel half a Line, Nor all your Tears wash out a Word of it. (Translated by Edward Fitzgerald, in British Literature 1800 to the Present, ed. Hazelton Spencer et al., Lexington, Mass.: D. C. Heath and Co., 1963, p. 958.)

Imagine a world in which each wrong was there forever, in spite of our "Piety" and our "Tears." How different the Latter-day Saint view is! And what a foolish weakness on our part to say, "The Lord promises to forget our sins if we repent, but he doesn't really mean what he says." He does mean it.

What if you have forgiven yourself, and you know the Lord has also forgiven you, but the people around you do not accept the totality of that forgiveness? Sometimes there is little that can be done to open a small mind or to enlighten someone with a narrow and misguided attitude. Continued, consistent activity will add to your credibility and to the welcome you find in the ward; many a woman returning to activity has endured weeks or months when she felt awkward or embarrassed, as if she were being tested. But finally ward members have given her the benefit of the doubt. If some one ward member prefers to give a cold shoulder rather than warm acceptance, then that person has a weak spot in his or her testimony that only he or she can overcome.

The healing effects of a life of obedience and activity in the Church are great. Many years ago I had a calling as a counselor in the ward Young Women organization. One day, in casual conversation, the other counselor referred to the time she had been found "drunk in the elevator in the dorm at Brigham Young University."

The time she what??? I was stunned! This woman was the star young married of our ward, chosen for her calling because of the example she could set for the young women. I couldn't help but be curious: "So what happened? Didn't they throw you out?"

No, they hadn't thrown her out. She described how the bishop of her BYU ward, a wonderful man named Darrel Monson, had arranged for her to be allowed to remain at BYU in spite of her infraction. He had extracted a simple promise from her as the condition of remaining at school: she was to keep all the commandments for a period of one month.

That month of obedience was the turning point in her life. Bishop Monson, in his wisdom, knew that the happiness of a life of obedience is undeniable. He knew that as soon as she had a chance to compare the way she felt about herself and about the world during her "good month" with her earlier rebellious conduct, she would choose the path of obedience. Wickedness never was happiness, but righteousness does lead in the direction of happiness, and Bishop Monson was just arranging for her to find that out for herself.

I believe my friend decided to tell me this story from her past life for two reasons. First, we had known each other for quite a while, and it is natural for friends to be open. Second, she was already aware that I knew and admired Bishop Monson, and she knew I would be thrilled to hear what he had done for her. She did not recount the story very often; when she did choose to do so, she told it because she thought it could help someone realize the worth of repentance.

The question of "to tell or not to tell" is a touchy one. If the wrongdoings are truly cancelled by repentance, why mention them, ever? I once knew a man who could hardly let a testimony meeting pass without standing up to paint for the ward a vivid, detailed picture of the decadent life he had lived in New York before joining the Church. I could not escape the feeling that he actually enjoyed reliving those years. He also enjoyed the sensationalism and the dramatic effect of his own descriptions. Nominally he had repented, but in fact he reveled in the memory of sin. His repentance was incomplete.

And yet once in a while someone might feel prompted to revive the story of less-than-praiseworthy past happenings in order to help someone else. A woman I know spent virtually her entire married life as the wife of an alcoholic. She chose (rightly or wrongly) to keep his addiction a secret and to shield her husband from the consequences of his alcoholism. As the children became old enough to understand what was going on, they too became part of the protective facade.

Many years after this man's death, one of the daughters, now the wife of a bishop, phoned to ask her mother for permission to reveal the secret the family had kept for so many years. She had a particular reason: a ward member was going through similar problems, and she wanted to share her own understanding with her. After much discussion and prayer, the family decided that it was time to open the pages of that story that had been sealed so long and so carefully. Their motives were thoughtful and unselfish; they knew their experiences could lend strength to others and could give them far greater credibility, as people who had "been there," in their efforts to help others.

Leading up to the Savior's famous dictum that "the last shall be first, and the first last: for many are called, but few chosen" is the parable of the laborers in the vineyard. The owner of the house pays each laborer one penny, even those who had come "at the eleventh hour." The workers who had labored all day were resentful, as we might expect; but the owner said to them, "Take that thine is, and go thy way." (Matthew 20:1-16.) The scriptures constantly reassure the person who wishes to begin a new life that she does not need to feel like a lesser being. Those who come late to the vineyard receive no less. The angels rejoice over the one lost soul who returns. The shepherd leaves the sheep that are safe to search for the one that is lost. All rejoice; resentment has no place.

Imagine a ward made up entirely of people who had lived identically traditional lives. Imagine that there are no new converts, no move-ins with different backgrounds, no reactivated sisters. Although the people of this ward would have much in common and share many understandings, wouldn't it seem a rather dull group in some ways? The established patterns tend to make us set in our ways and smug in our assumptions, with the distinctive edges of our individuality becoming smoothed away. A new attendee with some new points of view—an investigator asking interesting and difficult questions, a new convert still struggling with the Word of Wisdom, a reactivated sister needing to be included in a group of long-established friends—will give the group an opportunity to reach out to another woman and extend to her some of the comfort and faith they enjoy.

The aim of the gospel is to change lives. As President Harold B. Lee once said to a faculty assembly at BYU, "The gospel is not a gospel of being. It is a gospel of becoming." All of us, if we are living as we should, are in a state of transition and self-improvement. We can support one another at every point in our journey along the gospel path, whether we are taking only the first tentative steps or whether we have diligently pursued the path for decades.

Christ's call, "Come unto me," was directed especially to people who had lost a sense of their own worthiness. They are the ones who have the most personal, most direct invitation to attend the meetings and discover the happiness offered by The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. The opportunity to make them welcome is one of the prime blessings of Church membership.
