Karen Lynn Davidson, Thriving on Our Differences ( 1990)

CHAPTER FIVE

Mothers Alone and Blended-Family Mothers

The job of rearing children alone is a daunting and serious responsibility. Whereas married mothers have someone who shares the burden of being the villain when it comes to discipline and the worry of being "the-buck-stops-here" person when it comes to decisions, the mother alone must rely on herself.

Most mothers rearing their children alone today are doing so because of divorce, and most divorcees count themselves in the "no-fault" or at least "not my fault" category. "Every step I took in my life was in accordance with the wishes of my Father in Heaven. I sincerely feel that," she may say. "I have always tried to be his prayerful and obedient daughter. And what was the result? I'm divorced." She is no less worthy than many other women who have the blessing and help of a caring husband; this apparent unfairness is difficult to accept. She feels cheated, because she was always told she would be blessed if she did what was right. And in The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, with its constant emphasis on priesthood responsibility and the role of the father as leader and patriarch in his family, the family without a husband and father runs the risk of feeling like second-class citizens.

In a somewhat different circumstance is the blended family. A blended family is fully staffed, so to speak, but it differs from the traditional family in that one or both parents is a stepparent to one or more of the children in the home. In a church that sees the family as an eternal unit, the blended family may feel like a patchwork anomaly.

First Case History

Beth, thirty-five years old, has been divorced for four years. She has two boys and a girl between the ages of eight and fourteen. That her marriage ended in divorce was the greatest disappointment of her life, but it also brought a sense of relief: it is easier to know that she and she alone is responsible for the family and its routine than to deal with her resentment toward an irresponsible husband who was present but did not share the adult responsibilities of the household.

When she first met Curt she had been attracted by his spontaneity and his free-spirit attitude toward the world. After she married him, however, it did not take her long to realize that words like spontaneous and free spirit were naive rationalizations. She had been blind to his selfishness and detachment. It was understandable—she was young when she met Curt, and she felt sure she was in love almost from the moment she met him—but as a married woman, and now as a divorcee, she had paid a high price.

During all those unhappy years of marriage, she had asked herself the same questions over and over: why did her husband get to choose to go off with his friends and play basketball, thereby choosing her to stay home? Why did he get to choose to be the one who could just flop into bed at night when he got sleepy, thereby choosing her to be the one to lock the doors and turn out the lights? Why were the responsibilities hers but the freedoms his? Even Curt's mother had acknowledged that marriage to him must have been difficult: "Well, at least you have one fewer child to worry about now, Beth," she had commented after the divorce.

Curt was an attractive, athletic, friendly person, and he had been very popular in the ward. Because they knew a very different Curt from the one she had to deal with at home, it was hard for some ward members to understand how Beth's patience had finally been exhausted—how, when it became more and more clear that divorce was the only alternative, even after she tried marriage counseling, she almost felt as if she had awakened from a bad dream.

Of course she now longs for someone to share such day-to-day responsibilities as home repairs and the children's discipline, especially as the children are growing older and need strong guidance. Yet she realizes that her own instincts, undivided and undiluted by Curt's random presence and contradictory responses, are probably worth more than two-parent input would have been if they had still been married.

Financially, Beth and her children are living almost at subsistence level. It is difficult for her not to feel guilty when she cannot buy her children everything their friends have. But at least she knows what money she can count on from her former husband's support checks and her new job as a medical receptionist; there is no Curt to do violence to the budget with the purchase of a new boat trailer or a twelve-hundred-dollar, radio-controlled, model plane.

Two years ago Curt remarried. The children visit their father and stepmother every other weekend, and it truly is a "visit": the children are guests, and it is always a celebration, with trips to Baskin-Robbins, the movies, the zoo or the mountains. It is party time. On the other hand, it is Beth's job to worry about orthodontics, school performance, homework, discipline, curfews, piano practice. When it comes to the difficult or confrontational aspects of parenting, she is the only one willing to risk the children's immediate displeasure.

The eight-year-old son asks almost every day, "Mommy, how many days until we get to see Daddy?" The two older children are more tactful than to betray how much they look forward to being with their father, but Beth can always sense their excitement as "Daddy's weekend" approaches.

Needless to say, the at-home-every-other-weekend routine causes many problems for the children's Church activity. What are the teachers and leaders in Primary and Young Men to do when they cannot work with Beth's children consistently toward an award or an achievement recognition, or when they cannot count on them to be present to rehearse or perform in a special program? Most of the time, though not always, the teachers have been very understanding.

A far greater problem in the children's attitude toward the Church is Curt's influence. He now considers his mission to have been a waste of time and money, and she knows he has communicated those cynical feelings to their fourteen-year-old son. Ward members make a point of referring to Curt in a positive way in front of the children, no doubt with the praiseworthy motive of helping the children maintain a good image of their father. But such comments only increase Beth's dilemma: how can she help the children love their father, and even respect him for his good qualities, while at the same time pointing out to them that many of the things he says and does are not only destructive and immature but sometimes out-and-out wrong according to gospel standards?

Beth is proud of the way she is able to manage her responsibilities. She has no shyness about asking her home teacher or another man in her ward to play the "father role" when it comes time for father-son campouts, and though she wishes she didn't have to ask, she finds that they are usually happy to respond once she gives them a little push in the right direction. She feels that the Lord has answered her prayers by sending her strength she did not know she had. It is understandable, therefore, that every time someone hints to her that she should, in effect, "solve her problems by finding another man as soon as possible," she feels that her achievements and efforts are being underrated and demeaned.

Second Case History

Sandra, age forty-three, with three children of her own, is married to a man who has custody of his two daughters. As she often tells people, she considers herself "a big winner in the stepchild lottery," and she feels real affection toward the two stepdaughters. The two children of hers who are still at home get along quite well with their stepsisters. Sandra and her husband are each making a real effort to become more tolerant of the quirks and habits of the other's children and to be equal partners in the guidance and discipline of all four children. They are proud of the new family unit they have formed.

Though Sandra's former husband has agreed to the cancellation of temple sealings, he has made it clear that he will not at any time be willing to allow Sandra's husband to become the adoptive father of the three children. Everyone in the family tries to remember to smile each time they have to explain yet again why there are two surnames in one family.

But Sandra has a fantasy: if only her new family could move to the other side of the country, where no one knew them, and if her children, without anyone's permission, could just assume the new family name. The special distinction made in the ward list (cross-referenced between the two surnames) is clear and convenient, but it is a way of announcing a nontraditional family. Everyone seems to want to know how this came about. Some people have asked such questions as "Why did you get divorced? Why did your husband get divorced? Are you still sealed to your first husband? Why doesn't his former wife have custody of the girls?"

She reminds herself every day that she owes explanations to no one, and she tries to turn such questions aside without being too rude. Most people, thank goodness, have better judgment than to pry in this way, even though she realizes they are bound to be curious.

So why does she feel so accountable? Everything that signals their "difference" deeply disturbs her. Her husband's former wife maintains nominal activity in the ward where they live, and that awkward situation drove them to ask permission to attend another ward. They are the only family living outside the ward boundaries, and the ward boundaries and school boundaries put the children with two different sets of friends.

Sandra knows that the children worry about some deep, disturbing questions. So many of the lessons in Primary and in Young Men and Young Women relate to the joys of an eternal family, not the patched-together, confused arrangement that Sandra's family seems to be. Which family is the one that will "be together forever," as the song says, since both sets of children love both their parents and their stepparent? Which parents or stepparents—which grandparents, for that matter—will attend the graduations, speak at the missionary farewells, stand in the reception lines when the children get married?

Those of us who grew up in fairly sheltered environments and were not closely touched by divorce have sometimes been a long time in arriving at some kind of empathy and understanding for people in that situation. For many years I had heard sermons on "the evils of divorce." I, too, had read the articles in Church publications and elsewhere (I can imagine the effect of such articles on divorced women themselves) that sandwiched divorce among the most violent wrongs and deliberate maliciousness: "the great evils of our day are drugs, divorce, juvenile delinquency, alcoholism . . . " and so forth—as if someone goes out and commits a divorce just as she would a crime, or gives in to divorce just as she would an addiction. Nevertheless, the warnings had quite an effect. The thought of divorce sent a shiver down my spine. Better never to marry, I thought, than to be a divorced woman. (It did not occur to me then that a divorced woman with children she dearly loved would probably not wish to go back in time to decide not to marry and have children.)

Most Latter-day Saint women can remember very clearly the many Young Women lessons on temple marriage, the Standards Nights, the talks from bishops, parents, teachers. Those visions of the future were thrilling: the beloved wife of a noble priesthood bearer, each with an eternal commitment to the other, with children born in the covenant, in a bond that would never end. That was the life we wanted with all our hearts, that was the life we kept ourselves worthy for, that was the life we would have. Any thought of any sort of failure to meet this ideal might relate to one of the other girls, but that wonderful life was going to be ours.

No wonder the word divorce was a word of such horror to me for so many years! No wonder I felt such automatic pity and bafflement for anyone carrying the label "divorced woman"! How did I come to realize that divorce was not an event that necessarily involved wrongdoing on anyone's part? The turning point in my understanding came when I read a novel, Middlemarch, by George Eliot, first published in 1871. For the first time I got a close, convincing look at how two people who are seeking only what is best for themselves and others can make each other terribly unhappy in spite of their good intentions. In other words, I got an entirely new and enlightened perspective on divorce.

The story concerns Dorothea Brooke, a well-educated and intense young woman who has strong spiritual yearnings and a deep, meditative concern for sacred things. Even though most of the young women of her acquaintance are materialistic and superficial, Dorothea longs to serve the Lord and lead a saintly life.

Dorothea feels certain her prayers have been answered when she meets the Reverend Casaubon, a considerably older man who has never married because he has devoted his life to researching a multivolume compendium of biblical scholarship. She longs to serve as his assistant, to comfort his life and smooth his path so that he can finish this momentous and high-minded task. They decide to marry, and both feel confident that they will be happy together in a life of service and scholarship.

But the disillusionment is shattering. This is how George Eliot describes the despair that begins to overwhelm Dorothea almost immediately after the marriage:

"Her view of Mr. Casaubon and her wifely relation, now that she was married to him, was gradually changing with the secret motion of a watch-hand from what it had been in her maiden dream. How was it that in the weeks since her marriage, Dorothea had not distinctly observed but felt with a stifling depression, that large vistas and wide fresh air which she had dreamed of finding in her husband's mind were replaced by anterooms and winding passages which seem to lead nowhither?" (Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1956, p. 145.)

Mr. Casaubon is equally unhappy. In the first place, he cannot understand what Dorothea could possibly desire that she does not have as his wife, and in the second place, he knows deep within himself that someone is gradually, inevitably, coming to know the truth about his "great work in progress," the momentous Key to All Mythologies, although the prospect of this forthcoming work of scholarship has sustained his reputation for decades, he does not really have the intellect to produce such a work. He has collected scraps and pieces, but they amount to nothing. There will never actually be a Key to All Mythologies. The marriage is a tragic disappointment.

I learned some important things from this novel. Both Dorothea and Reverend Casaubon were good people who felt there was a strong spiritual basis for their marriage. Dorothea was naive and Reverend Casaubon deluded himself, but neither deserved harsh blame. They shared equal disappointment over the failure of the marriage; both of them were basically sound, upright people whose actions did not deserve this kind of punishment.

I needed to read about this couple. I needed to balance Dorothea Brooke and the Reverend Casaubon with the many sermons I had heard stating that divorce is the result of sin, the outcome of broken commandments. Both points of view can be true, of course; nothing in the world varies more widely than the circumstances behind divorce. No two divorces are alike. But because I read Middlemarch, and because over the course of years I became more aware of differing circumstances as various close friends and relatives faced divorce, I became much more accepting.

I am particularly grateful for this broadened understanding because I was then prepared to appreciate the man whom I eventually married. If I had met him ten or fifteen years earlier, my reflex reaction would have been, "Oh, no! I would never want to date a divorced man!" I would have passed right by a great and wonderful blessing. Divorce may signal serious personal deficiencies and wrongdoing, but this was one of the many times when it does not.

We are so accustomed to thinking of a one-parent family as a "broken home," as incomplete, that it can come as something of a surprise to realize that some broken homes are now far more whole than they were before the divorce. Some years ago a friend's husband decided after nineteen years of marriage that he had had enough of marriage, of family responsibilities, and of the Church, and so he left. Their bishop was aware of what was occurring. When her husband filed the papers for divorce, the bishop asked her to come to his office the following Sunday. She thought he was going to just check with her to make sure she was getting along all right and to offer some words of cheer. Instead, he called her to be the ward Relief Society president.

She was more than a little surprised. She asked him, "Isn't your timing a little unusual?" He answered, "On the contrary. I can extend this call to you now that the impediment is gone."

What insight! The bishop had perceived that after the divorce, the spiritual level of the home would be higher, greater peace would prevail, and my friend would be in a much better position to accept this demanding calling.

As Latter-day Saints, we cherish our picture of the traditional family pattern. But we should not let our ideal keep us from acknowledging and appreciating the many thriving, praiseworthy families that have another pattern. When a divorce occurs, it can be so devastating that the woman's first reaction is, "I can't go on." But then from inside her comes another voice asking, "So what exactly do you plan to do instead?" She knows that going on is her only choice, for her own sake and that of her children. Throughout the Church are families establishing their own identity even though no husband and father is present. They deserve our admiration.

Even a woman who does not go through a divorce herself may find that her life is strongly affected by someone else's divorce. The fact that my husband was previously married accounts for our blended family, because his teenaged son lives with us and his twelve-year-old son spends quite a bit of time with us. My two sisters are also married to men who have children by previous marriages. So, after my parents had lived for many decades without being closely touched by divorce, they now have three sets of stepgrandchildren. The realities of our modern world place many people in positions they thought they would never be in, especially with regard to their family arrangements.

Divorced women may often feel alone among the more traditional families in a typical ward, but they need not feel alone statistically as divorced women in the Church. A 1981 demographic study of Latter-day Saints in North America shows that although only 7 percent of adult Church members reported themselves as separated or divorced at the time of the study, fully one-third of them can expect to be divorced at some point by the time they are sixty years old, according to present trends. (See Kristen L. Goodman and Tim B. Heaton, "LDS Church Members in the U. S. and Canada: A Demographic Profile," AMCAP Journal, vol. 12, no. 1, 1986, p. 93.)

People all over the world are being called upon to form and help manage new family units, with new combinations of relationships and steprelationships. We do the best we can. Since genetics can sometimes play welcome tricks, I like to think that people can't necessarily tell by just looking at us that Wes and Eliott are not my sons, though there are bound to be a few, I suppose, who note how tall and good-looking the boys are and say to themselves, "She couldn't possibly be their mother!" I think it's usually when others hear the boys call me "Karen" that they know ours is not a traditional family.

When people refer to "your son," do I bother to set them straight? It depends. I don't want to convey incorrect information, so if the misunderstanding is liable to recur with the same person or have consequences later on, and it's important to be accurate, I just smile and say, "stepson, actually." Otherwise, if it's a transitory situation, I just let it go. The grim connotations of the word stepmother are all too well known. I don't tell Wes he has to stay home from the ball, and I don't send him out into the forest to get lost, and I don't feed him poison apples. So I would just as soon he let random references to his "mother" pass without comment, and usually he does.

Many books on stepfamilies are available, and families can also join stepparent support groups. In the books and in the discussion groups, certain "points to remember" for stepparents are emphasized again and again. Here is a summary of a few of the most important:

This list of suggestions may seem to assume a negative, problem-ridden blended family household. (In fact, it might be enough to frighten someone away from a marriage that means not only a husband but some new, ready-made children as well!) Of course not all stepfamily situations are grim. But when problems arise, it helps to know that your family is not the only one that doesn't seem to be acting like the Brady Bunch. Only on television do six charming children, with nothing but pleasant words on their lips, come together into one delightful family, thereafter encountering no problem that can't be solved in thirty amusing minutes.

Mothers who tend to see their child's (or stepchild's) poor behavior and lack of achievement as an embarrassing reflection on themselves would do well to remember that most people have paid their dues, in some form, where child-rearing is concerned. Teachers, ward members, and other adults are likely to be far more tolerant than we give them credit for. They've known and observed plenty of young people, and yours is unlikely to be the worst. They probably realize that a young person, especially a teenager, is an individual with free agency, not an automatic gauge of the care and guidance he or she receives at home. Misbehaving children, then, as stressful a problem as they pose, should not cause a gulf of embarrassment to distance a mother or stepmother from other women in the ward. The mother of a problem child may be performing more heroically and effectively than anyone imagines.

A particular situation in a nontraditional family may call for some frank words with a church leader or teacher or ward member. The teacher may not understand that the every-other-weekend absence is actually stipulated by court order; it is not a matter of the child's preference or the mother's preference. A ward member who idealizes the children's father when the father is actually undermining their testimony and loyalty to the Church may need to be quietly informed of a few facts. A ward member who is too nosy about personal family matters may just need to be told, with a smile, "I [we] prefer not to discuss that." If the question concerns another person, just change the response slightly: "He [she] prefers not to discuss that."

A nontraditional family living outside the ward boundaries or dealing with other awkward fallout of divorce or remarriage may have to call upon every bit of patience and tact they possess. Sometimes a bishop or other leader may make it more difficult for a nontraditional family to work out an effective pattern for their lives. But leaders can be educated, new leaders can be called, and many courageous and persistent families throughout the Church have found their niche. For a woman rearing her family without a husband, the friendships and resources offered by the young people and adults in their congregation can make the difference between a feeling of uncertainty and isolation and a feeling of support and encouragement. For the mother of a blended family, the values of the Church provide a core around which the goals and activities of the newly formed family can be structured.
