Karen Lynn Davidson, Thriving on Our Differences ( 1990)

CHAPTER SIX

The Woman Who Is "Single at Church"

We've discussed women who are single. What about the woman who is married but who is, as one described it, "single at church?" When it comes to activity in the Church, her husband is the invisible man. In fact sometimes the other ward members don't even know what he looks like. In her wish to attend meetings and fulfill a calling, this woman may or may not have her husband's support. He may occasionally attend a meeting himself. Some husbands who are not Latter-day Saints or who are less active enjoy themselves at ward social and sports events, but many do not.

First Case History

Because her mother was a Latter-day Saint and her father was not, Elaine did not find it particularly frightening to contemplate marriage to a man who was not a Latter-day Saint. In fact, she had a lot of approval from family and friends when she announced that she and Frank were engaged. She had met him when they both were seniors at the University of Delaware. She and her family were impressed with everything about him; he had a self-assurance and a generous nature that comes with a commitment to a strong set of values. She knew that the ideal marriage would be to someone who was also a Latter-day Saint, but she was grateful that she and Frank were compatible in so many other ways. Her mother said to her, "Elaine, you've found a jewel."

After Frank finished his graduate program in accountancy, they bought a home in Connecticut. It was a wonderful place to rear their two children. The family settled into basically the same pattern that Elaine had known growing up: Frank acknowledged that Elaine's church and its program provided a vital center for Elaine's life and a strong set of values and principles for their children, and so even though he did not seriously contemplate being baptized a Mormon himself, he was happy to support his wife and children in their affiliation with the Church.

One day Frank phoned Elaine to say that he had just met with his boss, who had asked him if he would consider a transfer to Salt Lake City! It meant a promotion, and Elaine and Frank decided to go ahead with the move. Frank told his boss, "Since my wife and children are Mormons, they'll probably feel right at home there." And in fact, Elaine had always been curious about what it would be like to have thousands of other Saints as neighbors.

But their experience with the ward in Salt Lake was entirely different from what it had been in Connecticut. Elaine felt a real gulf between herself and the other women in the ward. In Connecticut Elaine had served for several years as Young Women president, but she feels that she will never be called to serve in the Young Women organization in Salt Lake because her marriage to a man who is not a Latter-day Saint seems to make her a poor example to the young women of the ward.

When it comes time for an outing with the Scouts or a priesthood preparation program, the officers and teachers in the ward don't seem to know whether to treat Elaine's son as if he were fatherless or whether to assume Frank will be involved in some way. She understands that awkward confusion, but she feels that at the root of it is their perhaps unconscious belief that a man can be a good father only if he is a priesthood holder. Elaine gets angry at that idea, because she is convinced that there is no more involved, caring, or creative father in the entire ward than Frank.

Frank always attends church when the children are participating on the program, and he usually accompanies Elaine to ward dinners or other purely social events. To Elaine's great embarrassment, someone will frequently make the obligatory comments: "You have a great family there, Frank. Don't you want them with you forever? You're pretty stubborn, you know."

One day Elaine's visiting teacher seemed nervous. After a few minutes, the visiting teacher squared her shoulders—obviously there was something she felt she had to say, and finally she blurted out: "Elaine, why don't you just give your husband an ultimatum? Can't you tell him that either he joins the Church before another year goes by, or your marriage is over?"

Elaine was too astonished to be angry. How could this woman assume that the happiness and commitment that Elaine and Frank had achieved in their marriage was something to be used as a bargaining chip? Did she believe that no marriage other than a temple marriage could be a happy one? Obviously the visiting teacher assumed that the marriage she and Frank had built with such devotion over many years was something not worth preserving.

Second Case History

Marta and her husband Cliff often laughed about the "Yummy" label one of their friends had given them—"Young Upwardly Mobile Mormons." Though they were by no means wealthy, they were both professional people, and they enjoyed the things that they were able to afford through their two incomes. When their first child was born, Marta cut her accounting practice back to half time, and she enjoyed being a mother as well as a professional. They were one of the most visible families in their ward; in fact, the bishop had said to them at one point, "The young marrieds in our ward look to you as an example of what they're after."

So it came as quite a surprise to the bishop when, after Cliff had missed his Sunday meetings for several weeks, he asked for an appointment with the bishop to request that his name be removed from the records of the Church. That evening, Cliff called a few of their closest friends in the ward to let them know what had happened.

Marta was not surprised. She had known for quite a while that something was coming. But over and over again, ward members asked her, "What happened? Why did Cliff decide to do this?" Marta really didn't know how to answer questions about Cliff's motives. On many occasions she and Cliff had talked about his feelings late into the night. She had tried to understand. She and Cliff had subscribed for many years to two or three periodicals aimed at a liberal Latter-day Saint readership, but so did most of their friends. They enjoyed reading and discussing the articles, and often when they got together with LDS friends they had known since college days they discussed some of the issues. Was that the problem? Had Cliff "intellectualized himself" out of the Church by reading and pondering these out-of-the-mainstream materials? That was far too easy an answer. She and many of their friends had also read about and dealt with the same issues, and they had not lost their testimonies.

Marta was inclined to see Cliff's upbringing as the more direct cause of his dissatisfaction with the Church. Cliff was born in the Church, the son of an authoritarian father who gave his children very little freedom of choice. In Marta's mind, after Cliff's overbossed childhood, he had perhaps reached something of a midlife crisis triggered by the question of authority. Cliff had suddenly realized that he had never known a time when he was not following the script someone else had written for him. He had not even rebelled as a teenager. Now, as a thirty-nine-year-old man, Cliff could feel like an autonomous, free person only by rejecting the authority of the Church."

Cliff knew that his decision, which he felt to be honest and inevitable, jeopardized their marriage. He had said frankly to Marta, "You will have to decide whether your desire to be married to a Latter-day Saint husband is greater than your desire to be married to me."

Marta considered the possibility of divorce only briefly. She wanted to stay married to Cliff, and he wanted to stay married to her. He promised that he would not stand in the way of Church activity for her and the children. He made it clear, however, that he himself would not have anything to do with any event or program sponsored by the Church. He wanted, in his words, "a clean and complete break." The problem, especially as the children grow older, is that so many of their social and sports activities, as well as their Sunday meetings, center around the Church. By missing out on those activities, Cliff is missing out on a big part of his children's lives. Marta hopes the children will continue to find enough happiness and meaning in their Church activities to remain loyal in spite of Cliff's example.

Now that four years have passed since Cliff's decision, Marta takes for granted her role as the only Latter-day Saint adult in the family. Once the initial shock wore off, the members of the ward where they had lived for fourteen years seemed to accept what had happened. Most ward members understand that she does not like to be asked such questions as "Is he coming around yet? Does he ever talk about coming back? Has he joined another church?" Their inquiries are usually limited to "How's Cliff these days?" and her answers are always brief. Cliff prefers not to socialize with couples from the ward, although they have maintained their friendships with a few college-friend couples who Cliff felt would understand and respect his decision and not press him to justify what he had done.

A few people in the ward don't know Cliff at all. A little Primary friend asked one of Marta's children one day, "Who was that man your mother was with at the mall?" "That was my father," the little girl explained. The Primary friend was surprised to learn that Marta's daughter had a father.

Marta and Cliff have what Marta wryly calls "an armed neutrality pact" in their marriage. Cliff's decision is firm, and the issue of his attitude toward the Church is off-limits for discussion. They are actually getting along better than Marta had thought they would: their strong marriage continues to be strong. Though his decision to leave the Church has caused her much unhappiness, Marta is sure she did the right thing by not sacrificing her marriage over the issue of Cliff's Church membership.

Marta feels especially sad, however, when someone else from the ward must step in and do what most of the fathers do for their children—the baptisms, the ordinations, the accompanying of her son to the ward-sponsored father-and-son campouts. She feels no less loved and accepted in her ward than she did before, but makeshift arrangements for these events are a constant reminder that her family, as far as activity in the Church is concerned, is incomplete. When she sees a father blessing a baby, when she sees an entire family sitting together in sacrament meeting, when she hears a lesson on the blessings of the temple, the sadness is always there.

One brief piece of wisdom valuable for anyone, male or female, married or unmarried, that might be especially useful to the woman whose husband is not a Latter-day Saint or is less active, is as follows: "Don't wait for someone else to make you happy." One friend of mine remarked, "I love Paul, but sitting around waiting for him to be baptized would be a drag."

Most women whose husbands are not Latter-day Saints report that nagging, needling, and bargaining are not very effective means of interesting their husbands in the Church. In fact, they find that if they refer constantly to their wish to have him attend a meeting, for instance, they build up such resentment that they lose hope of attaining their goal. One woman said that her aunt, also the wife of a man who was not a Latter-day Saint, gave her this advice: "Be an example of what the Church can produce, not an example of how persistent we can be in our missionary zeal."

Though it is inevitable that an active Latter-day Saint woman without an active Latter-day Saint husband will wish she could find some way to turn him into a happy, believing member of the Church, it may help her to realize that 21 percent of households with at least one adult Latter-day Saint consist of a Latter-day Saint whose spouse is not a Latter-day Saint. Of the households where both husband and wife are members (47 percent of the total) some proportion (these statistics were not given) consists of one active Church member and one less active. (The other 32 percent of the total households are single adult households.) So the woman who is "single at church" may not be as alone as she thinks she is.

One woman remembers the burden she carried as the child of a father who was not a Latter-day Saint. "Insofar as certain people in my ward made me feel my father was inferior, I just had to disconnect from them," she states. "Now I'm the one married to the non-Latter-day Saint husband, and on one of the rare occasions when my husband attended church, the woman speaking in sacrament meeting stressed the blessings of temple marriage. That was all right, but then she went on to refer to marriage to someone not a Latter-day Saint as a 'horrible compromise.' Well, my 'horrible compromise' was sitting right next to me, and it was a long time before he attended another meeting."

In an effort to help other ward members understand her situation, one wife of a less-active husband made two decisions when she moved into a new ward. The first decision was that on Sunday when she was asked to stand and introduce herself, she would say something like "My name is , and we have just moved here from . My husband is a wonderful man, but he has chosen not to be active at this time. I look forward to getting to know all of you better." The second decision was that every time she mentioned her husband's lack of Church activity she would, in the same sentence, refer to one or another of his good qualities. It was important to her that the ward know about her situation as the wife of a less-active Church member. It was also important to her that other ward members realize that this man was someone she loved and someone they would enjoy meeting.

Many women who are "single at church" find that some of the most troubling problems of all relate to their children. Other children may be cruel, consciously or unconsciously. If a woman whose husband is not a Latter-day Saint is a Primary teacher and invites the class to her home, the children's shock when they spy a coffee can may be entirely out of proportion to that discovery.

Because a child cannot be baptized into the Church without the permission of the father, his or her baptism may be delayed beyond the age of eight—sometimes until age eighteen, when the young person may choose to be baptized without permission. Thus the rest of the Primary class may be celebrating their baptisms one by one, while the child whose father is not a Latter-day Saint must wait on the sidelines. Even the most sensitive Primary teacher will have a difficult time helping this child to feel part of the group.

One woman commented, "A few of the adults at Church seem to make the children responsible for the fact that one of their parents is not a member. I don't know why. It may just be ignorance, or it may be that they are carrying around a fantasy of the 'innocent little missionary' who is able to touch the parent's heart by rushing in where no one else dares venture. But I wish they would not urge my son to invite his father to church. That's not their role, that's not my son's role, and it only causes friction and disappointment. And one day a teacher told my son's class that only the members of our church were really on Heavenly Father's side. So where does that leave his father? You can imagine how that made him feel."

How does she handle her little son's worry over whether their family will be together in the next life? "I tell him that the ordinances are true and correct, but Heavenly Father considers a lot of things, including worthiness. I think that's the best way for us to deal with these worries."

How can ward members be helpful to a woman whose husband is not visible on the Church scene? Different families have different blanks to be filled in. One very important thing to remember is that in some contexts—purely social occasions or occasions involving his children in an important way—a man may choose to be visible after all. Once in a while a person who is not a Latter-day Saint will lead a life of virtually total activity, minus the baptismal ordinance. Many people can tell affectionate stories of Scoutmasters and other youth leaders who were not Latter-day Saints who influenced them for good in past years.

The ward, then, should complement his commitment to the extent necessary. Substitute fathers for the children's activities and ordinances may be needed often or almost not at all. In the case of a husband who is a Latter-day Saint but is less active, if his priesthood has not been formally removed, he is eligible to perform all the ordinances—baptism, blessing, priesthood ordination—to which his priesthood office entitles him, with the consent of the bishop.

Ward members are sometimes so anxious to welcome and impress a nonmember spouse that their enthusiasm may backfire. One woman was married to a quiet and reserved man who was not a Latter-day Saint. The first time he came to a ward social event—it was a Christmas dinner—her husband was put off by the repeated hearty hand-pumping and loud welcomes from people he had never met. This woman stated, "It was just two different ways of looking at the world. As far as my husband is concerned, friendship is something that is mutually earned and is built up over a long period of increasing trust and openness. The ward, on the other hand, assumed that if enough people could give him an enthusiastic welcome, he would be won over. People meant well, but to him, these effusive welcomes were out of place and in poor taste. He felt that their real motive was missionary zeal—'Here's somebody we can grab for baptism.' " She commented further, "People kept saying to me the following Sunday, 'Oh, your husband seems like such a fine man. We'd like to get to know him better.' But it stopped there. They haven't made any effort to get to know him on a purely social basis, though it would mean a lot to me if we could trade dinner invitations with some of the other families in the ward."

Ward leaders as well as ward members need to be careful not to make assumptions about a nonmember or less-active husband's attitudes toward the organization and customs of the Church. One woman had been taught all her life that her bishop was someone she could turn to in difficult moments. When she and her husband were not able to resolve a discussion over whether they should uproot and move to a new location, it was natural to her to turn to her bishop for counsel, and her husband, who was not a Latter-day Saint, agreed to the meeting. Both the wife and the husband expected that the tone of the meeting would be that of a discussion among equals. Unfortunately, the bishop, though probably intending no offense whatever, spoke as one in authority not only over the Latter-day Saint woman but also over her non-Latter-day Saint husband. The husband's response afterward was, "What made him think he was entitled to tell me what to do?"

Like many women in nontraditional situations, women whose husbands are not Latter-day Saints or are less active gain an additional measure of compassion and understanding for those whose lives are complicated or problematical in some way. A friend said, "I'm determined to make my marriage work, but it's not easy. I was in love. I was naive. I didn't really know what it would mean to be devoted to the Church when the man I was married to wasn't. But I get a lot of satisfaction from being the one a lot of the women turn to when they need to talk about their problems to a sympathetic ear. I guess they realize that after what I've been through, I can really understand someone who doesn't fit the traditional Latter-day Saint mold."
