Karen Lynn Davidson, Thriving on Our Differences ( 1990)

CHAPTER SEVEN

The Woman Who Has It All but Is Still Unhappy

The women we have discussed so far have identifiable characteristics that distinguish them from the traditional Latter-day Saint wife-and-mother model. But what about the woman who appears to be right at the center, who has the blessings of home, family, and children, who has been active all her life in the Church, and who still feels like an outsider? She may say to herself, "I am so fortunate; I have my husband, I have my children, our health and finances are stable, and I know that so many women would envy my situation. I should be happy. Yet I'm not." This woman, too, feels like she does not belong. What is her place as an unhappy homemaker in a Church that supports her in her homemaking role, promises her joy in the fulfillment of it, and praises her for carrying it out? She does not feel satisfied, and she feels guilty for not having found the fulfillment that others appear to find in their callings as wives and mothers.

First Case History

Jennifer got married after one year at Brigham Young University. She then worked for three years while her husband finished his master's degree in public administration. He did not have a great number of job offers after he finished his degree, and they moved to Louisiana so that he could take advantage of the offer that seemed to be the best. Their first child was born just three months before they moved from Provo.

Both Jennifer and her husband were sad to move so far away from their families in Utah. They knew it was good for them to become more independent, for their parents to be further away than just a local phone call, but Jennifer had never felt so isolated. Even with two bedrooms, she felt their apartment was terribly cramped, especially when the papers, brief cases, and notebooks that symbolized her husband's conscientious nature—he brings work home every night—seemed to be piled up everywhere.

Her husband is a kind and responsible father, but he takes it for granted that both of them feel entirely comfortable with Jennifer assuming 98 percent of the child care. He doesn't ask whether Jennifer is happy. He just knows that they always planned to have children and that Jennifer always assumed she would be a mother, so he takes it as a given that she must be happy.

Two years ago, when their second baby was born, Jennifer went through a time of great frustration and exhaustion. The baby had colic, and for weeks the only time he was not crying was when he was nursing or asleep. Jennifer is the oldest of seven children, and she can't recall any of her brothers or sisters being so demanding and bad-tempered as her own two children. She remembers clearly that each new brother or sister who came along consumed a great deal of her mother's time, yet her mother seemed to move through the child-care responsibilities with great aplomb, not paying nearly the emotional price Jennifer feels she is paying. She feels that she has almost no life or identity of her own.

She promised herself long ago not to complain about her husband's long working hours, but she now finds it very difficult to keep that promise. Was it really necessary to his success for him to go to so many Chamber of Commerce mixers, fund-raisers, receptions? People are quite accustomed to seeing him alone at such functions; he just explains that Jennifer is "home with our babies." On those occasions when she makes a point of arranging for him to stay with the children so that she can attend a homemaking meeting or another Relief Society function, he usually replies, "Yes, I'll be glad to baby-sit that evening."

Baby-sit??? She has to bite her tongue. "These are your own children," she wants to tell him. "You don't baby-sit your own children! You tend them, you take care of them, but you don't baby-sit them."

A year ago they were able to buy their first home, so they are no longer so cramped for space. Jennifer has what she has always wanted—a home, a righteous and hard-working husband, and two children whom she dearly loves. Yet she feels unhappy. She does not think her husband has any idea of the effort it requires for her to provide the comforts he takes so much for granted. He has no idea, for instance, how time-consuming it is to go grocery shopping with two small children. He considers that the meals, the clean laundry, the clean home, are privileges he has earned because of the hard day he has put in at work. It does not occur to him that he collects these rewards at Jennifer's expense, not at his employer's expense.

As a single woman, Jennifer did not really think seriously about a career, because she had looked forward to being a wife and mother. But lately she has been reading the part-time employment opportunities in the classified ads section of the local newspaper. She feels that if she could get out of the house one or two days a week, be with other adults, and earn even a small amount of money, that would make all the difference in the way she feels about herself. But she has not even mentioned the subject to her husband. She knows what would happen if she did. First he would be baffled at the notion that she was not happy staying with her children in her new home, and then he would proceed to show her mathematically that it would actually cost money for her to work part-time by the time child-care expenses were figured in.

She feels especially guilty about her growing resentment every time she hears a priesthood holder say things like, "You mothers in Zion are truly blessed. There could be no happier, more joyful calling." "You haven't tried it," she can't help muttering to herself. She loves her children and her husband and would not trade them for anything, but she doesn't want to hear about the "happiness" she should feel, especially from someone who has not experienced the personal cost exacted by those very same blessings.

Second Case History

By far the brightest one in her family, Rayla was the pride of her small Wyoming town from the time she was a young girl because of the way she distinguished herself as a writer and a student of literature. She is proud of that reputation. She has been writing roadshows, skits, and talks since she was thirteen, and her work has been published several times in the Church magazines. She also wrote the lyrics to a song that won first place in one of the Church contests. She earned a master's degree in English, and after only five years of high school English teaching, she achieved a reputation as one of the finest English teachers in the state. Her students loved her.

When she was twenty-eight years old, she fell in love and was married. Rayla and Frank did not want to postpone a family, and Rayla took a mischievous delight in pointing out to people that their first baby was due nine months and one day after the wedding.

They loved their new baby and boasted constantly of his good looks and achievements. "You sound more like grandparents than parents," one friend commented. But with the arrival of more children—there would be five in all—she began to feel discouraged at times about her role as a mother. After a lifetime of successes and honors, she often feels like a failure.

What does she mean by failure? Well, no one who came to Rayla's home and met her family would consider her a failure. But in her previous career, Rayla could feel a sense of satisfaction and closure at the end of a semester in seeing that most of her students had moved from a lower point to a higher point in their appreciation and skills. And now, what has she accomplished during any given day? She has nursed the baby six times, tried to take a nap in coordination with the baby's nap to recover from lost sleep the night before, and made at least some effort to take care of her house. So much of what she does is quickly undone, just in the normal course of family life: clean clothes are quickly dirty again, a neat house turns into a messy one in no time at all, and a meal is quickly consumed, leaving only dirty dishes and the prospect of fixing the next meal in a few hours.

Perhaps the hardest thing of all is that not one of Rayla's children is anything but a mediocre student. The three oldest children grudgingly take music lessons, but devouring junk food, "hanging out" with their friends, shopping at the mall, and constantly listening to meaningless popular music seem to be their chief interests. She is still hoping things will be different with the younger two.

Contrast these children with what she had pictured when she and Frank first talked of having a family: children just as eager as she had been as a child to read each new book, hear each new piece of music; and these children would have the advantage of Rayla for a mother, someone who would share, teach, and inspire. She had so much to offer them as a mother, so much knowledge and enthusiasm that would bring them a world of joy, and yet what they accepted from her they could just as well accept from any robot who could fix the meals and do the laundry.

To Rayla's frustration, her husband seems content with things as they are. The children are healthy, and they are staying out of major trouble. Although he was an excellent student and a voracious reader as a young man, his philosophy is just to "let the kids be themselves and appreciate them for what they are." He has virtually no empathy for Rayla's disappointment and unhappiness as a mother, and on those occasions when he has come home to find her in tears, his response has been wry and rueful. He even speaks in the third person instead of directly to her, as if he is reflecting out loud rather than offering comfort: "Poor dear. The responsibilities of motherhood weigh heavily upon her."

A friend told her, "Rayla, your kids aren't an extension of you. Do what you want; don't live through them. Let them shift for themselves a little more. You aren't going to change your kids or your husband." At this friend's invitation, she joined a women's issues discussion group, made up of Latter-day Saint and non-Latter-day Saint women. Rayla had been interested in topics relating to women for many years. When she taught high school, in fact, she was known as someone who could inspire the high school girls to plan to develop their talents and take advantage of their opportunities. But after three meetings of the discussion group, she decided not to attend any longer. The topics were interesting, and she liked most of the women, but they didn't seem to accept most of her comments as valid. After all, she was a traditional wife and mother with children, a nice home, and a husband who supported her financially. What did she know about women's struggles when no man had ever "done her wrong"?

One day she read a book review that mentioned the large number of recent novels that treated the theme of "the divided life." "That's me," Rayla thought. "I go to church, I hear the talks and lessons, people think of me as Sister Smith with that nice husband and those five children. I smile, I attend my meetings. They have no idea how different my thinking is—how unhappy I am. I'm not whole. I do live a divided life."

In Geoffrey Chaucer's "Wife of Bath's Tale," one of the Canterbury Tales, a knight is required to solve a riddle: "What do women most desire?" (He spends a year hunting for the answer, by the way, and when he finds it, the answer perhaps tells more about the character of the feisty and energetic Wife of Bath than it does about women in general. The answer he finds is that women want to be the boss in marriage!)

Many Latter-day Saints feel confident that they could answer this riddle quite easily for the Latter-day Saint woman: a temple marriage to a righteous and responsible breadwinner, children, and a lovely home. But many women can attest that even when they have these wonderful blessings, and even when they know they would make the same decisions again if they could turn back the clock, they still can face times (sometimes long ones) of low morale, low self-esteem, and depression. Here is the way Salt Lake City psychiatrist Libby R. Hirsh describes the problem:

"Let us postulate a prospective Patti Perfect. Patti Jr. has been born and raised in Tinytown, Utah. Her father is the bishop of her ward, her mother is the Relief Society president, and her uncle down the block is the stake president. Patti's small town is approximately 98 percent Mormon, and she has never really learned to understand that there are other people on this earth who exist without the influence of the gospel in their lives. Patti has been raised to believe that anything a bishop, stake president, even a Relief Society board member, may say (on any subject, mind you) is absolute gospel truth. Patti's entire life plan has been made for her since at least the age of three when she first learned to say 'celestial.' She will graduate from high school and will have a husband in the wings or, in lieu thereof, will continue on at BYU (not particularly to learn or develop a talent or career, but to find the elusive returned missionary who will take her to the temple, place her on a pedestal, and provide her total security in life). She will marry, have six children, and carry at least four high positions in the Church. And she will live happily ever after. Now you can imagine in this plan what innumerable pitfalls and traps have been set. Patti has learned to define herself and her life in terms of attributes or events totally outside her control. Patti believes that if she does not marry, she must be unworthy and a failure. If she marries, has her six children, but then feels unhappy, she will experience a major loss in terms of unfulfilled expectations; she will, however, worsen her own situation by believing that because she feels this, she is guilty. The 'Church' has promised her that these things will make her happy, and surely if she is not, the fault is hers; an underlying sin must be preventing her progression." ("Being Well Balanced," Woman to Woman, Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1986, pp. 164-65.)

So it's not just the unhappiness; it's the guilt over feeling unhappy. A woman does not feel challenged in her domestic role, does not feel fulfilled by it, and does not feel recognized for it. Yet it seems to be enough for other women, so the problem must lie with her. She is the outsider.

Most Mormon women can relate to these frustrations. We wish we could prove ourselves through some dramatic, courageous deed. The call comes to gather to Jackson County, let's say, and without a second's hesitation we drop everything and set out to march with the faithful to Missouri. Unfortunately, next Monday is not nearly as likely to bring a call to gather to Missouri as it is to bring a pile of dirty laundry that we are expected to take care of. Most of life—especially the life of a mother—is made up of unrewarding, repetitious tasks.

I do not pretend that I have paid all my dues in this category, because I have not had the responsibility of rearing young children. But I have done a lot of observing and discussing, and during the time I have been married and have shared the responsibility for a teenager, I have gained some insights into this dilemma. I have stood by the dryer, pairing the clean socks, and said to myself, "I am overqualified for this job." How is it possible to keep morale high when the tasks you must repeat are usually unexciting and often unappreciated? Perhaps if there were some way of being recognized—if motherhood carried with it a really impressive weekly paycheck, or if trophies were given out to the woman who remembered to go through every jeans pocket on laundry day for ten years, or if the entire nation could see a coast-to-coast instant replay of the brilliant way in which you handled your toddler's impending tantrum in the grocery store—the job of motherhood would carry considerable satisfaction.

In the meantime, here are some mental aerobics that may help you to feel more "up" about the work you carry out in your home.

Some women do a much better job than others of "collecting on their paydays." A friend of mine said, "A while ago we had a family home evening that really went well. I said to myself, 'Well, there would be more novelty in skiing down the slopes at Aspen, and it would be really exciting to be eating dinner at Maxim's in Paris, but the fact is that I couldn't be anyplace else, with anyone else, that would make me happier than being right here right now.' " She was collecting on a payday. Her lovely family was in large measure the result of her work and dedication, and she was allowing herself to enjoy that fact.

Another woman had just finished making a senior prom dress for her daughter. While other families had spent small fortunes on dresses for their daughters, she had made this one for under forty dollars, and most important, her daughter—a rather temperamental and choosy girl—was thrilled with the dress. She watched her daughter leave for the evening, looking beautiful, and then her mind immediately leaped ahead to her responsibilities for a dinner for a huge family reunion that would be happening in only two weeks. She stopped herself suddenly: "Wait a second. I have just scored a major triumph through my dedication and creativity. What's wrong with me that I can't allow at least a few minutes just to enjoy this achievement before I begin to fuss over something else?" This woman has now adopted a custom of giving herself a pat on the back (when no one is looking) each time she does something especially noteworthy. When she's especially pleased with herself, she says that it's quite a "slug between the shoulderblades." It's her private symbol, just her way, of ensuring that she takes a brief moment to give herself credit—that she collects on her payday.

Collecting on one's payday is not a matter of saying, "As soon as I finish this batch of ironing, I'll treat myself to a Hershey's Golden Almond." It's a matter of saying, "It's tough, but I've done it, and I'm proud." One friend of mine makes a list each morning of what she is going to do that day. She has an excellent memory, and she certainly doesn't need a list to remind her what to do, especially when the list includes such items as "fix lunch." But she loves crossing them off! Each line that she draws through an item is a minor payday, and at the end of the day, it's a long list of achievements that helps her feel she has really been productive.

There are two problems with this kind of figuring. First of all, the rates for these activities are usually not very high, so the total theoretical "replacement cost," if she were not there to carry out these activities, is demoralizingly low.

The second problem, and by far the more important, is that the market value of household tasks is not a true measure of their worth. My friend Kathleen Slaugh (now Kathleen Bahr) decided as a graduate student to study the unseen values of housework and the result was a Ph.D. dissertation titled "Family Interaction and Human Resource Development in the Housework Context." She obtained permission from several families to observe them in their homes while making herself as invisible as possible. In this way she was able to study what she called the "socialization function" of housework, noting that housework has the potential to bring families together in a repeated, purposeful way that has many results besides the housework itself. Under a somewhat friendlier title, "More than Clean Windows," she summarized a few of her findings in the October 1985 Ensign:

"Reducing the value of housework to its market equivalents focuses our attention on the products of our labor—the washed dish, the vacuumed house, the bathed child. But these products are secondary. The more important value of these tasks lies in the social situations in which they take place. . . . Many parents have reported reaching a level of intimacy in such settings that is difficult, if not impossible, to achieve under more formal conditions. Children sense their contribution to family goals is needed and appreciated. Working together at humble tasks can dissolve barriers between parents and children and bring greater feelings of unity."

So it is important to remember that a person hired to do the same tasks—fix a meal, for example, or care for children—does not really achieve the same results, even though the meal may be fine and the children kept safe and happy. The context of housework gives a family an opportunity for sharing, teaching, joking, planning, in a way that no other situation does. One friend of mine complained, several years ago when her children were very young, "I never have time to teach them anything!" In her mind, "teaching" meant lining her little girls up in a row and delivering a lesson. Kathleen Slaugh's study emphasizes that my friend was constantly teaching her children—teaching them very important things, in fact. The very same routine tasks that supposedly left her no time for teaching carried the most important lessons of all. These lessons by their nature are abstract and subliminal, lessons taught more effectively by example than by precept. Instead of having to do with numbers, colors, letters, and shapes, they had to do with attitudes, planning, social skills, cleanliness, the handling of happy moments and sad moments. Household tasks, then, add up to much more than their market value.

If you still wish to link your domestic labors to a financial figure, here is a much better way to approach the question: what would you require as an annual salary to do exactly the same work, but for a group of strangers? What would you charge, in other words, to do exactly the same planning, worrying, cooking, laundry, cleaning, disciplining, transporting, and so forth, for a group of people that you had no emotional connection with?

Several times, when I have given talks in front of groups of Latter-day Saint women, I have asked for someone from the audience to volunteer to answer this question. The lowest figure any woman has ever named was fifty thousand dollars, which the rest of the women in the audience thought was somewhat low. The highest was half a million dollars, and the woman who named this figure was totally serious. She was simply not willing to do this exhausting, endless work for a lesser amount, and she made it clear that this was for one year only; she would then retire on the interest income from her half-million dollars!

In the corporate world, some salaries reach this half-million dollar mark or even higher. That young mother's answer was really not so far out of line. What does someone do to earn such a huge salary? These salaries are paid for experience, long hours, dedication, a whole variety of skills—requirements familiar to every homemaker. And to this list we should add "exposure." Exposure means that part of the reason for the large salary is that if this person makes a mistake, the consequences are widespread and serious. Although most families do a good job of absorbing small mistakes and carrying on just fine, a mother does not want to make significant, long-term mistakes. On the large-scale questions—the questions of what kind of relationship is she able to establish with her family members, and what kind of atmosphere is she able to create in her home—there is little room for error.

Every family struggles; every family pays its dues. On those rare occasions when we talk about this fact openly, it can bring a lot of comfort. My husband came home from priesthood meeting not long ago and related that one of the men, an outstanding husband and father whose family is admired and respected by all, decided to make a frank comment in their priesthood class discussion on family home evening. He said, "In my house, family home evening is the only fight that opens and closes with prayer." Whereupon another equally prominent and respected man responded, "Well, in my house, family prayer is the only prayer that opens and closes with a fight!" The rest of the quorum laughed and breathed a real sigh of relief, of course. These very open comments helped each man to realize, "Maybe my family isn't so different after all."

Comparisons with other families are not the only kinds of comparisons that may be harmful. All around us are false pictures of what life supposedly can be. Part of growing up is realizing that the characters and families we see in movies and on television or read about in romantic fiction have virtually nothing to do with real life. But how many women lose themselves in a novel about a gorgeous and witty (and probably titled) young heroine who is swept off her feet and carried off to a castle by a mysterious and handsome stranger? Then they put the book down with a sigh and think, "My life's not like that!" Indeed not! Life never has been like that—not today and certainly not back in the days of Lady Clarissa or whoever that fictional heroine is. Nor can the problems of life be solved in thirty minutes minus commercials, the way our favorite television families solve them.

We tend to overrate other people's happiness; we tend to idealize other people's roles and activities. The life of a well-dressed career woman who gets her hair and nails done twice a week may seem so enviable to a mother who feels confined at home with her young children. But there's a truism that's worth remembering: every job has its dirty diapers. Every career woman has known pangs of envy when she sees a mother's joy in her family. It's human nature to think, "Someone else is happier and better off." We can hold up ideals that will increase our righteous conduct and our happiness, but we should be sure they are valid spiritual ideals, not superficial comparisons from some other source.

Homemakers do thankless things, over and over, year after year, in a divine cause: the welfare of those they love. The best scripture I know to validate these enduring efforts is from Alma 37:6-7: "Behold I say unto you, that by small and simple things are great things brought to pass; . . . and by very small means the Lord doth confound the wise and bringeth about the salvation of many souls."
