Karen Lynn Davidson, Thriving on Our Differences ( 1990)

CHAPTER EIGHT

Surrounded by Sisterhood

Within the scope of this book it is not possible to talk about every kind of false barrier that may seem to divide Latter-day Saint women from one another. It is not just our marital status, our family situation, or our past lives that may threaten our association and understanding; other factors may pose problems or even seem like total barriers to full and joyful activity in the Church.

What are some of the other differences that might cause a woman to hesitate to enter fully into the program of the Church? The list is a long one. Here are a few that come to mind:

And this list does not even begin to exhaust the many individual circumstances that may be found within the boundaries of one ward or branch. Nevertheless, we can live our distinctive lives and still be one—still feel comfortable around one another, have a sense of acceptance and support. Whose responsibility is it to establish these ties, to make sure that women of every background and circumstance have an opportunity to feel welcome in the ward? Who should build these bridges?

Throughout this book I have tried not to place the burden of responsibility on either the group or the individual woman, because it does not belong exclusively to either. It can work both ways. Sometimes the "outsider woman" must stop worrying about being an outsider and instead begin to exercise patience and initiative to be accepted by a group that may not be as alert and receptive as it should; sometimes the group must do everything but turn cartwheels to convince the woman who feels like an outsider that if she joins in with the ward activities she will find friends, interests, and support.

What a challenge for a visiting teacher! With prayer and imagination, she must seek to custom fit her visit and her message to each individual sister she is assigned to teach, to relate to each sister's strengths and problems in a unique and meaningful way. A sensitive visiting teacher will give a different emphasis to the message and leave a different challenge in each home because she knows and appreciates the individuality of each woman she visits.

What about the woman who may have achieved a considerable degree of acceptance in a ward but then must start all over again when she moves to another ward? My family and I have moved three times in the last two years—to a different stake in California, to Texas, and then back to California. In the process I've learned some pointers that will help a woman give herself every advantage as she seeks to feel comfortable in a new ward and to help others feel comfortable around her. Some of these suggestions are major, some are minor, but each one will help to shorten the time between her arrival and her full-fledged association.

These suggestions describe what the outsider can do to belong more readily. As we've acknowledged earlier, ward members have a responsibility too. A ward that is good at welcoming newcomers can help you assimilate, but at least half the task rests in your hands. The productive place to spend your time and emotional energies is in ensuring your friendliness, your willingness, and your openness to new associations, rather than worrying about seemingly unfriendly ward members. It is impossible for me to think that a reasonable and well-intentioned woman who follows these suggestions would not find herself welcome in a ward or branch anywhere in the Church.

Individuality is a precious gift from our Heavenly Father, one that we all prize. No one is a clone of anyone else, and in that respect each of us can enjoy being unlike all the other women. But once in a while we will find a woman who paradoxically seems to enjoy the negative aspects of being an outsider. Anger generates the steam that fuels her life; she looks for reasons to feel slighted and passed over; she takes note of each lesson or activity that is not aimed at individuals in her particular situation. She is like the woman in Robert Burns's "Tam O'Shanter,"

Gathering her brows like a gathering storm, Nursing her wrath to keep it warm. (British Literature 1800 to the Present, vol. 2, ed. Hazelton Spencer et al., Lexington, Mass.: D. C. Heath and Co., 1974, p. 47.)

A woman like the one Burns describes "keeps her wrath warm" by feeling victimized and misunderstood. Sister Norma B. Ashton offers some excellent advice, quoting her husband, Elder Marvin J. Ashton:

"My husband often says, 'Never let yourself be offended by someone who is learning his job.' Because we are a lay church and because we all change jobs at what seem to be brief intervals, we are all constantly learning how to fulfill new assignments. No one should ever let himself be hurt by a brother or sister in the gospel. We are each too worthy to be upset by someone else." ("For Such a Time As This, the Time Is Now," Woman to Woman, Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1986, p. 18.)

Obviously, ward members can do some things to make newcomers' arrival much more comfortable. My own ward Relief Society president has stressed to her board that it is the responsibility of every board member to mix and mingle, to look around at each meeting or social event, and identify new sisters or those who may need a friendly word. We have revised our "Relief Society Information Card" that we hand to move-ins on their first Sunday. The old one looked like this:

Name: Address: Phone: Husband's Name: Husband's Priesthood: Children's names and ages: Callings you have held:

The new card yields all the same information, but it looks like this:

WELCOME TO RELIEF SOCIETY! Please give us the following information so we can get to know you better: Name: Address: Phone: If any of the following information is relevant, please include it: Husband's name: Priesthood: Children's names and ages: Callings you have held:

The changes are fairly minor, but the unstated messages are quite different, and new converts, unmarried women, or those married to men who are not Latter-day Saints can feel much more welcome on their first day in the ward.

An alert ward leader will know that the new arrival may bring just the talents or insights their group has been needing. Louise Plummer, in a delightful Ensign article called "Thoughts of a Grasshopper," writes, "I've always wondered if there is room in a family of ants—or in a church of ants—for a grasshopper. I fear that ants will not accept me unless I am just like them." She suggests a new ending for Aesop's fable of the grasshopper and the ants. Instead of the ants telling the grasshopper, "You sang through the summer, now you can dance through the winter," she has created her own ending, one that places proper value on the grasshopper's talents:

"It is winter and the grasshopper is walking in the snow, talking to herself and answering herself. She wears a yellow slicker over her sweater because she can't find her parka (which is buried in the debris under her bed). Because she was out of groceries this morning, she is eating a brownie with a carton of milk bought at the local convenience store which, thank heaven, is open twenty-four hours a day. The door in the tree where the ants live swings open. The queen ant appears and says to the grasshopper, 'We are bored to death. Won't you tell us a story or at least a good joke? Our teenagers are driving us crazy; maybe you could write them a play to perform, or just a roadshow? Do you have any ideas for a daddy-daughter party?'

"The grasshopper replies that she has ideas for all of them. So the ant invites her in and seats her at a spotless kitchen table with pencil and paper, and the grasshopper writes the roadshow.

"The ant feeds her guest a slice of homemade bread, fresh from the oven, and a glass of freshly squeezed orange juice. 'How do you get all of these ideas?' she asks the grasshopper.

" 'They come to me,' says the grasshopper, 'while I am taking long hot baths.' " (Aug. 1988, p. 71.)

It is important to remember that the typical bishop has had no firsthand experiences in any of the circumstances we have discussed. If he got married soon after his mission, he has never, for all practical purposes, been single. He may well be a lifelong, active Latter-day Saint, with no firsthand knowledge of what it is like to leave behind a sinful or "drop-out" life and rejoin the fold; he has probably not been a single parent; he is almost certainly not married to a nonmember; he probably does not have a blended family; he probably has not been divorced. If he seems insensitive in deeds or actions, remember Sister Norma Ashton's advice: "Never let yourself be offended by someone learning his job." Because he has not encountered these situations himself, he is still learning to understand them. Be patient.

Many people may not have the patience, the imagination, or the empathy to see the world through the eyes of someone else. To these people, no one else's lives or problems are very real, and no one significantly different from themselves can be a good Latter-day Saint. Such people can become more sensitive, of course, but in the meantime they are more likely to express blame or bafflement than understanding.

Everyone at some time feels isolated or excluded. Everyone at some time feels as if she is criticized for not conforming to certain norms, even though the world may be measuring her by yardsticks that are not relevant to her life, her talents, or her responsibilities. Judgments and misunderstandings are rife. Only our Father in Heaven is qualified to judge, yet many people are in the habit of constantly judging. The waves of public opinion may come so unexpectedly and with such force that it may require every ounce of personal strength to keep from drowning!

Each of us can make a personal resolution: "I will not contribute to speculative, critical, and irresponsible public opinion. I will respect the motives and choices of other women. As someone who does not know all the trials someone else may have gone through or all the pressures she may be facing, I will decline to judge. I will make every effort to understand, appreciate, and encourage. I realize that most women are handling their lives in the best way they know how. I will not make things more difficult for them by judging."

If you find yourself starting to say or think any of these things, stop yourself immediately:

Many women, without fanfare, manage to deal with extremely difficult circumstances in their health, their home situation, their employment, and other aspects of their lives. The outside world may see the woman mainly as the mother of an often troublesome teenager, or as someone who does not attend most of her meetings; yet to achieve even the result of keeping the teenager halfway under control or to attend even a few meetings may be the result of real heroism behind the scenes. It is inappropriate to be critical. We are better off if we judge not.

A home can take many different forms. Among the households of members of the Church are many types other than the one that is traditionally pictured as the Mormon ideal. A woman whose household is of a kind that is in the minority should remember that her minority is probably not so small after all. Following is a summary of the 1981 demographic study we have referred to several times.

COMPOSITION OF LDS HOUSEHOLD

It is clear that no one type of household predominates among Latter-day Saints. Throughout the Church, faithful members are striving to establish gospel-centered homes under widely varying circumstances. We must stop defining home according to who lives there and instead focus our concern on what happens there. Is there sharing, support, a happy atmosphere, respect for individuality, a teaching and exemplifying of gospel principles? If so—or if the members of that household are sincerely striving toward those goals—then it is a home, whether it is a home with only one person living in it or a huge household that extends itself to include even nonrelatives.

Many of us have had the experience of bringing a friend or neighbor who was not a Latter-day Saint to a Relief Society function and suddenly realizing that the title "Sister," which we take for granted, to our friend might sound somewhat quaint at best and downright strange at worst. The "brothering and sistering" in our church is an old-fashioned custom, to be sure, but the great advantage of the title "Sister" is that it is totally egalitarian. Sisters are equal; the title by itself doesn't even hint which one may be the "big sister" or the "little sister." It refers to the woman herself, not to whether she is married or unmarried. It doesn't convey professional rank, church calling, or college degrees. So "Sister" as a form of address carries within it a significant, symbolic message: we are equals, working side by side, doing our best in our individual ways to build the kingdom. As sisters we can strengthen ourselves and each other. As sisters we can find unity in our diversity. As sisters we can thrive on our differences.
