What do you think is the most important word in the dictionary? President Spencer W. Kimball (1895–1985) said that perhaps the most important word is remember. He said our greatest need is to remember (see “Circles of Exaltation,” address to religious educators, Brigham Young University, June 28, 1968, 8).

The Book of Mormon prophet Helaman knew how important it is to remember. He urged his sons Nephi and Lehi to remember to keep the commandments of God. He asked them to remember the great men they were named after. He asked them to remember the words of the prophets. Most of all, he asked them to remember that Jesus Christ would come to redeem the world. Helaman said, “My sons, remember, remember that it is upon the rock of our Redeemer, who is Christ, the Son of God, that ye must build your foundation” (Helaman 5:12; see also vv. 5–9).

Nephi and Lehi did remember the teachings of their father. They were valiant men who kept the commandments of God all their lives.

We go to sacrament meeting every Sunday to take the sacrament. It is a time to remember our baptismal covenants. When a priest blesses the sacrament, we hear him say, “Always remember him and keep his commandments” (D&C 20:77; emphasis added).

Your faith will grow when you make baptismal covenants. After you are baptized and confirmed, you must remember to keep those covenants throughout your life. Your faith will continue to grow as you remember Jesus Christ.

Mount page F4 on heavy paper, and cut out the pictures. Place them face down. Turn over two of the pictures. If they match, put them in a pile, and take another turn. If they don’t match, turn them back over, and let the next person turn over two pictures. Try to remember where each picture is. Keep playing until all of the pictures and the word remember have been matched.

Note: If you do not wish to remove pages from the magazine, this activity may be copied, traced, or printed from the Internet at www.lds.org. For English, click on “Gospel Library.” For other languages, click on “Languages.”

1.  Write each word of John 3:5 on pieces of paper, and distribute the papers to the children. Ask the children to read the words in random order, and ask them what the scripture might be about. Explain that key words such as water, Spirit, and enter might help them. When the children correctly guess that the scripture is about baptism, give them the scripture reference, and help them put the words in order. Repeat the scripture several times together. A week ahead, invite several children to give a short report on what their names mean or why their parents chose their names. After their reports, ask the children what it means to take upon themselves the name of Christ. Conduct a discussion on taking upon oneself the name of Christ. Be prepared with examples, such as the missionaries having the name of Jesus Christ on their name tags because they are some of His representatives.

2.  Divide the Primary into two groups. Ask the first group to find a scripture that tells who the third member of the Godhead is. Ask the second group to find a scripture that tells what the fourth principle and ordinance of the gospel is. If they need a clue, remind them that the Articles of Faith are part of the Pearl of Great Price. Review the first and fourth articles of faith. Tell the children that it is difficult to explain exactly what the Spirit feels like. Ask an older child to read John 14:26. Tell the children to listen for another name for the Holy Ghost (Comforter). Point out the ways the Holy Ghost is the Comforter.
