The following are additional ideas Primary leaders may use with the Sharing Time printed in the August 2007 Liahona. For the lesson, instructions, and activity that correspond with these ideas, see “Listen to the Still, Small Voice” on pages F4 and F5 of the children’s section in this issue.

1.  Use an object lesson (see “Object Lessons,” Teaching, No Greater Call [1999], 164) to help the children understand how to recognize the Spirit. Prepare a “box with socks” by cutting two holes, about three inches (8 cm) in diameter and about six inches (15 cm) apart, in the bottom of a box. The box should be large enough to allow a child to put his or her hands in it but small enough to be held up for the Primary to see. Line the holes with the cut-off tops of two old socks. Staple these in place, being sure that the staple ends go into the box so they will not scratch anyone. Lining the holes with socks will prevent the child from seeing through the holes.

    Without letting the children see the item, put a familiar item in the box, close the top, and turn the box on its side. Hold up the box or place it on a table, and ask a child to insert his or her hands through the socks and try to figure out what is inside. Open the top of the box so the Primary children can see what the item is. Use readily identifiable objects such as familiar fruits, toys, and household objects. Repeat the activity with different children and objects. Explain that we can easily identify objects that are familiar to us.

    Next, give the children objects that are harder to identify. Such items might include specialized equipment such as a cooking implement or a garden tool. If the child cannot name the object, ask him or her to describe the way it feels.

    Compare the box experience with recognizing the promptings of the Holy Ghost. When we are familiar with the Spirit, when we feel His peaceful influence on a regular basis, we know what it feels like and can easily recognize the Spirit. However, when we are young or have not had many experiences with the Spirit, we might not easily recognize the Spirit.

    The way to learn to recognize the Holy Ghost is to feel His promptings yourself, but we can learn from the experience of others too. Bear your testimony of the Holy Ghost, and share an experience of when you felt His promptings.

2.  Display the words teach, guide, warn, protect, and comfort in different places around the room. Tell the children that you are going to give the meanings of the words and that you want them to find the word you are defining. Use simple definitions. Explain that you know of one person who can do all of these things. Let the children guess that it is the Holy Ghost.

    Show the following pictures: Gospel Art Picture Kit 520 (Gordon B. Hinckley), 518 (Ezra Taft Benson), and 516 (Harold B. Lee). Help the children name each of these Church Presidents. Read selected quotes from the following articles to illustrate three of the five words: teach (Gordon B. Hinckley, “In These Three I Believe,” Liahona, July 2006, 2), protect (Ezra Taft Benson, “To the Children of the Church,” Ensign, May 1989, 81), and warn (Harold B. Lee story, Primary 1, lesson 7). Feel free to substitute meaningful stories of your own or to refer to the following articles to illustrate the other two words: comfort (James E. Faust, “The Comforter,” Liahona, Apr. 2005, F2) and guide (Thomas S. Monson, “Teaching Our Children,” Liahona, Oct. 2004, 2). Bear testimony of how the Holy Ghost has helped you personally.
