Tom Hughes, Dean Hughes, Great Stories from Mormon History ( 1994)

Young Joseph's Leg Operation

In 1813, doctors had very few medicines to work with. They didn't even have aspirin. A simple fever or infection sometimes killed a person—especially a child. When people needed surgery, doctors had no way to put them to sleep first. Patients would drink a big glass of whiskey to deaden the pain, maybe bite down on a rag or stick, and the doctor would start cutting.

A good doctor was a fast doctor.

It was in those days, when Joseph Smith was seven years old, that he needed a good doctor. An epidemic of typhoid fever had struck Lebanon, New Hampshire, where Joseph lived. Typhoid can be controlled by modern medicines, but in Joseph's time it often killed its victims. Their insides would become infected and their tongues would turn black. Ulcers would form inside their bodies and then break out into huge sores on their skin.

All the Smith children—Alvin, Hyrum, Sophronia, Joseph, Samuel, William, and Catherine—one after another, caught the disease. Ten-year-old Sophronia almost died. After three months of treatment, her doctor gave up on her, and finally, she seemed to take her last breath. But Joseph, Sr., and Lucy, her parents, fell on their knees and pleaded with the Lord to spare her, and then Lucy grabbed Sophronia up in her arms and pressed her to her chest. Sophronia began to breathe again, and she recovered steadily from that day.

Joseph survived what seemed to be a mild case of the disease. He was sick for only two weeks. But after his recovery, he developed a bad pain in his shoulder. Joseph's doctor thought it was a sprain, even though Joseph didn't remember hurting himself. The doctor rubbed liniment—a sort of lotion often used in those days—on Joseph's shoulder. Then he applied another nice remedy: he pressed a hot shovel against the painful area. He assured Joseph that all would be well.

But he was wrong.

When the doctor returned some time later, he found that a large fever sore had developed near Joseph's shoulder blade. This time he used a knife. He cut the sore open. Lucy Smith said that more than a quart of pus oozed out.

The Smiths thought Joseph might be all right after that. But Joseph's trials were only beginning. No sooner had the pain left his shoulder than it seemed to shoot down his side and into his lower leg. That was how it felt to Joseph, anyway. What had really happened was that the disease had infected the bone in his leg.

Joseph's leg, below the knee, became huge from swelling, and the pain was almost more than he could stand. He was in agony for two weeks, with nothing at all to ease the constant ache. His mother, Lucy, nursed him and carried him around, even though Joseph was a good-sized boy for his age. And then Lucy got sick.

Joseph's thirteen-year-old brother, Hyrum, who would turn out to be loyal to Joseph throughout his life, took over. He sat with Joseph almost all the time, day and night. Holding the sore part of Joseph's leg, he would press it to help relieve the pain. For a week Hyrum hardly slept, and Joseph held out the best he could.

Finally the doctor came again with his knife. He sliced Joseph's shin open, making a cut eight inches long while Joseph was wide awake to feel it all. The raw pain was terrible, but opening the leg this way did relieve the pressure. For a short time Joseph was able to rest. As soon as the cut began to heal, however, the pain returned.

The next time the doctor cut deeper and longer, from the knee most of the way to the ankle—and all the way down to the bone. Joseph could do nothing but scream and take the torture.

And the results were the same. The pain and swelling returned as soon as the cut began to heal.

Finally a group of surgeons and students from Dartmouth Medical School came to the Smith home. After examining the wound, they all agreed: to save Joseph's life, they would have to cut his leg off.

Joseph wouldn't hear of it. He told his parents he wouldn't let the doctors take his leg. He was young, but his mind was made up, and so his mother asked the doctors whether they couldn't just cut the diseased part of his leg bone away. The doctors talked things over and decided they would try. But it was not going to be a simple operation, and certainly not a quick one.

The doctors wanted Joseph to drink some liquor, and then they wanted to tie him to the bed with ropes to keep him still. But Joseph preferred to have his father sit on the bed and hold him. The doctors agreed to that, and so did Joseph's father. Joseph asked his mother to leave the room, and then he said he was ready.

The surgery was almost too horrible to imagine. The doctor cut the leg open again, and then he drilled into the bone, first on one side and then the other. Then he used forceps—an instrument like a pair of pliers—and broke away chunks of bone.

When the doctor chipped the first piece of bone, Joseph screamed out loud, which brought his mother running into the room. Joseph begged her to leave. But when the third piece broke loose, and Joseph screamed a third time, Lucy couldn't stand it. She burst into the room once again. This time the sight was so awful that she had to get out, and she didn't return until everything was over and the blood was cleaned up.

Still, the operation was a success. Joseph walked on crutches for almost three years, and he walked with a slight limp the rest of his life. But he kept his leg. More important, he showed the resolve—the strength and faith—that he was going to need to face a life of never-ending trials.

For further reading, see Lucy Mack Smith, History of Joseph Smith, by His Mother (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1958), pp. 54-58; Donna Hill, Joseph Smith, the First Mormon (New York: Doubleday, 1977), pp. 35-36.
