Tom Hughes, Dean Hughes, Great Stories from Mormon History ( 1994)

A Promise to a Hero

When Joseph Smith was growing up, he had a hero. His big brother Alvin, almost seven years older than Joseph, was a powerful young man and a hard worker. But he was also gentle and quiet. There was no one Joseph looked up to more than Alvin. Once, the two of them went to a boxing match together. These fights were bare-fisted scraps with very few rules. But this time, when one of the boxers got the better of the other, he began to gouge at his opponent's eyes. Alvin couldn't stand by and watch that. He charged in, grabbed the fighter by the collar and britches, and threw him out of the ring.

Joseph was proud to watch. His brother was not only big and strong, but he was good. He stood up for what was right.

When the Smith family moved to Manchester, New York, near Palmyra, Alvin worked with his father to clear trees from the land so they could farm it. Then he began to build a fine house for his parents and their family.

In the spring of 1820, at age fourteen, Joseph had a miraculous experience that would change his life. He entered a grove of trees near his family's farm and prayed to know what religion he should follow. Heavenly Father and Jesus Christ appeared to him and told him not to join any church, but to wait for a time when the true gospel would be revealed to him.

Joseph reported the entire experience to his family. His account was so simple and honest that they knew he was telling the truth. Alvin was especially moved by the story, and he was convinced that Joseph would come to be a great and important servant of the Lord.

A few years later, in 1823, the angel Moroni appeared to Joseph and told him about some plates of gold hidden in a hill. On the plates were the religious writings of an ancient people who had lived on the American continent. The angel promised Joseph that if he lived worthily, he would someday be allowed to translate the records. Alvin was fascinated to hear everything about this experience. He could hardly wait for the day when Joseph would begin his great work. Time and again, he reminded Joseph to be worthy of the blessing.

Joseph sometimes wondered whether Alvin shouldn't have been the one chosen to serve the Lord. Joseph, at age seventeen, suspected himself of being too playful and not serious enough for such an important work. He didn't even like to study the scriptures the way twenty-four-year-old Alvin did.

But then, not long after the angel Moroni visited Joseph the first time, Alvin fell ill. A doctor had given him a medicine called calomel, but Alvin could feel that it had gotten stuck in his intestines and was going to kill him. Other doctors tried other medicines, but nothing would dislodge the calomel, and Alvin grew worse. After four days, he called his family to him one at a time. He told his brothers and sisters to be loyal to each other and to look after their parents as they grew old.

When Joseph's turn came, he approached Alvin's bed quietly. Joseph's heart was breaking at the thought of losing his big brother. He couldn't hold the tears back. But he listened closely to what Alvin told him. "I want you to be a good boy," Alvin said, "and do everything in your power to obtain the Record." Alvin told Joseph to be faithful in keeping every commandment that was given him.

Joseph promised that he would. But at that moment he couldn't stand to think of life without Alvin.

The last child to come to Alvin's bedside was little Lucy, just two years old. When Alvin told her that he must "go away," she cried and clung to him so tightly that her mother could hardly pull her away.

Soon after Alvin said good-bye to his family, he died. Joseph agonized over the loss. But he never forgot Alvin's advice. And he held Alvin up as an example. His hero had died, but Alvin's goodness, his work habits, his nobility, his devotion to his family—these were qualities Joseph tried to develop in himself.

Joseph had promised an angel, and he had promised the Lord, that he would live the commandments. But he had also promised his big brother who had died, and he didn't want to let him down. During those difficult years as he waited to receive the plates, he never forgot his vow to his dyingbrother.

For further reading, see Lucy Mack Smith, History of Joseph Smith, by His Mother (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1958), pp. 86-89; Donna Hill, Joseph Smith, the First Mormon (New York: Doubleday, 1977), pp. 59-60.
