Tom Hughes, Dean Hughes, Great Stories from Mormon History ( 1994)

Parley P. Pratt's Conversion

Parley Parker Pratt was a young farmer who spent his evenings reading the Bible. He had gradually become convinced that the churches he had learned about were not teaching the pure gospel. He also felt sure that they didn't have the authority to act in the Lord's name. Praying and studying to try to find the truth, he felt the Spirit teach him and give him insights.

In the summer of 1830, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints was only a few months old. Parley Pratt had never heard of it. But he did know, from his studies and by the Spirit, that Christ would someday return to the earth, and he felt the need to warn people to repent and prepare the way. He decided he should go out and preach the principles he understood.

Parley and his wife, Thankful, had a home and a beautiful farm in Ohio. They would have to leave all that behind if Parley was to go where the Spirit led him. Thankful supported her husband and agreed that if the Spirit of the Lord told Parley to preach, he should preach.

Parley and Thankful sold their farm at a great loss. By the time they paid off their bills, they were left with only ten dollars. They decided to visit their families in and around Canaan, New York. Parley would start by teaching family and friends. After that, they would let the Spirit tell them where to go next.

It was a righteous plan, but the Lord had other things in mind for Parley. The Pratts were traveling to Canaan on a river boat. When it stopped in Rochester, New York, to take on passengers and supplies, Parley told to Thankful that the Spirit had prompted him to get off the boat at the next stop. He told her to continue on to her family home. "I will come soon," he told her, "but how soon I know not; for I have a work to do in this region of country."

Thankful knew her husband. There was no use arguing. When he heard the Spirit, he always listened. And so she went on without him.

Parley got off the boat in the little town of Newark, New York. It was still early in the morning when he stopped at a farmhouse, where a man named Mr. Wells invited him to breakfast. When Parley offered to preach that evening, Mr. Wells took him to meet some of the neighbors who might be interested. One of the people they met was a Baptist deacon named Mr. Hamlin.

Soon it was clear why the Lord had directed Parley to this place. Hearing that Parley was interested in religion, Mr. Hamlin told him about Joseph Smith and the Book of Mormon. As Parley listened to the story with great interest, he knew he had to read that book.

Mr. Hamlin told Parley to come back the next morning and he would show him a copy of the Book of Mormon. So Parley preached that night and then returned to Mr. Hamlin's home the next morning. He later wrote this about reading the Book of Mormon for the first time:

"I read all day; eating was a burden, I had no desire for food; sleep was a burden when the night came; I preferred reading to sleep. As I read, the spirit of the Lord was upon me, and I knew and comprehended that the book was true."

Parley decided he wanted to meet the young man who had discovered and translated this wonderful book. So he set out walking to Palmyra. As it had turned out, the Lord had led him to get off the boat just a few miles from the Smith farm.

When Parley reached the farm, he met a man who was driving some cows to a nearby pasture. He asked the man whether he knew Joseph Smith. The man said he did, but that Joseph had moved to Pennsylvania, about a hundred miles away. Parley wondered whether he could meet any of Joseph's family and learn more about the Book of Mormon and the newly formed church. At that point the man said that he was Hyrum Smith, the Prophet's brother, and he would be happy to tell Parley anything he wanted to know.

The two men talked until late that night. One of the things Parley told Hyrum was that he was searching for the authority to act in God's name. Hyrum told Parley about the priesthood that Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery had received from John the Baptist and from the apostles Peter, James, and John.

Parley was thrilled. He felt the truth of all he heard. He was amazed and thankful that in setting out to serve the Lord, he had been led almost immediately to the right place.

A few days later, Hyrum introduced Parley to Oliver Cowdery, who along with Joseph Smith had received the priesthood from the angels. Oliver baptized and confirmed Parley and then immediately ordained him an elder. Parley now possessed the authority he had been seeking.

A few weeks later, Parley joined his wife, Thankful, as they had agreed. He was able to preach to and baptize several friends and family members, including his younger brother Orson.

Parley P. Pratt continued on the path where the Spirit led him. He served many missions, was ordained an apostle when the Quorum of the Twelve was first organized, and served the Lord for the rest of his life. And all this began because he had the courage to step off a boat for no other good reason than that he knew it was what God wanted him to do.

For further reading, see Parley P. Pratt, Autobiography of Parley P. Pratt (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1975), pp. 33-42.
