Tom Hughes, Dean Hughes, Great Stories from Mormon History ( 1994)

A Home in Ohio

In the winter of 1830-1831, all the elk disappeared from the plains of North America. It was a cruel season, with snow lying four feet deep. Elk and other large animals became trapped when they broke through the crust on the snow. Wolves, light and quick, could run across the crust and attack the helpless animals.

That winter, early in January, Joseph and Emma Smith, along with Edward Partridge and Sidney Rigdon, set out from New York for Kirtland, Ohio. Joseph had received a revelation that Church members should gather to Kirtland, but the revelation didn't promise that the trip would be easy. And it wasn't, especially for Emma. They were making the three-hundred-mile journey in a horse-drawn sleigh. The sleigh was crowded, the cold was harsh, and Emma was expecting a baby.

Emma Hale Smith was twenty-six years old at that time. She had already learned that her marriage to Joseph, the young prophet, was going to require great sacrifices. Her parents had never been happy with her choice of a husband. To them, it seemed that Joseph was too concerned with his translation of the Book of Mormon to provide well for a family.

Their worries might have been justified. Although Joseph was a hard-working man who could have made a good living, he had a calling to help carry out the restoration of the gospel. That work pulled him away from his daily labor. Members of the new church were willing to help, but not many of them were wealthy. Joseph and Emma had very little to live on.

And now Emma was moving to Ohio, leaving her parents and relatives far behind, traveling to a place she had never seen. No home awaited her. She didn't even know how Joseph would make a living. Making things worse was the fact that she had been very sick all through December and was only now getting her strength back. The cold and the long days of travel would have been difficult for anyone, but Emma's pregnancy and recent illness made the trip a great hardship for her.

Each night for nearly a month the four travelers found lodging in public inns or with farmers. Although the journey was a real trial, Joseph and Emma felt they must go on. More than a hundred people had joined the Church in Kirtland, and the Lord had told the Saints to gather there. The Prophet had to lead the way.

On the first day of February Joseph stopped the sleigh in front of the Gilbert and Whitney store in Kirtland. Joseph marched into the store and spotted a man behind the counter. "Newel K. Whitney, thou art the man!" Joseph announced in a thundering voice, and he reached out to shake hands.

Newel Whitney was taken by surprise. "You have the advantage of me," he said. "I could not call you by name as you have me."

Joseph grinned. "I am Joseph, the prophet. You have prayed me here, now what do you want of me?"

It was true. Newel Whitney had prayed that Joseph would come to Kirtland. Even before that, he and his wife, Elizabeth, had prayed for spiritual guidance. A voice had come to them, saying, "Prepare to receive the word of the Lord, for it is coming." Mormon missionaries had soon arrived in Kirtland and brought them the gospel, which they had accepted.

Joseph had seen Newel Whitney in a vision, kneeling and praying, and so Joseph had recognized him the instant that he stepped into the store. Brother Whitney already believed in the prophet, but now he saw firsthand that the man was blessed with special, visionary powers. He and his wife were honored to give Joseph and Emma a temporary place to live in their own home. But the house was crowded, and although Emma did the best she could in the cramped rooms, she worried about having enough space for a family.

A few weeks later, the Smiths were offered a one-room log cabin on land owned by Isaac Morley, another new Church member. It was a humble place, but again, Emma made the best she could of it. In this little home, on April 30th, she gave birth to twins, a girl and a boy.

But the babies were premature. They lived only about three hours.

Emma was heartbroken. She had now given birth to three children and had watched them all die within a few hours of their births. She felt terribly alone in this new place, away from her loved ones, housed in a tiny cabin, and robbed of the joy of children she had been expecting all through the hard winter. She was almost overwhelmed with grief.

Then a remarkable coincidence happened. On the very next day, a woman named Julia Murdock died while giving birth to twins—a boy and a girl. The babies needed a mother to nurse them or they would die. John Murdock, the father, took the babies to Emma to raise as her own. Emma was pained to think of Brother Murdock's great loss, but the babies brought her immediate joy.

The little cabin was suddenly filled with life again. But it was crowded, and it soon became a very busy place. Church members came to consult with Joseph, and investigators of the new church arrived at all hours of the day to meet the Prophet in person. Joseph found it difficult to do his work: compiling his revelations and preparing an inspired version of the Bible. Emma, along with raising the twins, was working on a hymnbook that the Lord had commanded her to prepare. She didn't even have a separate bedroom where she could let the babies sleep. The constant stream of visitors was a great burden.

One day Joseph and Emma were visited by a group of people from Hiram, Ohio, south of Kirtland: a couple named John and Elsa Johnson, a Methodist preacher named Ezra Booth, and some others who wished to learn more about the new religion. Elsa Johnson suffered with chronic rheumatism, which had left one of her arms almost useless. The guests asked many questions before one of them said to Joseph, "Here is Mrs. Johnson with a lame arm; has God given any power to man now on the earth to cure her?"

For a time Joseph said little. Later, when the subject had changed, he got up from his chair and walked to Elsa Johnson. He took her arm in his hands and said, "Woman, in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ I command thee to be whole."

Elsa instantly raised her arm above her head—and everyone in the room knew that a miracle had just occurred. The next day, she was able to wash clothes without difficulty or pain.

The Johnsons were convinced that Joseph was a prophet. They soon joined the Church, as did Ezra Booth. Shortly afterward, John Johnson invited Joseph and Emma to move into the Johnsons' large farm home in Hiram, thirty-six miles from Kirtland. This was an answer to Joseph and Emma's prayers. They found comfort in this new home, which had enough living space and the peace and quiet they needed to carry out their work.

Throughout their lives, Joseph and Emma found little peace. Troubles and challenges always followed them—and would soon visit them in Hiram. But the winter of 1831-1832 was a sweet time, when the young couple found joy in the babies they had received as a gift, satisfaction in the work they were doing for the Lord, and the love of good friends who were willing to share their home.

For further reading, see Joseph Smith, History of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, ed. B. H. Roberts, 7 vols. (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1951), 1:145-46; Milton V. Backman, Jr., The Heavens Resound (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1983), pp. 43-45.
