Tom Hughes, Dean Hughes, Great Stories from Mormon History ( 1994)

Lucy Smith Leads the Way to Kirtland

Joseph Smith has become known throughout the world as a powerful leader. This was no accident—he learned many things from the example of his parents. His mother, Lucy Mack Smith, was a particularly gifted leader. She was fearless and decisive, and she was ready to take on any challenge.

When the early Saints began to gather in Kirtland, Ohio, a group of members from Waterloo, New York, sold their farms and prepared to make the move. Some of those Saints were older than Lucy Smith, and several held the priesthood, but the entire group agreed that "Mother Smith" should be their leader.

She was a good choice.

The plan was for the eighty Saints to take a boat on the Erie Canal to Buffalo, and then to catch another boat across Lake Erie to Fairport, Ohio. From there, they would take wagons to Kirtland.

The group left New York in the early spring. The winter had been very cold, but the ice on the lake had supposedly broken up. As the Saints departed, a friend gave Lucy seventeen dollars to help buy food. As it turned out, she was glad she had the money.

Once they were on their way on the canal boat, Lucy called the group together to sing and pray. She then asked the fathers of the families whether they had enough supplies for the trip. She learned that most of them had very little. They had sold everything they had just to provide clothing, and were hoping that others in better circumstances might offer help. But few were in "better circumstances." Lucy had to use the seventeen dollars wisely, but she managed to feed those in need throughout the trip.

Lucy was disappointed with the way some of the mothers let their children run about on deck. There were many dangers on board. But the mothers told Lucy that their children simply wouldn't obey.

Lucy would hear none of that. She called the children together and told them, "When I come upstairs, and raise my hand, you must, every one of you, run to me as fast as you can." The children promised her they would do that. From that time on, when "Mother Smith" thought the children were getting too careless—or when the mothers weren't watching as well as they might—she merely raised her hand, the children came running, and order was restored.

When the boat was about halfway to Buffalo, the canal wall broke. The water fell to such a low level that the boat got stuck in the mud. Several of the men began to complain. They were certain they would be caught in the canal for a long time with no way to pay for the food they would need. They would surely starve.

Lucy listened to their complaints, and then she gave them this advice: Be patient and trust the Lord. She was certain He was looking out for them, whether it seemed like it or not. Chances were, the harbor in Buffalo was blocked with ice. If so, the Saints were better off on this canal boat than they would be seeking shelter in the crowded harbor town.

Two days later, the boat was moving again. When they finally got to Buffalo, the Saints learned that Lucy had been exactly right. The harbor was frozen over and was full of boats waiting but unable to sail.

While waiting in Buffalo, the Waterloo group learned that another group of Mormons, from Colesville, New York, had arrived ahead of them. They had been waiting for a week for the ice to break up so that they could cross the lake. Lucy asked the Colesville members whether they had told anyone about their religion. The Colesville Saints said they hadn't. They feared that no one would let Mormons rent a room or travel on a boat. They advised Lucy to keep quiet herself.

But Lucy wasn't about to hide the truth. "If you are ashamed of Christ," she told them, "you must not expect to be prospered; and I shall wonder if we do not get to Kirtland before you."

Lucy set out to find a boat to get her group across the lake. She knew a captain, and she sent some men to ask him for space on his vessel.

The men returned with good news. The boat was full, but the captain would let their party aboard if they didn't mind traveling on the open deck. It was the best they could hope for, so the Saints moved their belongings on board. But the ice was still holding, making it impossible to cross the lake. To make things worse, rain began to fall.

Several of the children in the group were sick. Lucy was concerned that if they stayed out in the cold and wet, everyone would fall ill. She sent one of the men into town to seek a warm, dry place to stay for the night. But when the man returned, he said that all the public houses were full. When the members heard that, they began to complain. Why hadn't they stayed at home until the weather was better? What would they do now?

Lucy had faith that she could find something. She headed for town herself.

At her first stop, the landlord said he would take the group in. But some guests complained that they didn't want to be crowded in with a lot of sick children. Lucy stiffened her back and said, "Never mind, it is no matter; I suppose I can get a room somewhere else, just as well."

At the next stop, she found someone who agreed to let the women and children stay—if Lucy would tell her all about this new religion she belonged to. Needless to say, Lucy was only too happy to do that.

The women and children got in out of the cold for the night, but the next morning the ship captain asked all to come on board again. He wanted to be able to leave at a moment's notice, if the ice broke up.

The Waterloo group was soon restless, and they began to complain once again. Lucy was tired of that, and she put a quick stop to it. She told the members, "Suppose that all the Saints here should lift up their hearts in prayer to God, that the way might be opened before us, how easy it would be for him to cause the ice to break away, so that in a moment we could be on our journey!"

At that moment, a man shouted from the shore, "Is the Book of Mormon true?"

He had asked the right person. Lucy bore him a powerful testimony of the book and of the church her son had helped restore to the earth. She then turned back and promised the members that if they would all pray to God for the ice to break, He would break it up for them.

They prayed. And the ice broke.

A crack in the ice stretched clear across the harbor. It was just wide enough for the boat to squeeze through. The captain set out immediately, and even though the boat was riding low in the water and people from the dock shouted that it would sink for sure, it stayed afloat and reached open water. Shortly after the boat cleared the harbor, the crack closed again. Lucy had been right. She would arrive in Kirtland well ahead of the Colesville Saints.

The passage was rough, and many of the Saints were seasick. Then, when they arrived in Fairport, some were worried because they couldn't afford to travel on to Kirtland. But Joseph Smith arrived to meet them. He had arranged for teams to transport the group the rest of the way. They made it to Kirtland safely.

"Mother Smith" had shown the strength that Joseph had known all his life. Lucy was a woman of faith, one who knew how to get a job done. No one in the Waterloo group would ever doubt that again.

For further reading, see Lucy Mack Smith, History of Joseph Smith, by His Mother (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1958), pp. 195-208.
