Tom Hughes, Dean Hughes, Great Stories from Mormon History ( 1994)

Parley's Great Escape

We think of the early Saints, especially the early missionaries, as serious, devoted people. And they were. But they also knew how to laugh. In fact, Parley P. Pratt, one of the greatest missionaries, had a wonderful sense of humor.

Parley had been a member of the Church for only a few weeks when Joseph Smith called him to serve a mission to the "western part of the United States," in what is now Missouri. Parley took just a few days to prepare and then set out.

Parley began his mission with Oliver Cowdery, Peter Whitmer, and Ziba Peterson. But the four missionaries had traveled only about fifty miles west of Kirtland, Ohio, when they ran into trouble. Some people in the area were violently opposed to what they called "Joe Smith's Golden Bible"—the Book of Mormon. These people were willing to do almost anything to silence the Mormon preachers.

One evening Parley and Ziba Peterson were teaching a man named Simeon Carter when a police officer barged in and arrested Parley. The officer took Parley down a dark, muddy road to appear before a judge that very night. Ziba went along too, although he was not under arrest himself.

Parley soon learned that the whole idea was to stop him from preaching. Even though the hour was late, a number of men had been brought in to make false charges. Parley decided not to defend himself against the lies. He remained absolutely silent.

The judge finally ordered Parley to pay a large fine or go to jail. Parley ignored the man. He asked Ziba to join him in singing a hymn, "O How Happy Are They."

The judge didn't think that was funny. He demanded that Parley pay the fine.

Parley had another solution. He proposed that the witnesses repent of their lies, and the judge repent of his injustice and abuse. If they would do that, and all kneel down with him, he would pray that God might forgive them of their sins.

The judge was not impressed with that offer either. He ordered a policeman, Officer Peabody, to take Parley off to jail.

The jail, however, was some miles off. For the first night, Parley was kept in a public inn. The next morning, while Parley and the police officer ate breakfast, the three other missionaries showed up. Parley whispered to them to go on without him. He would catch up soon.

He had a plan.

When Parley and the officer walked outside, Parley asked, "Mr. Peabody, are you good at a race?"

"No," the officer said, "but my big bull dog is." He added that the dog was trained to "take any man down," on command.

Parley didn't seem to worry about that. He smiled and thanked Officer Peabody for giving him "the chance to teach and sing" and for the night's lodging—with breakfast. Then he said, "I must now go on my journey; if you are good at a race you can accompany me. I thank you for all your kindness—good day, sir."

And Parley took off running.

The officer was stunned. He didn't move.

When Parley realized he wasn't being chased, he stopped and shouted to the officer again to join him in the race. But Mr. Peabody stood amazed, seemingly stuck to the ground.

Parley turned and ran again, and this time he increased his speed to "something like that of a deer." He was two hundred yards ahead before Mr. Peabody finally remembered to send the bulldog after him.

Parley had jumped a fence and was racing across a field toward the woods when the dog finally began to catch up. Mr. Peabody was running behind, pointing and shouting, "Stu-boy, stu-boy—take him—watch—lay hold of him, I say—down with him."

The dog was almost at Parley's heels, and Parley knew that he was about to lose the race, when the thought hit him that he should "assist the officer" in sending the dog on into the forest. Parley pointed to the woods and began shouting the same commands: "Take him down, boy. Lay hold of him."

The dog flew on past and kept right on going in the direction Parley was pointing. Parley ran on, yelling loudly to the dog, and Mr. Peabody followed, farther back, shouting for the dog to turn around. But the dog had a phantom to chase, and he wouldn't give up.

Parley made it to the woods and then doubled back and slipped away. Before the day was over, he caught up with the other missionaries—with a very good story to tell.

The missionaries had a good laugh, and then they preached to a friendly audience that night. And meanwhile, Simeon Carter continued to study the Book of Mormon that the missionaries had left in his home. He became converted and traveled to Kirtland, where he was baptized and ordained an elder. When he returned home he preached the gospel and baptized nearly sixty people in the same place where Parley P. Pratt had fooled Mr. Peabody—and his dog.

For further reading, see Parley P. Pratt, Autobiography of Parley P. Pratt (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1975), pp. 48-51.
