Tom Hughes, Dean Hughes, Great Stories from Mormon History ( 1994)

An Attack on the Prophet

On a cold spring night in 1833, a mob of angry men learned a great deal about Joseph Smith. In fact, they may have learned more than they wanted to know.

While Joseph and Emma were living in Hiram, Ohio, some of the members of the Church in the area turned against the Prophet. Ezra Booth began to publish letters containing all sorts of accusations, and Symonds Ryder had become an open enemy to both Joseph and the Church.

The two former believers claimed that Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon wanted to take away the Church members' land to make themselves rich. Joseph taught that all the Saints should share what they had, not that any one person would come out better than the rest. But some people didn't understand that. Symonds Ryder was also bothered by Joseph's tendency to laugh and joke, which he didn't think a prophet should do.

These and other complaints were spread through the area, along with lies about the teachings of the Church. A number of men, roused by the charges—and by whiskey—decided to attack the Prophet and try to drive him away.

At the time, Joseph and Emma were nursing their adopted twins, who were sick with measles. On Saturday night, March 24, Emma had gone to bed with little Julia by her side. Joseph had lain down near her, in the trundle bed, with baby Joseph next to him. Emma heard a tapping on the window but thought nothing of it.

Suddenly a mob of men burst into the house. They forced their way into the bedroom, which was near the front door. The men grabbed the Prophet by his hair and bedclothes and dragged him outside. Fighting hard, Joseph was able to free a leg and kick a man hard enough to knock him down and bloody his nose. But powerful as he was, Joseph didn't have a chance. A mob of forty or fifty men were waiting to get their hands on the man they hated.

While several men held Joseph, the man with the bloody nose grabbed him by the neck and choked him until he passed out. When Joseph came to, men were carrying him away from the house and into a field. He spotted Sidney Rigdon lying unconscious on the ground. He thought the mob had killed poor Sidney, and he expected the same for himself. But when he asked the men to spare his life, one of them said, "Call on yer God for help, we'll show ye no mercy."

They carried him farther from the house and then tore off his clothes and beat him. One man fell on him like a mad cat, ripped his skin with his fingernails, and growled, "That's the way the Holy Ghost falls on folks."

Some of the men shouted threats on Joseph's life. Others threatened to mutilate his body. Joseph tried to fight the men off, but he was held securely. He felt hot tar being poured on his body and face. One man tried to push the tar paddle into his mouth, and another pushed a small bottle against his teeth, claiming it was full of poison. Joseph resisted and the bottle broke, chipping one of his teeth at the same time.

The men threw feathers over him, which stuck in the tar, and then they scattered, leaving him on the cold ground. Joseph rested for a few minutes and got his breath as best he could. He collapsed the first time he tried to stand up, but he struggled to his feet again and cleared the tar from his lips so he could breathe better. Then he staggered back to the house.

Emma saw him coming. In the darkness, she thought the tar on his body was blood, and she fainted. Friends had gathered by now. They wrapped Joseph in a blanket and took him inside. The long, painful process of scraping away the tar took all night.

The next morning was Sunday, and Joseph was scheduled to preach a sermon. He dressed himself, in spite of the concern of Emma and his friends, and kept his appointment. He preached the sermon he had prepared even though his face was scraped and bruised and he was still exhausted from the long night's agony.

Some of the mob from the night before had come to hear what Joseph would say. But he made no mention of what had happened, and he expressed no bitterness or anger. He simply preached the gospel of Jesus Christ, astounding all who listened.

That afternoon Joseph baptized three new members. And later, some of the men from the mob, having seen the Prophet's noble behavior in the face of such cruelty, joined the Church.

For further reading, see Joseph Smith, History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, ed. B. H. Roberts, 7 vols. (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1951), 1:259-65; Lucy Mack Smith, History of Joseph Smith, by His Mother (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1958), pp. 218-21; Donna Hill, Joseph Smith, the First Mormon (New York: Doubleday, 1977), pp. 218-21.
