Tom Hughes, Dean Hughes, Great Stories from Mormon History ( 1994)

Tar and Feathers

While Joseph Smith was in Kirtland, Ohio, he wanted to find another place, farther to the west, where more Saints could gather and build a center for the Church. The place chosen was near Independence, Jackson County, Missouri. Church members began to locate there in 1832.

But troubles soon developed. Most of the old Missouri settlers were from southern states where slavery was practiced. The Saints were nearly all from the northeast, and they were opposed to slavery. The old settlers feared that the balance of power in the county would shift. The Mormons, who seemed overly religious and strange to the old settlers, were coming in large numbers. They could take over the county and press their attitudes against slavery.

In the summer of 1833, a large group of the old settlers held a meeting in Independence. The meeting was supposed to be an orderly discussion of ways to get rid of the Mormons. But many of the men were drunk and unreasonable. They were ready for a fight.

The old settlers agreed that the Mormons should leave the county. The majority of them voted to give the Saints time to get things organized and move out peacefully. But that didn't satisfy the anger of many in the group, and they turned into a mob. As the meeting broke up, nearly three hundred men, wild with anger, headed for the Mormon newspaper office where William Phelps published The Evening and the Morning Star. They shoved the printing press out the second-story window. When they found copies of the Book of Commandments—the first publication of Joseph Smith's revelations—they scattered the pages in the streets.

The mob also tore up a Mormon-owned store, and then they went looking for the bishop. Edward Partridge, the first bishop of the Church, was the highest Mormon authority in Jackson County, so the mob chose him as their target.

Bishop Partridge was sitting with his wife, who had recently had a baby. Three men barged in the door and dragged the bishop outside. Then they put him on a horse and rode away with him.

The bishop's daughters, Emily and Eliza, had gone to a nearby spring for water. They saw about fifty men surround their house and drag their father outside. They hid and watched as the mob disappeared with their father. Then the girls ran to their mother in the house. They were terrified that their father was about to be murdered.

Edward Partridge was taken to the town square, where the rest of the mob was waiting. He and another Mormon man named Charles Allen were quickly surrounded. Russel Hicks, one of the leaders of the mob, warned the bishop and Brother Allen that they and the rest of the Saints would have to deny the Book of Mormon or leave the county. If they refused, they would be driven out.

Given the chance to speak, Bishop Partridge answered calmly. He told the men that Saints had suffered persecution in all ages of the world. He had done nothing to offend any of these people. If they abused him, they would be abusing an innocent man. "I am willing to suffer for the sake of Christ," he told them, but he refused to leave the county.

The bishop's speech only made the crowd angrier. They pressed in around him and Charles Allen, screaming and jeering, cursing and swearing. Some of them shouted, "Call on your Jesus!" Others wanted to hear what Bishop Partridge was saying, and they shouted for quiet.

Everything was out of control, and Edward Partridge had no idea what the mob intended to do. But he remained calm as they knocked him down and kicked him. They tore away his coat and hat and vest, and they began to strip away his other clothes. "Would you leave me here naked in the street?" he cried.

For some reason, they responded to this, leaving his pants and shirt on. But they covered him from head to foot with tar, and they poured feathers over him. Then they did the same to Charles Allen.

The crowd continued to taunt and shout insults. But slowly, as the men watched the quiet, dignified way that the bishop accepted their treatment, the noise began to die down. The mob watched as the bishop rose to his feet. He was a tall, straight man, and even in the tar and feathers, he looked dignified. The men had meant to shame him; instead, they were the ones feeling the shame. The entire crowd had fallen silent.

Bishop Partridge kept his quiet composure as the circle opened and the mob let him walk away. Charles Allen followed. The men of the mob seemed to recognize that they had faced better men than themselves—and lost to their meekness.

For further reading, see Donna Hill, Joseph Smith, the First Mormon (New York: Doubleday, 1977), pp. 160-62; Parley P. Pratt, The Autobiography of Parley P. Pratt (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1975), p. 191.
