Tom Hughes, Dean Hughes, Great Stories from Mormon History ( 1994)

Philo Dibble's Miraculous Recovery

In the autumn of 1833, the old settlers of Jackson County, Missouri, got bolder about attacking the Mormon settlements. Night riders pulled down or burned log homes. They ran off cattle and trampled crops, and they severely beat a number of the Mormon men.

The Saints were angry that a mob, by brute force, could steal away their land—their Zion. At first, even though the Mormons were greatly outnumbered, they stood their ground. Finally, when armed men attacked a small troop of Saints, the Mormons fought back.

The battle didn't last long, but when it was over Andrew Barber, a Mormon, lay dying, and two of the old settlers were dead. A number of men from both sides were wounded. One of them was a Mormon named Philo Dibble.

Philo was "gutshot"—wounded in the abdomen—and was as good as dead. Surgery of the abdomen was impossible in those days. If a man wounded this way didn't bleed to death, infection would kill him.

What made things worse was that the reign of terror had spread, and the Saints were fleeing from the county. Most were piling their belongings into wagons and heading toward the Missouri River to cross into Clay County. Others, forced from their homes in the cold and rain, were walking, taking nothing more than the clothes on their backs. One group headed south. Snow covered the heavy prairie grass that had burned that fall. The stubbly grass cut the feet of the children, many of whom had no shoes. Rescuers later tracked the group by following the blood on the snow.

Friends of Philo Dibble had a tough choice to make. No one wanted to leave him behind, but there seemed to be no way to save him, and if they stayed with him in the county, they would be in great danger. One man, Newel Knight, refused to give up. He risked his life to get to the Dibble home. Slipping past the mob, he entered the home, quickly gave his friend a priesthood blessing, and then rode away.

The next day, as Newel Knight was leaving the county, he met up with none other than Philo Dibble—ten miles from where he had given him the blessing the day before. Philo was actually well enough to have joined the fleeing Saints. He told Newel that as soon as he had received the blessing, the pain seemed to move as though a "power were driving it," and in a few minutes it was gone. Then his body discharged a large amount of infected fluid, along with the bullet and even some cloth from his shirt.

Philo Dibble made it safely into Clay County, and he recovered completely. After surviving further trials in Missouri and Illinois, he crossed the plains to Utah. He served the Church in many callings throughout the rest of his long life.

For further reading, see Parley P. Pratt, Autobiography of Parley P. Pratt (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1975), pp. 99-100; Joseph Smith, History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, ed. B. H. Roberts, 7 vols. (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1951), 1:431.
