Tom Hughes, Dean Hughes, Great Stories from Mormon History ( 1994)

Saved by a Storm

The men of Zion's Camp were tested to the limit. Some were not up to the test, but the majority never doubted that God was with them. On several occasions the men were protected from their enemies. One night in particular, when an army of Missouri old settlers had threatened to attack and destroy the camp, even the forces of nature came to the rescue.

By June 19, 1834, Zion's Camp had crossed most of Missouri. As the marchers neared Clay County, they began to receive warnings that an attack was coming.

That night the men set up their camp on a section of high ground between the Big Fishing River and the Little Fishing River. Anyone who attacked them would have to cross one of those rivers. When the army had crossed the Little Fishing River that afternoon, however, the water hadn't been even as high as their boot tops, and the weather was calm.

As the Saints were setting up their tents for the night, five men wearing guns rode into camp. They announced that nearly four hundred men, gathered from the surrounding counties, were ready to attack. They promised to kill every member of Zion's Camp.

Wilford Woodruff wrote that when the men rode away, the sky was blue. But shortly after, he noticed a small, dark cloud that began to "unroll itself like a scroll" across the sky. In a few minutes the heavens were black, and then rain began to fall. A wild, intense storm followed.

Parley Pratt said it was the kind of storm "seldom witnessed on our earth." Rain fell in torrents and thunder crashed and rumbled. Joseph Smith said the lightning was so constant that throughout the night he could see everything around him in perfect detail.

The men in the camp spent a frightening night in the rain and mud. Joseph and George A. Smith dug a trench around their tent, but the inside still filled up with six inches of water. George A. finally climbed out of the tent and dropped, exhausted, into the back of a wagon and slept in the driving rain. Some of the men took cover in an old log church. Others managed the best they could in their flooded tents, which were whipped and sometimes even torn away by the raging winds.

But the men, wet and cold as they were, survived the night. In the morning they tested their guns—and almost all of them fired. All was well, and the storm had passed over them. The skies were now clear.

Meanwhile, however, their attackers had not come out of the storm so well. The Little Fishing River, which the men of Zion's Camp had walked through the day before, was now thirty feet deep. The Big Fishing River was even deeper. Both were too dangerous to cross. The Saints had been protected from the planned attack.

About forty men from the mob had crossed the Missouri River from Jackson County as the storm had begun. Many more had planned to follow. But the first group was pinned down all night by hailstones the size of eggs. The wind tore trees up by their roots, and the furious hail broke away limbs. The hailstones actually broke the stocks of some of the men's rifles.

One Jackson County man was killed by lightning. Another had his hand torn off as he tried to hold his bolting horse. The rain, hail, and floods kept the rest of the mob from even crossing the Missouri River into Clay County.

After a terrifying night under wagons, in hollow logs, or anywhere the old settlers could protect themselves, they were humbled and frightened. Besides, their ammunition was soaked and wouldn't fire. And so they boarded their boat and rowed back across the Missouri River. Some had lost their horses, which had been run off by the storm. Not one had the heart to consider trying another assault on Zion's Camp.

At the very height of the storm, when some of the men of Zion's Camp had complained, Joseph told them, "Boys, there is some meaning to this. God is in this storm." And he was not the only one who thought so. When the old settlers learned that the Saints had only been rained on, while they, just a few miles away, had been pounded by hail, some of them said that if God fought for the Mormons that way, "we might as well go about [our] business."

And that's just what they did.

For further reading, see Merlo J. Pusey, Builders of the Kingdom (Provo, Utah: Brigham Young University Press, 1981), pp. 14-15; Parley P. Pratt, Autobiography of Parley P. Pratt (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1975), p. 116.
