Tom Hughes, Dean Hughes, Great Stories from Mormon History ( 1994)

Sarah's Dream

In 1835, at the age of twenty, Sarah Pea heard about the restored gospel for the first time. Her father happened to meet two Mormon missionaries, and he invited them to his home in St. Clair County, near Bellville, Illinois. The missionaries explained the first principles of the gospel, and they told the Pea family about the Book of Mormon.

The meeting ended late in the afternoon, so Mr. Pea invited the missionaries to spend the night. After supper, many of the Peas' neighbors came over to hear the two strangers preach. Sarah was fascinated with what she heard. She asked to see a copy of the Book of Mormon. She left the other guests, took the book to her room, and read it throughout the evening and much of the night. It left a strong impression on her.

The missionaries were on their way to Kirtland, Ohio—five hundred miles away—so they left the next morning. Sarah and her family continued to think about what they had heard. They thought, however, that they would never see the elders again.

And then, six weeks later, Sarah announced that the missionaries were coming back.

Sarah had dreamed on a Friday night that the two elders would arrive at their home the following evening at sundown. In the dream, they stepped onto her porch and said certain words that she remembered specifically.

The morning after her dream, Sarah warned her parents, who were going to town, to hurry home in time to meet the Mormon missionaries. They just laughed at her. Sarah also told her sister about her dream, but her sister laughed too.

All day, Sarah and her sister cooked and got ready for Sunday. As the afternoon and evening wore on, Sarah began to watch out the door for the elders.

As the sun was setting the missionaries appeared, exactly as it had happened in her dream. When they stepped onto her porch, the conversation that followed was word for word what she remembered from her dream:

"I have been looking for you to come," she said.

"Why, had you heard we were coming?"

"No, I dreamed last night that you would come, and I felt sure you would be here."

"Well," said one of the missionaries, "we had a dream that we were to return here and baptize you and build up a church in this region."

"Well," responded Sarah, "that is something for the future."

Not much later, Sarah's parents returned. Her father laughed and said, "Well, Sarah, where are your Mormon elders?" Just then the elders stepped out onto the porch. Mr. and Mrs. Pea were astounded!

But Sarah and her family were soon baptized.

The Peas eventually moved to Far West, Missouri, where Sarah met and married Charles Coulson Rich. She and her husband were driven by mobs from their homes in Missouri and in Nauvoo, Illinois. They eventually crossed the plains to Utah. They raised a fine family and Brother Rich was called as an apostle of the Lord. With her husband, Sarah served as a leader in founding settlements in San Bernardino, California, and in Bear Lake Valley on the Utah-Idaho border.

Sarah had learned at an early age to trust in the Lord's guidance, and she never lost that trust.

For further reading, see John Henry Evans, Charles Coulson Rich (New York: Macmillan, 1936), pp. 38-40.
