Tom Hughes, Dean Hughes, Great Stories from Mormon History ( 1994)

A Fight at the Gallatin Election

The Saints who were driven from Jackson County remained in Clay County for more than a year. Some began to see the area as a place to gather until they could move back into Jackson County. But Clay County citizens, sympathetic at first, became alarmed about so many Mormons moving in. The Saints knew they would have to move on again, and so they worked out an agreement with officials of the state of Missouri to settle in two counties where fewer people lived. These were Caldwell and Daviess counties, in the northern part of the state. There, the Saints gathered again and built the settlements of Far West and Adam-Ondi-Ahman.

But the same old problems soon returned. As the members began to move to Missouri from Kirtland, Ohio, the number of Mormons in Caldwell and Daviess counties grew to more than five thousand, with more coming. The old settlers in the area didn't want their counties to be dominated by a group of outsiders, especially these rather strange newcomers. But this time the Saints were tired of being driven away. This was America, and they had a right to live where they chose. They decided to stand their ground—even to fight if they had to.

On August 8, 1838, an election was held in the town of Gallatin. Two weeks before the election, a non-Mormon judge who was friendly to the Church warned that the old settlers might try to keep the Saints from voting. He told the Mormon men to go to the elections armed and prepared to protect themselves (in 1838 women did not have the right to vote). The Saints, however, ignored the warning and arrived at the elections unarmed.

A man named William P. Peniston, who had been an enemy of the Saints in Clay County, was running for the state legislature. In recent weeks he had tried to gain the Mormon vote by pretending he was a friend after all. But that plan hadn't worked, and now he was afraid that if the Mormons got to vote, they would keep him from winning.

Peniston served up plenty of whiskey to a rough bunch of old settlers, and then he stood on a barrel and gave a speech. He told the crowd that if the Mormons voted, they would seize control of the county and prevent the old settlers from voting in the future.

The Mormons, he said, were horse thieves, liars, and counterfeiters. "They profess to heal the sick, and cast out devils," he shouted, "and you all know that is a lie."

When a small group of Mormons approached the balloting place, a drunken man named Richard Weldon stopped an elderly man named Samuel Brown. "Are you a Mormon preacher?" he demanded. Samuel Brown said that he was. "Do you Mormons believe in healing the sick by the laying on of hands, speaking [in] tongues, and casting out devils?" Once again, Brother Brown said yes. Mr. Weldon shouted that Brown was a liar, and then he began to beat the old man.

Another Mormon, Hyrum Nelson, stepped in to stop the beating and took some hard blows himself from several of the old settlers. The other Mormons in the group weren't going to stand by and watch this. Riley Stewart picked up a good-sized stick and gave Richard Weldon a solid blow over the head.

Weldon dropped to the ground, and suddenly everyone got into the fight. One of the old settlers pulled a knife and tried to stab Riley Stewart. But a Mormon by the name of John Butler had grabbed a solid stick of oak. Just as the old settler stuck Riley Stewart's shoulder with his knife, John Butler hit the old settler over the head with his stick.

The Mormon men were badly outnumbered, maybe ten to one, but they fought like lions. One of the old settlers, who took a blow in the face with a two-pound rock, called out that he had never seen people hit as hard as the Mormons did.

John Butler later wrote a report on the whole incident.He said that one Mormon, Brother Olmstead, had bought some earthenware bowls and dishes that day. He had wrapped them up in a cotton handkerchief in order to carry them home on horseback. When he was surrounded and had to fight, he used the dishes as a weapon, and he used them well. When the fight was over, the dishes were broken into a thousand pieces, no piece bigger than a silver dollar, and the handkerchief "looked as though cows had been chewing on it." But Brother Olmstead was still feeling fine. The same could not be said of some of those who had gotten in his way.

John Butler wrote that he didn't want to kill anyone, only to protect himself and his brothers. "When I got in reach," he said, "I commenced to call out loud for peace." But at the same time, he continued to swing his stick. He said he thought he was only "tapping" his enemies lightly, but they dropped to the ground, one after the other, as though they were dead.

Most who saw the incident agreed that the dozen or so Mormons not only held their own but won the fight. No one recorded, though, how many were actually able to vote.

In the next few days, the story spread through the state that Mormons had attacked a group of old settlers in Gallatin. Things got worse from that point. Mormons were accused of every sort of bad behavior. But they had only fought because they wanted to vote. And then, under attack, they had stood together and protected each other.

John Butler couldn't help it if his little "taps" had turned out the lights on so many of the old settlers!

For further reading, see Joseph Smith, History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, ed. B. H. Roberts, 7 vols. (Salt Lake City, Deseret Book, 1951), 3:56-58; Donna Hill, Joseph Smith, the First Mormon (New York: Doubleday, 1977), pp. 228-30.
