Tom Hughes, Dean Hughes, Great Stories from Mormon History ( 1994)

Haun's Mill—A Massacre and a Miracle

Far West and Adam-Ondi-Ahman were the largest of the Mormon communities in northern Missouri. Many Mormons in the area lived in tiny settlements. One of those was Haun's Mill, where about thirty families lived. The Prophet Joseph had advised them to move to the larger communities for safety, but they chose to stay where they were. Several of them had just arrived from Ohio and were still living in tents or wagons. It was at Haun's Mill that one of the greatest trials came to the early Saints.

In 1838, the governor of Missouri, Lilburn W. Boggs, listened to lies and rumors and finally sided with the old settlers of Caldwell and Daviess counties, who wanted to get rid of all Mormons. He issued a written statement that said, among other things, "The Mormons must be treated as enemies and must be exterminated or driven from the state."

"Extermination" is something done to cockroaches or termites, not to human beings. But the order was taken to be a license to kill, and some of the old settlers acted immediately.

On Tuesday, October 30, late in the afternoon, 240 armed men of the Missouri state militia rode their horses toward Haun's Mill. Children were outside playing, and men and women were working in the fields, harvesting crops. A few of the Mormon men were standing guard, however, worried that just such an attack might happen. When the guards saw the large group of armed men, riding hard and looking angry, they put down their guns, waved their hats, and called for peace. The mob answered by firing their first shots.

The old settlers charged into the settlement, shouting and swearing and shooting. A few of the Mormon men tried to return the gunfire, but others, seeing no hope, scattered and tried to hide. One of the mob leaders shouted, "Shoot everything with breeches, and shoot to kill!"

The men listened only to the order to kill. They shot at the women and children who were running to the woods for protection. Amanda Smith, a Mormon woman, grabbed her two little daughters and hurried across a plank over the mill pond. As she ran into the woods, bullets flew around her, tearing through her clothes. Another sister, Mary Stedwell, who was running alongside Amanda, was struck by a bullet and fell. Amanda helped her get behind a log and told her to stay down.

As Mary huddled against the ground, the mobbers shot at her dress, which was draped over the log. They apparently thought they were hitting her, finishing her off. More than twenty bullets were later cut from the log.

A number of the Mormon men and boys ran into the blacksmith's shop with the hope of using it as a fort. It was a log building, but there were wide gaps between the logs. Those inside were caught like animals in a cage. The mob surrounded the shop and fired through the gaps. Eight of those inside were killed. Some, who ran from the shop, were able to get away, although several were wounded. Others were killed as they tried to make their escape.

Warren Smith, Amanda's husband, and his sons Sardius and Alma were among those in the blacksmith's shop. Warren was killed. Sardius, who was ten years old, managed to slide under the blacksmith's bellows, where he tried to hide. But the men of the mob found him and dragged him outside, where they put a gun to his head and shot him.

Once the shooting was over, and all the Mormon men were dead or wounded or had managed to get away, the mob looted the houses. They even stole the boots and clothes off some of the bodies. One man rode off with a bonnet that he said he wanted for his sweetheart.

When the mob cleared out, some of the Mormons came out of hiding to discover the horror. Of the thirty or so men in the settlement, fifteen were dead, along with two boys. A few other men died later. Several others, both men and women, were wounded, some of them disabled for life.

When Amanda Smith came out of hiding, she saw her oldest son carrying one of his younger brothers out of the shop. "Oh! My Alma is dead!" she cried. Seven-year-old Alma was actually still alive, though badly wounded in the hip. But her husband and Sardius were dead.

Amanda later wrote that in spite of her grief, she couldn't cry. Her "mother's sense" focused all her attention on Alma, who seemed to have little hope of surviving. One of the members of the mob had stuck his rifle through a crack in the logs of the blacksmith shop, placed the barrel against the boy's hip, and fired. Not only the flesh but the hip bone itself had been shot away. Sister Smith wrote:

We laid little Alma on a bed in our tent and examined the wound. It was a ghastly sight. I knew not what to do. . . .

The women were sobbing, in the greatest anguish of spirit; the children were crying loudly with fear and grief at the loss of fathers and brothers; the dogs howled over their dead masters and the cattle were terrified with the scent of the blood of the murdered.

Yet I was there, all that long, dreadful night, with my dead and my wounded, and none but God as our physician and help.

"Oh my Heavenly Father," I cried, "what shall I do? Thou seest my poor wounded boy and knowest my inexperience. Oh Heavenly Father, direct me what to do!"

And then I was directed as by a voice speaking to me.

The voice told Sister Smith to make medicines from the ashes of the fire and from the root of a slippery elm tree. Then she was directed to wash and bandage the wound. All the while she talked to her son:

"Alma, my child!" I said, "you believe that the Lord made your hip?"

"Yes, mother."

"Well, the Lord can make something there in the place of your hip, don't you believe he can, Alma?"

"Do you think that the Lord can, mother?" inquired the child, in his simplicity.

"Yes, my son," I replied, "he has shown it all to me in a vision."

Then I laid him comfortably on his face, and said: "Now you lay like that, and don't move, and the Lord will make you another hip."

Some of the Saints, in the face of such violence, simply gave up. They left the Church or returned to their former homes, away from the rest of the Saints. But most did not. Most of them found ways to survive, ways to discover strengths they didn't know they possessed. Amanda Smith was one of those survivors. She had lost a husband and a son, but she hadn't lost her faith.

She later described the miracle that came five weeks after the Haun's Mill massacre:

I was out of the house fetching a bucket of water, when I heard screams from the children. Running back, in affright, I entered, and there was Alma on the floor, dancing around, and the children screaming in astonishment and joy.

It is now nearly forty years ago, but Alma has never been the least crippled during his life, and he has traveled quite a long period of the time as a missionary of the gospel and a living miracle of the power of God.

Mormons, it would appear, are not all that easy to exterminate.
