Tom Hughes, Dean Hughes, Great Stories from Mormon History ( 1994)

Alexander Doniphan: Friend to the Saints

The same day the massacre occurred at Haun's Mill—October 30, 1838—leaders at Far West received warnings that more than two thousand Missouri soldiers were marching toward their city. The Saints prepared themselves for an all-out fight. They built barricades for protection by tearing down log cabins and turning wagons on their sides.

The first army to arrive was headed by General Samuel D. Lucas from Jackson County, a longtime enemy of the Saints. Joseph Smith led a small group of men on a spying mission that night. He came away satisfied that General Lucas's army was setting up camp and would not yet attack. But no one knew what the next morning might bring.

During the night many of the soldiers rode onto Mormon farms. They trampled crops and killed animals. One soldier used the butt of his rifle to bash a Mormon man in the head. He claimed that the man, called only "Brother Carey" in later reports, had burned the soldier's house. When Sister Carey tried to help her husband, soldiers stopped her. She could only watch as her husband bled to death. Later, Mormons learned that the soldier's house had not, in fact, been burned.

The next morning the men of Far West took up their positions at the barricades. But news came that Governor Boggs had sent Major General John Clark with several thousand more troops to carry out the destruction of their city. The Saints would be overwhelmingly outnumbered.

General Lucas, early in the day, led his troops toward Far West, but when he saw that the Mormons were armed and ready, he retreated. A stand-off lasted through most of the day. Finally, Lucas approached the town again, this time with 250 soldiers under a white flag of truce. He demanded that the Mormons give up their guns and turn over their leaders to the army.

The Saints had hoped to hold their ground, appeal for justice, and somehow find a way to keep their homes. But Joseph Smith could now see that a bloodbath was coming. He asked Colonel George Hinkle, the highest ranking military leader in the Far West militia, to go out and negotiate with General Lucas.

When Hinkle returned, he told Joseph that General Lucas wanted to hold a council with the Mormon leaders. Perhaps an agreement could be worked out that would save the lives of the people. Joseph took Parley Pratt, Sidney Rigdon,and a few other Church leaders and rode out to hold the council. But as the Mormon leaders approached the waiting soldiers, General Lucas commanded his men to grab and arrest them.

Many of the soldiers had painted themselves with Indian-style war paint. And many were drunk. As they grabbed the Mormon leaders, they shouted with a terrifying, eerie howl that everyone in Far West could hear. Every Saint shuddered to think what now might happen to their beloved Prophet.

Joseph and the others were forced to spend the whole night in the open while a hard rain fell. As they lay in the mud, their enemies held a court to decide their fate. The Mormon leaders were not allowed to speak on their own behalf.

While the so-called court continued, guards taunted Joseph. "Come, Mr. Smith, show us an angel," they demanded.

Late in the night, the court reached a decision. Lucassent the following order to Brigadier-General Alexander Doniphan, the commanding officer of one of the armies under Lucas's command:

Sir: You will take Joseph Smith and the other prisoners into the public square at Far West and shoot them at 9 o'clock tomorrow morning.

Samuel D. Lucas, Major-General Commanding.

General Doniphan, besides being a militia commander, was an attorney. He and his partners had once been hired by Joseph Smith to represent the Church during the negotiations when the Saints had been driven out of Jackson County. General Doniphan knew Joseph well, and he admired him. As a military officer, his obligation was to carry out the order. On the other hand, as a decent human being who believed in justice, he knew that what Lucas was commanding him to do was deeply wrong.

He didn't hesitate. He quickly sent a note back to Lucas:

It is cold-blooded murder. I will not obey your order. My brigade shall march for Liberty tomorrow morning, at 8 o'clock; and if you execute these men, I will hold you responsible before an earthly tribunal, so help me God.

A. W. Doniphan, Brigadier-General.

General Doniphan kept his promise. In the morning he marched his troops away from Far West. Now Lucas was left to carry out the order that he had hoped to pass off on someone else. But he lost his courage. He kept the Mormon leaders as prisoners, but he did not shoot them.

It is rare for a military officer to refuse a direct command from a superior officer. But General Doniphan was certain he was right, so he acted nobly and took his chances. Perhaps he knew the kind of coward he was dealing with. When General Lucas later wrote his report to the governor, he didn't even mention the trial or the death order.

Lucas also later reported that his troops had been well behaved and under control. But the truth was, over the next few days his army turned into a mob. They beat many of the Saints, and killed several men. They destroyed houses. They trampled crops and shot cattle for sport.

General Lucas also forced the Saints to surrender, give up their weapons, and sign away their rights to their own property. His troops took Joseph Smith home long enough to collect a few of his belongings. But when little Joseph III, Joseph's son, clung to his father's leg and cried, a soldier waved his sword and told him to get away "or I will run you through."

Hyrum Smith, who was sick in bed, was dragged out and arrested. Soldiers placed him and Joseph and the other leaders in covered wagons to take them away to jail. The Prophet's mother and youngest sister, Lucy, having heard that Joseph and Hyrum were to be shot, ran to the wagons. They were able to grasp Joseph's and Hyrum's hands, each for a moment, before soldiers forced them to leave.

All the Saints watched as the wagons rolled away. Rain was still pouring down. In the gloom, the members feared not only the loss of their leaders but the destruction of the Church itself.

Two days later, General Clark arrived. The Saints tried to talk with him, hoping that he might be more reasonable than General Lucas. But Clark promptly arrested fifty-six additional Church leaders. Then he assembled the Saints and addressed them. Among other things, he told them, "You have always been the aggressors—you have brought yourselves these difficulties."

And he left no hope for the leaders: "Do not imagine for a moment—do not let it enter your minds that they will be delivered, or that you will see their faces again, for their fate is fixed—their die is cast—their doom is sealed."

Needless to say, the words cut the Saints deeply and made them angry but also left them near despair. All the same, they refused to lose hope that the Lord would somehow save them.

Contrary to General Clark's prediction, all the leaders eventually gained their freedom. Not one lost his life or was convicted of a crime. The Church had survived one of its darkest hours. But none of that would have been possible had it not been for the courage of one friend—General Alexander Doniphan—who defied an order that his conscience told him he must not carry out.

For further reading, see Donna Hill, Joseph Smith, the First Mormon (New York: Doubleday, 1977), pp. 237-41; Parley P. Pratt, Autobiography of Parley P. Pratt (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1975), pp. 187-88.
