Tom Hughes, Dean Hughes, Great Stories from Mormon History ( 1994)

Joseph Silences the Guards

After the surrender of the Saints at Far West, many of the Church leaders were held prisoner while a court of inquiry met to review what had happened. The court would decide whether a trial of the Mormon leaders was justified.

But the court of inquiry, with Judge Austin A. King presiding, had a strange way of doing things. Every time the defense presented the name of a witness to tell the Mormons' side of the story, the witness was chased down, arrested, and held with the other prisoners. Before long the defense lawyers, one of whom was Alexander Doniphan, recognized that justice would not be done here. The only hope was to go on to a trial and hope for a better judge.

Joseph Smith and several other men were imprisoned together in an old log courthouse in Richmond, Missouri. Winter had come on harsh and bitter. The jail was crowded, gloomy, and cold. The prisoners, all chained to each other, were forced to sleep on the floor, with little bedding. The food was disgusting, and the men were forced to eat it with their fingers. Poor Sidney Rigdon, suffering with illness and fever, was given no special help, except that his daughter, Athalia, who was married to another of the prisoners, George Robinson, was allowed to come inside to look after her father.

In this degrading situation one night, Joseph Smith showed what kind of man he was. With Athalia Robinson present, the guards began to brag about the terrible things they had done to the Mormons in Far West. The stories got worse and worse. The guards, using filthy language, claimed they had robbed, raped, and killed many of the Saints.

Parley Pratt, one of the Twelve Apostles, suffered through all this with the others. He listened until he was disgusted and was thinking that he ought to rise up and tell the guards what he thought of them. But Joseph Smith was the one who rose to his feet. He spoke to the guards in a voice that was like "the roaring of a lion":

"SILENCE, ye fiends of the infernal pit. In the name of Jesus Christ I rebuke you, and command you to be still; I will not live another minute and hear such language. Cease such talk, or you or I die THIS INSTANT!"

The Prophet, in his chains, stood straight and tall. The guards, frightened and humbled, backed away and actually begged Joseph's forgiveness. They remained quiet during the rest of the night.

Later, remembering the experience, Parley Pratt wrote that he had seen judges in the courts of England, and he had watched as congressmen had created laws in Washington. He had also imagined kings and royal courts, but, he said: "dignity and majesty have I seen but once, as it stood in chains, at midnight, in a dungeon in an obscure village of Missouri."

When the court of inquiry ended, Parley and several others continued to be held in the Richmond jail on charges of treason and murder. Joseph and Hyrum Smith were taken with some other men to a jail in Liberty, Missouri. A long winter of misery would follow, but no one who had been in the Richmond jail on that dramatic night—including the guards—would ever forget that they had seen, once in their lives, the power of a prophet.

For further reading, see Parley P. Pratt, Autobiography of Parley P. Pratt (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1975), pp. 210-11.
