Tom Hughes, Dean Hughes, Great Stories from Mormon History ( 1994)

The Flight from Far West

Joseph Smith, along with five fellow Church leaders, spent a long, difficult winter in the Liberty jail. Conditions were degrading, almost inhuman, but for Joseph the worst part was knowing that his friends and family were suffering and he could do nothing to help them. When Joseph reached the point of despair one spring day, he finally cried out, "O God, where art thou?"

The answer came in a revelation from the Lord: "Know thou, my son, that all these things shall give thee experience, and shall be for thy good. The Son of Man hath descended below them all. Art thou greater than he?"

These words comforted Joseph, and they have comforted many others throughout the history of the Church. But Joseph received no promise that the misery was over. Little did the Saints know, in fact, what great challenges lay ahead.

Church members had agreed to leave the state of Missouri in the spring, but that had not been good enough for many of the old settlers. They continued to torment and harass the Mormons who didn't move on. Before decent weather could come, even though food and warm clothing were in short supply, most of the Saints felt they had to begin their trek eastward, toward Illinois. The weather was still cold, many were sick, and everyone suffered, but children were hit the hardest. Many were buried along the way.

One of the exiles from Far West was Martha Thomas. In the late winter of 1839, Martha was thirty-one. She and her husband, Daniel, had five children. She had watched the previous fall as wagons had rolled away, carrying Joseph Smith and other Church leaders to jail. And then she had watched as armed men had arrested her husband. But Daniel had been set free just in time to arrive home and load the family's belongings onto their wagon. Snow was still on the ground, but the Thomases knew they had no choice but to get away from Far West.

So, on February 14, Martha and Daniel set out for Quincy, Illinois. The Thomases' five children walked across the frozen prairie for more than a hundred miles. The wagon was too full and the load too heavy for them to ride. Martha described the children's pain: "The snow was about sixinches deep. The children all barefoot but the eldest boy. To hear them cry at night with their feet cracked open and the blood oozing out was a grievous thing for a mother to bear. I often would grease [their feet at night]."

It was a terrible journey, but Brigham Young, the president of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles, led the way in looking out for the needs of the Saints. He and the other apostles set up stations all along the way, with food and assistance available. If it hadn't been for this careful planning, many of the travelers would have starved.

When the Thomases finally reached the Mississippi River, they learned they would have to wait to cross. Many of the Saints had arrived at the river, more than the ferry could keep up with. As the Thomases settled down for their wait, a man Martha called "Brother Bronson" called all the men in the area together. He explained to them that there were still many families in Far West whose lives were in danger. The old settlers were warning that if the remaining Saints didn't leave soon, they would all be shot. But the remaining Saints were poor and didn't have any wagons. They had no way to leave. Brother Bronson asked the men if any of them would offer their wagons to be taken back to Far West.

Daniel came back from the meeting and asked Martha what she thought. It took her no time at all to decide. "Well, dump the things out by that log," she said.

The family unpacked the wagon, and Martha watched her husband drive it off to send to those in greater need. She and her family could do nothing but sit down and wait for a chance to cross the river. She didn't say so in her account, but she must have been very worried. She did mention that she was not feeling well, but she didn't explain why.

Some friends built a little shelter for Martha out of poles and quilts, with one side left open so the heat of an open fire could reach her. "I have often thought the Queen never enjoyed such a bedroom," she later joked. But she spent only one night in that little shelter. The next morning she learned that her family could cross the Mississippi. Her children helped her carry the family's belongings onto the ferry, and they floated across the mile-wide river. Big chunks of ice were still flowing with the current, making the crossing a frightening experience, but Martha praised the Lord when the ferry arrived safely.

Getting across the river didn't solve all of the Thomases' problems, however. Daniel and his oldest son, Morgan, had stayed on the Missouri side because they had not been able to get their cow across a boggy creek bottom and up to the ferry in time for the passage. They hoped to cross later that evening.

As night fell, Martha didn't know where to go. Those who had wagons drove on ahead toward Quincy, but she had no way to travel. She also wanted to wait for Daniel to catch up so her family could stay together. So she and her children waited by the river in the cold and dark. They wrapped themselves in quilts and hoped that the boat would arrive safely and that Daniel and Morgan would be on it. For the first time, Martha couldn't hold back her tears.

Then a man rode by and told her that he had located a "house" and the Thomases were welcome to use half of it. The house, he said, was twelve feet square. Each couple had five children, so there would be fourteen people. He laughed and told her they would have plenty of standing room. He waited until he could hear the ferry approaching, and then, promising to send a wagon and team back for her, he rode on.

Martha waited for the ferry to land. What a relief it was to see Daniel and Morgan get off! Martha and Daniel rejoiced in finding each other. Then they took their children to a nearby camp, where they set up another little shelter and again waited.

The man who had come by earlier soon kept his promise. About ten o'clock another man drove a wagon into camp. The driver said he was there to carry the Thomases to the little log house.

When they reached the house that night, they found, of course, that it was very crowded. But it was also warm and safe. The Thomases were greatly relieved, and they thanked the Lord to be inside.

Just a few days later, Martha Thomas gave birth to a son.

All through this ordeal, Martha Thomas had known that she would soon be having her baby. She had known it as she and her family crossed the state of Missouri, known it when she gave up her wagon, known it as she waited by the river to cross, known it as she watched for her husband, alone on the other side. Many years later, when she finally wrote her story, she remembered the suffering of her children, the goodness of those who had built her bedroom out of poles and blankets, and the worry about her husband and son crossing the river safely. What she never mentioned was her own suffering.

For further reading, see Kenneth W. Godfrey, Audrey M. Godfrey, and Jill Mulvay Derr, Women's Voices (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1982), pp. 84-96.
