Tom Hughes, Dean Hughes, Great Stories from Mormon History ( 1994)

Brigham Young's Mission to England

As the Saints fled from Missouri in the spring of 1839, Brigham Young was faced with a hard decision. The Lord had revealed to Joseph Smith the summer before that the apostles were to serve a mission to England. They were to depart, leaving from the Far West temple site, on April 26, 1839. That hardly seemed a good time for most of the leaders of the Church to abandon the suffering Saints. And yet, Brigham was not one to ignore a direct call from the Lord.

Brigham, who was in Illinois by then, knew that a trip back into Missouri would be dangerous, but he felt he must obey the Lord. So he asked the other apostles to join him, and they rode the two hundred miles back to Far West, held a brief ceremony, and "took their leave" for their missions.

The apostles hoped the way would be opened for them now that they could soon depart for England. But first they had to get their families settled somewhere. As it turned out, their hardships had just begun.

All the brethren returned to Illinois and began the hard work of establishing the city that would be called Nauvoo. Brigham Young found a shabby log house on the Iowa side of the Mississippi River and moved his family in. The other apostles found similar housing or began to build log cabins. The apostles were eager to get going, but when the summer heat came on, almost all the Saints began to fall ill. The mosquitoes in the wetlands around Nauvoo carried malaria, a disease that made people deathly sick.

On July 2, Joseph Smith met with the apostles. He blessed both the men and their wives, and he set them apart for their missions. Every one of the apostles was sick with malaria, and so were their families, but the men prepared to go.

Wilford Woodruff, sick as he was, got out of bed on the morning of August 8. He blessed his wife, Phoebe, who was very sick, and then he embraced her. He knew he was leaving her with little food, a rundown cabin to live in, and a sick family. Phoebe, according to Brother Woodruff, accepted his departure with the courage that "becomes a saint."

Brigham Young waited until his wife, Mary Ann, delivered a baby daughter. Mary Ann was still very sick with malaria, but ten days after the birth, Brigham left home. Since he could hardly walk because of his own illness, he asked a brother to take him on horseback to the ferry. He vowed to go to England or "die trying." But Brigham had a promise from the Prophet: "If you will go, your family shall live, and you shall live." Brigham trusted in that promise.

When Brigham and Heber Kimball left Nauvoo together, each had only one wornout suit to wear. Brigham had wrapped himself in a quilt, because he had no coat. Heber Kimball's wife, Vilate, and his children were all sick, except for one young son who was barely big enough to carry water to the house. But Heber hugged everyone and said good-bye.

Brigham Young and Heber Kimball got into a wagon and started to ride away. Heber felt so awful to be leaving his family behind, in their sickness and poverty, that he felt as though "his inmost parts would melt." Asking the wagon driver to stop, he said to Brigham, "This is pretty tough, isn't it; let's rise up and give them a cheer."

The two got up in the wagon, waved their hats over their heads, and shouted, "Hurrah, hurrah for Israel." Mary Ann Young was with Vilate Kimball, and the two came to the cabin door. They shouted, "Good-bye, God bless you."

The apostles told the driver to go on then, and Heber felt much better. "I felt a spirit of joy and gratitude," he later wrote, "having had the satisfaction of seeing my wife standing upon her feet, instead of leaving her in bed, knowing well that I should not see [my family] again for two or three years."

Brigham and Heber made slow progress at first. Their journey to Kirtland, Ohio, took seven weeks. Along the way, they stopped to preach, but they also had to rest and recover from their continued illness.

The two apostles had started out with only thirteen dollars and fifty cents between them, but they decided to ride the stagecoach for as long as their money held out. Each time they bought tickets, however, they found they had enough money to pay for the next part of their trip. Brigham accused Heber of putting money in the trunk, but Heber said he had done no such thing. When the travelers arrived in Kirtland, they still had fifty cents left, but they figured out that they had spent eighty-seven dollars—from a purse that had contained only thirteen dollars and fifty cents.

Brigham said that he didn't know how this had occurred, "except by some unseen agent from the Heavenly world." And so he knew that the Lord was with them.

But the trials didn't end.

The apostles remained in Kirtland for two weeks and then took a steamer on Lake Erie to New York. In New York City, several of the apostles gathered, ready to sail to England. One day, while waiting to raise money for the voyage, Brigham leaped from a ferry boat onto a dock. He was still weak from his illness, and he slipped and hit his shoulder, dislocating it. He asked two of the brethren to hold him down while Parley Pratt pulled on his arm. Brigham guided the bone into place with his other hand. His friends then helped him to his feet, but after walking a few steps, he fainted from the pain. The shoulder continued to give him trouble for many months afterward.

The apostles were worried about their families, but their wives wrote careful letters, revealing little about their conditions. In reality, the first winter was terrible for Mary Ann Young. At one point, out of food, she wrapped her baby in a blanket and boarded a ferry. She arrived in Nauvoo cold and exhausted and still very sick. There she found a bishop, received a few potatoes and a little flour, and gratefully returned across the river to feed her children. Fortunately, conditions gradually improved for her from that time on.

The apostles finally sailed from New York in the spring of 1840. Brigham must have felt that the worst was finally over. His shoulder was improving, and he was recovering from his illness. But the voyage was very rough, and now he was struck with seasickness. It took a whole month to cross the ocean, and during that time Brigham could rarely lift his head from the bunk. The other apostles suffered just as much.

By the time the brethren landed in England, they were weak and exhausted from all they had been through. The malaria, the separation from their families, and the hard travel had robbed them of their strength. And now, a month of constant seasickness during the voyage had left them looking almost like skeletons. But they were filled with determination. Brigham felt the power of the Spirit that Joseph had promised him. "I gave a loud shout of hosannah," he recorded. "I felt the chains were broken, and the bands that were upon me were burst asunder."

The apostles began their work with devotion. What followed was one of the greatest missionary experiences in the history of the Church. The apostles had met their test, and now the blessings poured down upon them. Thousands of British converts came into the Church, and most of them eventually crossed the ocean and settled in Nauvoo. Many became great Church leaders.

The apostles, who had arrived sick and worn down, proved themselves to be men of power. Brigham's great commitment to the cause of truth only deepened. When he returned to his family in the summer of 1841, as promised by Joseph Smith, his wife and children were alive and well. Joseph now pronounced a revelation in which the Lord told Brigham: "It is no more required at your hands to leave your family as in times past, for your offering is acceptable to me."

Brigham recorded in his journal, with his poor spelling, "This evening I am with my love alone by my fireside for the first time for years. We injoi it and feel to prase the Lord." Certainly Brigham had earned a little rest and joy. What he didn't know was that three years later Joseph Smith would be murdered. Then Brigham, tested and proven, would be ready for an even greater challenge: the leadership of the entire Church.

For further reading, see Leonard J. Arrington, Brigham Young: American Moses (New York: Knopf, 1985), pp. 70-97; Eugene England, Brother Brigham (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1980), pp. 34-61; James B. Allen, Ronald K. Esplin, David J. Whittaker, Men with a Mission (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1992), pp. 54-83.
