Tom Hughes, Dean Hughes, Great Stories from Mormon History ( 1994)

Joseph and Hyrum Come Home

Joseph Smith was in Iowa. Nauvoo was still home for most of the Saints, but huge troubles had come—the same old troubles that had followed the Mormons everywhere. In just five years Nauvoo had grown to be the biggest city in Illinois, larger than Chicago. More Church members were gathering there all the time. That meant political power for the Saints, and the old settlers of Illinois didn't like that.

And then, in the spring of 1844, Joseph Smith made a crucial decision. A local newspaper had been printing what he considered vicious lies against him and the Church. As the mayor of Nauvoo, he declared the paper a "nuisance," so the city council shut the operation down and wrecked the printing press.

Now the Church's enemies felt they had a just cause for driving the Mormons out. Local militias began to prepare for war, and the Saints in Nauvoo began to dig trenches and prepare for attack. The governor of Illinois, Thomas Ford, wrote to Joseph, demanding that he and his brother Hyrum, along with other leaders, report to Carthage, Illinois, for trial. He promised that if they would turn themselves in, he would guarantee their safety.

Joseph wrote Governor Ford that he would be happy to stand trial, if a fair trial were possible. But that wasn't likely. He was certain that if he and Hyrum gave themselves up, they would be murdered.

Joseph and Hyrum, with the help of their friend and cousin Porter Rockwell, made a dangerous night crossing of the flooding Mississippi River in a leaky little boat. They stayed at a home in Montrose, the Mormon settlement on the Iowa side of the river, as they planned their escape to the Great Basin in the West—the place where the Saints would eventually migrate and establish Salt Lake City. Porter Rockwell crossed the river again, carrying messages to Emma and orders to bring back good horses for the escape.

Joseph believed that the people of Illinois, who had grown to hate their Mormon neighbors as much as the Missourians had, wanted only him and his brother. He thought that if he and Hyrum left Illinois, the old settlers and the governor would be satisfied.

But back in Nauvoo, the Saints were terrified. They knew that mobs were threatening, and they knew that Joseph and Hyrum had left. Some didn't understand that the brothers were trying to save their friends. They thought that Joseph and Hyrum were only trying to save themselves, and called them cowards.

Even Emma wanted Joseph to turn himself in. She believed Governor Ford's promise and thought that this trial would be like the others before. Joseph had always done well when he was allowed to plead his case. At the worst, she thought, Joseph might be in jail for a time, but she believed no court could find him guilty of any serious crime. Emma sent a message with Porter Rockwell, asking her husband to come home.

When Joseph received the message, along with an account of what some of the Saints were saying, he was hurt. He told Hyrum and Porter Rockwell, "If my life is of no value to my friends, it is of none to me." He asked Porter for advice.

Porter said that Joseph knew best, and whatever the decision, he would always support him. So Joseph turned to Hyrum and asked him, as the older brother, what they should do. "Let us go back and give ourselves up, and see the thing out," Hyrum told him.

Joseph thought for a moment and then said sadly, "If you go back, I will go with you, but we shall be butchered."

"The Lord is in it," Hyrum said. "If we live or have to die, we will be reconciled to our fate."

Joseph agreed, but he felt he knew what that fate would be. He expected to die. He crossed the river back to Nauvoo and sent a letter to Governor Ford, telling him he was on his way to Carthage.

The next morning, June 24, 1844, Joseph and Hyrum, along with Porter Rockwell, John Taylor, and other Church leaders, prepared to leave Nauvoo. The weather was mild, and the sky was blue. As they rode out of town, Joseph stopped several times and looked back. He gazed on the temple, on the lovely city he had helped to build, and on his own farm. He told his friends: "I am going like a lamb to the slaughter, but I am calm as a summer's morning. I have a conscience void of offense toward God and toward all men. If they take my life, I shall die an innocent man, and my blood shall cry from the ground for vengeance, and it shall be said of me 'He was murdered in cold blood!'"

Joseph, of course, was right. On June 27 a mob rushed the Carthage jail, where the Prophet and Hyrum were being held. The guards, actually cooperating with the attackers, allowed them to charge up the stairs and fire their rifles into the jail room. Joseph ran to the window, but a shower of bullets hit him as men fired from outside the jail. Joseph fell out the window and landed in the dust below. Hyrum lay on the floor of the jail.

Willard Richards and John Taylor had been visiting with the Smith brothers in their jail room. Willard Richards received only a slight wound, but several bullets struck John Taylor, and for a time it seemed likely he would die. He survived, however, and went on to lead the Church as its third President.

But Joseph and Hyrum were dead.

Their bodies, each in a rough pine box, were carried back in a wagon to Nauvoo. An honor guard and a brass band met the wagon and led a procession through the streets, where all the people of the city lined up to watch. The next day, ten thousand Saints waited in line to walk past the caskets and pay their last respects. Grief hung in the air, and to many it seemed that the Church would never survive.

But Hyrum had been right when he had told his younger brother that if they died the Lord was "in it." The Lord had delivered Joseph and Hyrum years before from the Liberty jail, and he might have done the same at Carthage. But now their work was complete.

The two martyrs sealed their testimonies with their own blood. From that time on they stood as symbols to a people who had many more trials ahead of them.

For further reading, see B. H. Roberts, A Comprehensive
