Tom Hughes, Dean Hughes, Great Stories from Mormon History ( 1994)

The Mantle of the Prophet

It took nearly three weeks for news of Joseph and Hyrum's deaths to reach Brigham Young in Boston. Most of the twelve apostles were on missions in the eastern part of the United States. When they learned of the murders, they hurried back to Nauvoo.

What they found in Nauvoo was confusion. Once the funeral for Joseph and Hyrum had ended, the questions had come: Who was in charge? Could the Church even stay together?

Some thought that the prophet's oldest son, Joseph Smith III, should be the next prophet and President of the Church. A number of leaders spoke on their own behalf. Sidney Rigdon had disconnected himself from the Church the year before and was living in Pittsburgh. But now he returned and said that he had seen a vision that he should lead. He was, after all, the only remaining member of the First Presidency.

When Brigham first received the news of Joseph's death, he wondered whether the keys of the kingdom had been lost from the earth. But he remembered a letter Joseph had written him from the Liberty Jail. Joseph had instructed the Twelve to elect a president—the senior member of the quorum. If anything happened to Joseph, he explained, the men who held the keys of the apostleship would lead the Church.

As Brigham thought of this, he slapped his knee and said, "The keys of the kingdom are right here with the Church." So he hurried back to Nauvoo to see to it that the Church didn't fall apart. He had loved Joseph, and was completely loyal to him. His grief was overwhelming. But now he knew what course the Lord wanted the Church to follow. He put aside his sorrow and went to work.

As soon as Brigham got to Nauvoo, he met with the other apostles who had arrived. A general meeting of all the Church members was called for the next morning. Sidney Rigdon would be allowed to present his case for leadership first.

The next morning, Sidney Rigdon spoke for an hour and a half. He argued that he should lead the Church until the day that Joseph III was grown and ready to take over the leadership himself. But everyone there knew that Rigdon had broken with Joseph Smith the year before, and most were suspicious of him.

When Brigham Young finally took his turn to speak, his voice was penetrating and powerful. He taught the Saints what Joseph had taught him, and what he had told the other apostles the night before, "I don't care who leads the church . . . ; but one thing I must know, and that is what God says about it. I have the keys and the means of obtaining the mind of God on the subject. . . . How often has Joseph said to the Twelve, 'I have laid the foundation and you must build thereon, for upon your shoulders the kingdom rests.'"

Brigham's arguments were persuasive. But more powerful than his words was the spirit with which he spoke. Many people who were there that day said that when Brigham spoke, they heard Joseph's voice. Looking at Brigham, they saw the martyred prophet's face, even his physical presence. They took it as a sign that God had placed the mantle of leadership on Brigham's shoulders, showing them who should lead the Church.

One man, George Romney, late in his life, bore testi-mony of what he saw that day: "When Brigham got up the mantle of Joseph Smith fell upon him. It was Joseph's voice; it was Joseph's appearance, and I testify to you, if I never again do so on this earth, in the presence of God and angels, that this is verily the truth."

Joseph had fallen, but the Church had not. Brigham Young was the powerful leader needed to take the Saints through the terrible trials to come. That day, August 8, 1844, the members of the Church sustained Brigham Young and the Twelve as those holding the keys to the kingdom. God had shown them the course they must take.

For further reading, see Eugene England, Brother Brigham (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1980), pp. 69-75; Leonard J. Arrington, Brigham Young: American Moses (New York: Knopf, 1985), pp. 113-16.
