Tom Hughes, Dean Hughes, Great Stories from Mormon History ( 1994)

Miracles in the Poor Camp

After the death of Joseph Smith, the Saints tried to make peace with the people of Illinois. For about a year an uneasy stand-off persisted, but late in the summer of 1845, mob violence broke out. Once again, the Saints tried to make it through another winter, and once again the mobs were not satisfied to let them stay just until spring.

The Saints pushed ahead to finish the inside of their temple so that ordinances could be performed. Even as the members hurried to receive their endowments, they were preparing to leave their beloved city. Early in February the great exodus began.

The first groups to cross the Mississippi River did so on ferries, but bitter cold set in and ice formed across the river. The ice helped thousands to cross. The cold, however, was a mixed blessing. The suffering was terrible in the camps across the river. Still, most of the Saints survived and then pushed on as the weather improved.

As the wagon trains reached the top of the hill across the river, the Saints would take one last look at their lost city and at the gleaming white temple. Many reported in their journals the heartache in saying good-bye to everything they had worked so hard to build.

Illness struck many of the members, especially the children, and the ordinary events of life became great trials. Babies were born in temporary shelters, in tents, or in wagons. Eliza R. Snow said that sisters would walk all day, through any weather, and then prepare meals at night without so much as a tent for cover. Then they would make their beds under wagons that contained everything they owned.

All during the summer of 1846, thousands of Mormons worked their way slowly across Iowa. But a few hundred of the Saints remained in Nauvoo. They were too poor to buy provisions and wagons, or too sick to travel. For a time the old settlers left them alone, but toward the end of the summer the pressure increased again. More than six hundred Church members crossed the Mississippi River to avoid further troubles, but that was as far as they could go.

Many of the men in this "poor camp" went to nearby towns and farms to look for work. Others simply tried to rest and recover from their illnesses. All of them watched their supplies gradually disappear. The adults survived on almost nothing as they tried to keep their children alive. Soon, they knew, they would all starve.

And then, a miracle occurred—or maybe it would be better to say, two miracles occurred.

One day, quail began to drop out of the sky into the poor camp. Even small children could easily grab them. Some of the birds, apparently exhausted from a long flight, flopped directly into shelters and tents.

The quail were everywhere, thick on the ground. The people caught thousands of them. And these people were too weak and sick to chase the birds. They wouldn't have caught anything if the quail hadn't been so easy to gather up.

For these poor Saints, who didn't know where they would find food when their provisions ran out, the quail were an answer to prayers. What they didn't know was that another kind of miracle was occurring at Winter Quarters—the place where the migrating Saints were gathering just beyond the western border of Iowa.

Brigham Young heard about the Saints trapped in the poor camp. He called for volunteers to go back across Iowa with wagons and supplies to gather up the Church members who were stranded on the banks of the Mississippi River.

Men who had just labored all summer to get their own families to Winter Quarters must have thought twice about turning back. It was a round trip of more than five hundred miles, with winter not far off. But volunteers stepped forward and agreed to go. After all, the people in the poor camp were their brothers and sisters.

A wagon train hurried back to the poor camp, gathered up the stranded people there, and then traveled back across Iowa. Most of the people of the poor camp were saved.

Perhaps most amazing, such miracles of bravery would prove to be common, not exceptional, as the Mormons continued their trek from Winter Quarters to the West in the following years.

For further reading, see B. H. Roberts, A Comprehensive History of the Church, 6 vols. (Provo, Utah: Brigham Young University Press, 1965), 3:134-36.
