Tom Hughes, Dean Hughes, Great Stories from Mormon History ( 1994)

Hosea Stout's Great Loss

The first wagon trains that pushed westward across Iowa met with great hardship. Cold and snow made travel very slow, and springtime didn't make things much easier. Heavy rains combined with melting snow to turn the dirt roads to deep mud. Rivers flooded, and the Saints had to repair or rebuild almost every bridge they came to.

The trip was so difficult that many of the Saints didn't reach Winter Quarters until late in the summer. There they settled in, hoping to survive the winter so they could move on to the Great Basin the following year.

Among the Saints who reached Winter Quarters that summer was a man named Hosea Stout. He had been chief of police and an important leader in Nauvoo. But now he had spent many months on the open prairies with nothing but a tent to shelter him and his wife, Miranda, and their two sons. Every day had been a trial.

Hosea had responsibilities and worries. He was in charge of hauling the guns of the Nauvoo Legion, the militia that he had been part of, but he didn't have enough wagons. The company he traveled with was short of food and other supplies. Even one of his best friends, a brother in the gospel, seemed to turn against him for reasons he couldn't understand.

But Hosea's greatest worry was the sickness of his family. In Missouri, during the awful winter following the extermination order, Hosea had lost his young wife to illness. A baby daughter, his only child at the time, had also died. He had married again, in Nauvoo, but now once again he was running from a mob while his family was sick.

Hosea watched his baby son weaken daily, and on May 8, 1846, little Hyrum finally died in his father's arms. Hosea was crushed, and also terribly worried: he couldn't provide proper food for his pregnant wife and older son, and he couldn't get them in out of the weather. They, too, were now frail and in great danger.

All the same, the Stouts pushed on with their wagon train. By the middle of June, Hosea began to believe that his three-year-old son, Hosea, Jr., would recover. But a heavy storm on Thursday, June 25, soaked everything the family owned, including the little boy's bed. The child's condition worsened and soon became hopeless.

Little Hosea passed through a time of agony, but on Sunday he finally slept peacefully. On Monday he died. The members of the wagon train waited long enough to bury the child, but then they traveled on for four more miles before stopping for the day. That night Hosea Stout wrote in his journal:

Thus died my only son and one too on whom I had placed my own name and was truly the dearest object of my heart. Gone too in the

midst of affliction sorrow & disappointment in the wild solitary wilderness. . . .

I have once lost a companion for life and [was] left without a bosom friend. . . . But not then did I feel the loss or mourn as for an only son. This last loss. This loss of my only son. This my hopes for comfort in my old age. This darling object of my heart gone seemed to cap the climax of all my former misfortunes and seemed more than else to leave me utterly hopeless.

Before Hosea stopped writing, he expressed his appreciation for the kindness everyone had offered him and his wife. Then, the next day, he wrote only: "To day all the men who possibly could leave their camps went down to work at the bridge I did not go but staid at home to fix up and to arrainge my affairs as they were much out of order."

The day after that Brother Stout began his journal entry by saying, simply, "To day I worked on the bridge."

He had given himself one day to grieve, one day to set his life in order. Then, in spite of all the pain, he and Miranda pushed ahead with the others. One can only guess what Miranda was also feeling that day, still very sick, pregnant, and now without either of her sons.

Hosea's journal seldom mentions after that the grief he must have continued to suffer. But he still had reason to hope. Miranda was holding on, along with the baby she was expecting. A new life—another child—could give them a new start.

But then, on September 26, Miranda gave birth to a stillborn child. Shortly afterward, she died herself. Hosea had lost another entire family.

Hosea Stout did not write much in his journal for some time. He was sick himself for a while. But finally, on November 24, he completed a log cabin to the point that he could move inside. That night he wrote again of all he had suffered and lost. He was angry with the mobs who twice had driven him from his home. And he was angry with a government that had done nothing to stop the mobs. Even deeper than his anger was his heartbreak and loneliness. Yet he finished his journal entry by saying that through all these "adverse changes" and trials, he had never once regretted following the "voice of the spirit."

And he didn't give up.

Hosea Stout survived the winter and the migration across the plains. He became one of the great leaders in the settlement of the West. He helped establish the cotton mission in southern Utah, and he served a mission to China. With other wives, he was finally blessed with many children. And he trusted all his life that he would, after death, be reunited with the beloved wives and children he had buried along the trails, out in the "wild solitary wilderness."

For further reading, see Juanita Brooks, ed., On the Mormon Frontier: The Diary of Hosea Stout, 2 vols. (Salt Lake City: University of Utah Press, 1964), 1:121-97.
