Tom Hughes, Dean Hughes, Great Stories from Mormon History ( 1994)

The Lost Oxen

Joseph F. Smith, the son of Hyrum Smith, became the sixth President of the Church. When he was a boy, his widowed mother, Mary Fielding Smith, once taught him a lesson about prayer that he would never forget.

In the fall of 1847, Joseph F. was almost nine years old and was living in Winter Quarters. He traveled with his mother and uncle, Joseph Fielding, fifty miles to the city of St. Joseph, Missouri, to buy supplies for the winter and for their planned trip to the Great Salt Lake Valley the next spring. Little Joseph F. drove one wagon and his uncle another, each wagon pulled by four oxen. Rain fell throughout the journey, and the roads were muddy and hard to travel on.

On the way back, one morning the travelers awoke to find two of their eight oxen gone. The camp was near a little creek on an open prairie, so the oxen should have been easy to spot. Some men were camped on the other side of the creek, tending a herd of cattle. The night before, Uncle Joseph Fielding had left the oxen in their yokes so they wouldn't wander across the stream and get mixed in with the other cattle. There seemed to be no way that the oxen could have gone very far. But they had vanished.

Joseph F. and his uncle spent the whole morning looking for the lost animals. The two of them tramped through the deep grass, wet with dew, and wore themselves out with the work. But they saw no sign of the oxen.

When Joseph F. returned to camp he found his mother on her knees, praying. He heard her pleading with Lord not to leave them in this helpless condition. One team would never be able to pull the heavy wagon through the mud, and the food and supplies were so important for the trip across the plains.

Joseph Fielding returned a few minutes later and told his sister, "Well, Mary, the cattle are gone!"

But Sister Smith seemed unconcerned, almost cheerful. She told the two Josephs, "I will just take a walk out and see if I can find the cattle." Joseph Fielding threw up his hands in astonishment. And Joseph F. couldn't have been more surprised, as he expressed it, had the Missouri River "suddenly turned to run up stream."

But Sister Smith walked toward the creek, just a short distance from the camp. It was the one place where Joseph F. and his uncle were sure they could see everything already. When Mary got to the creek, a cattle driver called across and said he had seen the oxen moving in the opposite direction at sunrise that morning. But Mary ignored the man and continued on her way.

Soon she was waving for Joseph F. and her brother to join her. The two got up from their greatly delayed breakfast and ran to her. Joseph F. described what he saw:

There I saw our oxen fastened to a clump of willows growing in the bottom of a deep gulch

which had been washed out of the sandy bank of the river by the little spring creek, perfectly concealed from view. We were not long in releasing them from bondage and getting back to our camp, where the other cattle had been fastened to the wagon wheels all the morning, and we were soon on our way home rejoicing.

Mary had known where to look for the oxen because the Lord had shown her.

Joseph F., remembering this experience many years later, said, "It made an indelible impression upon my mind, and has been a source of comfort, assurance and guidance to me throughout all of my life."

For further reading, see Joseph Fielding Smith, Life of Joseph F. Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1938), pp. 131-34.
