Tom Hughes, Dean Hughes, Great Stories from Mormon History ( 1994)

A Harvest of Faith

Brigham Young led the first company of Saints to the Great Salt Lake Valley. The wagons arrived late in July of 1847. This was an advance company, sent to prepare the way for those who would follow. When these first Saints arrived, they wasted no time in getting to work. They knew they had to prepare the way for thousands of their brothers and sisters who would be arriving the next summer. Above all, they had to have food ready and waiting.

These pioneers soon learned that farming in the desert valleys of the Great Basin was not going to be easy. The land was dry and hard. In time, Mormon settlers would build irrigation canals to bring water from the nearby mountain streams. But for the present, they planted a few crops in the hopes of having a small harvest even so late in the season. Then they fenced off a large field and began the backbreaking work of preparing the ground for planting the following spring. They broke their plows and wore down their cattle, but they stuck with the job. A mild winter allowed them to work the soil through most of the year. They planted thousands of acres of wheat.

By spring, these advance settlers were almost out of food. They had little beef, since all their cattle were needed for milk or for work, and the supplies they had carried with them were almost gone. The whole community was put on rations, and people survived any way they could. They learned from the Indians, for instance, that the roots of thistles and sego lilies, while not exactly tasty, could be eaten. Each family planted a garden, but as the people waited and hoped for an early harvest, they also knew that if their crops failed, they would starve.

The Saints watched as the wheat sprouted in the big field. Finally the end to their hunger seemed to be in sight. Then disaster struck.

As the first settlers had entered the valley the summer before, they had noticed huge black crickets along the river. They hadn't thought much about them then, but now, nine months later, they could think of nothing else. Millions of the creatures came hopping down out of the mountains and began feasting on the young wheat plants. Nothing, it seemed, could stop them.

The settlers tried to bury the crickets, fight them with their hands, wash them away, even burn them, but nothing worked. Every day more and more of the beautiful green fields turned black, then brown, as the crickets ate the plants down to the ground and then marched on. There was nothing the farmers could do. They kept fighting the crickets, but they knew their efforts were hopeless. How would they stay alive? They needed to find some answer and find it soon.

Many of these people had broken ground and built homes in Missouri, only to be driven away by mobs. Then they had done the same in Nauvoo, once again to be forced out. Now they had trudged a thousand miles away from civilization to a place they thought no one wanted—a place where they could live in peace. And now they were being threatened once again with destruction—this time by an insect.

The people—men, women, and children all together—continued to fight for their crops even when they knew they couldn't win. And they prayed. Every one of them must have wondered when the Lord would ever decide that they had suffered enough.

Then a cloud appeared in the sky—or at least that was what it seemed to be. But it moved too fast to be a cloud. It turned out to be thousands of seagulls, flying in from the Great Salt Lake. As the gulls landed in the fields, the settlers first thought the birds were also after the wheat sprouts. Instead, they began to eat the crickets.

To those early Saints the birds seemed like white-winged angels, but they ate like gluttons. They flew to streams and vomited up the hard body parts of the crickets. Then they came back to eat again. They kept this up for days, until the crickets were virtually gone.

The Saints watched. And they prayed again, this time to thank the Lord.

It is natural for a seagull to eat insects. It is even natural for birds to vomit the parts of the insect that are not easily digested. That part was not really a miracle. The real miracle was that the seagulls had come just in time. And the Saints knew, without a doubt, who had sent them.

For further reading, see Parley P. Pratt, Autobiography of Parley P. Pratt (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1975), pp. 363-64; B. H. Roberts, A Comprehensive History of the Church, 6 vols. (Provo, Utah: Brigham Young University Press, 1965), 2:329-35.
