Tom Hughes, Dean Hughes, Great Stories from Mormon History ( 1994)

Sailing to Madras

While the wagon trains were rolling westward to the Great Salt Lake Valley, the Saints continued to send missionaries out to all the world. The greatest harvest of converts came from England and Wales, but missionaries were also traveling to the islands of the Pacific, to South America, and even to India. Missionaries often traveled on riverboats and ships, and some very exciting missionary experiences occurred on those voyages.

In 1853, one group of nine missionaries sailed to Calcutta, India. Two of the elders, Richard Ballantyne and Robert Skelton, were then sent on to the city of Madras, on the east side of the tip of India.

India has a monsoon season, when fierce storms dump hundreds of inches of rain in just a few months. In those days, a sea voyage during a monsoon was out of the question. The two elders discovered that there would be only one more ship, the John Brightman, sailing to Madras before the rainy season began. Madras was hundreds of miles from Calcutta, and sailing was the best way to get there. Unfortunately, the captain of the ship, Captain Thomas Scott, didn't like Mormons and refused to take the elders on board.

Elder Ballantyne was impressed to make an unusual promise. He told Captain Scott that if he would transport the missionaries, the Lord would guarantee a safe trip. The captain accepted the bargain and let them board his ship.

To leave the port of Calcutta, a ship had to sail down the Hooghly River. It was a dangerous waterway with too much traffic. At the narrowest point, another ship appeared. It was heading directly for the John Brightman, and Captain Scott saw the collision coming. But Elder Ballantyne calmly assured the captain that there was no danger, and the captain was shocked when the ships seemed to steer themselves around each other. Whether the captain believed in miracles or not, he instantly became a friend to the missionaries.

The ship reached the open sea only to be battered by a hurricane all along its course to Madras. Two sailors were thrown overboard—but both were rescued. Sails tore and masts broke. Water washed over the decks. Lightning flashed all around the ship. The voyage was a terrible ordeal, but the ship stayed together and finally arrived in Madras.

When the ship put in to port safely, Captain Scott was finally convinced that Richard Ballantyne's promise had been kept. He gave Elder Ballantyne a pair of shoes. He also gave him enough money to rent a room and to print two thousand missionary pamphlets. The man who had hated Mormons was now helping missionary work for the Church getstarted in India.

For further reading, see Conway B. Sonne, Saints on the Seas: A Maritime History of the Mormon Migration, 1830-1890 (Salt Lake City: University of Utah Press, 1983), pp. 7-10.
