Tom Hughes, Dean Hughes, Great Stories from Mormon History ( 1994)

"Save the People"

Brigham Young was committed to the idea that no member of the Church should suffer when other members could prevent it. No one should go hungry when others had extra. No one should ever be abandoned. That commitment was tested as the Saints moved across the prairies and mountains into the valley of the Great Salt Lake.

As thousands of Mormons struggled across America to reach their new home, missionaries in Europe, and especially in Great Britain, were baptizing thousands more. They asked these converts to leave behind homes and families and join with the Saints in Zion, and many did just that. But after crossing the Atlantic, most of the new members had little money left to make the trip from the Mississippi River to the Rocky Mountains.

To help these brothers and sisters, Brigham Young began a program called the Perpetual Emigration Fund. Members of the Church were called on to contribute money that would be used to pay for others to make the trip to the West. When those people arrived and went to work, they would pay back the costs of their travel into the fund. In this way, the fund would never run out, and no one would be left behind.

It was an excellent plan, but there was one problem. It was often difficult for people, in their poverty, to pay the fund back. That meant that the amount of money in the account slowly shrank. And with all the new converts lining up to cross the plains, it was becoming too expensive to provide wagons and teams for everyone.

Brigham's solution to this problem was a simple one. Instead of traveling by wagon, families would walk across the plains, pulling their belongings on handcarts. Many sections of the trail were easier to walk on than to drive wagons over, so the trip would take less time. And the travelers wouldn't have to worry about tending so many animals. Of course, they wouldn't be able to bring as many belongings, but most of the European immigrants hadn't brought much with them anyway.

There were problems with this plan, however. The handcarts offered little room for food. In a storm, there was no wagon to crawl into. And small children and older people, or those who became sick, had to be pulled in the carts.

At best, traveling with the handcart companies was brutal work. But the system worked for a time.

In 1856, five handcart companies of European converts left from Iowa City, Iowa, and made their way to Salt Lake City. The first three had no serious problems. The last two weren't as fortunate. The Willie Company and the Martin Company started much later in the year. The leaders of these companies might have been wise to delay their departure until the next spring, but the Saints were anxious to move on, and they were convinced that God would protect them.

Going forward so late turned out to be a fateful decision, however. On October 1, the Willie Company left Fort Laramie, still five hundred miles away from Salt Lake City. By that time winter storms had begun in the mountains, but the company pushed ahead anyway. The Martin Company followed on October 9.

Both companies ran into raging blizzards. The people had tried to lighten their loads so they could move faster, but in doing so they had left behind things they needed, such as heavy coats, blankets, and extra clothes. Many walked through the snow without shoes. Their clothes got wet from crossing ice-cold rivers, and then froze to their bodies. It was all they could do just to start a fire some nights.

Finally, in the middle of the worst blizzard yet, the immigrants thought they were finished. A few men went ahead, breaking their way through the snow and hoping to get help from the Saints in Salt Lake City. Meanwhile, the companies tried to survive in the mountains, but many were dying.

The men got through just as the Saints were gathering in a general conference. President Young listened to the heartbreaking news, and then he addressed the congregation:

Many of our brethren and sisters are on the plains with handcarts. . . . They must be brought here, we must send assistance to them. . . . I want the brethren who may speak [today] to understand that their text is the people on the Plains. And the subject matter for this community is to send for them and bring them in before the winter sets in. That is my religion; that is the dictation of the Holy Ghost that I possess. It is to save the people.

President Young asked for volunteers to go back along the trail as a rescue party. The response was overwhelming. He asked for plenty of wagons, drivers, oxen, clothes, food—and he got more than he asked for. During the days and weeks to come, he continued to ask for more help, and the Saints never disappointed him or their stranded sisters and brothers.

The rescue parties fought their way through the storm that had pinned down the Willie and Martin companies. The snow was so bad that they were almost ready to turn back when two riders came out of the storm. Joseph Willie and another brother arrived at the rescuers' camp and told them that they were just a few miles away from the Willie Company, and only a day and a half away from the Martin Company. With that news, the rescuers pushed ahead once again.

Men, wagons, and supplies poured out of Salt Lake City. When they reached the stranded Saints, they were greeted as angels of mercy. More than two hundred of the handcart pioneers died, but hundreds more made it to the valley because of these rescue parties.

Patience Loader's family was in the Martin Company. When the people of this company, now aided by rescuers, reached the Sweetwater River, they saw that the ice had been broken by wagons. They had already crossed many icy rivers, and they were afraid to cross another in their weakened condition. Patience described what happened:

Three brave men [were] there in the water packing the women and children over on their backs. Names: William Kimball, Ephraim Hanks and I think the other was James

Ferguson. Those poor brethren was in the water nearly all day. We wanted to thank them, but they would not listen. . . . This poor Brother Kimball stayed so long in the water that he had to be taken and packed to camp, and he was a long time before he recovered, as he was chilled through, and in after life he was always afflicted with rheumatism.

The first group of the surviving immigrants arrived in the valley on a Sunday. When Brigham Young heard the news, he showed his practical side. He told the congregation: "The afternoon meeting will be omitted, for I wish the sisters to go home and prepare to give those who have just arrived a mouthful of something to eat, and to wash them and nurse them up. . . . Prayer is good, but when baked potatoes and milk are needed, prayer will not supply their place."

Later, when Brigham visited the survivors himself, he showed the deep compassion that was also part of his nature. Mary Goble Pay, then a girl of thirteen, recorded her memory of Brigham arriving at the house where she had been taken in:

When Bro. Young came in he shook hands with us all. When he saw our condition—our feet frozen and our mother dead—tears rolled down his cheeks.

The doctor amputated my toes using a saw and a butcher knife. Brigham Young promised me I would not have to have any more of my feet cut off.

And she didn't. But Brigham worried constantly until the rest of the survivors were brought in. What he saw was the commitment he had hoped for. Those who had heard his sermon and had committed to save the people never stopped working until they had brought the last ones to safety.

For further reading, see B. H. Roberts, A Comprehensive History of the Church, 6 vols. (Provo, Utah: Brigham Young University Press, 1965), 4:89-105; Wallace Stegner, The Gathering of Zion, the Story of the Mormon Trail (Salt Lake City: Westwater Press, 1964), pp. 221-55.
