Tom Hughes, Dean Hughes, Great Stories from Mormon History ( 1994)

Afterword

When we tell stories from Mormon history, we remember especially heroes and heroines—people of great faith. We tend to forget that there were also backsliders and weaklings among the early members. Most of all, there were common people who did their best and carried out their duties in a quiet way without ever being remembered in history books. In the diaries and journals from that early era, we learn that many of those quiet lives were also filled with heroism. The people survived in a very tough time, and those who held to the faith accomplished a great deal just to raise families and carry out the work of the Church.

One little story from the history of early Utah symbolizes the grit that many of the members had to discover in themselves. Robert Gardner heard a rumor that he had been called to go on a "cotton mission," and he wasn't very pleased about it. He ran a sawmill in Salt Lake City, and he had worked hard to get his business going and his family settled. Now he was being asked to give up everything to move to the deserts of southern Utah. Why? To raise cotton. Or at least to try to raise cotton. In fact, no one knew whether cotton would grow in the southern deserts at all. In truth, he didn't want to go.

Brother Gardner found George A. Smith of the Quorum of the Twelve and asked whether the rumor was true. Elder Smith said yes, that Brother Gardner's family was on the list, but the name could be removed if the Gardners didn't want to go. Still, Brigham was hoping that they would. They were needed.

Brother Gardner looked around and spat on the ground. He took off his hat, scratched his head, thought about it for a minute, and then he said, "All right."

Cotton, as it turned out, didn't do well in southern Utah. Still, Robert Gardner and his wife and children suffered through some hard seasons and tried to make a go of it. They would rather have stayed in Salt Lake City. But Brigham Young wanted their help, and Brother Gardner wasn't about to turn down the prophet.

It was that kind of commitment that kept things going until the Saints found a way to survive and prosper in a harsh environment. But it's also the same kind of commitment that keeps things going today. Modern Mormons often learn the wrong lesson from their own history. Too often, in sacrament meetings, especially around the twenty-fourth of July, speakers tell the modern Saints that they aren't as tough as those gritty pioneers, that modern members could never survive what the early Saints went through.

But that is obviously not true. The Church continues to survive in a harsh environment. Tens of thousands of young people are heading out, all across the world, to continue to carry the message that Joseph Smith brought back to the earth. Great numbers of retired couples do the same. The work of the Church—the teaching and leading and caring—goes on in every ward and branch. And heroes devote their time to "saving the people" every day, often in quiet ways.

There is still plenty of grit in the Church. We may scratch our heads, as Brother Gardner did, and wonder whether we really want to take that new calling or carry out an assignment. But we do it, and we do it in a time when the challenges have actually never been greater. Crossing the plains was tough, but living a good life in a corrupt world is also tough. Faith, nobility, goodness, love, heroism—all these qualities are still with us, and our own journals will someday give courage to those who come after us.
