Years Events References

605 Nebuchadnezzar defeats the Egyptians at Jer. 46:2

Carchemish

The first deportation of exiles (including Daniel) to Dan. 1:1-7

Babylon

604 Jehoiakim burns Jeremiah's first scroll Jer. 36

601 Jehoiakim rebels against Babylon 2 Kings 24:1

598 Jehoiakim is deposed and dies

2 Chron. 36:3

Jehioachin reigns over Judah for 3 months 2 Kings 24:8

597 The second deportation of exiles 2 Kings 24:12-16

(includingJehoiachin) to Babylon

Zedekiah made king of Judah by Nebuchadnezzar 2 Kings 24:17

593 Zedekiah summoned to Babylon Jer. 51:59

588 Zedekiah is besieged in Jerusalem for treachery Jer. 52:3-4

586 Fall of Jerusalem

Jer. 39

Gedaliah appointed governor of Judah by Jer. 40:5-6

Nebuchadnezzar

Gedaliah assassinated by Ishmael Jer. 41:2

Judean refugees flee to Egypt taking Jeremiah with Jer. 42—43

them

581 The third deportation of exiles to Babylon Jer. 52:30

568 Nebuchadnezzar invades Egypt

Jer. 43:8-13;

46:13-26

561 Jehoiachin released from prison in Babylon Jer. 52:31-34

539 Fall of Babylon to Cyrus the Persian Dan. 5:30

538 Cyrus issues his decree allowing the Jews to return Ezra 1:1-4

to Palestine

DATE

As has already been pointed out, Jeremiah gave the prophecies and composed the narratives that constitute this book at various times during his long ministry. The date at which the book reached the state in which it is today is debatable. Most scholars believe that editors continued to add and rearrange the material long after Jeremiah's day. However, the tradition that Jeremiah was responsible for the book is old and has encouraged many conservative scholars to view it as the product of the prophet himself or perhaps his scribe Baruch. If Jeremiah was the final editor of the work, as well as its writer, he completed this editorial task after his last historical reference and before his death. The last historical reference is Jehoiachin's release from captivity in Babylon (561 B.C.; 52:31-34). We do not know when Jeremiah died, but if he was born about 643 B.C., he probably did not live much beyond 560 B.C. Some scholars believe Jeremiah wrote this account himself or that Baruch provided it. Others believe the writer of the Book of Kings added it to the collections of Jeremiah's writings.18 One writer speculated that the final canonical form of the book was in circulation not later than 520 B.C.19 Another believed it was available shortly after Jeremiah's death, which he guessed was about 586 B.C.20

AUDIENCE

Jeremiah ministered to the people of Judah during the last days of the monarchy and the early part of the captivity. Almost all his ministry took place in Jerusalem. He spoke to kings, priests, and prophets, as well as the ordinary citizens, and he delivered oracles against foreign nations.

"The book of Jeremiah and the book of Lamentations show how God looks at a culture which knew Him and deliberately turned away."21

PURPOSE

Jeremiah's purpose was to call his hearers to repentance in view of God's judgment on Judah, which would come soon from an army from the north (chs. 2—45). Judgment was coming because God's people had forsaken Yahweh and had given themselves to idolatry. Jeremiah spoke more about repentance than any other prophet. He also assured his audience that God had a future for Israel and Judah (chs. 30—33). Once it became clear that the people would not repent, he advocated submission to Babylon to minimize the destruction that was inevitable. As God's prophetic spokesman, he also uttered oracles against the nations that opposed God's chosen people (chs. 46—51).

"The theme of this prophet consists largely in a stern warning to Judah to turn from idolatry and sin to avoid the catastrophe of exile."22

THEOLOGICAL EMPHASES

The Book of Jeremiah is not theologically organized in the sense that it develops a certain theological emphasis as it unfolds, as Isaiah does. Rather it presents certain theological truths in greater or lesser degree throughout its 52 chapters. The dominant theological emphases are as follows.

The prophet paid more attention to God and the Israelites than to any other subjects of revelation. His appreciation for God as the Lord of all creation is noteworthy. In contrast

18E.g., Dyer, p. 1123.

19Harrison, Jeremiah and . . ., p. 32.

20Feinberg, p. 362.

21Francis A. Schaeffer, Death in the City, p. 16.

22Gleason L. Archer Jr., A Survey of Old Testament Introduction, p. 359. See also Young, pp. 248-49. to Isaiah, Micah, Zechariah, and Daniel, Jeremiah did not reveal much about the coming Messiah, though he did record a few significant messianic predictions. A coming revealer would outshine the ark of the covenant (3:14-17), and the fulfillment of the Davidic Covenant promises would come (33:14-26).

Regarding the Israelites, Jeremiah stressed the fact that immorality always accompanies idolatry. Israel's present problems were the result of her past and present apostasy. The priests, Jeremiah asserted, were primarily responsible for the degeneration of worship from spiritual to merely formal, though several false prophets also misled the people. The Judahites could not escape going into captivity because they refused to repent. Therefore, they needed to accept the inevitable and not resist the Babylonians. Jerusalem and Judah would suffer destruction, the Davidic kings would not rule (for some time), and the Israelites would lose their land (temporarily). But there would be a return from exile (25:11; 29:10). Israel had hope of a glorious future in view of God's faithfulness to His promises (32:1-15). In the distant future, Israel would return in penitence to the Lord (32:37-40). Messiah would rule over her (23:5-8).

". . . Jeremiah placed an enormous emphasis on the sins and misdeeds of Israel. . . .

"The evil deeds in which Israel was involved were of two broad classes— the worship of false gods, and the perpetration of personal and social sins of an ethical and moral kind."23

"The theology of the book of Jeremiah may be summarized as follows: God's judgment would fall on Judah because she had broken His covenant."24

The nations were God's agents in executing His will, particularly Nebuchadnezzar (27:6). But Babylon would fall (chs. 50—51). The nations, as well as Israel, needed to demonstrate righteousness (chs. 46—51). God had a concern for the nations as well as for His people (29:1-14). In the distant future, the remnant of the nations would enjoy blessing from the Lord (3:17; 16:19).

There is also a strong emphasis on the biblical covenants in Jeremiah, particularly the Mosaic and New Covenants. Jeremiah viewed Israel as the chosen people of God adopted by Him for a special relationship with Himself and for a special purpose in the world. The Mosaic Covenant was pure grace, and Yahweh had made it with a redeemed people. It involved promises from God and responsibilities for the Israelites that required trust, obedience, and holiness. Obedience would result in blessing from God, and disobedience would yield divine cursing. The prophet knew the Mosaic Law and compared the conduct of the people to what it required. 25 Jeremiah anticipated the appearing of the promised

23Thompson, pp. 110, 111.

24Robert B. Chisholm Jr., "A Theology of Jeremiah and Lamentations," in A Biblical Theology of the Old Testament, p. 342.

25This feature is so prominent that some scholars have argued that someone from the so-called Deuteronomistic School composed or edited the book. Writers identified as Deuteronomistic in their emphasis, especially writers of the books of Joshua through 2 Kings, consistently compared the conduct of the Israelites to what God required in the Mosaic Law, which was Moses' practice in Deuteronomy. Davidic Messiah and the fulfillment of the kingdom promises that God had made to David. He also predicted that God would make a new covenant with the Israelites sometime in the future that would involve new provisions and conditions for living (31:31-34). It would replace the old Mosaic Covenant and would feature personal relationship with God to an extent never experienced before.

"Probably the outstanding emphasis in Jeremiah's ministry was the priority of the spiritual over everything else. He saw how secondary the temporal features of Judah's faith were. . . .

"The lasting value of Jeremiah's book lies not only in the allusions (between forty and fifty of them) in the NT (over half are in Revelation) but also in its being a wonderful handbook for learning the art of having fellowship with God."26

COMPOSITION

The present canonical form of the book was probably the result of a long and complex process of collection. The Book of Psalms also underwent compilation in a similar fashion over many years. The compilation is not chronological, but it did occur in stages.

"Precisely how the final form of the prophecy arose is unknown."27

In some cases key words link units of material together. There is also some grouping of subject matter according to genre within the larger sections of the book.28

The attempt to identify the original sources of material in Bible books is a worthy subject of study, but the purpose of these notes is to expound the text.29 The book itself indicates that King Jehoiakim destroyed some of Jeremiah's earlier written prophecies and that Baruch rewrote them and added more to form another collection (ch. 36). This information explains to some extent the anthological structure of the book and suggests that Jeremiah, Baruch, and perhaps others added even more prophecies as time passed and that the final product is what we have.

"It is clear that the book assumed its present form either very late in the prophet's lifetime, or more probably after his death."30

26Feinberg, pp. 369-70. Most of the allusions to Jeremiah in Revelation deal with the coming fall of Babylon. For more extensive discussions of Jeremiah's theological emphases, I recommend Harrison, Jeremiah and . . ., pp. 37-42; Thompson, pp. 107-13; and Kidner, pp. 163-72. 27Harrison, Jeremiah and . . ., p. 32.

28See Dyer, pp. 1127-28.

29See the major commentaries on Jeremiah for further discussion of how the present canonical form of the text came into existence. I recommend especially Thompson, pp. 33-50. 30Craigie, p. xxxiii.
