About half of Jeremiah is poetry and half prose. But poetry and prose appear side by side in many sections of the book; several literary units contain both forms of composition.

Scholars have identified three types of literature (genre) in Jeremiah: poetic sayings or oracles (so-called Type A material), prose narratives that are largely biographical and historical (so-called Type B material), and prose speeches or discourses (so-called Type C material).31

Several generations of scholars have held that the poetic oracles toward the first part of the book represent Jeremiah's original sayings, and the historical and biographical narratives that follow were the product of Baruch, Jeremiah's scribe. This view, while a common one, contains serious problems, and many competent authorities have pointed out the inconsistencies of this position. I mention it here because it is a common view, not because I accept it. I do not.32

STRUCTURE

Like most other prophetic books of the Old Testament, Jeremiah is a collection of oracles and other materials. It is an anthology of Jeremiah's speeches and writings, really an anthology of anthologies. It is not like a novel that one may read from start to finish discovering that it unfolds in a logical fashion as it goes.

"No commentator, ancient or modern, has seriously posited a chronological arrangement of its prophecies."33

This book, even more than most of the other prophetic books, strikes the western mind initially as not following any consistently logical order, especially within the body of the book. The difficulty that students of Jeremiah have had in discovering its underlying plan is clear from the fact that commentators have offered so many different outlines of it.34

"When we come to inquire whether any principles of arrangement can be observed in the book of Jeremiah, we have to admit that any consistent principles escape us."35

". . . it is often difficult to see why certain passages occur at precisely the point where they do occur."36

31Sigmund Mowinckel labeled the three types A, B, and C in Zur Komposition des Buches Jeremia (1914) following the earlier work of Berhard Duhm in Das Buch Jeremia (1901), and commentators make frequent reference to the genre by these types.

32For further discussion of the different genres in Jeremiah, see C. Hassell Bullock, An Introduction to the Old Testament Prophetic Books, pp. 204-6.

33Feinberg, p. 367. He argued for an essentially topical arrangement of the material. 34Harrison even provided two different outlines of the book in his Old Testament Introduction and in his commentary on Jeremiah.

35Thompson, p. 30.

36Young, p. 249.
