Hyrum L. Andrus, Helen Mae Andrus, They Knew the Prophet ( 1974)

Thomas H. Taylor

To our inquiries if he was acquainted with the Smiths, and the early settlers throughout that part sometimes called Mormons, Mr. Taylor said: "Yes, I knew them very well. They were very nice men, too. The only trouble was they were ahead of the people; and the people, as in every such case, turned out to abuse them, because they had the manhood to stand for their own convictions. I have seen such work all through life."

"What did the Smiths do that the people abused them so?"

"They did not do anything. Why! these rascals at one time took Joseph Smith and ducked him in the pond that you see over there, just because he preached what he believed, and for nothing else. And if Jesus Christ had been there, they would have done the same to Him. Now I don't believe like he did; but every man has a right to his religious opinions, and to advocate his views, too. If people don't like it, let them come out and meet him on the stand, and show his error. Smith was always ready to exchange views with the best men they had."

"Why didn't they like Smith?"

"To tell the truth, there was something about him they could not understand. Some way he knew more than they did, and it made them mad."

"But a good many tell terrible stories, about them being rogues, and liars, and such things. How is that?"

"Oh! they are a set of d- - - - d liars. I have had a home here, and been here, except when on business, all my life—ever since I came to this country—and I know these fellows. They make these lies on Smith, because they love a lie better than the truth. I can take you to a great many old settlers here who will substantiate what I say."

"Well, that is very kind, Mr. Taylor, and fair; if we have time we will call around and give you the chance; but we are first going to see these fellows who, so rumor says, know so much against them."

"All right; but you will find they don't know anything against those men when you put them down to it. They could never sustain anything against Smith."

Interview with E. L. and William H. Kelley, March 1881, published in The Saint's Herald, Plano, Illinois, XXVIII, (June 1, 1881), p. 167; Juvenile Instructor, XVII (October 1, 1882), p. 302.
