Hyrum L. Andrus, Helen Mae Andrus, They Knew the Prophet ( 1974)

Mary A. Noble

About 1828, my father, Alva Beaman, became acquainted with Father Joseph Smith, the father of the Prophet. We frequently would go to Palmyra to see Father Smith and his family during this time. Brother Joseph Smith came in possession of the plates that contained the Book of Mormon. As soon as it was noised around that there was a Golden Bible found, for that was what it was called at the time, the minds of the people became excited, and rose to such a pitch that a mob collected to search the house of Father Joseph Smith to find the records. My father was there at the time and assisted in concealing the plates in a box, in a secluded place, where no one could find them, although he did not see them.

In the spring of 1834, Brother Joseph Smith came from Kirtland, Ohio, to my father's New York estate, which he had purchased at Avon, Livingston County. This was the first time I ever beheld a prophet of the Lord, and I can truly say at the first sight that I had a testimony within my bosom that he was a man chosen of God to bring forth a great work in the last days. His society I prized. His conversation was meat and drink to me. The principles that he brought forth and the testimony that he bore of the truth of the Book of Mormon made a lasting impression upon my mind.

While he was there, Sidney Rigdon, Joseph and Brigham Young, Luke and Lyman Johnson, and twelve or fourteen of the traveling elders had a council at my father's place. I, in company with my sisters, had the pleasure of cooking and serving the table and waiting on them, which I considered to be a privilege and a blessing.

Brother Joseph and Elder Rigdon held a meeting in Geneva, which was called the Orton neighborhood, in a barn. Elder Rigdon preached, Brother Joseph bore testimony of the truth of the Book of Mormon, and of the work that had come forth in these last days. Never did I hear preaching sound so glorious to me as that did. I realized it was the truth of heaven, for I had a testimony of it myself. Many very interesting interviews we had with them while they were at my father's house.

Journal of Mary A. Noble, included in the journal of Joseph Bates Noble, Brigham Young University Library, pp. 16, 18, 19.
