Hyrum L. Andrus, Helen Mae Andrus, They Knew the Prophet ( 1974)

Levi W. Hancock

On the 4th of June, 1831, we all met in Kirtland, in a school house built of logs. Here the Elders were seated on slab benches, and the meeting was opened as usual.

Joseph Smith began to speak. He said that the kingdom that Christ spoke of, that was like a grain of mustard seed, was now before him, and some should see it put forth its branches, just as the Savior had said.

He looked at Lyman Wight and said, "You shall see the Lord and meet him near the corner of the house."

The Prophet laid his hands upon him and blessed him with the visions of heaven.

Joseph Smith then stepped out on the floor and said, "I now see God, and Jesus Christ at his right hand. Let them kill me; I should not feel death as I am now."

Joseph put his hands upon Harvey Whitlock and ordained him to the office of high priest in the High Priesthood. He turned as black as Lyman was white. His fingers were set like claws. He went around the room and showed his hands and tried to speak. His eyes were in the shape of oval O's.

Hyrum Smith said, "Joseph, that is not of God."

Joseph said, "Do not speak against this."

"I will not believe," said Hyrum, "unless you inquire of God and he owns it."

Joseph bowed his head, and in a short time got up and commanded Satan to leave Harvey, laying his hands upon his head at the same time.

At that very instant an old man said to weigh two hundred and fourteen pounds, sitting in the window, turned a complete summersault in the house and came down with his back across a bench, and lay helpless.

Joseph told Lyman to cast Satan out. He did. The man's name was Leman Copley, formerly a Quaker.

The evil spirit left him, and as quick as lightning Harvey Green fell bound and screamed like a panther. Satan was cast out of him, but immediately entered someone else. This continued all day and the greater part of the night.

But to return to the meeting, Joseph said, "Now if you elders have sinned, it will do you no good to preach, if you have not repented. Heman Basset, you sit still. The devil wants to sift you."

He then ordained Jacob Scott and some others to the High Priesthood. He came to Zebedee Coltrin and myself, and told us that we had another calling as high as any man in the house. [They were made members of the First Council of Seventy in 1835.] I was glad for that, for I was so scared I would not stir without his liberty, for all the world. I knew the things I had seen were not made.

Joseph Smith called Lyman Wight to lay his hands on his head and say what God should tell him to say. He did, and the blessing was so long I cannot write it.

After this we went down to the house and heard Harvey Whitlock say that when Hyrum Smith said it was not of God, he disdained him in his heart, and when the devil was cast out he was convinced it was Satan that was in him, and then he knew it. I also heard Harvey Green say that he could not describe the awful feeling he experienced while in the hands of Satan.

On June the fifth we all assembled on the hill, in a field where there was a large concourse of people collected. The Prophet Joseph said that from that time on the Elders would have large congregations to speak to, and they must soon take their departure into the regions west.

After I returned from a mission, the Prophet told me about being mobbed in Hiram, and how they pulled the hair out of his head. Then he showed me the place where they had pulled the hair out. He said they poured aqua fortis down him, he thought.

I said, "While I was in Cleveland, I heard some laughing about it. They said the devil must have gotten the better of the Lord that time. I told them I thought he did once before when they killed the Son of God, and his disciples too. I did not consider that proved him an impostor."

I never saw men so much confounded. I said no more, but all eyes were on me while I stayed at the house.

The Prophet was often in trouble. If his friends gave him money, he was stripped of it all by his enemies. I know, for I did all I could do to uphold that good man. My heart would ache for him. He had to stand against thousands of his pretended friends who sought to overthrow him. It was terrible the abuse he suffered.

Bishop Newel K. Whitney also was cursed by some when he did his best to uphold Joseph. He would suffer himself to be slandered to save the Prophet from trouble.

The Prophet called me to go on a mission with Evan Green. The snow came and it began to get cold to travel, but we went as far as we could get, and returned back. Joseph talked plain to me for not pressing forward into Pennsylvania. I told him that I was to blame, for I had had a dream that troubled me.

He said, "Don't let that trouble you. I have had dreams as bad as you ever had. You do as I now tell you to and you will come out all right."

He gave me to understand how the Comforter would comfort the mind of man when asleep. He said, "Go again," and we started forthwith for Pennsylvania.

We went from neighborhood to neighborhood preaching. We were treated very well through the land about. When the time came for us to open the door to baptism, Lyman Johnson came along. We asked him to preach. He opened the door and baptized all we had labored with, except two who chose to have me baptize them. Lyman returned to Kirtland and never mentioned Evan or Levi or their good works.

I asked the Prophet Joseph about such a case. He said the laborer who first labored with the people would in the end get the blessing.

On the first of May, 1834, I started for Cartage County, some forty miles from Kirtland, to go with Zion's Camp. I was appointed cook for Sylvester Smith's mess. In this way we traveled, being directed by the Prophet in peace, until Sylvester lost the spirit of peace and became dissatisfied with John Carter, and called him an old jackass and many other names, which soon brought dissatisfaction in our tent. Some dared to express their feelings, until Joseph rebuked them and told them that Sylvester was guilty of sowing the seeds of discord.

Sylvester said, if Joseph was a prophet he was not afraid, and would contradict him in the face of all present.

Joseph said, "If I have not told you the truth, then God never spoke by me," and walked off.

We all said, "That is enough."

We believed Joseph. Sylvester became more calm and acted like a saint, and for some time we had peace. We did not stop, but continued on our march westward until we got in Illinois. Joseph then said, "I want you to remember what I say to you. The Lord is going to give us dry weather now until we get through. He has given rains that there might be water on the prairies. You will see the movings of the Lord in our favor all the way through."

One morning, many went to see a big mound about a mile below the crossing. I did not go on it, but saw some bones that were brought back with a broken arrow. They were laid down by our camp. Joseph Smith said, "This land was called the land of desolation, and Onedagus was the king, and a good man was he. There in that mound did he bury his dead, and did not dig holes as the people do now, but they brought their dirt and covered them until you see they have raised it to be about one hundred feet high. The last man buried was Zelf. He was a white Lamanite who fought with the people of Onedagus for freedom. When he was young, he was a great warrior and had his thigh broken, and it never was set. It knitted together as you see on the side. He fought after it got strength, until he lost every tooth in his head save one, when the Lord said he had done enough and suffered him to be killed by that arrow you took from his breast."

We continued our march westward. I had made me an elder fife, and played some marches on the way to the camp, being led by Sylvester Smith. As soon as we came in sight of camp, a dog came. He began to bark and ran to Sylvester and tried to bite him. It made Sylvester mad, and he said he would kill that dog.

Joseph said he should not, and he would whip any man who would do it. If Sylvester had a good spirit he could get along without being bit. It was a man's being overcome with such a spirit that caused him always to try to take vengeance and seek an opportunity to do it, and take life. Such a spirit kept men in misery.

Sylvester would not believe it. Joseph said, "If you do not get rid of that feeling, you will have your flesh eaten off from you and you cannot help it."

He would not believe Joseph yet.

Once after this, Joseph on the same principle said, "If a man should have to fight in self defense and kill his enemy, he should say in his heart, 'I wish it might have been otherwise, but you sought to take my life and would not let me alone and I was obliged to take yours.'"

He said, "If you ever go to battle and are prospered over your enemies and slay them, I fear you will be tempted to boast. If you should boast of your own strength, I fear God will leave you."

The greatest miracle in our favor was when we had got between the two branches of Fishing River, on a high ridge by a log meetinghouse. We had been told that morning by a colored woman who came to the fence where we were walking, that there were three hundred men who were armed and equipped to fall on us that night and cut us off. Men came riding by who cussed and swore that before morning we would all be in hell, for there was an army before and behind, and death was our portion.

Jenkins Salsbury wanted Joseph to let him fight.

"No," said he, "the Lord will give us a bramble to keep off the dogs this night."

In a short time it commenced thundering and the clouds arose. I went into the tent and lay down and knew no more till I found myself one third buried in water. The tent had blown down and all hands were gone. I soon found they had gone to the old church for shelter, where I also went. The lightning flashed and thunder roared one continual sound. The flashes were so connected that one could hardly hear any interval between the flash and the peal of thunder, as if the marshal bands of the whole earth had assembled and were beating the sounds of war.

We lay on the benches dripping with water until daylight, when we were called to go and discharge our pieces and load anew, which we did. To our astonishment, two thirds, if not more, went off.

It was a pleasant morning. We got our breakfast and soon learned that the two branches of Fishing River were so high we could not cross over. The branch west had raised upwards of forty feet and all boats were gone. We turned our course northward about three miles and camped near an old acquaintance of some in our camp. Next day we were visited by a committee from the mob. Lyman Wight explained to them the cause of our coming, and others spoke, which appeared to give satisfaction.

After the meeting, those of the community went away, and Joseph said, "Let us help this man right up his corn." We all went into our friend's field and straightened up the corn that the storm had laid low.

"Life story of Levi W. Hancock," Brigham Young University Library, pp. 47-49, 73-75, 76, 77, 78, 79-80, 81-82.
