Hyrum L. Andrus, Helen Mae Andrus, They Knew the Prophet ( 1974)

Mary Elizabeth Rollins Lightner

After many people were converted at Kirtland, John Whitmer came and brought a Book of Mormon. There was a meeting that evening, and we learned that Brother Morley had the book in his possession—the only one in that part of the country. I went to his house before the meeting and asked to see the book. As I looked at it, I felt such a desire to read it that I could not refrain from asking him to let me take it home while he attended meeting. He finally said, "Child, if you will bring this book home before breakfast, tomorrow morning, you may take it."

My uncle and aunt were Methodists, so when I got into the house, I exclaimed, "Oh, Uncle, I have got the 'Golden Bible.'"

We took turns reading it until late at night.

As soon as it was light enough to see, I was up and learned the first verse in the book. When I reached Brother Morley's house, he remarked, "I guess you did not read much in it."

I showed him how far we had read.

He was surprised, and said, "I don't believe you can tell me one word of it."

I then repeated the first verse, also the outline of the history of Nephi.

He gazed at me in surprise and said, "Child, take this book home and finish it. I can wait."

About the time I finished the last chapter, the Prophet Joseph Smith arrived in Kirtland. Brother Whitney brought the Prophet Joseph to our house and introduced him to the older ones of the family. He saw the Book of Mormon on the shelf and asked how that book came to be there. He said, "I sent that book to Brother Morley."

Uncle told him how his niece had obtained it.

He asked, "Where is your niece?"

I was sent for. When he saw me, he looked at me so earnestly I felt almost afraid, and I thought, "He can read my every thought." I thought how blue his eyes were. After a moment or two, he came and put his hands on my head and gave me a great blessing, the first I ever received, and made me a present of the book, and said he would give Brother Morley another.

Joseph came in time to rebuke the evil spirits and set the Church in order. We all felt that he was a man of God, for he spoke with power, as one having authority in very deed.

A few evenings after his visit to our house, Mother and I went over to the Smith house. There were other visitors. The whole Smith family, excepting Joseph, was there. As we stood talking to them, Brother Joseph and Martin Harris came in, with two or three others. When the greetings were over, Brother Joseph looked around very solemnly. It was the first time some of them had ever seen him. He then said, "There are enough here to hold a little meeting."

A board was put across two chairs to make seats. Martin Harris sat on a little box at Joseph's feet. They sang and prayed; then Joseph got up to speak. He began very solemnly and very earnestly. All at once his countenance changed and he stood mute. He turned so white he seemed perfectly transparent. Those who looked at him that night said he looked like he had a searchlight within him, in every part of his body. I never saw anything like it on earth. I could not take my eyes away from him. He got so white that anyone who saw him would have thought he was transparent. I remember I thought we could almost see the bones through the flesh of his face. I shall remember it and see it in my mind's eye as long as I remain upon the earth.

He stood some moments looking over the congregation, as if to pierce each heart, then said, "Do you know who has been in your midst this night?"

One of the Smiths said, "An angel of the Lord."

Joseph did not answer. Martin Harris was sitting at the Prophet's feet on a box. He slid to his knees, clasped his arms around the Prophet's knees and said, "I know, it was our Lord and Savior, Jesus Christ."

Joseph put his hand on Martin's head and answered, "Martin, God revealed that to you. Brothers and Sisters, the Savior has been in your midst this night. I want you all to remember it. There is a veil over your eyes, for you could not endure to look upon Him. You must be fed with milk and not strong meat. I want you to remember this as if it were the last thing that escaped my lips. He has given you all to me, and commanded me to seal you up to everlasting life, that where He is there you may be also. And if you are tempted of Satan say, 'Get thee behind me, Satan, for my salvation is secure.'"

Then he knelt and prayed, and such a prayer I never heard before or since. I felt he was talking to the Lord, and the power rested upon us all. The prayer was so long that some of the people got up and rested, then knelt again.

In the fall of 1831, we left Kirtland for Jackson County, Missouri. One evening, the brethren came to Uncle's house to converse upon the revelations that were being printed. They felt to rejoice that they were counted worthy to be the means of publishing them to the world. While talking, they were filled with the Spirit and spoke in tongues. I was called upon to interpret. I felt the spirit of it in a moment.

On one occasion after interpreting something about the Saints going to be driven, there was a great cry raised by the High Council. They wrote the Prophet and said I was talking with an evil spirit. Joseph answered, "What she has said is true and correct. Interpretations rightly belong to the Priesthood, but you did not ask for it. She did and received it."

I was a very inquisitive girl, and after becoming well acquainted with the Prophet, I asked many questions. As I grew older, he told me more serious things. He said, "John the Revelator was caught up to the third heaven, but I know one who was caught up to the seventh heaven and saw and heard things not lawful for me to utter."

I stayed with Uncle Gilbert most of the time until Zion's Camp came up in 1834. Many of the brethren stopped with us, including the Prophet Joseph. One morning Joseph came while we were eating breakfast of cold mush. My stepfather liked cold mush, so had told Mother not to fix anything else. When Joseph came in, Mother and I looked at each other and must have shown it, for he asked for some, first saying, "Brother Burk, that mush looks good. I like mush."

Of course he was asked to have some. He ate heartily, but we thought he did it to lessen our embarrassment.

After the Saints settled in Illinois, my husband, Mr. Lightner, got a job cutting cordwood about fifteen miles up the river from Nauvoo. He got a log house and I prepared to move there. The Prophet felt very sad when he knew we were going to leave, and with tears running down his cheeks he prophesied that if we left the Church we would have plenty of sorrow; that we would make property on the right and lose it on the left, we would have sickness on sickness, and lose our children; that I would have to work harder than I ever dreamed; then he added, "And at last when you are worn out and old you will get back to the Church."

I thought these were hard sayings for it seemed as though things had already been about as hard as could be, and I felt to doubt them. But the sequel proved them true. It all came to pass as he predicted.

Before leaving Nauvoo, there was a general parade of the Legion. Since I was living as a neighbor, Emma came to borrow my dining room table, as the officers were to dine with them. The Prophet came also a few minutes later. He spoke to his wife, then said, "I want you and you (pointing to my aunt, brother Henry and wife, and myself) to go and be baptized." He added that he had been commanded to baptize us that day.

Emma said, "What Joseph, why is this? They have always been good members of the Church, and another thing, the officers will be here for dinner soon."

He answered, "Never mind, they can wait."

Then Emma said, "Well, you certainly are not going in those clothes."

To this he replied, "No, but you all be ready by the time I return."

As we lived on the bank of the river, we were soon there. Mr. Lightner carried the baby. Mr. Lightner had never been baptized, and perhaps the Prophet thought he would want to be at that time, for the rest of us had of course been baptized some time before, in the year the Church was organized.

After we were baptized and confirmed, he turned to my husband and said, "Now, Adam, it's your turn."

Mr. Lightner said, "No, Joseph, I'll wait till I quit smoking. I don't feel worthy. I will some other time."

I thought Joseph could persuade him, as he tried hard.

As we walked back to the house, my husband went ahead with the baby. Joseph walked by me and said, "Mary, that man will never be baptized in this life, unless it is a few moments before he dies."

Though he was only then twenty-one and lived to be seventy-three, crossing the plains, enduring all the hardships, and seeing the prophecies of Joseph fulfilled, and often saying he would be baptized, still he never was. He was the kind that looks at the acts of men and lets that influence him, instead of looking at the principles. A few minutes before his death, he seemed to want something and looked all around, then finally settled back and said, "It's too late now."

I thought he may have been wondering if he could yet be baptized. So in all of the fifty-two years, the Prophet's prophecy held good.

I heard Joseph say, "I have rolled this kingdom off of my shoulders on to the shoulders of the Twelve and they can carry out this work and build up His kingdom."

Said he: "I am tired, I have been mobbed, I have suffered so much. Some of the brethren think they can carry this work out better than I can, far better. I have asked the Lord to take me out of this world. I have stood all I can. I have to seal my testimony to this generation with my blood. I have to do it, for this work will never progress until I am gone, for the testimony is of no force until the testator is dead. People little know who I am when they talk about me, and they never will know until they see me weighed in the balance in the kingdom of God. Then they will know who I am, and see me as I am. I dare not tell them, and they do not know me."

These words were spoken with such power that they penetrated the heart of every soul that believed on him.

Diary of Mary Elizabeth Rollins Lightner; Young Woman's Journal, XVI (December, 1905), pp. 556-557; The Utah Genealogical and Historical Magazine, XVII (July, 1926), pp. 193-195; Remarks of Mary E. Lightner, April 14, 1905, at Brigham Young University.
