Hyrum L. Andrus, Helen Mae Andrus, They Knew the Prophet ( 1974)

Zebedee Coltrin

About ten days after I was confirmed a member of the Church by Lyman Wight, I first saw the Prophet Joseph at a prayer meeting at the home of Father Morley. He was then a beardless young man.

During the meeting, the powers of darkness were made manifest in a remarkable degree, causing some to make horrid noises, and others to throw themselves violently around. Joseph said this was a fulfillment of the scriptures where it says "That the man of sin should be revealed."

When Lyman Wight was ordained a high priest, Joseph told him he should see the heavens opened, and after he was ordained he stood on his feet and testified that he could see the heavens open and could see Jesus standing at the right hand of God.

Harvey Whitlock was ordained next with the same promise, but afterwards he seemed paralyzed. His mouth was in the shape of an italic "O" and his arm was stretched as if nailed to a cross. Joseph rebuked the power that had seized him, and it left him, and he testified, as Lyman had done, that he saw the heavens open, and Jesus standing on the right hand of the Father. This was the beginning in our day of ordinations to the office of high priest.

At Father Billings' home, a revelation was given where some of the men undertook to correct the language of a revelation as being ungrammatical. Joseph rebuked them and said that every word of that revelation had been dictated by Jesus Christ. There were twelve persons present, who were all the elders then belonging to the Church, with the exception of those in Missouri. Joseph thanked God that he had as many members as Jesus had in the beginning when he first organized the Church.

At Kirtland, we were called to the School of the Prophets. At one time Joseph was in the translating room, and myself and others were talking about the gift of tongues, when the gift of tongues fell upon me and I spoke under its influence. Joseph came into the room and said, "God bless you Brother Coltrin, that is the Spirit of God." He told me to continue, and the gift of tongues and of prophesying rested on the greater part of the brethren present, and we continued speaking in tongues and prophesying through that day and the greater part of the night.

At another time after fasting and prayer, Joseph told us that we should see the glory of God, and I saw a personage passing through the room as plainly as I see you now. Joseph asked us if we knew who it was, and answered himself: "That is Jesus our elder Brother, the Son of God."

Once after returning from a mission to Kirtland, I met Brother Joseph, who asked me if I did not wish to go with him to a conference at New Portage, Ohio. The party consisted of Presidents Joseph Smith, Sidney Rigdon, Oliver Cowdery and me. Next morning at New Portage, I noticed that Joseph seemed to have a far off look in his eyes, or was looking at a distance. Presently he stepped between Brother Cowdery and me, and taking us by the arm said, "Let's take a walk."

We went to a place where there was some beautiful grass, and grapevines and swamp birch interlaced. President Joseph Smith them said, "Let us pray."

We all three prayed in turn—Joseph, Oliver and me. Brother Joseph then said, "Now brethren, we will see some visions."

Joseph lay down on the ground on his back and stretched out his arms, and we laid on them. The heavens gradually opened, and we saw a golden throne, on a circular foundation, and on the throne sat a man and a woman, having white hair and clothed in white garments. Their heads were white as snow, and their faces shone with immortal youth. They were the two most beautiful and perfect specimens of mankind I ever saw. Joseph said, "They are our first parents, Adam and Eve."

Adam was a large broad shouldered man, and Eve, as a woman, was as large in proportion.

In the Kirtland Temple I have seen the power of God as it was on the day of Pentecost, and cloven tongues of fire have rested on the brethren, and they have spoken in other tongues as the Spirit gave them utterance. I saw the Lord high and lifted up. The angels of God rested upon the Temple and we heard their voices singing heavenly music.

Address of Zebedee Coltrin at a meeting of high priests, Spanish Fork, Utah, February 5, 1878, High Priests' record of Spanish Fork Branch, from April 29, 1866 to December 1, 1898, Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah; Minutes of the Salt Lake City School of the Prophets, October 10-11, 1883, Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah.
