Hyrum L. Andrus, Helen Mae Andrus, They Knew the Prophet ( 1974)

Luke S. Johnson

Soon after Joseph Smith moved to Ohio from the state of New York, my father, mother and Ezra Booth, a Methodist minister, went to Kirtland, to investigate Mormonism. For about two years my mother had been laboring under an attack of chronic rheumatism in the shoulder, so that she could not raise her hand to her head. The Prophet laid hands upon her, and she was healed immediately.

My father was satisfied in regard to the truth of Mormonism, and was baptized by Joseph Smith, Jr., in the winter of 1830-1. He furnished him and his family a home while he revised a portion of the Bible.

In the fall of 1831, while Joseph was yet at my father's place, a mob of forty or fifty came to his house. A few entered his room in the middle of the night, and Carnot Mason dragged Joseph out of bed by the hair of his head. He was then seized by as many as could get hold of him, and taken about forty rods from the house, stretched on a board, and tantalized in the most insulting and brutal manner. They tore off the few night clothes that he had on, for the purpose of emasculating him, and had Dr. Dennison there to perform the operation. But when the doctor saw the Prophet stripped and stretched on the plank, his heart failed him, and he refused to operate; the mob then scratched his body all over, saying, "Damn you, this is the way the Holy Ghost falls upon you."

In attempting to force open his jaws and pour a vial of some obnoxious drug into his mouth, they broke one of his front teeth.

The mob became divided, and did not succeed; but poured tar over him and then stuck feathers in it and left him, and went to an old brick yard to wash themselves and bury their filthy clothes. At this place a vial was dropped, the contents of which ran out and killed the grass. About the same time, part of the mob went to the house that Sidney Rigdon occupied and dragged him out, and besmeared him with tar and feathers. My father, hearing the outcry of the family, went to the door, but finding it held by someone on the outside, he called for his gun, when those who held the door left. He pursued and was knocked down; his collar bone was broken. He was taken back to the house, and hands laid upon him by David Whitmer, and he was immediately healed. A few minutes after this accident, we heard the voice of Joseph calling for a blanket. Some person handed him one, and he came in, the tar trickling down his face. His wife was very much alarmed, supposing it to be blood, until he came near enough to see that it was tar. My mother got some lard and rubbed it upon him to get the tar off, which they succeeded in removing.

Waste, who was the strongest man on the Western Reserve, had boasted that he could take Joseph out alone. At the time they were taking him out of the house, Waste had hold of one foot. Joseph drew up his leg and gave him a kick, which sent him sprawling in the street. He afterwards said that the Prophet was the most powerful man he ever had hold of in his life.

At a conference in Orange, Cuyahoga County, Ohio, I was ordained a high priest by Joseph Smith. At this conference, the eleven witnesses to the Book of Mormon, with uplifted hands, bore their solemn testimony to the truth of that book, as did also the Prophet Joseph.

A Baptist clergyman from the state of New York, who had been acquainted with the Prophet Joseph in his early life, called upon him and stayed all night. Joseph made the minister welcome and treated him hospitably and respectfully. But when breakfast was over next morning, he called Joseph a hypocrite, a liar, an impostor and a false prophet, and called upon him to repent. Joseph boxed his ears with both hands and, turning his face towards the door, kicked him into the street. The clergyman immediately went before a magistrate and swore out a writ against Joseph for assault and battery.

I saw the operation, and as an officer of the law I followed the minister into the Squire's office and demanded a writ for his apprehension, for provoking an assault. The clerk filled up the writ I called for first. The minister, fearing trouble, paid for his writ and withdrew without it, and made his way posthaste for Cuyahoga County. I followed him on horseback, making him travel pretty lively until he got a few rods over the line, where I overtook him and said, "Sir, you are lucky to have got over the line, and out of my jurisdiction, or I should have arrested you."

Handwritten account by Luke Johnson, Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah.
