Hyrum L. Andrus, Helen Mae Andrus, They Knew the Prophet ( 1974)

Lorenzo Snow

The first time I saw Joseph Smith I was seventeen years of age. It was in the fall of 1831. He was going to hold a meeting in Hiram, Portage County, Ohio, about four miles from my father's home. Having heard many stories about him, my curiosity was considerably aroused and I thought I would take advantage of this opportunity to see and hear him.

When we reached there, the people were already assembled in a small bowery. There were about two hundred or two hundred and fifty people present. The meeting had already commenced, and Joseph Smith was standing in the door of Father Johnson's house looking into the bowery and addressing the people.

I made a critical examination as to his appearance, his dress, and his manner as I heard him speak. He was only twenty-five years of age and was not, at that time, what would be called a fluent speaker. His remarks were confined principally to his own experiences, especially the visitation of the angel, giving a strong and powerful testimony in regard to these marvelous manifestations. He simply bore his testimony to what the Lord had manifested to him, to the dispensation of the gospel which had been committed to him, and to the authority that he possessed.

At first he seemed a little diffident and spoke in rather a low voice. But as he proceeded, he became very strong and powerful and seemed to affect the whole audience with the feeling that he was honest and sincere. It certainly influenced me in this way, and it made impressions upon me that remain until the present day.

As I looked upon him and listened, I thought to myself that a man bearing such a wonderful testimony as he did, and having such a countenance as he possessed, could hardly be a false prophet. He certainly could not have been deceived, it seemed to me. If he was a deceiver, he was deceiving the people knowingly; for when he testified that he had had a conversation with Jesus, the Son of God, and had talked with Him personally, as Moses talked with God upon Mount Sinai, and that he had also heard the voice of the Father, he was telling something that he either knew to be false or to be positively true.

When I went to Kirtland some three or four years later, I was on the street with my sister, Eliza, when Joseph Smith came along. He was in a great hurry, and stopped just long enough to be introduced and shake hands. He turned to my sister and said, "Eliza, bring your brother over to the house to dinner."

She was then boarding at his home and teaching his private school. As he left us I watched him just as far as I could see him, then I turned to my sister and said: "Joseph Smith is a most remarkable man; I want to get better acquainted with him. Perhaps, after all, there is something more to Joseph Smith and to Mormonism than I have ever dreamed."

Accordingly, the next time I saw the Prophet was at his own house in Kirtland. He sat down at one end of the table and I sat next to him. He seemed to have changed considerably in his appearance since I first saw him at Hiram, four and a half years before. He was very ready in conversation, and had apparently lost that reserve and diffident feeling that he seemed to have before. He was free and easy in his conversation with me, making me feel perfectly at home in his presence. In fact, I felt as free with him as if we had been special friends for years.

I became perfectly acquainted with the Prophet. I sat at his table frequently, and had many conversations with him. I listened to the teaching of the gospel and received these truths with an open heart. I was exceedingly anxious to know without doubt that Joseph Smith was a true prophet.

I heard the Prophet discourse upon the grandest of subjects. At times he was filled with the Holy Ghost, speaking as with the voice of an archangel and filled with the power of God. His whole person shone, and his face was lightened until it appeared as the whiteness of the driven snow. Finally, I was convinced of the truth sufficiently to want to be baptized, to get a knowledge for myself of the testimony that Joseph Smith had seen God. After my baptism, everything that I had thought about in a religion was changed. Every part of my system became convinced, through the power of the Holy Ghost, that God is my Father, that Jesus Christ is my Elder Brother, and that Joseph Smith is His prophet.

The Improvement Era, XL (February, 1937), pp. 82-84.
