Hyrum L. Andrus, Helen Mae Andrus, They Knew the Prophet ( 1974)

Brigham Young

In the Fall of 1832, Brothers Heber C. Kimball, Joseph Young and myself started for Kirtland to see the Prophet Joseph. We went to his father's house and learned that he was chopping wood. We immediately went to the woods, where we found the Prophet and two or three of his brothers.

Here my joy was full at the privilege of shaking the hand of the Prophet of God, and I received the sure testimony, by the spirit of prophecy, that he was all that any man could believe him to be, as a true prophet. He was happy to see us, and made us welcome.

In the evening a few of the brethren came in, and we conversed together upon the things of the kingdom. Joseph called upon me to pray. In my prayer I spoke in tongues, which gift I had previously received and exercised. As soon as we arose from our knees, the brethren flocked around him and asked his opinion concerning the gift of tongues that was upon me. He told them that it was the pure Adamic language. Some said to him they expected he would condemn the gift Brother Brigham had, but he said, "No, it is of God, and the time will come when Brother Brigham Young will preside over this Church."

The latter part of this conversation was in my absence.

When Zion's Camp went to Missouri in 1834, there were no apostles or seventies in the Church. After we returned, my brother, Joseph Young, and myself had been singing after preaching in a meeting. Brother Joseph Smith said, "Come, go down to my house with me."

We went and sang to him a long time, and talked with him. He then opened the subject of the Twelve and Seventies for the first time I ever thought of it. He said, "Brethren I am going to call out Twelves Apostles. We will get together by-and-by and select Twelve Apostles, and select a Quorum of Seventies from those who have been up to Zion, out of the camp boys."

In 1835, about the last of January, or in February, we held our meetings from day to day, and Brother Joseph called out Twelve Apostles at that time. He had a revelation when we were singing to him.

Those who were acquainted with him knew when the spirit of revelation was upon him, for his countenance wore an expression peculiar to himself while under that influence. He preached by the spirit of revelation, and taught in his council by it, and those who were acquainted with him could discover it at once, for at such times there was a peculiar clearness and transparency in his face.

When I saw Joseph Smith, he took heaven, figuratively speaking, and brought it down to earth; and he took the earth, brought it up, and opened up, in plainness and simplicity, the things of God. The excellency of the glory of the character of Brother Joseph Smith was that he could reduce heavenly things to the understanding of the finite. When he preached to the people—revealed the things of God, the will of God, the plan of salvation, the purposes of Jehovah, the relation in which we stand to Him and all the heavenly beings—he reduced his teachings to the capacity of every man, woman, and child, making them as plain as a well-defined pathway. This should have convinced every person that ever heard of him of his divine authority and power, for no other man was able to teach as he could, and no person can reveal the things of God, but by the revelations of Jesus Christ.

When you hear a man pour out eternal things, how well you feel! to what a nearness you seem to be brought with God! What a delight it was to hear Brother Joseph talk upon the great principles of eternity.

Who can say aught against Joseph Smith? I do not think that a man lives on the earth that knew him any better than I did, and I am bold to say that, Jesus Christ excepted, no better man ever lived or does live upon this earth. I feel like shouting Hallelujah all the time, when I think that I ever knew Joseph Smith, the Prophet.

Millennial Star, XXI (July 11, 1863), p. 439; Journal of Discourses, III, p. 51; IV, p. 54; V, p. 332; VIII, p. 206; IX, pp. 89, 332.
