Hyrum L. Andrus, Helen Mae Andrus, They Knew the Prophet ( 1974)

Heber C. Kimball

In September, 1832, Brothers Brigham and Joseph Young and myself went to Kirtland, Ohio. We saw Brother Joseph Smith and had a glorious time, during which Brother Brigham spoke in tongues, this being the first time Joseph had heard the gift. The Prophet rose up and testified that it was from God. The gift then fell upon him, and he spoke in tongues himself.

At that time, our enemies were threatening destruction upon us, and we had to establish a guard night after night. For weeks we were not permitted to take off our clothes, and were obliged to lay with our firelocks in our arms to preserve Brother Joseph's life and our own.

Our brethren in Jackson County, Missouri, also suffered great persecution. In 1833, about twelve hundred were driven, plundered and robbed. Their houses were burned, and some of the brethren were killed. The next spring, Joseph gathered together as many of the brethren as he could, with what means they could spare, to go to Zion, to render assistance. We gathered clothing and other necessaries to carry to our brethren.

Our wagons were about full of baggage, etc. Consequently, we had to travel on foot. Every night before we went to bed, we united in our tent and offered up our prayers before the Lord for protection. This was done by all of the companies at the sound of the trumpet; and at the sound of the trumpet in the morning every man was upon his knees, each one in every tent being called upon in his turn to be mouth in prayer.

When we came to Belle Fountain, we discovered refractory feelings in Sylvester Smith. Finding quite a rebellious spirit in him, and to some extent in others, the Prophet declared that as a result they would meet with misfortune, difficulties and hindrances. "And you will know it before you leave this place," he said, while exhorting them to humble themselves before the Lord and become united.

On the following morning when we arose, we found almost every horse in the camp so badly foundered that we could scarcely lead them a few rods to water. When Brother Joseph learned the fact, he explained that it was for a witness that God overruled and had his eye upon them. He then said that all those who would humble themselves before the Lord should know that the hand of God was in this misfortune, and their horses should be restored to health immediately. By twelve o'clock the same day the horses were as nimble as ever, with the exception of one of Sylvester Smith's, which soon afterwards died.

On the 21st of June, Colonel Sconce and two other leading men from Ray County, Missouri, came to see us. Said he, "I see that there is an Almighty power that protects you, for I started from Richmond, Ray County, with a company of armed men, having a fixed determination to destroy you, but was kept back by the storm and was not able to reach you."

When he came into camp, he was seized with such a trembling that he was obliged to sit down. When he desired to know our intentions, Brother Joseph arose and began to speak, and the power of God rested upon him. He gave a relation of the sufferings of our people in Jackson County, and what we had suffered from our enemies for our religion; and that he had come one thousand miles to assist our brethren, to bring them clothing, and to reinstate them upon their own lands; that we had no intention to molest or injure any people, but only to administer to the wants of our afflicted brethren. After he got through with his address, the power of which melted them into compassion, they arose and offered him their hands and said they would use their influence to allay the excitement which everywhere prevailed against us. They accordingly rode day and night to pacify the people.

Brother Joseph called the camp together and told us that in consequence of the disobedience of some who had not been willing to listen to his words, but had been rebellious, God had decreed that sickness should come upon us. "I am sorry," he said, "but I cannot help it."

When he spoke these things it pierced me like a dart, having a testimony that so it would be.

About twelve o'clock at night the destroyer came upon us and we began to hear the cries of those who were seized. Even those on guard fell, and we had to exert ourselves considerably to attend to the sick, for they were stricken down on every hand.

Brother Joseph, seeing the sufferings of his brethren, stepped forward to rebuke the destroyer, but was immediately seized with the disease, and I assisted him a short distance from the place, when it was with difficulty he could walk.

In the winter of 1834-5, I attended a theological school in Kirtland. On one occasion I was called upon to speak on the principle of faith. I referred to an original circumstance which took place in my family. My wife, when going out to make a call, gave my little daughter a charge not to touch the dishes which she had left on the table. But she broke a number by letting the table leaf fall. She then went out under an apple tree and prayed that her mother's heart would be softened, that she might not whip her. Her mother was very punctual to fulfil her promises. But when she returned she had no disposition to chastise the child. Afterwards the child told her mother that she had prayed to God that she might not whip her.

Joseph wept like a child on hearing this simple narrative and its application, and said it was well timed.

While I was in the Kirtland Temple, June 4, 1837, the Prophet Joseph came to me and said, "Brother Heber, the Spirit of the Lord has whispered to me, saying: 'Let my servant, Heber, go to England and proclaim my gospel, and open the door of salvation to that nation.'"

A short time previous to starting, I was laid prostrate on my bed from a stitch in my back, which suddenly seized me while chopping and drawing wood for my family. I could not stir a limb without calling out from the severeness of the pain. Joseph, hearing of it, came to see me, bringing Oliver Cowdery and Bishop Partridge with him. They prayed for and blessed me, Joseph being mouth, beseeching God to raise me up. The Prophet then took me by the right hand and said, "Brother Heber, I take you by the right hand in the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth, and by virtue of the Holy Priesthood vested in me I command you in the name of Jesus Christ to arise, and be thou made whole."

I arose from my bed, put on my clothes and felt no more of the pain afterwards.

Woman's Exponent, IX (August 1, 1880), p. 39; (September 15, 1880), p. 59; (November 1, 1880), p. 82; (November 15, 1880), p. 90; X (May 15, 1881), p. 186.
