Hyrum L. Andrus, Helen Mae Andrus, They Knew the Prophet ( 1974)

Elizabeth Ann Whitney

Joseph Smith, with his wife, Emma, and a servant girl, came to Kirtland in a sleigh early in 1831; they drove up in front of my husband's store. Joseph jumped out and went in; he reached his hand across the counter to my husband and called him by name. My husband spoke, saying: "I could not call you by name as you have me."

He answered, "I am Joseph the Prophet; you have prayed me here, now what do you want of me?"

My husband brought them directly to our own house. I remarked to my husband that this was the fulfillment of the vision we had seen of a cloud as of glory resting upon our house. During the time they resided with us, many of the revelations were given which are recorded in the Doctrine and Covenants.

My husband traveled with Joseph the Prophet through many of the Eastern cities, bearing testimony and collecting means toward building a temple in Kirtland, and also toward purchasing lands in Missouri. During this journey the Prophet Joseph often prophesied of the destruction that ultimately would come upon the cities of the Eastern States, and especially New York, that in that city there would not be left a vestige of its grandeur. He said that wars would soon commence in our own land, which last has since transpired. He said to my husband, "If they reject us they shall have our testimony, for we will write it and leave it upon their doorsteps and window sills."

He prophesied of the desolation by fire, by storms, by pestilence and by earthquakes.

After their return from the East, they traveled together up to Missouri, and while upon this journey my husband had his ankle broken. Through the power of the administration of the gospel ordinance and faith, he was relieved from all pain.

My husband was ordained a bishop. We had always been in the habit of entertaining our friends and acquaintances generously and hospitably, but after we received the gospel we did not feel like using our means and time in a way that would only benefit those who had an abundance of this world's means. According to our Savior's pattern and agreeable to the Prophet Joseph's and our own ideas of true charity, we determined to make a Feast for the Poor, such as we knew could not return the same to us: the lame, the halt, the deaf, the blind, the aged and infirm.

This feast lasted three days, during which time all in the vicinity of Kirtland who would come were invited, and entertained as courteously and generously as if they had been able to extend hospitality instead of receiving it. The Prophet Joseph and his two counselors were present each day, talking, blessing, and comforting the poor, by words of encouragement and their most welcome presence.

The Prophet Joseph often referred to this particular Feast, during his lifetime, and testified of the great blessing he felt in associating with the meek and humble ones whom the Lord has said that "He delights to own and bless."

Great manifestations of power were witnessed in the Kirtland Temple. It seemed as though it was illuminated, and many and powerful were the manifestations to those who were humble and participated in the ordinances bestowed upon the faithful Saints in that house.

The first patriarchal blessing meeting over which Joseph Smith, Sen., presided was one of the most striking features of that particular period of time. In this meeting I received the gift of singing inspirationally, and the first song of Zion ever given in the pure language was sung by me then, and interpreted by Parley P. Pratt. It describes the manner in which the ancient patriarchs blessed their families, and gives some account of Adam-ondi-Ahman. The Prophet Joseph promised me that I should never lose this gift if I would be wise in using it; and his words have been verified.

About 1837, the Prophet Joseph called upon my husband to go to Far West to preside. My friends, who knew what delicate health I had, and how unaccustomed I was to any hardships, looked upon it as almost certain death for me to go. But I had unbounded faith in the promises of Joseph, that I should be able to go in safety, and my trust in God was firm and unshrinking.

Early in the Spring of 1840 we went to Nauvoo. Here we were all sick with ague, chills and fever, and were only just barely able to crawl around and wait upon each other. Under these trying circumstances my ninth child was born. Joseph upon visiting us and seeing our change of circumstances, urged us at once to come and share his accommodations. We went to live in the Prophet Joseph's yard in a small cottage; we soon recruited in health, and the children became more like themselves.

One day while coming out of the house into the yard the remembrance of a prophecy Joseph Smith had made to me, while living in our house in Kirtland, flashed through my mind like an electric shock. It was this: that even as we had done by him, in opening our doors to him and his family when he was without a home, even so should we in the future be received by him into his house. We afterwards moved upstairs over the brick store.

During our residence in the brick store the Relief Society was organized, March 17, 1842, and I was chosen counselor to the President of the society, Mrs. Emma Smith. I was also set apart under the hand of Joseph Smith the Prophet to administer to the sick and comfort the sorrowful. Several other sisters were also set apart to administer in these holy ordinances.

The Relief Society then was small in numbers, but the Prophet foretold great things concerning the future of this organization, many of which I have lived to see fulfilled; but there are many things which yet remain to be fulfilled in the future.

President Joseph Smith had great faith in the sisters' labors, and ever sought to encourage them in the performance of the duties which pertained to these societies, which he said were not only for benevolent purposes and spiritual improvement, but were actually to save souls. And my testimony to my sisters is that I have seen many demonstrations of the power and blessing of God through the administration of the sisters.

Woman's Exponent, VII (September 1, 1878), p. 51; (October 1, 1878), p. 71; (November 1, 1878), p. 83; (November 15, 1878), p. 91; (December 15, 1878), p. 105; (February 15, 1879), p. 191.
