Hyrum L. Andrus, Helen Mae Andrus, They Knew the Prophet ( 1974)

George A. Smith

On the first day of May, 1833, my father and his family started for Kirtland. We were heartily welcomed by Cousin Joseph, the Prophet. It was the first time I had seen him.

I was selected by President Joseph Smith, Jr., to accompany him to Missouri as a member of Zion's Camp, being then in my seventeenth year. My father furnished me with a musket, generally known as a Green's Arm, a pair of pantaloons made of bed ticking, a pair of cotton shirts, a straw hat, cloth coat and vest, a blanket, a pair of new boots, and an extra shirt and pantaloons which my mother packed up in a knap sack made of apron check.

The first day we traveled twenty-seven miles and slept in the barn of Mr. Ford, in the town of Streetsborough. My new boots blistered my feet severely, and Joseph gave me a pair of his own, a great relief to me.

President Joseph selected me to be of his mess. I slept in his tent, lying directly at his feet, and heard many of his counsels and instructions to the officers of the camp. Zebedee Coltrin was cook. After my day's walk, it was my duty to bring water, make fires and wait upon the cook.

The camp was organized into tens. Joseph Smith was acknowledged Commander-in-Chief, and Lyman Wight was the Second Officer. Joseph selected two companies of ten men each as his life guard. I was appointed his armor bearer, and the rest of the journey I took care of and kept his arms loaded and in good order. They consisted of a brace of fine silver-mounted, brass-barrelled horse pistols which had been taken from a British officer in the War of 1812, a rifle, also a sword. I generally accompanied him wherever he went, carrying these arms with me. This gave me a better opportunity of hearing the counsels and instructions of the Prophet than I had had previously.

The Prophet Joseph took a full share of the fatigues of the journey, in addition to the care of providing for the camp, and presiding over it. He walked most of the time and had a full share of blistered, bloody, and sore feet, which was the natural result of walking twenty-five to forty miles a day in the hot season of the year.

But during the entire trip he never uttered a murmur or complained, while most of the men in the camp complained to him of sore toes, blistered feet, long drives, scanty supply of provisions, poor quality of bread, bad corn dodger, frowsy butter, strong honey, strong bacon and cheese. Joseph had to bear with us and tutor us like children. There were many in the camp, however, who never murmured, and who were always ready and willing to do as our leader desired.

During our noon meal, near the place where the town of Pittsfield stands, Joseph stood on a wagon while he made a speech to the camp. He said: "The Lord is displeased with us. Our murmuring and fault finding and want of humility has kindled the anger of the Lord against us. A severe scourge will come upon the camp, and many will die like sheep with rot, and we cannot help it. It must come. But by repentance and humility and the prayer of faith, the chastisement may be alleviated, but cannot be entirely turned away, for as the Lord lives, this camp must suffer a severe scourge for their wickedness and rebellion. I say it in the name of the Lord."

This prophecy struck me to the heart. I thought we should probably get into battle with the mob and some of us get killed. Little thought I that within four weeks a dozen of my brethren would be laid in the ground without coffins, by the fell hand of the plague. But it was so, and I learned ever after to heed the counsels of the Prophet, and not murmur at the dispensations of Providence.

When several men died, Joseph said to me, "If your work had been finished, you would have had to tumble into the ground without a coffin."

I told him it did seem as if it would have been better for me to have died than my Cousin Jesse, as he had a good education, and many other qualifications to benefit the Church which I did not possess.

The Prophet replied, "You do not know the mind of the Lord in these things."

On May 30, 1835, I was appointed on a mission to preach the gospel in the East. My circumstances were so reduced that I could not procure clothes to go in. Joseph and Hyrum gave me some gray cloth to make me a coat and a snuff-colored vest and pantaloons. Brother Charles Thompson cut them out, and Sister Eliza Brown made them up for me. Elder Brigham Young gave me a pair of shoes.

I called to see Cousin Joseph. He gave me a Book of Mormon, shook hands with me and said: "Preach short sermons, make short prayers, and deliver your sermons with a prayerful heart."

This advice I have always denominated my collegiate education.

Later, while on a mission to England, I went with Elder Richards to visit Elder Theodore Turley, in Stafford jail. We shook hands with him through a large iron grating, which forcibly brought to mind a circumstance which occurred when Elder Turley and myself parted with the Prophet Joseph Smith in Nauvoo. Joseph had blessed us and said: "Keep up good courage, boys. Some of you will look through grates before you come back!"

At the close of another conversation with the Prophet, he wrapped his arms around me and squeezed me to his bosom and said: "George A., I love you, as I do my own life."

I felt so affected I could hardly speak, but replied, "I hope, Brother Joseph, that my whole life and actions will ever prove my feelings and the depth of my affection towards you."

Zora Smith Jarvis, "George A. Smith Family," pp. 46, 49, 50, 51, 52, 64, 71, 86, 87.
