Hyrum L. Andrus, Helen Mae Andrus, They Knew the Prophet ( 1974)

Daniel Tyler

My first impression of the Prophet was that he was a meek, humble, sociable and very affable man, as a citizen, and one of the most intelligent of men, and a great prophet. My subsequent acquaintance with him more than confirmed my most favorable impressions in every particular. He was a great statesman, philosopher and philanthropist, logician, and last, but not least, the greatest prophet, seer and revelator that ever lived, save Jesus Christ only.

A short time prior to his arrival at my father's house, my mother, Elizabeth Comins Tyler, had a remarkable vision. Lest it might be attributed to the evil one, she related it to no person, except my father, Andrew Tyler, until the Prophet arrived, on his way to Canada, I think. She saw a man sitting upon a white cloud, clothed in white from head to foot. He had a peculiar cap, different from any she had ever seen, with a white robe, underclothing, and moccasins. It was revealed to her that this person was Michael, the Archangel.

The Prophet informed her that she had had a true vision. He had seen the same angel several times. It was Michael, the Archangel.

During his short stay, he preached at my father's residence. He read the third chapter of John and explained much of it, making it so plain that a child could not help understanding it, if he paid attention. I recollect distinctly the substance of his remarks on the third verse—"Except a man be born again he cannot see the Kingdom of God."

The birth here spoken of, the Prophet said, was not the gift of the Holy Ghost, which was promised after baptism, but was an illumination of the mind by the Spirit which attended the preaching of the gospel by the elders of the Church. The people wondered why they had not previously understood the plain declarations of scripture as explained by the Elders, as they had read them hundreds of times. When they afterward read the Bible, it was a new book to them. This was being born again to see the kingdom of God. They were not in it, but could see it from the outside, which they could not do until the Spirit of the Lord took the veil from before their eyes. It resulted in a change of heart, but not of state; they were converted, but were yet in their sins. For instance, although Cornelius had seen an holy angel, and on the preaching of Peter the Holy Ghost was poured out upon him and his household, they were only born again to see the kingdom of God. Had they not been baptized afterwards they would not have been saved. (See Acts, 10th chapter.)

Explaining the fifth verse, he said, "To be born of water and of the Spirit means to be immersed in water for the remission of sins and receive the gift of the Holy Ghost thereafter."

The latter was given by the laying on of the hands of one having authority given him of God.

The joy that filled my juvenile soul no one can realize, except those who have had a foretaste of heavenly things. It seemed as though the gates of heaven were opened, and that a living stream flowed directly to the holy man of God. It also filled the house where we were sitting.

The Prophet Joseph Smith was a great reconciler of discrepancies in passages of scripture which were or seemed to be in conflict with each other. Until I heard the great expounder of Bible doctrines explain the following passages I concluded there must be a wrong translation in one verse or the other. One werse read: "I indeed baptize you with water unto repentance, but he that cometh after me is mightier than I, whose shoes I am not worthy to bear; he shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost and with fire."—Matthew iii, 11.

Here we have baptism with water, baptism with the Holy Ghost, and baptism with fire, three in number. The question naturally arises, how can this passage be reconciled with the following: "There is one . . . Lord, one faith, one baptism."—Ephesians iv., 4-6.

Joseph Smith reconciled these two scriptural passages. He said: "There is but one baptism; it takes the baptism of water, of the Holy Ghost, and of fire to constitute one full baptism."

At the time William Smith and others rebelled against the Prophet at Kirtland, I attended a meeting "on the flats" where Joseph presided. Entering the school house a little before the meeting opened and gazing upon the man of God, I perceived sadness in his countenance and tears trickling down his cheeks. A few moments later a hymn was sung and he opened the meeting by prayer. Instead of facing the audience, however, he turned his back and bowed upon his knees, facing the wall. This, I suppose, was done to hide his sorrow and tears.

I had heard men and women pray—especially the former—from the most ignorant, both as to letters and intellect, to the most learned and eloquent. But never until then had I heard a man address his Maker as though He was present listening as a kind father would listen to the sorrows of a dutiful child. Joseph was at that time unlearned, but that prayer, which was to a considerable extent in behalf of those who accused him of having gone astray and fallen into sin, was that the Lord would forgive them and open their eyes that they might see aright. That prayer, I say, to my humble mind, partook of the learning and eloquence of heaven. There was no ostentation, no raising of the voice as by enthusiasm, but a plain conversational tone, as a man would address a present friend. It appeared to me as though, in case theveil were taken away, I could see the Lord standing facing His humblest of all servents I had ever seen. It was the crowning of all prayers I ever heard.

When Joseph arose and addressed the congregation, he spoke of his many troubles, and said he often wondered why it was that he should have so much trouble in the house of his friends, and he wept as though his heart would break. Finally he said, "The Lord once told me that if at any time I got into deep trouble and could see no way out of it, if I would prophesy in His name, he would fulfill my words." He then said, "I prophecy in the name of the Lord that those who have thought I was in transgression shall have a testimony this night that I am clear and stand approved before the Lord."

The next Sabbath his brother William and several others made humble confessions before the public.

In a discourse in Far West, Missouri, Joseph Smith said, "Many of the elders of this Church shall yet be martyred."

When the massacre took place at Brother Haun's mill, I felt in hopes that that was the fulfillment of the prediction. Subsequently, when he and his brother Hryum were martyred in Carthage jail, I hoped that that would be the entire amount of those who would seal their testimony with their blood; but alas, several have since had their blood shed for the testimony of Jesus.

Everyone has probably heard or read of the terrible massacre at Haun's Mill. Brother Haun owned a grist mill which took his name. From two to four days prior to the massacre, the citizens of the little settlement assembled in a mass meeting and appointed Brother Haun a committee of one to go to the city for advice to know what to do. The whole county was under arms and excitement. The Apostle David W. Patten, with Brothers Gideon Carter and O'Banion, had already sealed their testimony with their blood.

Brother Haun repaired to the city, and as the Prophet was but a private citizen and minister of the gospel, in the legal sense, he first went to Captain John Killian, of the Caldwell County Militia, informed him of his appointment, and inquired what he and his brethren should do.

"Move into the city," was the prompt reply.

Brother Haun: "What! And leave the mill?"

Captain Killian: "Yes, and leave the mill."

Brother Haun: "What! To the mob?"

Captain Killian: "Yes, to the mob."

Brother Haun then left the Captain and went to Brother Joseph and asked him the same questions, and received the same answers.

"But Brother Joseph," responded the mill-owner, "we think we are strong enough to defend the mill and keep it in our own hands."

"Oh, well," replied he, "if you think you are strong enough to hold the mill you can do as you think best."

What more could he say? The Prophet's method had always been when his counsel was asked to give it freely and leave parties to receive or reject it. He could not, nor would not if he could, take away people's agency.

Brother Haun returned and reported that Brother Joseph's counsel was for them to stay and protect or hold the mill.

Soon after the Prophet's arrival in Nauvoo from Missouri prison, Brother Isaac Behunnin and I made him a visit at his residence. His persecutions were the topic of conversation. He repeated many false, inconsistent and contradictory statements made by apostates, frightened members of the Church and outsiders. He also told how most of the officials who would fain have taken his life when he was arrested turned in his favor on forming his acquaintance. He laid the burden of the blame on false brethren.

Those who testified against him through fear subsequently returned to the Church, some of them weeping and expressing a willingness that the Lord would remove them by death if that would remove the stain they had brought upon themselves be swearing falsely to shield themselves from the threatened death if they said aught in the Prophet's favor.

One scene was particularly touching, and showed the goodness of the Prophet's heart. A man who had stood high in the Church while in Far West was taken down with chills or ague and fever. While his mind as well as body was weak, disaffected parties soured his mind and persuaded him to leave the Saints and go with them. He gave some testimony against the Prophet. While the Saints were settling in Commerce, having recovered from his illness, he removed from Missouri to Quincy, Illinois. There he went to work chopping cordwood to obtain means to take himself and family to Nauvoo, and provide a present to the injured man of God if, peradventure, he would forgive and permit him to return to the fold as a private member. He felt that there was salvation nowhere else for him, and if that was denied him, all was lost as far as he was concerned. He started with a sorrowful heart and downcast look.

While on the way, the Lord told Brother Joseph he was coming. The Prophet looked out of the window and saw him coming up the street. As soon as he turned to open the gate, the Prophet sprang up from his chair and ran and met him in the yard, exclaiming, "O Brother, how glad I am to see you!"

He caught him around the neck, and both wept like children.

Suffice it to say that proper restitution was made, and the fallen man again entered the Church by the door, received his priesthood again, went upon several important missions, gathered with the Saints in Zion, and died in full faith.

When the Prophet had ended telling how he had been treated, Brother Behunnin remarked, "If I should leave this Church, I would not do as those men have done. I would go to some remote place where Mormonism had never been heard of, and no one would ever learn that I knew anything about it."

The great Seer immediately replied: "Brother Behunnin, you don't know what you would do. No doubt these men once thought as you do. Before you joined this Church you stood on neutral ground. When the gospel was preached, good and evil were set before you. You could choose either or neither. There were two opposite masters inviting you to serve them. When you joined this Church you enlisted to serve God. When you did that, you left the neutral ground, and you never can get back on to it. Should you forsake the Master you enlisted to serve, it will be by the instigation of the evil one, and you will follow his dictation and be his servant."

On one occasion, when the Nauvoo Legion was on parade, the heavens began to blacken as if to rain. The people began to get uneasy, and some were preparing to leave. Joseph arose in his saddle and shouted, "Attention, Legion! Don't break the ranks—it is not going to rain. If it rains enough to wet through your shirt sleeves, the Lord never spoke by my mouth!"

It had already begun to sprinkle rain, but it ceased, the clouds passed away, and drill continued as long as it was desirable.

The Juvenile Instructor, XXVII (February 1, 1892), pp. 93-95; (February 15, 1892), pp. 127-128; (August 15, 1892), pp. 491-492; XXVIII (May 15, 1893), p. 332.
