Hyrum L. Andrus, Helen Mae Andrus, They Knew the Prophet ( 1974)

Eliza R. Snow

In the autumn of 1829, I heard of Joseph Smith as a prophet to whom the Lord was speaking from the heavens; and that a sacred record containing a history of the origin of the aborigines of America was unearthed. A prophet of God, the voice of God revealing to man as in former dispensations—this was what my soul had hungered for. But could it possibly be true? I considered it a hoax—too good to be true.

In the winter of 1830 and 31, Joseph Smith called at my father's home. As he sat warming himself, I scrutinized his face as closely as I could without attracting his attention, and decided that his was an honest face. My adopted motto, "Prove all things and hold fast to that which is good," prompted me to investigation, as incredulous as I was.

On the 5th of April, 1835, I was baptized by a "Mormon" Elder.

In the Spring of 1836, I taught a select school for young ladies, and boarded with the Prophet's family.

Early in 1837, I again resided in the family of Joseph Smith, taught his family school, and had ample opportunity to mark his "daily walk and conversation" as a prophet of God. The more I became acquainted with him the more I appreciated him as such His lips ever flowed with instruction and kindness; and, although very forgiving, indulgent, and affectionate in his temperament, when his godlike intuition suggested that the welfare of his brethren or the interests of the kingdom of God demanded it, no fear of censure, no love of approbation, could prevent his severe and cutting rebuke.

Though his expansive mind grasped the great plan of salvation and solved the mystic problem of man's destiny—though he had in his possession keys that unlocked the past and the future with its succession of eternities, in his devotion he was as humble as a little child. As a philanthropist, his soul was broad as eternity. In the cause of truth and righteousness—in all that would benefit his fellow man, his integrity was as firm as the pillars of heaven. He knew that God had called him to the work, and all the powers of earth and hell combined failed either to deter or divert him from his purpose. With the help of God and his brethren, he laid the foundation of the greatest work ever established by man—a work extending not only to all the living, and to all the generations to come, but also to the dead.

He boldly and bravely confronted the false traditions, superstitions, religious bigotry and ignorance of the world—proved himself true to every heaven-revealed principle—true to his brethren and true to God, then sealed his testimony with his blood.

In Nauvoo I first understood that the practice of plural marriage was to be introduced into the Church. The subject was very repugnant to my feelings—so directly was it in opposition to any educated prepossessions that it seemed as though all the prejudices of my ancestors for generations past congregated around me. But when I reflected that I was living in the Dispensation of the Fulness of Times, embracing all other dispensations, surely plural marriage must necessarily be included, and I consoled myself with the idea that it was far in the distance, and beyond the period of my mortal existence. It was not long, however, before the announcement reached me that the "set time" had come—that God had commanded His servants to establish the order, by taking additional wives. I was sealed to the Prophet Joseph Smith for time and eternity.

While my brother Lorenzo Snow was absent on his first mission to Europe, these changes had taken place with me, of which I supposed him to be entirely ignorant. Not knowing how my mother would receive it, I did not feel at liberty, and did not wish to assume the responsibility of instructing him in the principle of plural marriage, and either maintained silence, or, to his indirect questioning, gave evasive answers, until I was forced, by his cool and distant manner, to feel that he was growing jealous of my sisterly confidence—that I could not confide in his brotherly integrity. I could not endure this—something must be done. I informed my husband of the situation, and requested him to open the subject to my brother. A favorable opportunity soon presented and seated together on the lone bank of the Mississippi River they had a most interesting conversation. The Prophet afterwards told me that he found that my brother's mind had been previously enlightened on the subject in question, and was ready to receive whatever the spirit of revelation from God should impart. That Comforter which Jesus said should "lead into all truth" had penetrated his understanding, and while in England had given him an intimation of what at that time was, to many, a secret. This was the result of living near the Lord, and holding communion with Him.

It was at the private interview referred to above that the Prophet Joseph unbosomed his heart and described the trying mental ordeal he experienced in overcoming the repugnance of his feelings, the natural result of the force of education and social custom, relative to the introduction of plural marriage. He knew the voice of God—he knew the commandment of the Almighty to him was to go forward, to set the example, and establish celestial plural marriage. He knew that he had not only his own prejudices and prepossessions to combat and to overcome, but those of the whole Christian world; but God, who is above all, had given the commandment, and He must be obeyed. Yet the Prophet hesitated and deferred from time to time, until an angel of God stood by him with a drawn sword, and told him that, unless he moved forward and established plural marriage, his priesthood would be taken from him and he should be destroyed! This testimony he not only bore to my brother, but also to others—a testimony that cannot be gainsayed.

Eliza R. Snow, "Life Sketch," handwritten manuscript. Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah. Woman's Exponent, II (January 1, 1874), p. 117; Biography and Family Record of Lorenzo Snow (Salt Lake City, 1888), pp. 68-70.
