Hyrum L. Andrus, Helen Mae Andrus, They Knew the Prophet ( 1974)

Oliver B. Huntington

Soon after Joseph settled in Kirtland, members of the Church began to gather to that place. The name of Joseph Smith and his power with God aroused everybody either for good or for bad. Mrs. John Johnson, who lived at the town of Hiram, forty miles distant from Kirtland, heard of the wonderful man that could receive revelations from God, heal the sick and see angels. She had a stiff arm that she wanted healed and made useful like the other, so she induced her husband to take a journey to Kirtland to see the Prophet.

Joseph asked her if she believed that God could make him instrumental in healing her arm which had been stiff a long time.

She answered that she believed her arm could be healed.

The Prophet only remarked that he would visit her the next day.

The next day Joseph came to Bishop Newell K. Whitney's home where Mr. Johnson and his wife were staying. There were a Campbellite doctor and a Methodist preacher in the room. He took Mrs. Johnson by the hand and without sitting down or standing on ceremonies, and after a very short mental prayer, pronounced her arm whole in the name of Jesus Christ. He left the house immediately.

When he was gone, the preacher asked if her arm was well. She immediately stretched out her arm straight, remarking at the same time, "It's as well as the other."

The next day the preacher came to the house of Philo Dibble, who lived a little out of town, and related what he saw, and then tried to account for it upon natural principles, saying that when Joseph pronounced that arm whole in the name of Jesus Christ, it frightened her so badly that it threw her in a heavy perspiration and relaxed the cords, and the result was that she could straighten her arm.

When the knowledge of the miracle was had among the Saints, some of the brethren asked the Prophet if the arm would remain sound. Joseph answered, "The arm is as sound as the other and is as liable to accidents or to be hurt as the other."

Joseph Smith said that some people entirely denounce the principle of self-aggrandizement as wrong. "It is a correct principle," he said, "and may be indulged upon only one rule or plan—and that is to elevate, benefit and bless others first. If you will elevate others, the very work itself will exalt you. Upon no other plan can a man justly and permanently aggrandize himself."

At another time he was speaking of works that tend to save and elevate the human family. He spoke earnestly of improving one's time in this life. Said he, "A man can do as much in this life in one year as he can do in ten years in the spirit world without the body."

On another occasion, he was asked the meaning of the words of the Savior: "Make to yourselves friends of the mammon of unrighteousness, that when ye fail they may receive you into everlasting habitations."

His answer was this, as near as I can get the words, but the meaning I give, for I marveled when I heard him say: "Every man will fail sometime. Be charitable and liberal with your substance, for it is only a secondary consideration—the use you make of it is the primary consideration. You may do good to some one who is down today and who will rise and be on top of the wheel when you are down, for every man will fail sometime."

He said that he would compare our existence to a wheel that was forever revolving. We are on the outside of the wheel, and sometimes we are on the top and sometimes on the down side.

I heard the Prophet reply to the question: "Will there ever be any more offering of sheep and heifers and bullocks upon altars, as used to be required of Israel?"

He said: "Yes, there will; for there were never any rites, ordinances or laws in the priesthood of any gospel dispensation upon this earth but what will have to be finished and perfected in this the last dispensation of time—the dispensation of all dispensations."

Another question was, "If a person does a good act, a kindness, or perhaps a charitable act, to a very bad, wicked man, will that person receive a reward of good for that act as if he had done it to a good man?"

Joseph said, "Yes, he will receive a reward for that good act to a wicked man, as surely as if he did it to a good man, but not as quick."

These were the words of Joseph Smith, for they were so strange to me that I could never forget my thought: "It's strange that the reward should come quicker if done to a good man."

I heard him say that he hoped the spirit of invention and improvement would rest upon the Saints, as it was upon the Gentiles, for unless it did there would many useful and important inventions be lost to the world when the great destruction of nations comes. It would then probably take hundreds of years to reproduce them again among men; yes, and perhaps thousands of years before they would get back upon the earth.

When the Saints were driven from the state of Missouri it was a very surprising circumstance that we could not understand. We naturally asked ourselves the question, "Where can we find another Holy land? How or when shall we get back to the consecrated spot for the New Jerusalem, that is to be built?"

Our only hope was that as God had given us a prophet he would certainly tell us how to manage and where to go, or what to do.

Oh! what confidence we had in that man! What comfort we derived through our faith in God and Joseph Smith. How little we knew of the great future, and for that one thing I feel very thankful!

Joseph finally led us to Nauvoo. Under his all-inspiring words, we quickly resolved, "We will stay here as long as Joseph wants us to—he knows what is best."

In a few months there was quite a town built up out of as near nothing as God ever made anything.

My father was living in a good hewed log house in 1840, when one morning as the family all sat at breakfast old Father Joseph Smith, the father of the Prophet, came and sat down by the fireplace, after declining to take breakfast with us. There he sat some little time in silence, looking steadily in the fire. At length he observed that we had been driven from Missouri to this place. He then asked this question, "And how long, Brother Huntington, do you think we will stay here?"

As he asked this question, I noticed a strange, good-natured expression creep over his whole being—an air of mysterious joy.

Father answered, after a moment's hesitation, "Well, Father Smith, I can't begin to imagine."

"We will just stay here seven years," he answered. "The Lord has told Joseph so—just seven years. Now this is not to be made public; I would not like to have this word go any further."

The Patriarch leaned and relied upon his son Joseph in all spiritual matters as much as boys generally do upon their parents for temporalities.

There were two or three minutes of perfect silence. Then the old gentleman with more apparent secret joy and caution in his countenance said, "And where do you think we will go to when we leave here, Brother Huntington?"

Father did not pretend to guess—unless we went back to Jackson County.

"No," said the old Patriarch, his whole being seeming to be alive with animation. "The Lord has told Joseph that when we leave here we will go into the Rocky Mountains, right into the midst of the Lamanites."

This information filled our hearts with unspeakable joy, for we knew that the Book of Mormon and this gospel had been brought to light more for the remnants of Jacob upon this continent than for the Gentiles.

Father Smith again enjoined upon us profound secrecy in this matter, and I don't think it was ever uttered by one of Father Huntington's family.

The history of Nauvoo shows that we located in Nauvoo in 1839 and left it in 1846.

Joseph Smith once undertook to plead law. This is impressed upon my mind, never to be blotted out or dimmed by time, not so much for the law he quoted, but for the great prophecy he uttered and the divine appearance of the man while he spoke the word of the Lord.

Soon after we settled in Commerce, three of our brethren were kidnapped by Missourians, taken to Missouri and starved and whipped until they were hardly able to run at all. But they managed to get away and returned home.

One of the men who did the wicked, cruel deed was found, years after, in disguise, parading the streets of Nauvoo.

The kidnapper was brought before an alderman for trial, and Joseph acted as prosecuting attorney. When he had just started to set forth the crime that the defendant was arraigned for, he suddenly left the law and declared the word of God with regard to the state of Missouri and its inhabitants. He told what the Saints had suffered at the hands of Missouri and the injustice and cruelty of their sufferings. He went on to tell what Missouri should be called to endure in order to pay the penalty for wrongs inflicted, and for the blood of the Saints they had shed.

A portion of the words of the prophecy I will quote verbatim: "She shall drink out of the same cup, the same bitter dregs we have drunk, poured out, out, out! and that by the hand of the enemy—a race meaner than themselves."

All the time he was delivering the word of the Lord, his face shone as if there was a light within him, and his flesh was translucent. The time thus occupied was considerable, for he pronounced two other very remarkable prophecies.

When he had done prophesying, he stopped speaking entirely, while he wiped a flood of perspiration from his face and gave vent to his pent-up breath with a long blow, kind of a half-whistle.

After a minute or two he remarked: "Well, where that meaner race is coming from God only knows. It is not the Negroes, for they don't know enough, and are gentlemen by the side of their masters. It is not the Indians, for they are chosen people of God and a noble race of men. But as sure as God ever spoke by me that shall come to pass."

I have lived to see that prophecy literally fulfilled in the Rebellion, when every family in that part of that state that the Saints used to occupy was killed or compelled to leave their homes by the Bushwhackers or Guerillas under Quantrell—a generation of vipers raised up mostly after the prophecy was uttered.

The place or country where Noah's ark was built was designated in my hearing by the Prophet Joseph Smith as being in or near South Carolina.

He advised the elders all to keep daily journals. "For," said he, your journals will be sought after as history and scripture. That is the way the New Testament came, what we have of it, though much of the matter there was written by the apostles from their memory of what had been done, because they were not prompt in keeping daily journals."

I have kept a journal as he directed.

On one occasion while the Prophet was waiting for his boots to be repaired by my brother Dimick in Nauvoo, he indulged in recounting personal services rendered him by Dimick. He exhibited his gratitude and greatness of soul in this way. He said, "Now, Dimick, in return for such acts, you may ask of me what you will and it shall be given you, even if it be to the half of my kingdom."

Dimick told it to me, and said that in thinking what he should ask for, decided he would not ask for anything that would impoverish Joseph. Nor would he ask for worldly honors or goods, but made this request: "Brother Joseph, I desire that where you and your father's house are (having reference to eternity), there I and my father's house may be also."

Joseph sat in meditation but a moment, and then said, "Dimick, in the name of Jesus Christ, it shall be even as you ask."

On another occasion, when Joseph was sitting in Dimick's shop waiting for something, he got on a wonderful strain of relating the history of the world in the past, recounting many strange things I never had read or heard of before. When he came to the present times, he did not stop, but went on and related the principal events that will transpire in the history of the world down to the time when the angel will declare that time shall be no longer.

Although I did not see the events with my natural eyes, the vividness of their appearance to my mind was next to reality. He declared the succession of events with as great clearness as one of us can repeat the events of our past lives.

After the Prophet had crossed the Mississippi River to go west before his martyrdom, he went to the house of Joseph Hancock and told him where he was going, and that he wanted him to go along as a hunter to kill game for the company. Brother Hancock was a great hunter. Brother Hancock's horse was on the open prairie, and could not be caught only by several men on horseback driving it into a yard.

He replied to Joseph that he would go if he could catch his horse.

The Prophet said that if he would go right after the horse, he could catch it. Brother Hancock went out immediately and had no trouble in walking up to the horse on the broad prairie, the first and only time he ever did.

The Young Woman's Journal, II, (December, 1890), pp. 124-125; (February, 1891), pp. 225-226; (April, 1891), pp. 314-315; (May, 1891), p. 366; (July, 1891), pp. 466-468; IV (March, 1893), pp. 274-275; (April, 1893) pp. 320-321; (June, 1893), pp. 424-425.
