Hyrum L. Andrus, Helen Mae Andrus, They Knew the Prophet ( 1974)

Daniel D. McArthur

To me, Joseph Smith seemed to possess more power and force of character than any ordinary man. I would look upon him when he was with hundreds of other men, and he would appear greater than ever. The more I heard his sayings and saw his doings, the more I was convinced that he had of a truth seen God the Father and His Son Jesus Christ, and also the holy angels of God. If I know anything on this earth, I surely know that he was a prophet.

When Joseph Smith first spoke to me, I was in the woods about half a mile south of Kirtland. He was on his horse and I was chopping wood. Said he, "Good afternoon."

I returned the compliment. He had a smile on his face, and I felt that he was going to say something else.

"You are not the young man who sold his wife for a bull-eye watch the other day, are you?" he asked.

I replied, "No, sir."

He went on laughing. There was a man who had sold his wife for a bull-eye watch a day or two before, and there was quite a talk about it in the neighborhood, so I suppose he thought he would have a little fun with me.

This same winter, 1836, he stated that he was out of firewood and that he had no time to get up any, for the officers of the law were continually on his track. So some of the brethren thought they would turn out and get him some wood.

When noon came, we were all called to dinner at Joseph's house. The table was loaded down with corn-meal mush and milk, and at the bidding of Joseph we all stepped forward to our places around the table, standing on our feet. Joseph asked Joshua Holman, who was one of the wood haulers, to ask a blessing upon the food. He went at his duty with all his soul. As he had been a Methodist exhorter before joining the Church, he commenced to call upon the great and mighty God who sat upon the top of a topless throne to look down and bless the food, and asked many other blessings to rest upon the Prophet, etc.

As soon as he closed, Joseph said, "Brother Joshua, don't let me ever hear you ask another such blessing."

Before we took our seats, he stated his reasons for making this remark and showed us how inconsistent such ideas were. He told us many things about God and who He was. Then we sat down to our mush and milk. After eating, the men went out to hitch up their teams, and Joseph took his hat and stepped out into the yard. We boys followed close at his heels. He turned around and said: "Boys, you think I am a prophet, and want to hear all I have to say. If I should tell you all I know that will come to pass within twelve years, perhaps there would not one of you believe it. You would apostatize from the Church. But I shall let you learn things as they happen, then most likely you will all stand in the Church."

This saying caused me to watch what transpired in the following twelve years. About the first thing that took place after that was the great apostasy in 1837. Next we were driven out of Kirtland; and Joseph was obliged to flee for his life. Next, Joseph and his brethren and the whole Church were driven out of Missouri. Later, Joseph and Hyrum were murdered. Afterwards, the entire Church was driven from Nauvoo. These things took place inside of twelve years, and ten thousand other things besides.

The Juvenile Instructor, XXVII (February 15, 1892), pp. 128-129.
