Hyrum L. Andrus, Helen Mae Andrus, They Knew the Prophet ( 1974)

James Henry Rollins

I first met Joseph Smith in my Uncle Sidney Gilbert's house, the first day he arrived in Kirtland, in February, 1831. While he was in the house with my uncle and aunt, I saw a wagon turn over as it was coming down the slippery hill, and heard a woman and two or three children screaming. I ran in and told Joseph and my uncle about it, and Joseph ran without his hat to assist them. My first impression was that if any of the occupants were hurt seriously, Joseph could heal them. But none of them were hurt, and it turned out to be Joseph's own family.

Joseph and my uncle returned to the house. He asked my uncle if I was his son.

He said no, I was his wife's nephew.

"Well," he said, "The Lord has shown him great things."

I had seen Joseph and Hyrum in a vision, in December, 1830.

In 1831, I started for Missouri, and arrived about the 1st of January, 1832. Joseph Smith the Prophet came to Independence on his second visit there, about the last of April or the first of May, 1832. He came to my uncle's house and saluted my uncle and aunt. Then he came to me and said, "Henry, I want to baptize you, if possible, before I leave."

I was then working in my uncle's store, and, on Saturday, Joseph came into my uncle's store and asked him if I could go with him to the Whitmer settlement. He wanted to baptize me, but my uncle could not spare me.

When Joseph returned from the Whitmer settlement, he authorized Oliver Cowdery to baptize me, instead of himself, but Cowdery did not get to do it. I was finally baptized by John Corrill.

On June 1, 1834, the first news came of the arrival of Zion's Camp in Missouri. Joseph the Prophet and his brother William, with Dr. F. G. Williams and several others, stayed at our place. But the majority of the camp went to the farm of John Burk, where many were stricken with the cholera and died.

George A. Smith and Jesse Smith were about my own age. We three were out in the road trying to get a ball out of a pistol which had got wet at Fishing River. We were all three quite merry and were laughing a great deal, when Jesse made the remark, "We had not ought to be out here making so much noise, while there are so many of our brethren sick and dying in the house. We don't know how soon some of us may be taken."

We then went in the house. In a short time this noble boy was struck with the cholera. Joseph and his brethren worked over him, but fever took hold of him and with all they could do for him it availed them nothing. He died lying on the floor of our largest room.

Joseph took the death of this noble boy very hard, as he undoubtedly had been entrusted with his care by the boy's parents.

When the Saints were driven from Missouri, I was taken to Richmond. General Clark said, "You get down off the horse and go into the bull pen with the rest of them."

When I entered, I found forty or fifty brethren.

I was called the next morning, when court had convened. A pole was stretched across to keep us back from Judge King and his court. I stood close to this pole, at the back of Joseph and Hyrum and the lawyers, and Doniphan and Atchison. A man was brought in as a witness, who testified that I had burned his house. I spoke openly, as I stood behind Joseph and Hyrum, that he was a curly headed liar.

Joseph turned his head toward me and said, "Pshaw, Henry, don't say anything."

This saying caused some consolation in the court room.

After leaving Missouri, I went to my stepfather's farm, nine miles from Montrose, in Iowa territory. While there, I received a letter from the Prophet requesting me to come to Nauvoo immediately. I went and asked Joseph what he wanted of me.

He said for me to move to Nauvoo, that he wanted me there.

I did as he advised.

Soon after this I went to Joseph, where he resided down on the flats in a mansion, and asked him what he desired me to do. The next morning I went with him to his store. He asked Newell K. Whitney if he had any work for me to do.

He replied that there was nothing that he knew of then, that he had sufficient help at present.

Joseph then said, "I have work for you."

He took me through in the back of the store and showed me cords of hickory wood. He asked me if I was a good hand with the ax. I laughed and said, "Well, some little."

I chopped and piled up the wood the same day.

The next day he came to the store and unbarred the outside cellar door, and asked me if I thought I could straighten up things.

He was pleased with the change I made with the appearance of the cellar.

Early the next morning, Judge Cleveland brought a carload of hogs. Joseph asked me if I could cut them up and salt them. He said, "I want it done just as my wife Emma tells you."

She told me to cut out the bones and salt the pork in the barrels, then add brine and molasses; and after laying for a certain time, smoke them in the carriage house.

I said I was afraid, as it was getting quite warm in the day, that the flies would spoil them.

She said, "Fix them as I want it done, if they all spoil."

They did almost all of them spoil.

About this time, Lyman Wight, Amasa Lyman and Henry G. Sherwood came up the river with twenty-five barrels of Orleans sugar and several barrels of molasses.

Edward Hunter also came with a large supply of dry goods, from Philadelphia. Joseph told me to harness up his old Charlie to the buggy and take Brother Hunter around to view the city, to see Joseph's farm, and to answer all the questions he might ask.

A good deal of work was being done on the temple, and the workmen received orders on the store for their labor. It was very crowded for two or three days, and as I stood in the counting room door looking at faces in the house, the men came to me and asked if I could wait on them.

Joseph said to me, "Why don't you wait on these people?"

I told him that when I was ordered I would do so with pleasure.

He then said, "Go and wait on them."

I then went to work behind the counter on the grocery side, and paid off many orders.

When Joseph came in and saw us looking tired and pale, he told us to shut up the store that night and not open again for two or three days, which we did until we got rested.

During the spring and summer of 1844, previous to his death, the Prophet told me to assist in carrying water and other commodities to the room above the store. Afterwards I found out it was to give endowments to some of the brethren.

A few days after this as I was alone in the store, standing outside of the counter, Joseph came in with his cane in his hand and stepped directly opposite of me on the other side and eyed me for a moment. Then he walked across to where I stood and raised his right leg and laid it on my left shoulder. He then took it down, walked back to his first position, and he said, "I thought to break you down with the heft of my leg, but you are stiffer than I thought you were."

While I was in the store, Newell K. Whitney came in and said, "Joseph wants you to come up the river near the old printing office."

I went, supposing he would send me somewhere on an errand as he sometimes did. When I arrived I saw that he had been baptizing several individuals.

He said to me, "Do you remember, I promised to baptize you at Independence, Missouri. I want to fulfill that promise now, if you are willing."

I said, yes, I was very willing.

He then took me in the river and baptized me, after which I took a seat on a rock and he confirmed me and placed many blessings on my head.

A Sketch of the Life of James Henry Rollins, Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah.
