Hyrum L. Andrus, Helen Mae Andrus, They Knew the Prophet ( 1974)

Wilford Woodruff

My first introduction to the Prophet, in 1834, was rather singular. He had on a very old hat, and was shooting at a mark. He had a pistol in his hand. Said he, "Brother Woodruff, I've been out shooting at a mark. I wanted to see if I could hit anything. Have you any objection to it?"

"Not at all," said I. "There is no law against a man shooting at a mark, that I know of."

He invited me to his house. I accepted the invitation, and I watched him pretty closely to learn what I could. He remarked while passing to his house that this was the first hour he had spent in recreation for a long time.

Shortly after we arrived at his house, he went into an adjoining room and brought out a wolf-skin, and said, "Brother Woodruff, I want you to help me tan this." So I pulled off my coat, went to work and helped him, and felt honored in so doing. He was going with the brethren of Zion's camp, and he wanted this wolf-skin to put upon his wagon seat, as he had no buffalo robe.

This was my first acquaintance with the Prophet Joseph. And from that day until the present I never saw a moment when I had any doubt with regard to this work. I have felt to rejoice exceedingly in what I saw of Brother Joseph, for in his public and private career he carried with him the Spirit of the Almighty, and he manifested a greatness of soul which I had never seen in any other man.

The evening after I arrived in Kirtland several of the brethren came in and talked with Brother Joseph, and asked what they should do, for they had not means to bear their expenses from there to Missouri. Brother Joseph said, "I am going to have some money soon."

The next morning he received a letter containing a hundred and fifty dollars.

On Sunday, he called a priesthood meeting. The elders all gathered in a little cabin. There I first heard Joseph Smith speak publicly. He called upon the elders to bear testimony of the gospel of Christ. He then arose and said, "Brethren, I am very much edified and interested in listening to your testimony. But I want to tell you that you know no more concerning the result of this work and what lies before you as the elders of Israel, and before this people, than a parcel of little children."

He told them this work would fill the whole earth, and that all nations would have to hear the proclamation of the gospel. He further said: "This work will fill the Rocky Mountains with tens of thousands of Latter-day Saints, and there will be joined with them the Lamanites who dwell in those mountains who will receive the gospel of Christ at the mouth of the elders of Israel, and they will be united with the Church and the kingdom of God, and bring forth much good."

I have heard the Prophet Joseph pray when the power of God rested upon him, and all who heard him felt it; and I have seen his prayers answered in a marvelous manner, almost immediately. Governor Reynolds, of Missouri, on one occasion employed men to try and kidnap Joseph, and they almost accomplished their designs. Thereafter, the governor continued to harass him with writs, and was determined to destroy Joseph. The Prophet and the Twelve went before God in prayer. Joseph asked the Lord to deliver him from the power of that man. In about forty-eight hours from that time, word reached Joseph that Reynolds had blown his brains out.

There is another instance. A certain man took a stand against Joseph and endeavored to bring persecution on him. Joseph went to God and laid the matter before Him, asking to be delivered out of the hands and power of that wicked man. Joseph knew the voice of the Spirit when it spoke to him. After offering up his prayer, the whispering of the still small voice came to him saying, "Wait with patience."

The next day that man was taken sick with cholera, and died in a few hours.

While I was living in a cabin in an old barracks at Nauvoo, we experienced a day of God's power with the Prophet Joseph. It was a very sickly time and Joseph had given up his home to the sick, and was living in a tent pitched in his dooryard. The large number of Saints who had been driven out of Missouri were flocking in, but had no homes and were living in wagons, in tents, and on the ground. Many were sick through the exposure they were subjected to. Brother Joseph had waited on the sick until he was worn out and nearly sick himself.

On the morning of the 22nd of July, 1839, he arose reflecting upon the situation of the Saints of God in their persecutions and afflictions. He called upon the Lord in prayer, and the power of God rested mightily upon him. And as Jesus healed all the sick around Him in His day, so Joseph, the Prophet of God, healed all around on this occasion. He healed all in his house and dooryard, then, in company with Sidney Rigdon and several of the Twelve, he went through among the sick lying on the bank of the river, and he commanded them in a loud voice, in the name of Jesus Christ, to come up and be made whole, and they were all healed.

When he healed all that were sick on the east side of the river; they crossed the Mississippi River to Montrose, where we were. The first house they went into was President Brigham Young's. He was sick on his bed at the time. The Prophet went into his house and healed him, and they all came out together. As, they were passing by my door, Brother Joseph said, "Brother Woodruff, follow me."

These were the only words spoken by any of the company from the time they left Brother Brigham's house till we crossed the public square and entered Brother Elijah Fordham's house. Brother Fordham had been dying for an hour, and we expected each minute would be his last.

I felt the power of God that was overwhelming His prophet. When we entered the house, Brother Joseph walked up to Brother Fordham and took him by the right hand; in his left hand he held his hat.

He saw that Brother Fordham's eyes were glazed, and that he was speechless and unconscious.

After taking hold of his hand, the Prophet looked down into the dying man's face and said, "Brother Fordham, do you not know me?"

At first he made no reply; but we could all see the effect of the Spirit of God resting upon him.

Joseph again said, "Elijah, do you not know me?"

With a low whisper, Brother Fordham answered, "Yes."

The Prophet then said, "Have you not faith to be healed?"

The answer, which was a little plainer than before, was, "I am afraid it is too late. If you had come sooner, I think I might have been."

He had the appearance of a man waking from sleep. It was the sleep of death.

Joseph then said, "Do you believe that Jesus is the Christ?"

"I do, Brother Joseph," was the response.

Then the Prophet of God spoke with a loud voice, as in the majesty of the Godhead, "Elijah, I command you, in the name of Jesus of Nazareth, to arise and be made whole!"

The words of the Prophet were not like the words of man, but like the voice of God. It seemed to me that the house shook from its foundation. Elijah Fordham leaped from his bed like a man raised from the dead. A healthy color came to his face, and life was manifested in every act. His feet were done up in Indian-meal poultices. He kicked them off his feet, scattered the contents, then called for his clothes and put them on. He asked for a bowl of bread and milk and ate it. Then he put on his hat and followed us into the street to visit others who were sick.

As soon as we left Brother Fordham's house, we went into the house of Joseph B. Noble, who was very low and dangerously sick. When we entered the house, Brother Joseph took him by the hand, and commanded him, in the name of Jesus Christ, to arise and be made whole. He did arise and was immediately healed.

While this was going on, the wicked mob in the place, led by one Kilburn, had become alarmed, and followed us into Brother Noble's house. Before they arrived there, Brother Joseph had called upon Brother Fordham to offer prayer. While he was praying, the mob entered, with all the evil spirits accompanying them. As soon as they entered, Brother Fordham, who was praying, fainted and sank to the floor.

When Joseph saw the mob in the house, he arose and had the room cleared of both that class of men and their attendant devils. Then Brother Fordham immediately revived and finished his prayer.

This shows what power evil spirits have upon the tabernacles of men. The Saints are only saved from the devil by the power of God.

This case of Brother Noble's was the last one of healing upon that day. It was the greatest day for the manifestation of the power of God through the gift of healing since the organization of the Church.

When we left Brother Noble, the Prophet Joseph went with those who accompanied him from the other side of the bank of the river, to return home. While waiting for the ferryboat, a man of the world, knowing of the miracles which had been performed, came to him and asked him if he would not go and heal his twin children, about five months old, who were both lying sick nigh unto death. They were some two miles from Montrose.

The Prophet said he could not go, but after pausing some time, he said he would send some one to heal them. He then turned to me and said, "You go with the man and heal his children."

He took a red silk handkerchief out of his pocket and gave it to me, and told me to wipe their faces with the handkerchief when I administered to them, and they should be healed. He also said unto me, "As long as you will keep that handkerchief, it shall remain a league between you and me."

I went with the man, and did as the Prophet commanded me, and the children were healed.

I have possession of the handkerchief unto this day.

It has been my faith and belief from the time that I was made acquainted with the gospel that no greater prophet than Joseph Smith ever lived on the face of the earth, save Jesus Christ. He was raised to stand at the head of this great dispensation—the greatest of all dispensations God has ever given to man.

Millennial Star, LIII (October 5, 1891), pp. 627-628; LIV (September 19, 1892), p. 605; Journal of Discourses, VII pp. 100-101; Woodruff, Leaves From My Journal, pp. 62-65.
