Hyrum L. Andrus, Helen Mae Andrus, They Knew the Prophet ( 1974)

Edward Stevenson

I first saw Joseph Smith at Pontiac, Michigan, in 1834, when he visited the Pontiac Branch. The meetings were crowded. The Prophet stood at a table for a pulpit. Before he got through, he was in the midst of the congregation with uplifted hand. His countenance seemed to assume a heavenly whiteness. He testified with great power concerning the visit of the Father and the Son, and the conversation he had with them. Never before did I feel such power. Though only a small percentage of those who saw and heard him accepted the restored gospel, there was not one who dared to dispute it. Many were heard to say, "Well, if Mormonism is true, it will stand; if not true, it will fall."

A prediction made by the Prophet was afterwards literally fulfilled. Joseph said, "If you will obey the gospel with honest hearts, I promise you in the name of the Lord that the gifts as promised by our Savior will follow you, and by this you may prove me to be a true servant of God."

I both saw and heard the gifts follow those who believed and obeyed the gospel.

During the Prophet's visit, he came to our house. My heart swelled with love as I selected and presented him with some of our choice apples. While looking over our copy of a large English Book of Martyrs, he expressed sympathy for the Christian martyrs and a hope for their salvation. He asked to borrow the book, promising to return it when he should meet us again in Missouri. On returning it he said, "I have, by the aid of the Urim and Thummim [Seer Stone?], seen those martyrs. They were honest, devoted followers of Christ, according to the light they possessed. They will be saved."

The Prophet also looked over our large Bible and remarked that much of the Apocrypha was true, but it required the Spirit of God to select the truth out of those writings.

Finally, in speaking of the latter-day work, he said, "There are thousands of good people in England and those old countries who are waiting for the fulness of the gospel, and it will not be long before they will flock to Zion, for Ephraim dwells largely in those parts."

I have often seen the Prophet indulge in a game of checkers. He was cheerful—often wrestling with Sidney Rigdon. One time he had his pants torn badly, but had a good laugh over it. In Missouri, when mob forces oppressed the Saints, we were encamped in Adam-ondi-Ahman, mostly around campfires without tents. One night the snow fell four or five inches. The Prophet, seeing our forlorn condition, called on us to form into two parties—Lyman Wight at the head of one line and he (Joseph) heading the other line—to have a sham battle. The weapons were snowballs. We set to with a will full of glee and fun.

I stood with Joseph Smith and others when he pointed out the sacred spot of Adam's altar. Turning to the lovely valley below us, in a large bend of Grand River, he said, "Here is the real valley where Father Adam called his posterity together and blessed them."

He also stated that the Garden of Eden was in Jackson County—the Center Place of Zion where a great temple will be reared.

Twelve days after the Prophet escaped from Missouri, a General Conference of the Church was held at Quincy, Illinois. His soul was filled with emotion, and it seemed as though he could not utter his feelings, only with a flood of tears. He looked calm, however, and a halo of brightness hovered about him. He was of a tender heart, as well as of a stern and firm disposition when occasion required it. I have known the Prophet to weep with tender affection, and have seen him with his sword drawn, as a military officer, when he was mighty as well as powerful.

After the Prophet had looked over the congregation, he said, "To look over this congregation of Latter-day Saints who have been driven from their homes and are still in good faith, without homes, as pilgrims in a strange land, and to realize that my life has been spared to behold your faces again seemed to be so great a pleasure that words were only a vague expression of my soul's gratitude."

I have heard the Prophet say that he did not claim perfection, but possessed human weaknesses. He said, "When I speak as a man it is Joseph only that speaks. But when the Lord speaks through me, it is no more Joseph Smith who speaks; but it is God, and let all Israel hear."

Joseph Smith, Wilford Woodruff and Willard Richards saw a light in the heavens, in the southwest quarter of the sky, and a broad sword, from half past seven to nine o'clock. The Prophet said, "As sure as there is a God who sits enthroned in the heavens, and as sure as he ever spoke by me, so sure will there be a speedy and bloody war; and the broad sword seen this evening is a sure sign thereof."

We very often went to Nauvoo to meetings. I have never heard or seen a man so filled with inspiration as the Prophet. He was full of light. I began to believe that he possessed an infinity of knowledge. I looked upon him as upon no other man. I have often heard him speak under divine influence, and I have felt as though I have been lifted in spirit beyond mortality, and that I was looking upon a simile of God, and at times I found myself in tears of joy. Others have I seen in the same condition, and at times even those not members of our church.

The Prophet gave rich instructions relative to preaching the gospel by the Spirit and power of the Holy Ghost. He also explained several passages of scripture. He taught that the Lord's prayer should state, "Leave us not in temptation"—not, "Lead us not into temptation." (Matthew 6:13.) John's revelation on Patmos should read, "Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord, ... and they shall continue in their work"—not, "and their works do follow them." (Revelation 14:13.) The epistle to the Hebrew saints should say, "Therefore not leaving the principles of the doctrine of Christ, let us go unto perfection"—not, "Therefore leaving the principles of the doctrine of Christ." He said that the plural term "baptisms" in this passage had reference to baptism for the living, baptism for the dead, and rebaptism. (Hebrews 6:1-2.)

I loved to hear the Prophet teach us. On one occasion he said, "Oh! how I would delight to bring before you things you never thought of, but poverty and the cares of the world prevent. But I am glad I have the privilege of communicating to you some things which, if grasped closely, will be a help to you when earthquakes bellow, the clouds gather, the lightnings flash, and the storms are ready to burst upon you like peals of thunder. Lay hold upon these things, and let not your knees or joints tremble, and your hearts faint."

He was cheerful and comforting. He said, "I shall not be sacrificed until my time comes; then I shall be offered freely."

I heard the Prophet state, while preaching on a stand erected on the east side of the Temple, that he now saw the time he had long desired to see. "Now I am a free man," he declared. "There are men now prepared to carry out the work of the kingdom of God here on earth, and it will roll on forever. Thank God I have lived to see this day."

I never saw him so full of power. It thrilled through my whole system.

"Autobiography of Edward Stevenson," Typewritten manuscript, Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah, pp. 7-9, 33-36, 57-58, 65-68, 78, 96.
