Hyrum L. Andrus, Helen Mae Andrus, They Knew the Prophet ( 1974)

Benjamin F. Johnson

I feel in every degree incompetent to the task of recounting what I have witnessed in the life and character of our great Prophet, who stood in the presence of both the Father and the Son and personally conversed with them both; being often visited by holy angels, while continually receiving by revelation the word of the Lord to His people. And yet he was of like passion with his brethren and associates.

As a son, he was nobility itself, in love and honor of his parents; as a brother he was loving and true, even unto death; as a husband and father, his devotion to wives and children stopped only at idolatry. His life's greatest motto, after "God and His Kingdom," was that of "wives, children and friends." On one Sunday morning while sitting with him in the Mansion dining room, in private converse, two of Emma's children came to him as just from their mother, all so nice, bright and sweet. Calling them to my attention, he said, "Benjamin, look at these children. How could I help loving their mother?"

Joseph, the Prophet, as a friend was faithful, long suffering, noble and true to that degree that the erring who did love him were reminded that the rod of a friend was better than the kiss of an enemy, while others who "sopped in his dish" but bore not reproof became his enemies and, like Law, Marks, Foster, Higbee and others who hated him, conspired to his death.

As a companion, socially, he was highly endowed—was kind, generous, and mirth loving. For amusements, he would sometimes wrestle a friend, or others; would test strength with others by sitting upon the floor with feet together and stick grasped between them. But he never found his match. Jokes, rebuses, matching couplets in rhymes, etc., were not uncommon. But to call for the singing of one or more of his favorite songs was more frequent. Of those, "Wives, Children and Friends," "Battle of River Russen," "Soldier's Tear," "Soldier's Dream," and "Last Rose of Summer" were most common. And yet, although so social and even convivial at times, he would allow no arrogance or undue liberties.

While with him in such fraternal, social and sometimes convivial moods, we could not then so fully realize the greatness and majesty of his calling, which, since his martyrdom, has continued to magnify in our view, as the glories of this last dispensation were more fully unfolded to our comprehension.

In 1833, I went to Kirtland, Ohio, where were gathered many converts to the new revelation. Though the Prophet was hardly more than a boy in appearance, I soon learned that he was a man indeed in wisdom and council; and although younger than he, I had great opportunity to scrutinize his life and habits. Such were the social and religious elements of his unselfish nature that those who knew him best loved him most; and to me, who became associated with him personally in his family, who became his confidential friend, his financial agent, his trusted companion and nurse in his sickness—to me, he was the embodiment and perfection of all that I could comprehend in perfect manhood.

But as he was the most loved by those who knew him best, so he was the most hated by those who did not and would not know him. For as in the case of the Great Nazarene, who was no one "but the carpenter's son," so he was of poor parentage and uneducated, and therefore was despised by the rich and the learned who, with all classes, sought by false witnesses and otherwise to entangle him in lawsuits and to incite mob violence, and for no real cause but that he professed a new revelation from heaven.

In the summer of 1833, a mob drove the Saints from Jackson County. Zion's Camp was prepared to start, in which I desired to accompany the brethren. But the Prophet deemed it best for me not to go, owing to the opposition of my father, and as I had not yet received my baptism. I was assured by the Prophet Joseph that no loss should come to me for waiting, for although not fully a member I had partaken of every hope, desire, and spiritual influence with which those around me were animated.

Previous to the dedication of the Temple, on the 27th of March, 1836, all who had labored upon it were called together, and in the public congregation received their blessings under the hands of the First Presidency. I felt a great joy in these prophetic words that filled and thrilled me. Yet all the time I was thinking that these blessings would only be for those who had labored with their hands upon the Temple. As I had not myself worked upon it, not being strong enough for such labor, I felt that I would not receive any blessing and it grieved me exceedingly. On the last day of blessings, I was standing by the door in the crowded congregation. How I did yearn for a blessing! As the last blessing was given, the Prophet earnestly looked towards the door where I was standing and said to his brother Hyrum, "Go and see if there is not one more yet to be blessed."

Brother Hyrum came to the door and put his hand upon my shoulder, and asked me if I had not worked upon the Temple.

I said, "No sir," but it seemed like passing a sentence upon my fondest hopes.

He then asked if I had done nothing towards it.

I then thought of a new gun I had earned and given as a donation, and of the brick I had helped to make. I said, "I did give often"

"I thought there was a blessing for you," he said; and he almost carried me to the stand.

The Prophet blessed me with a confirmation of all his father had sealed upon me in my patriarchal blessing, and many more also. I felt then that the Lord had respect for my great desire.

In 1839, after the Prophet escaped from Missouri and arrived at Nauvoo, I was with him. The people had flocked in from the terrible exposures of the past, and nearly everyone was sick with intermittent or other fevers, of which many died. The Prophet, too, had a violent sickness. As Emma was in no degree able to care for him, it wholly devolved upon me. Both day and night through a period of a little less than two weeks I was hardly absent from his room. Almost his only food was gruel, and about the only treatment he would accept was a flush of the colon with warm water, perhaps tinctured slightly with capsicum of myrrh, or a little soda and salt, both of which were prepared and administered by me in the room he occupied. If any sleep came to me, it was while lying upon his bed or sitting in my chair.

At this time, with so much sickness and death, a great fear began to prevail, with a desire in some to abandon Nauvoo, and with this feeling President Rigdon was greatly exercised, making grave complaints. The Prophet now arose in great power, like a lion, or as a giant refreshed with wine, shook off his own sickness, went to Brother Rigdon, rebuked his fearful and complaining spirit, and told him to repent or a scourge from the Lord awaited him. Those being sick he commanded to be healed, which they were. He then called for a skiff and crossed the river to Montrose, where he found Elijah Fordham, drawing apparently his last breath. By his command, life returned and he arose and was at once made whole. The Prophet then visited Brother Joseph B. Noble and other places, full of the power of God, healing the sick.

Soon after the Prophet's recovery, I too came apparently nigh unto death through a violent attack of the fever, through which my comfort was kindly looked after by the Prophet.

About the middle of October, a letter came to say that my dear mother and young sister were apparently near to death, in Springfield, Illinois, and were anxious for my return. In my anxiety to see my mother again, I procured quinine, which was just becoming known as an antidote for fever, and taking it in large quantities, my fever soon abated. Under its tonic influence, I fancied I had become well, and in great joy and hope hastened preparations to start for the home of my mother and kindred in Springfield. My horse was in the yard ready to mount, but I wished to take leave of the Prophet with the hope of receiving his blessing. I had but one ten-dollar bill left, and I thought that at least I would pay a tithing. So, going to the Prophet, I told him I was ready to leave, and giving him the bill, I said, "As this is all I have left, I want to pay a tithe of it."

He saw I was weak in body and that my heart was sad, to thinking to cheer and arouse me, when putting the nine dollars in my hand, he playfully knocked my hand upward, scattering the money all over the room.

My heart was full of tears, and my emotion must have vent, so forgetting all but the feeling that we were boy companions playing together, I sprang at and grappled him, so as to teach him a lesson. But the lesson was all to me, for on making the one grand effort to throw him, I found myself in strength no more than a bullrush as compared with him, and as my strength was fictitious and my real recovery but an illusion, I collapsed and fainted in his arms. He placed me in repose, and did all necessary for my restoration and comfort. He then gathered up the scattered money.

After a period of delay, weak, trembling and desolate, yet determined to start, I led my horse to the outer gate. As I was passing through, with the bridle on my arm, his hand detained me. Placing his hands upon my head, he seemed to pour out his soul in blessing me. He told the Lord I had been faithful to care for others, but I was now worn and sick, and that on my journey I would need His care, and he asked that a guardian angel might go with me from that day and stay with me through all my life.

O! how often I have seen through life the footprints of the angel, and knew that his hand had drawn me back from death.

Living in one of the Prophet's homes was Father G. W. Harris, who had married the widow of William Morgan. She has two children, Lucinda and Thomas. Lucinda, then sixteen years of age, appeared to be very lovable, both in purity and beauty and being often companions naturally drew us together in feeling. The Prophet, seeing our partiality for each other, told me to make her my wife, seeming to enjoin it upon me. I at once moved to that object, and we soon pledged our vows to each other.

Having later left Nauvoo on a mission, I returned in the Spring of 1842 and saw the Prophet, who cordially welcomed me with renewed blessing. I conversed with him upon business matters. He said that he wished me to remain in Ramus, Illinois, as it was then called, and act as trustee or agent for the Church property at that place.

The Prophet often came to Ramus, but after my arrival he lodged in no house but mine. I was proud of his partiality and took great delight in his society and friendship. When with us there was no lack of amusement, for with jokes, games, etc., he was always ready to provoke merriment, one phase of which was matching couplets in rhyme, by which we were at times in rivalry; and his fraternal feeling in great degree did away with the disparity of age or greatness of his calling.

Sometimes when at my house I asked him questions relating to the past, present and future. Some of his answers are now recorded in the Doctrine and Covenants.

In talking with my mother after the revelation on plural marriage was given, Joseph Smith told her that when the Lord required him to move in plural marriage his first thought was to come and ask her for some of her daughters; and I can now understand that the period alluded to was at Kirtland, where she had three unmarried daughters at home, two of whom died there.

As I have alluded to the law of plural marriage, I will relate the time and manner in which it was taught to me. About the first of April, 1843, the Prophet, with some of the Twelve and others, came to Macedonia to hold a meeting, which was to convene in a large cabinet shop owned by Brother Joseph E. and myself. As usual, he put up at my house.

Early on Sunday morning he said, "Come Brother Bennie, let us have a walk."

I took his arm, and he led the way into a by-place in the edge of the woods surrounded by tall brush and trees. Through the swale ran a small spring brook, across which a tree was fallen and was clean of its bark. On this we sat down, and the Prophet began to tell me that the Lord had revealed to him that plural or patriarchal marriage was according to His law; and that the Lord and not only revealed it to him but had commanded him to obey it; that he was required to take other wives; and that he wanted my Sister Almira for one of them, and wished me to see and talk to her upon the subject.

If a thunderbolt had fallen at my feet, I could hardly have been more shocked or amazed. He saw the struggle in my mind and went on to explain. But the shock was too great for me to comprehend anything, and in almost an agony of feeling I looked squarely in the eye and said, while my heart gushed up before him, " Brother Joseph, this is all new to me. It may all be true—you know, but I do not. To my education it is all wrong. But I am going, with the help of the Lord, to do just what you say, with this promise to you—that if ever I know you do this to degrade my sister I will kill you, as the Lord lives."

He looked at me, oh, so calmly, and said, "Brother Benjamin, you will never see that day, but you shall see the day you will know it is true, and you will fulfill the law and greatly rejoice in it." And he said, "At this morning's meeting, I will preach you a sermon that no one but you will understand. And furthermore, I will promise you that when you open your mouth to your sister, it shall be filled."

At the meeting he read the Parable of the Talents, and showed plainly that to him that hath shall be given more, and from him that had but one should be taken that he seemed to have, and given to him who had ten. This, so far as I could understand, might relate to families, but to me there was a horror in the idea of speaking to my sister upon such a subject, the thought of which made me sick.

But I had promised, and it must be done. I did not remember his words and have faith that light would come. I only thought, "How dark it all looks to me. But I must do it."

And so I told my sister I wished to see her in a room by herself. I stood before her trembling, but I opened my mouth and my heart opened to the light of the Lord. My tongue was loosened, and I was filled with the Holy Ghost. I preached a sermon that forever converted me and her also to the principle, even though her heart was not yet won by the Prophet. And so I had great joy after my tribulation.

He had asked me to bring my sister to the city, which I soon did. His brother, Hyrum, said to me, "Now, Brother Benjamin, you know that Brother Joseph would not sanction this if it was not from the Lord. The Lord revealed this to Brother Joseph long ago, and he put it off until the angel of the Lord came to him with a drawn sword and told him that he would be slain if he did not go forth and fulfill the law."

He told my sister to have no fears, and he there and then sealed my sister, Almira, to the Prophet.

One evening the Prophet called me and my wife to come and sit down, for he wished to marry us according to the law of the Lord. I thought it a joke, and said I should not marry my wife again unless she courted me, for I did it all the first time. He chided my levity, told me he was in earnest, and so it proved, for we stood up and were sealed by the Holy Spirit of Promise.

This occurrence is referred to in the life of Joseph Smith as "Spending the evening in giving counsel to Brother Johnson and wife."

The Prophet's "teaching of love" was not to work upon the sympathies and sensibilities of the people, rather it was his great example and self-sacrifice, and his showing us that while all the world was against us, our only hope was in our union, and that union was only possible as the fruit of our love for each other. In teaching us the "Fatherhood of God, and the brotherhood of man," we could begin to see why we should "love God supremely, and our brothers as ourselves."

He taught us that God was the great head of human procreation, was really and truly the father of both our spirits and our bodies; that we were but parts of a great whole, mutually and equally dependent upon each other, according to conditions. And in our love of God we show, as do the members of our bodies, a greater love and protection for our head.

You will not forget that the march in science has in many things reversed the world's thought, changed its "modus" and almost its face, and in fact, exploded the dogmas of outside theology. The keys to all this knowledge were first committed to the Prophet Joseph, as a part of the gospel, for the world's benefit, for all of which he was derided. He was the first to teach in this age "substantialism," the eternity of matter, that no part or particle of the great universe could become annihilated or destroyed; that light and life and spirit were one; that all light and heat are the "glory of God," which is His power, that fills the "immensity of space," and is the life of all things, and permeates with latent life, and heat, every particle of which all worlds are composed; that light or spirit, and gross matter, are the two first great primary principles of the universe, or of being; that they are self-existent, co-existent, indestructible, and eternal, and from these two elements both our spirits and our bodies were formulated.

He taught that all systems or worlds were in revolution, the lesser around the greater. He taught that all the animal kingdoms would be resurrected, and made us understand that they would remain in the dominion of those who, with creative power, reach out for dominion, through the power of eternal lives. He taught us that the Saints would fill the great West, and through Mexico and Central and South America we would do a great work for the redemption of the remnant of Jacob. And he taught us relating to the kingdom of God as it would become organized upon the earth through "all nations learning war no more" and all adopting the God-given Constitution of the United States as a palladium of liberty and equal rights.

I was present when the Prophet gave his last charge to the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles. It was in Nauvoo early in 1844, in the meeting of a council of the Prophet's most trusted friends, including the Twelve, but not all of the constituted authorities of the Church. The Prophet stood before that association, and with great feeling and animation he graphically reviewed his life of persecution, labor and sacrifice for the Church and the kingdom of God, both of which he declared were now organized upon the earth, the burden of which had become too great for him longer to carry, that he was weary and tired with the weight he had so long borne. He then said, with great vehemence: "And in the name of the Lord, I now shake from my shoulders the responsibility of bearing off the kingdom of God to all the world, and here and now I place that responsibility, with all the keys, powers and privileges pertaining thereto, upon the shoulders of you, the Twelve Apostles, in connection with this council; and if you will accept this, to do it, God shall bless you mightily and shall open your way; and if you do it not, you will be damned. I am henceforth free from the blood of this generation and of all men."

Shaking his skirt with great vehemence, he raised himself from the floor, while the Spirit that accompanied his words thrilled every heart.

At his last visit to us at Ramus, he preached with great animation to a large congregation and blessed nineteen children. He then turned to me and said, "Benjamin, I am tired, let us go home."

My home being only a block distant, we soon reached it, and entering we found a warm fire with a large chair in fromt, and my wife sitting near with her babe, our eldest, upon her lap. Approaching her, I said, "Now, Melissa, see what we have lost by not going to meeting. Brother Joseph has blessed all the children in the place but ours, and it is left out in the cold."

But the Prophet at once said, "You shall lose nothing" He then proceeded to bless our first born.

Then with a deep-drawn breath, as a sigh of weariness, he sank down heavily in his chair, and said, "Oh! I am so tired—so tired that that I often feel to long for my day of rest. For what has there been in this life but tribulation for me? From a boy I have persecuted by my enemies, and now even my friends are beginning to join with them, to hate and persecute me! Why should I not wish for my time of rest?"

He words and tone thrilled and shocked me, and like an arrow pierced my hopes that he would long remain with us. I said, as with a heart full of tears, "Oh! Joseph, what could we, as a people, do without you and what would become of the great latter-day work if you should leave us?"

He was touched by my emotions, and in reply he said, "Benjamin, I would not be far away from you, and if on the other side of the veil I would still be working with you, and with a greatly increased, to roll on this kingdom."

Early on June 28, 1844, I heard of the assassination of Joseph and Hyrum. To attempt to delineate the feelings of woe and unutterable sorrow that swelled every heart too full for tears, I need not attempt. I stood up, dazed with grief, could groan but but could not weep. The fountain of tears was dry! "Oh God! what will thy orphan Church and people now do!" was the only feeling or thought that now burst out in groans.

I did not go to see their mutilated bodies. I had no wish to look into their grave; I knew they were not there, and the words of Brother Joseph began to come back to me: "I could do so much more for my friends if I were on the other side of the veil." These sords, "my friends"—oh, how glad I was that he was my friend! These thoughts gradually gained the empire in my heart, and I began to realize that in his martyrdom there was a great and eternal prupose in the heavens.

The journal of Benjamin F. Johnson, Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah; "An Interesting Letter," from Patriarch Benjamin F. Johnson to George S. Gibbs, 1903; Benjamin F. Johnson file, Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah.
