Hyrum L. Andrus, Helen Mae Andrus, They Knew the Prophet ( 1974)

Samuel Miles

My recollections and acquaintance with the Prophet Joseph are those of a boy from the age of eight to eighteen, when he was martyred.

His kind manner and gentle words when I first met him in company with my father, and he took me by the hand; his noble deportment when before the people; his easy, jovial appearance when engaged in the sports which were common in the days of Nauvoo; his firm dislike of that which was degrading—all these combined to give me a very favorable opinion of this noble man.

My father's farm, two miles south of Far West, Missouri, on the rich prairie and bottoms of a branch of Log Creek, produced phenomenal growths of vegetables, etc. Among other things a mammoth musk-melon was being developed. Father said, "We will give this to the Prophet."

I watched over it with great care, and we had much satisfaction when it was ripe in presenting it to Joseph and receiving his thanks.

When times of trouble came on in Missouri, I have seen the Prophet mustering in the ranks, his rifle on his shoulder, encouraging the Saints by his example as well as by his cheering words.

On his first visit to Nauvoo, traveling from Quincy, he stayed over night in the little town of Lima, where several families of the Saints had found shelter. I recollect how joyful we all were to greet the Prophet and the brethren who accompanied him. In the morning, we all came out to bid them Godspeed on their journey to find a location for the Saints. Joseph's spirited black horse, when he attempted to mount him, made a start, wheeling partly around, but the Prophet with a sudden spring gained the saddle minus his tall black hat, containing, as was customary in those days, his papers, etc. There being at the time a light wind, hat and papers went flying around. But we were not long in getting them together and restoring them to their owner.

The Juvenile Instructor, XXVII (March 15, 1892), pp. 173-174.
