Hyrum L. Andrus, Helen Mae Andrus, They Knew the Prophet ( 1974)

Mosiah L. Hancock

We went with Joseph Smith to Missouri, and it was there on the road to Far West that I learned to love the noble course of the Prophet.

I asked Father, "Who made the father of our God?"

Brother Joseph answered, "Brother Levi, it is just as natural for God to have a father as it is for you or me to have one."

It was the disposition of the Prophet Joseph when he saw little children in the mud to take them up in his arms and wash the mud from their bare feet with his handkerchief. And oh how kind he was to the old folks, as well as to little children. He always had a smile for his friends, and was always cheerful.

The mobocrats in Missouri tried to make it appear that the Mormons were disloyal to the government. None but the most ignorant ever said that of the Saints. They were from Eastern or Puritan stock, and the songs of liberty and freedom were on every tongue. The mobocrats were known to say that the law could not reach the Saints, but that powder and ball could! During the Fourth of July celebration, lightning struck the liberty-pole at Far West, Missouri, and made it a mass of splinters. Brother Joseph said, "There goes the liberty of the people."

The summer of 1841 I played my first game of ball with the Prophet. We took turns knocking and chasing the ball, and when the game was over the Prophet said, "Brethren, hitch up your teams."

We did, and we all drove to the woods. I drove our one-horse wagon, standing on the front bolster, and Brother Joseph and Father rode on the hounds behind. There were thirty-nine teams in the group and we gathered wood until our wagons were loaded. When our wagon was loaded, Brother Joseph offered to pull sticks with anyone who wanted to compete with him—and he pulled them all up one at a time. Afterwards the Prophet sent the wagons out to different places where people needed help; and he told them to cut the wood for the Saints who needed it. Everybody loved to do as the Prophet said, and even though we were sickly, and death was all around us, folks smiled and tried to cheer everyone up.

I saw many remarkable cases of healing under the hands of the Prophet while we were at Nauvoo.

Well do I remember the Prophet's speech from a frame in front of his mansion—where he said, "Brethren, I now roll this work onto the shoulders of the Twelve; and they shall bear and send this gospel to every nation under heaven."

He asked the members of the Legion if they were not all his boys, and they shouted "Yes!"

I stood on the rail of the fence in front of the Mansion. The Prophet said, "Brethren, the Lord Almighty has this day revealed to me something I never comprehended before! That is—I have friends who have at a respectful distance been ready to ward off the blows of the adversary (he brought his hand down on my father's head as he was acting as bodyguard to the Prophet), while others have pretended to be my friends, have crept into my bosom, and have become vipers—my most deadly enemies. I wish you to be obedient to these true men as you have promised. ARE YOU WILLING TO DIE FOR ME?"

"Yes!" was the shout.

"You have said you are willing to die for me—." Then he drew his sword and cried, "I WILL DIE FOR YOU! If this people cannot have their rights, my blood shall run upon the ground like water."

I saw the Prophet and the rest when they departed from Nauvoo for the last time; and I went out to meet their martyred bodies when they were brought from Carthage with Apostle John Taylor, who was himself so badly wounded that he could not stir. Many of the Saints went out to meet them, and their hearts were full of sorrow. I went to see those noble martyrs after they were laid out in the Mansion.

After the people had gone home, my father took me again into the Mansion and told me to place one hand on Joseph's breast and to raise my other arm and swear with hand uplifted that I would never make a compromise with any of the sons of hell, which vow I took with a determination to fulfill to the very letter. I took the same vow with Hyrum.

Autobiography of Mosiah L. Hancock, Brigham Young University Library, pp. 2-3, 9-10, 21, 22, 24, 25, 27-30.
