Hyrum L. Andrus, Helen Mae Andrus, They Knew the Prophet ( 1974)

Orange L. Wight

We moved to Daviess County, Missouri, and made our principal settlement at Adam-ondi-Ahman. The Prophet Joseph told us that it was the place where Adam offered his holy sacrifices. The altar was not far from our house.

Adam-ondi-Ahman was visited a number of times by the Prophet Joseph Smith, and I became acquainted with him. Being now fourteen years old, I could comprehend and appreciate all, or nearly all, he would say. He was very kind and sociable with both young and old. We often bathed in the limpid waters of the Grand River. Although but a boy, I was invited to bathe with them. At one time we had a jolly time. There was Joseph the Prophet, my father Lyman Wight, Sidney Rigdon, and several others.

Mother and I made several trips to the Liberty Jail, in Clay County, Missouri. Most of the trips were made with sisters whose husbands were in prison with my father and the Prophet. While in the prison with the Prophet, I got better acquainted with him and could appreciate his divine mission.

Later in Quincy, Illinois, I had further opportunities to become better acquainted with the Prophet Joseph, and had an increase of my faith in his holy mission, being at an age when I could judge and see more perfectly that he was an inspired prophet of God.

In the fall of 1839, we moved to Nauvoo and stopped in the house with the Prophet Joseph for several weeks.

After I returned to Nauvoo in 1843, Joseph asked me a great many questions about my mission. I told the Prophet that a man by the name of Brank was coming to Nauvoo. He looked troubled for a moment, and said he had trouble enough with that man. Brank was an apostate. Then his countenance changed to one of inspiration, and he said, "Orange, he will not come."

He never did come. That was a prophecy which, my having seen the Prophet and heard his words, I can never forget. It was proof to me that he was inspired.

Letter written by Orange L. Wight to Joseph I. Earl and Harriet M. Earl, Bunkerville, Nevada, May 4, 1903, typewritten copy in the Brigham Young University Library, pp. 3-9.
