Hyrum L. Andrus, Helen Mae Andrus, They Knew the Prophet ( 1974)

Anson Call

In the month of September, 1838, I received a visit from Joseph, Hyrum, and Sidney Rigdon at the Three Forks of the Grand River, near Adam-ondi-Ahman, in Missouri. Joseph stated that he had come on a special errand. It was on the Sabbath, and the brethren were congregated at my house to meet with a number of Missourians. After the meeting, he slipped into the cornfield with about twelve of the brethren. He stated that we must leave, for there were going to be difficulties. We inquired from what source. He said it was not for him to say. The message he had received was for us to leave and go to Far West, or Adam-ondi-Ahman.

We unanimously agreed to do so. We then inquired whether it was necessary for us to go forthwith, or whether we could stay and save our crops and sell our farms. He said we need not sell our farms, and he presumed we should have time to get away. But how much time he knew not. These leaders then left us, after the dinner.

We were very anxious to save our crops and we concluded we would do so if we could. It was agreed by the brethren that I should travel through Daviess, Caldwell and Ray Counties, and see if there was any stir among the people. I accordingly started the next day and discovered no excitement among the people. We therefore concluded we could give ourselves sufficient time to secure our crops.

After doing so, we decided we could go bee hunting. After seven days' hunt, we still found that all was peace. Since we had done so well, we decided to take another hunt.

But on our return we found the whole country in arms, between us and Adam-ondi-Ahman and Far West. Cornelius Gilliam had a company of mobbers placed to prevent the Mormons from going to and from either place. They told us that if we stayed we should not be harmed, but that if we attempted to go away it would be death.

About the middle of May, 1839, after the Saints had been driven out of Missouri, I was one day traveling to Warsaw, Illinois, when to my great surprise I met Brothers Joseph and Hyrum. I asked him when and how he had made his escape from Missouri.

He said, "I am in a great hurry, for my enemies are pursuing me. I will say in short that the prayers of the brethren brought me here."

He then inquired of me where I lived. He said, "In about a week I will be at your house; then I will relate the whole matter to you."

He passed on in great haste. I was filled with great joy to see our prophet in the enjoyment of liberty.

He came to my house about the appointed time, had his dinner and spent the principal part of the afternoon in conversation on the circumstances of his escape from Missouri.

On the 14th of July, 1843, with quite a number of his brethren, the Prophet crossed the Mississippi River to the town of Montrose, to be present at the installment of the Masonic Lodge of the "Rising Sun." A block schoolhouse had been prepared with shade in front, under which was a barrel of ice water.

Joseph, as he was tasting the cold water, warned the brethren not to be too free with it. With the tumbler still in his hand, he prophesied that the Saints would yet go to the Rocky Mountains. Said he, "This water tastes much like that of the crystal streams that are running from the snow-capped mountains."

I had before seen him in a vision, and now saw his countenance change to white; not the deadly white of a bloodless face, but a living, brilliant white. He seemed absorbed in gazing at something at a great distance, and said, "I am gazing upon the valleys of those mountains."

This was followed by a vivid description of the scenery of these mountains, as I have since become acquainted with it. Pointing to Shadrach Roundy and others, he said, "There are some men here who shall do a great work in that land."

Pointing to me, he said, "There is Anson. He shall go and shall assist in building up cities from one end of the country to the other, and you (rather extending the idea to all those he had spoken of) shall perform as great a work as has been done by man, so that the nations of the earth shall be astonished, and many of them will be gathered in that land and assist in building cities and temples, and Israel shall be made to rejoice."

It is impossible to represent in words the grandeur of Joseph's appearance, his beautiful descriptions of this land, and his wonderful prophetic utterances as they emanated from the glorious inspirations that overshadowed him. There was a force and power in his exclamations of which the following is but a faint echo: "Oh the beauty of those snow-capped mountains! The cool refreshing streams that are running down through those mountain gorges!"

Then looking in another direction, as if there was a change of locality: "Oh the scenes that this people will pass through! The dead that will lie between here and there."

Then turning in another direction as if the scene had again changed: "Oh the apostasy that will take place before my brethren reach that land! But the priesthood shall prevail over its enemies, triumph over the devil and be established upon the earth, never more to be thrown down!"

He then charged us with great force and power to be faithful to those things that had been and should be committed to our charge, with the promise of all the blessings that the priesthood could bestow: "Remember these things and treasure them up. Amen."

Autobiography of Anson Call, Brigham Young University Library, pp. 6-7, 18-20. Edward W. Tullidge, History of Northern Utah and Southern Idaho: Biographical Supplement, pp. 271-272.
