Hyrum L. Andrus, Helen Mae Andrus, They Knew the Prophet ( 1974)

Peter Hardeman Burnett

Joseph Smith was much more than an ordinary man. He possessed the most indomitable perseverance, was a good judge of men, and deemed himself born to command, and he did command. His views were so strange and striking, and his manner was so earnest and apparently so candid that you could not but be interested. There was a kind, familiar look about him that pleased you. He was very courteous in discussion, readily admitting that he did not intend to controvert, and would not oppose you abruptly, but had due deference to your feelings. He had the capacity for discussing a subject in different aspects and for proposing many original views, even of ordinary matters. His illustrations were his own.

He had great influence over others. As an evidence of this I will state that after he had been taken a prisoner in Missouri, I saw him out among the crowd conversing freely with everyone and seeming to be perfectly at ease. In the short space of five days he had managed so to mollify his enemies that he could go unprotected among them without the slightest danger.

Among the Mormons he had much greater influence than Sidney Rigdon. The latter was a man of superior education, an eloquent speaker, of fine appearance and dignified manners; but he did not possess the native intellect of Smith, and lacked his determined will.

Joseph Smith was a very stout, athletic man, and was a skillful wrestler. This was known to the men of Daviess County, and some of them proposed to Smith that he should wrestle with one of their own men. He at first courteously objected, alleging substantially that though he was once in the habit of wrestling, he was now a minister of the gospel and did not wish to do anything contrary to his duty as such, and that he hoped they would excuse him upon that ground.

They replied that they did not desire to do anything contrary to his calling; that they would not bet anything; that it was nothing but a friendly trial of skill and manhood, for the satisfaction of others, and to pass away the time pleasantly; and that they hoped he would, under all the circumstances, comply with their request.

He consented. They selected the best wrestler among them, and Smith threw him several times in succession, to the great amusement of the spectators.

Peter Hardeman Burnett, An Old California Pioneer (Oakland, 1946), pp. 40-41.
