Hyrum L. Andrus, Helen Mae Andrus, They Knew the Prophet ( 1974)

George Miller

In the early part of November, 1838, the wolves being unusually destructive to my sheep, I resolved to take most of them into the adjoining state of Missouri (I was then living in McDonough County, Illinois) and sell them.

While I was ferrying my sheep over the Mississippi, at Quincy, Illinois, I met a young man who had been in the town to get armed and equipped to enter the "Mormon War," as he pleased to call it. This declaration of the ignorant young man was indeed news to me.

By the time I got home, the Mormons expelled from Missouri began to cross the Mississippi River in a poor and distressed condition.

During the winter, I found my health very much declining. I had concluded to rent my farm and move into the village. I had 300 acres tillable land, between 5,000 and 8,000 bushels of grain that I had no market for, a large quantity of bacon and lard, about 250 head of hogs, about 100 head of cattle, together with sheep and poultry, and fourteen well-selected horses, well suited for the saddle or harness; also three yearling colts.

The encumbrance of this property was greatly in the way of my resolution to move to the village. I resolved to seek out some poor Mormon families, and establish them as farmers on my homestead, as I was well supplied with house room.

I had a friend in Quincy who had in one of his houses the families of Joseph Smith, Sen., Samuel H. Smith, Don Carlos Smith, Jenkins Salsbury, and a Brother Henry Hoit. He said they were all destitute and he thought gentlemen, and would suit my purpose.

I waited on the venerable patriarch and those under his roof. He frankly said that his sons would take charge of my farm and effects, and praised God that I had been sent in answer to his prayers.

I arrived home and the Brothers Smith came as was agreed upon. I told them to inform all the destitute Mormons to come and get provisions, and they could be had without money or price.

About this time news reached us that the Prophet Joseph Smith had escaped from prison, and arrived in Illinois, and was making an effort to buy the village of Commerce. I had great anxiety to see him, but Don Carlos informed me that as soon as a place was fixed for the gathering of the Saints, Joseph would be at my place to pay them a visit.

One bright morning I prevailed on my wife to ride on horse-back to visit our tenants on the farm. On our return home. I perceived that a carriage containing a number of persons was meeting us. As we neared it, the appearance of a large man sitting in front driving seemed to be familiar to me, as if I had always known him. Suddenly the thought burst on my mind that it was none other than the Prophet Joseph Smith.

My whole frame was in a tremor with the occurrence of the thought, and my heart seemed as if it were coming up into my mouth.

Getting in speaking distance, he suddenly reined up his horses as making ready to speak. I was much agitated as the words came from his mouth: "Sir, can you tell me the way to the farm of a Mr. Miller, living somewhere in the direction I am going?"

Instead of answering him directly, my reply was, "I presume sir, that you are Joseph Smith, Jr., the Mormon Prophet?"

"I am, sir," he said, adding, "I also presume that you are the Mr. Miller whose farm I inquired for?"

"I am, sir," I replied.

He then introduced me to his wife and family.

I solicited him to preach. He excused himself as not feeling like sermonizing, having just escaped from prison; that he felt like a bird uncaged and was more disposed to reconnoiter the country and visit his friends and people.

Upon my urging the matter, he suddenly turned to me, saying that he did think of some one of the elders preaching for me, but he was now resolved on doing it himself; that it had been whispered that a Samaritan had bound up the wounds of his bleeding friends, adding that he would do the best he could in the way of preaching. Accordingly the time and place was fixed upon, and I went to notify the people of the appointment of the Mormon Prophet to preach.

The appointed time arrived. The house and dooryard were filled with people, apparently anxious to hear more for the purpose of fault finding than seeking after truth. He took for his text the chapter in the writings of Luke where a certain man fell among thieves when journeying from Jerusalem to Jericho, and was taken and ministered to by the Samaritan.

He took an extensive latitude while treating on this text, and took up a long time. Notwithstanding it was a rainy day, those outside of the house stood in the rain sheltered by umbrellas until the service was over. I had no remaining doubts left in regard to the truth of the Prophet Joseph, and the doctrine of the gospel as taught by the Latter-day Saints. Shortly thereafter I was baptized by Elder John Taylor, and here a new era of my life was fully ushered in.

Correspondence of Bishop George Miller with the Northern Islander, pp. 1-6.
