Hyrum L. Andrus, Helen Mae Andrus, They Knew the Prophet ( 1974)

Wandle Mace

My eyes rested upon the great Prophet of the last days for the first time in 1839. I was introduced to him and his brother, and hook hands with them. Their sister—the wife of brother McClary hurried to and fro, pressing them to partake of refreshments, at the same time telling them how anxious they had been, and how fearful they were lest the mob would take their lives. Joseph said to her, "You were much troubled about us, but you did not know the promises of God to us."

On the landing at the top of some stairs at the back of the house the Prophet addressed the people. This is the first time I heard him preach, and I shall never forget his words In the course of his remarks he said, "Yes," said the angel, "your name shall go out for good and for evil."

He was a fine looking man, tall and well proportioned, strong and active, with a light complexion, blue eyes, and light hair, and very little beard. He had a free and easy manner, not the least affectation, yet he was bold and independent, and very interesting and eloquent in speech.

Almost as soon as the father and mother of the Prophet set their feet upon the hospitable shore of Illinois, I became acquainted with them. I frequently visited them and listened with intense interest as they related the history of the rise of the Church.

With tears they could not withhold, they narrated the story of the persecution of their boy Joseph when the angel first visited him and informed him of the great things the Lord was about to bring to pass. Since that time it had been one continual scene of persecution.

In these conversations, Mother Smith related much of their family history. She said their family must have presented a peculiar appearance to a stranger, as they were seated around the room, father, mother, brothers, and sisters, all listening with the greatest interest to Joseph, as he taught them the pure principles of the gospel as revealed to him by angels, and the glorious visions beheld, as he saw the Father and the Son descend to to earth

She said: "During the day our sons would endeavor to get through their work as early as possible, and say, Mother, have supper early, so we can have a long evening to listen to Joseph,' Sometimes Joseph would describe the appearance of the Nephites, their mode of dress and warfare, their implements of husbandry, etc., and many things he had seen in vision. Truly ours was a happy family, although persecuted by preachers, who declared there was no more vision, the canon of scripture was full, and no more revelation was needed."

But Joseph had seen a vision and must declare it.

Oh, how many hours I have spent with these good old folks. They were as honest and true as it was possible for mortals to be; and they exemplify the words of the apostle who said, "All who will live godly in Christ Jesus, shall suffer persecution."

Meetings in Nauvoo were held in a Jack Oak Grove, in the open air, and here I listened to the words of inspiration as they fell from the lips of the Prophet. Who could listen to these words of inspiration and honestly say Joseph Smith is an impostor? No one, not even his bitter enemies. I have listened to the Prophet Joseph in public, and in private, in sunshine and shower—as many others have done; and I do know that no man could explain the scriptures—throw them wide open to view, so plain that none could misunderstand their meaning—except he had been taught of God.

I have felt ashamed myself sometimes, having studied the scriptures so much [before joining the Church, he memorized the New Testament], that I had not seen that which was so plain when he touched them. He, as it were, turned the key, and the door of knowledge sprang wide open, disclosing precious principles, both new and old. I have many times been pondering upon a subject, and seemed to come to a standstill, not knowing how to gain further information relating to it, when upon going to meeting on the Sabbath, the key would be touched by Joseph and the subject would be so plain I wondered why I had not seen it before.

One day Joseph rode up to the Temple grounds, as we stood together talking after our day's work, and called out, "Boys, has Bonaparte any friends in the French Army?" Of course we were all attention to know his meaning. He then told us that Orrin Porter Rockwell had been thrown in jail, in Missouri, and that for the sum of two hundred dollars his mother could obtain his release. Joseph said he had not sufficient money himself, so he wanted the brethren to assist him. All present respondended heartily.

Joseph dismounted from his horse and engaged in a friendly wrestle with some of the "boys," as he called us. He often tried to get me to wrestle with him. I never could. I was a strong man. Often when we met and shook hands, he would pull me to him for a wrestle and say, slapping my shoulder with his hand, "If you are not a strong man there is no use of putting a man upright."

I have been with him at times when approached by a long-faced religious stranger, who seemed to think that it was almost a sin to smile, and that the Prophet should be as sedate and as cheerless as himself. The Prophet would challenge someone present for a wrestle—to the utter astonishment of the religious stranger, who would be almost shocked at the mention of a wrestle, but would extol Jacob, who seemed to be an accomplished wrestler and also a great favorite with God.

Such was Joseph, the great Prophet of the last days. As he often joined us on the Temple grounds, we were sure of a rare treat if we could get him to talk to us. Some one present, being in a hurry to hear him, would say, "Brother Joseph talk to us."

He would say: "What do you want to talk about? Start something."

Soon a conversation would bring out some question for Joseph to answer. Then I would lean back and listen. Ah, what pleasure this gave me! He would unravel the scriptures and explain doctrine as no other man could. What had been mystery he made so plain it was no longer mystery.

He fed us deliciously with spiritual food. His discourses were becoming better every time he addressed the Saints, and we anticipated a continuance of these things.

I have both seen and heard him when filled with the Holy Ghost prophesy in the name of the Most High God, and I have lived to see many of those prophesies fulfilled, and some are now being fulfilled, and all will be in the due time of the Lord. I have heard him rebuke the wicked for their misdeeds until they would fear and trembled before him. I have seen him lay hands on the sick, and heard him rebuke disease, and in an instant raise from beds of sickness some who to all human appearance were past recovery, and this by the power of God which was in him. Indeed, he was a prophet of the living God.

Journal of Wandle Mace, Brigham Young University Library, pp. 36-37, 45-47, 92-93, 100-102, 129, 299-300
