Hyrum L. Andrus, Helen Mae Andrus, They Knew the Prophet ( 1974)

Mercy R. Thompson

A small company of friends gathered to witness the ceremony of my marriage to Robert B. Thompson, at Kirtland. The Prophet performed the ceremony. After the ceremony, we listened to the words of instruction and counsel which fell from the inspired lips of Joseph Smith, each word carrying to our hearts deeper and stronger convictions that we were listening to a mighty prophet of God. And yet there was not the slightest appearance of ostentation or conscious power on his part. He was as free and sociable as though we had all been his own brothers and sisters, or members of one family. He was as unassuming as a child.

In Nauvoo, I became more intimately acquainted with the Prophet, in consequence of my husband being employed as his secretary, and to whom the Prophet became very much attached, to much so that one day he jocosely said to me, "Sister Thompson, you must not feel bad towards me for keeping your husband away from you so much, for I am married to him."

They truly loved each other with fervent brotherly affection.

I have seen the Prophet under a great variety of circumstances. I have seen him as if carried away by the power of God beyond all mortal conception, when speaking to the Saints in their public gatherings; and in less public places I have heard him explaining to the brethren and sisters the glorious principles of the gospel as no man could, except by prophetic power.

I have seen him in the lyceum and heard him reprove the brethren for giving way to too much excitement and warmth in debate, and have listened to his clear and masterly explanations of deep and difficult questions.

To him all things seemed simple and easy to be understood, and thus he could make them plain to others as no other man could that I ever heard.

In a social gathering of the Saints at the bowery near the site of the Temple, I saw him rejoicing with the people, perfectly sociable and without reserve, occasionally uttering jokes for their amusement and moving upon the same plane with the humblest and poorest of his friends. To him there were no strangers.

Still he had enemies, and they were always bitter, who, wolf-like toward the lamb, hated him not so much as they thirsted for his blood, because their deeds were evil and their natures and their appetites had fallen to crave for violence and delight in vengeance.

I received my endowments by the directions of the Prophet Joseph, his wife Emma officiating in my case. In his instructions to me at that time, he said, "This will bring you out of darkness into marvelous light."

I saw him by the bedside of Emma, his wife, in sickness, exhibiting all the solicitude and sympathy possible for the tenderest of hearts and the most affectionate of natures to feel. And by the deathbed of my beloved companion, I saw him stand in sorrow, reluctantly submitting to the decree of Providence, while the tears of love and sympathy freely flowed.

This indeed was a time of sorrow, but I can never forget the tender sympathy and brotherly kindness he ever showed toward me and my fatherless child. When riding with him and his wife Emma in their carriage, I have known him to alight and gather prairie flowers for my little girl.

At another time—a time never to be forgotten—I was present at a meeting when Joseph knelt down with the small congregation surrounding him, when every sentence he uttered seemed to convey to my mind, and to the minds of others present, the impression that this was our last meeting together—and so it was.

It seemed to me that there was nothing forgotten or omitted by him, at that time, which pertained either to himself or the Church generally.

A few days after this, he called at his brother Hyrum's to take leave of the family previous to their crossing the Mississippi River, intending to go west to the Rocky Mountains to seek out, if possible, a place of peace and safety for the Saints. His parting words to my sister Mary, as she wept at their going, were these: "Sister Mary, don't feel bad. The Lord will take care of you, and He will deliver us, but I do not know how."

The two brothers then started to cross the river, not knowing whether they would ever see their homes again or not. But on account of the feelings expressed by some of the brethren, who should have been their truest friends, and by their urgent request, sent after them, they returned to Nauvoo the following day. Although I did not know that the brothers had returned home to be taken as "lambs to the slaughter," my feelings were indescribable, and the very air seemed burdened with sorrowful forebodings.

The Juvenile Instructor, XXVII, (July 1, 1892), pp. 398-400.
