Hyrum L. Andrus, Helen Mae Andrus, They Knew the Prophet ( 1974)

Christopher Merkley

After the Prophet Joseph came out of prison in Missouri, he called a conference at Quincy, Illinois. While the people were gathering, I was standing near the Prophet when a brother approached him and dunned him for money. The Prophet asked him where he thought he could have money, as he had just gotten out of prison. The man, however, still importuned him. The debt was not the Prophet's, but another brother's who had bought land from this man in Missouri. The Prophet had endorsed for the man who bought.

The Prophet told him that under the circumstances he thought he ought not to demand any pay. But the man was very obdurate, and insisted on having it.

Brother Joseph finally told him he had just five dollars in his pocket. If four dollars would do him any good, he could have them. These the man accepted.

Brother Joseph took five silver dollars out of his pocket and gave him four of them, returning one to his own pocket.

While I was walking around with the Prophet, a man came and told him a sister wanted to see him. Brother Joseph went to see her. I followed him. The sister was sick, and her friends had written to her from the East telling her if she would come back they would take care of her. She asked him what she should do.

Brother Joseph asked her what she would rather do.

She said she would rather stay with the Saints, if she was not too burdensome.

He said, "Then stay, sister, and God bless you."

He put his hand in his pocket and gave her his last dollar. He then instructed the brethren not to let her suffer.

At the close of the conference the Prophet Joseph went to Commerce. On his way he stopped at Lima to take dinner. I met him there and asked him if he would like a little money.

He said, "Yes, Brother Merkley. I am now on a journey of fifty miles, and I have not a dime in my pocket."

I gave him a sovereign.

He took me by the hand and blessed me, and said, "Brother Merkley, may you never want."

I never have.

Biography of Christopher Merkley, pp. 9-11.
