Hyrum L. Andrus, Helen Mae Andrus, They Knew the Prophet ( 1974)

Bathsheba W. Smith

The Prophet was a handsome man—splendid looking, a large man, tall and fair. He had a very nice complexion. His eyes were blue, and his hair a golden brown, and very pretty.

My first impressions were that he was an extraordinary man, a man of great penetration; was different from any other man I ever saw; had the most heavenly countenance; was genial, affable and kind; and looked the soul of honor and integrity.

I know him to be what he professed to be—a true prophet of God, and the Lord through him restored the everlasting gospel and every ordinance and endowment that will lead us into the celestial kingdom.

I have heard the Prophet Joseph preach many times. I have heard him prophesy, and I never knew but that everything came to pass that he said.

I heard him preach baptism for the dead; saw him baptizing for the dead in the Mississippi River. I heard him say, "Peradventure, the Ten Tribes were not on this globe, but a portion of this earth had cleaved off with them and went flying into space, and when the time comes, when the 'earth reels to and fro like a drunken man and the stars fall from heaven,' it will join on again."

I heard him preach that the ancient order of Abraham should be restored. He counseled the sisters not to trouble themselves in consequence of plural marriage, that all would be right, and the result would be for their glory and exaltation.

In Nauvoo, at his home, while playing with my baby boy, he said that children were the "honor, glory, and royal diadem of women."

Once when speaking in one of our general fast meetings, he said that we did not know how to pray to have our prayers answered. But when I and my husband had our endowments, in February, 1844, Joseph Smith presiding, he taught us the true order of prayer. I met many times with Brother Joseph and others who had received their endowments, in company with my husband, in an upper room dedicated for that purpose, and prayed with them repeatedly in those meetings.

I was present when William Law, Joseph Smith's counselor, was dropped from that Quorum by each one present voting yes or no in his turn. He was the first member that was dropped who had received his endowments. One member hesitated to vote, which called for earnest remarks from the Prophet Joseph. He showed clearly that it would be doing a serious wrong to retain him longer. After this explanation the vote was unanimous.

Joseph Smith attended one of our Relief Society meetings in the lodge room. He opened the meeting by prayer. His voice trembled very much, after which he addressed us and said, "According to my prayer, I will not be with you long to teach and instruct you, and the world will not be troubled with me much longer."

I used to go very often to Brother Joseph's house, though not much before I was married. Once at dinner, I knew he was looking at me, but I did not feel afraid bcause I knew I had always been good and obedient and had all the faith possible in him and Mormonism. So I just let him look at me. Pretty soon he said to my sister-in-law, "George hit the right stick when he got her."

And I have proved it, for my husband (George A. Smith) and I have lived happily together—like lovers.

The Prophet said we would come to the Rocky Mountains, and he had a company of young men selected to hunt a location for a home for the Saints. I heard of it when we were in Illinois, and I remember an old lady coming in and talking to Mother about what Joseph, the Prophet, had said, that we would be in the Rocky Mountains sometime. I said I would like the time to come soon. I would like to get away from our enemies. She gave me a right good scolding, saying it was terrible to think of going to the Rocky Mountains.

I have seen very many good men, but they had not the gift and blessing Joseph had. He was truly a prophet of God.

The Juvenile Instructor, XXVII (June 1, 1892), pp. 344-345; Young Woman's Journal, XVI (December, 1905), pp. 549-550; "Reminiscences of Bathsheba W. Smith," Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah, pp. 5-11.
