Hyrum L. Andrus, Helen Mae Andrus, They Knew the Prophet ( 1974)

Rachel Ridgeway Grant

The first time I saw the Prophet Joseph Smith was in New Jersey, before I joined the Church. He preached there that night, but I was prejudiced at the time. I just went to hear him mostly out of curiosity.

The Baptist minister warned me. He said if I did not stop going, I must give up my place in the Baptist Church; and then I went right along. I commenced to read the Voice of Warning and the Book of Mormon. I read nearly all night in the Book of Mormon, and felt that it was true, and then I got the spirit of gathering and went to Nauvoo.

The Prophet was not at home very much. His life was so often sought that he had to be hid up. After he had been in hiding and had came out, he was always jolly and happy. He would play with the people, and he was always cheerful and happy whenever he would come out. He was different in that respect from Brother Hyrum, who was more sedate, more serious. I thought at the time Hyrum seemed more like a prophet than Joseph did. You see, there was a great deal of sectarianism about me. Once when a schoolmate wanted me to go with her to hear the Mormons, I went Saturday, but did not want to go on Sunday at all. But I thought it would be impolite not to do as she wished, so I went. When I came home, I went right up stairs and asked the Lord to forgive me for going to hear them on Sunday.

I was many times at the Prophet's house, but not so many times when I saw him. We used to have parties there.

I guess you have seen the picture where Brother Joseph was preaching to the Indians. I was there at that time. The Indians were all Kneeling down on the grass in front of the Mansion, and if you have seen that picture, that just describes the way everything was, though it is a miserable picture of the Prophet. He was a fine, noble looking man, always so neat. There are some of the pictures that do not look a particle like him. When he was preaching you could feel the power and influence.

I know Joseph Smith was a prophet, and I have lived to see many of his sayings fulfilled.

Young Woman's Journal, XVI, (December, 1905), pp. 550-551
