Hyrum L. Andrus, Helen Mae Andrus, They Knew the Prophet ( 1974)

Margarette Mclntire Burgess

One morning when the Prophet called at our house, I had a very sore throat. It was much swollen and gave me great pain. He took me up in his lap and administered to me, and I was healed. I had no more pain nor soreness.

Another time my older brother and I were going to school, near the building which was known as Joseph's store. It had been raining the previous day, causing the ground to be very muddy, especially along that street. My brother Wallace and I both got fast in the mud and could not get out, and of course, childlike, we began to cry, for we thought we would have to stay there. But looking up, I beheld the loving friend of children, the Prophet Joseph, coming to us. He soon had us on higher and drier ground. Then he stooped down and cleaned the mud from our little, heavyladen shoes, took his handkerchief from his pocket and wiped our tear-stained faces. He spoke kind and cheering words to us, and sent us on our way to school rejoicing. Was it any wonder that I loved that great, good and noble man of God? As I grew older I felt to honor and love him, for his mission to earth in restoring the gospel of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

Joseph's wife, Sister Emma, lost a young babe. My mother having twin baby girls, the Prophet came to see if she would let him have one of them. Of course it was rather against her feelings, but she finally consented for him to take one of them, providing he would bring it home each night. This he did punctually himself, and also came after it each morning. One evening he did not come with it at the usual time, and mother went down to the Mansion to see what was the matter, and there sat the Prophet with the baby wrapped up in a little silk quilt. He was trotting it on his knee, and singing to it to get it quiet before starting out, as it had been fretting. The child soon became quiet when my mother took it, and the Prophet came up home with her.

Next morning when he came after the baby, mother handed him Sarah, the other baby. They looked so much alike that strangers could not tell them apart. But as mother passed him the other baby, he shook his head and said, "This is not my little Mary."

Then she took Mary from the cradle and gave her to him, and he smilingly carried her home with him. The baby Mary had a very mild disposition, while Sarah was quite cross and fretful, and by this my mother could distinguish them one from the other, though generally people could not tell them apart. But the Prophet soon knew which was the borrowed baby.

After his wife became better in health he did not take our baby any more, but often came in to caress her and play with her. When, after a time, the little one died, he grieved as if he had lost one of his own. I remember seeing him embrace the little cold form and say, "Mary, oh my dear little Mary!"

The Juvenile Instructor, XXVII (January 1, 1892), pp. 66-67; "Stories from the Notebook of Martha Cox, Grandmother of Fern Cox Anderson," Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah; Lee C. LaFayette, "Recollections of Joseph Smith," Church Historian's Library. Salt Lake City, Utah.
