Hyrum L. Andrus, Helen Mae Andrus, They Knew the Prophet ( 1974)

Sarah M. Kimball

I went with my husband, Hiram Kimball, to his home in Nauvoo, Illinois, three weeks after my marriage. When my eldest son was three days old, the Church was in need of help to assist in raising the Temple walls. I belonged to The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, but my husband was not yet a member. I wished to help on the Temple, but did not like to ask my husband (who owned considerable property) to help for my sake.

My husband came to my bedside, and as he was admiring our three-day-old darling, I said, "What is the boy worth?"

He replied, "Oh, I don't know; he is worth a great deal."

I said, "Is he worth a thousand dollars?"

The reply was, "Yes, more than that if he lives and does well."

I said, "Half of him is mine, is it not?"

"Yes, I suppose so."

"Then I have something to help on the Temple."

Pleasantly, "You have?"

"Yes, and I am thinking of turning my share right in as tithing."

"Well, I'll think about that."

Soon after the above conversation, Mr. Kimball met the Prophet and said, "Sarah has got a little the advantage of me this time. She proposes to turn out the boy as church property."

President Smith seemed pleased with the joke, and said. "I accept all such donations, and from this day the boy shall stand recorded, church property."

Then turning to Willard Richards, his secretary, he said. "Make a record of this; and you are my witness."

Joseph Smith then said, "Major (Mr. Kimball was major in the Nauvoo Legion), you now have the privilege of paying $500 and retaining possession, or receiving $500 and giving possession."

Mr. Kimball asked if city property was good currency.

President Smith replied that it was.

"Then," said Mr. Kimball, "how will that block north of the Temple suit?"

President Smith replied, "It is just what we want."

The deed was soon made out and transferred in due form.

President Smith said to me, "You have consecrated your first born son. For this you are blessed of the Lord. I bless you in the name of the Lord God of Abraham, of Isaac and of Jacob. And I seal upon you all the blessings that pertain to the faithful."

In the summer of 1843, a Miss Cooke was seamstress for me. The subject of combining our efforts for assisting the Temple hands came up in conversation. She desired to help, but had no means to furnish. I told her I would furnish material if she would make some shirts for the workmen. It was then suggested that some of our neighbors might wish to combine means and efforts with ours, and we decided to invite a few to come and consult with us on the subject of forming a Ladies' Society. The neighboring sisters met in my parlor and decided to organize. I was delegated to call on Sister Eliza R. Snow and ask her to write a constitution and by-laws, and submit them to President Smith prior to our next meeting. When she read them to him, he replied that the constitution and by-laws were the best he had ever seen.

"But," he said, "this is not what you want. Tell the sisters their offering is accepted of the Lord, and he has something better for them than a written constitution. I invite them all to meet with me and a few of the brethren next Thursday afternoon, and I will organize the women under the priesthood after the pattern of the priesthood."

He further said, "The Church was never perfectly organized until the women were thus organized."

He wished to have Sister Emma Smith elected to preside in fulfillment of the revelation which called her an elect lady.

Woman's Exponent, XII (September 1, 1883), p. 51.
