Hyrum L. Andrus, Helen Mae Andrus, They Knew the Prophet ( 1974)

Howard Coray

On the 3rd or 4th day of April, 1840, I set out with a few others for Nauvoo, for the purpose of attending conference, and to gratify a curiosity that I had to see the Prophet. Joseph Wood introduced me to Brother Joseph. The Prophet, after looking at me for a little and asking me some questions, wished to know if I would come to Nauvoo and clerk for him. I engaged at once to do so; and in a couple of weeks I was on hand to go to work.

The first thing he gave me to do was to copy a large pile of letters into a record. This labor was performed in his kitchen, our having no other place at that time to do such business.

While thus engaged, I had many very precious opportunities. Great and small, almost every day, were calling on him—some for one thing, and some for another; politicians and preachers of different persuasions, some with the view of testing the depth of his knowledge and, if possible, confounding him and putting him to shame. Well, what did I discover but that he was equal to every occasion, and perfect master of the situation. He possessed the power to make everybody realize his superiority, which they evinced in an unmistakable manner. I could clearly see that Joseph was the captain, no matter whose company he was in. Knowing the meagerness of his education, I was truly gratified at seeing his great ease, even in the company of the most scientific minds, and the ready, off-hand manner in which he would answer their questions. I heard him say that God had given him the key of knowledge by which he could trace any subject through all its ramifications.

I had heard it remarked that Joseph Smith was Sidney Rigdon's cat's-paw. Soon after President Rigdon returned from the East, he came to see Joseph, and the thought went through my mind: "Now I will see who the cat's-paw is."

Well, I did see. After passing the usual compliments, Rigdon said to Joseph: "When I was preaching in Philadelphia, after I had finished my discourse a man stepped up to me and desired me to explain something in John's Revelation (mentioning at the same time what it was). I could not do it. How is it Joseph?"

Joseph cited him at once a passage in Ezekiel and something in some other book of the Old Testament, saying that they explained all about it.

I thought to myself, "That doesn't look much like Joseph was a cat's-paw."

Stephen A. Douglas called to see him and ask him some questions. One thing he desired to know was how Joseph managed to govern a people so diverse, coming from so many different countries with their peculiar manners and customs.

"Well," Joseph said, "I simply teach them the truth, and they govern themselves."

Among other great men who called to see him was Cyrus Walker, a lawyer of much note. He tried to sound the Prophet, and see how deep he was. Well, it was with Walker as it had been with all the others. He soon got enough, found Joseph too deep for his lead and line, and gave up the enterprise. Thus it was in every instance that came under my observation. How could we expect it to be otherwise—for any man who had never peered into heaven and seen heavenly things to be a match for one who had had a half a score or more heavenly messengers for teachers.

I continued the work of copying his letters until I finished. He then desired me to write up the church history, saying that he would furnish all the material. I declined, telling him that I did not feel myself competent; but finally, having more confidence in him that I had in myself, I engaged in the business of a historian. He placed in my hands some items and scraps of history to arrange chronologically and fix up as best I could. We had now moved into his new office—a two-story building where it was arranged to do the office work in the upper story.

John C. Bennett was occupying a portion of the room, engaged in writing the Nauvoo Charter. Joseph dictated much of the charter. I could overhear the instruction he gave Bennett, and I know it was gotten up mainly as Joseph required.

One morning I went as usual into the office to go to work. I found Joseph sitting on one side of a table and Robert B. Thompson on the opposite side, and the understanding I got was that they were hunting in the manuscript of the new translation of the Bible for something on priesthood which Joseph wished to present or have read to the people the next conference. Well, they could not find what they wanted, and Joseph said to Thompson, "Put the manuscript to one side and take some paper, and I will tell you what to write."

Brother Thompson took some foolscap paper that was at his elbow and made himself ready for the business. I was seated probably six or eight feet on Joseph's left side, so that I could look almost squarely into the side of his eye. The Spirit of God descended upon him, and a measure of it upon me, insomuch that I could fully realize that God, or the Holy Ghost, was talking through him. I never, neither before or since, have felt as I did on that occasion.

In June, 1841, I met with an accident. The Prophet and I, after looking at his horses and admiring them across the road from his house, started thither. The Prophet at the same time put his arm over my shoulder. When we had reached about the middle of the road, he stopped and remarked, "Brother Coray, I wish you were a little larger. I would like to have some fun with you."

I replied, "Perhaps you can as it is"—not realizing what I was saying. The fact that Joseph was a man of over 200 lb., while I was scarcely 130 lb., made it not a little ridiculous for me to think of engaging with him in anything like a scuffle.

However, as soon as I made this reply, he began to trip me. He took some kind of a lock on my right leg, from which I was unable to extricate it, and throwing me around broke it some three inches above the ankle joint.

He immediately carried me into the house, pulled off my boot, and found at once that my leg was decidedly broken; then got some splinters and bandaged it. A number of times that day he came in to see me, endeavoring to console me as much as possible.

The next day when he happened in to see me after a little conversation, I said: "Brother Joseph, when Jacob wrestled with the angel and was lamed by him, the angel blessed him. Now I think I am also entitled to a blessing."

To that he replied, "I am not the Patriarch, but my father is, and when you get up and around, I'll have him bless you".

He said no more for a minute or so. Then, looking very earnestly at me, he declared, "Brother Coray, you will soon find a companion, one that will be suited to your condition and whom you will be satisfied with. She will cling to you like the cords of death; and you will have a good many children."

In nine days after my leg was broken I was able to get up and hobble about the house by the aid of a crutch, and in two weeks thereafter I was about recovered—so much so that I went to meeting on foot, a distance of a mile. I considered this no less than a case of miraculous healing.

Some three or four weeks after getting my leg broke, and while at meeting, the blessing of the Prophet came into my mind, VIZ: that I should soon find a companion. So I thought I would take a look at the congregation, that possibly the fair one promised me might be present. After looking awhile at the audience, my eyes settled upon a young lady sitting in a one-horse buggy. She was an entire stranger to me. I concluded to approach near enough to her to scan her features well, and thus be able to decide in my own mind whether her looks would satisfy my taste.

She had dark brown eyes, very bright and penetrating (at least they penetrated me), and I said to myself, "She will do."

The fact is, I was decidedly struck. After the dismissal of the meeting, instead of going for my dinner, I remained on the ground and commenced promenading about to see what I could see. I had not gone far before I came square in front of the lovely miss, walking arm in arm with a Mrs. Harris with whom I was well acquainted. They stopped and Mrs. Harris said, "Brother Coray, I have the honor of introducing you to Miss Martha Knowlton, from Bear Creek."

I, of course, bowed as politely as I knew how, and she curtsied, and we then fell into somewhat familiar conversation. I discovered at once that she was ready, offhand, and and inclined to be witty; also, that her mind took a wider range than was common for young ladies of her age.

This interview, though short, was indeed very enjoyable; it closed with the hope that she might be the one whom the Lord had picked for me. And thus it proved to be.

I let Brother Joseph into the secret—showed him a letter that I had written designed for her. He seemed to take uncommon interest in the matter. He took pains to see her and talk with her about me, telling her that I was just the one for her. A few letters passed between us. I visited her at her home, proposed, was accepted, and, on the 6th day of February, 1841, we were married at her father's house, Brother Robert B. Thompson performing the ceremony.

I will say in this connection that what the Prophet said in regard to the companion which I should soon find has been fully verified. A more intelligent, self-sacrificing, and devoted wife and mother few men have been blessed with. She became well acquainted with the Prophet; and, as such, greatly venerated him. I have frequently heard her say that he himself was the greatest miracle to her she had ever seen, and that she valued her acquaintance with him above almost everything else.

Journal of Howard Coray, Brigham Young University Library, pp. 7-13; Howard Coray Folder, Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah.
