Hyrum L. Andrus, Helen Mae Andrus, They Knew the Prophet ( 1974)

Lucy Walker Kimball

In the spring of 1841, Father took his family to Nauvoo. My brother, who had been staying with the Prophet, met us with an invitation to dinner, which we gladly accepted. We were introduced to the Prophet and his wife Emma, the dear children, who in after years I learned to love as my own brothers, and Julia, an adopted daughter, as my sister.

During the summer, Mother was taken with chills and fever. One after another of the children were also attacked with the same disease until all were in a helpless condition. Mother was invited to spend a few days at the Prophet's house, the Prophet's family thinking a change would benefit her. But she could not be content away from her afflicted family. She lingered until January, 1842, then passed away.

Calling her children around her bed, she bore a faithful testimony that Joseph Smith was a prophet of God, and that through him the gospel of the Son of God had been restored in its fulness. She then closed her eyes, and her sweet spirit passed away, leaving a beautiful smile on her dear face. We were in the depths of despair. Ten motherless children! The youngest was not yet two years old. What were we to do?

The Prophet came to our rescue. He said, "If you remain here, Brother Walker, you will soon follow your wife. You must have a change of scene, a change of climate. You have just such a family as I could love. My house shall be their home. I will adopt them as my own. For the present I would advise you to sell your effects, place the little one with some kind friends, and the four eldest shall come to my house and be received and treated as my own children, and if I find the others are not content or not treated right, I will bring them home and keep them until you return."

I wrung my hands in the agony of despair at the thought of our being broken up as a family, and being separated from my loved ones. "But," said the Prophet, "my home shall be you home, eternally yours."

My father sought to comfort us by saying two years would soon pass away, then we might be together again. Soon after he left, my sister Lydia (aged eight years and eleven months) was attacked with brain fever. We had visited her several times and found that all that was done did not relieve her sufferings. When we told the Prophet how very sick she was, he told the boys to put a bed in the carriage and he went with them. He told the family that they must excuse him, but he was under the greatest obligation to look after their welfare and had come to take her to his own house where he could see to her himself. Everything that could be done was done, but she was to join her dear mother in the spirit world, and we were left more lonely than before.

Our own father and mother could scarcely have done more or manifested greater solicitude for her recovery than did the Prophet and his wife Emma. They watched with us by her bedside; and when all was over, they accompanied us to her last resting place beside her mother.

One after another was brought to the Prophet's home, until all the younger members of the family were there except the baby. My brother William married Olive Hovey Farr, in the fall of 1843. They boarded at the Mansion six months, then went to house-keeping and took the children with them.

The Prophet and his wife introduced us as their sons and daughters. Every privilege was accorded us in the home. He often referred to my brother Lorin as "his Edwin." He was his trusted friend; arm in arm they walked and conversed freely on various subjects. He was with him when he was arrested at Dixon, by Wilson and Reynolds, who were determined to take him down the river to Missouri, but were foiled in this attempt.

They were forced to take him through the state by way of Nauvoo. Lorin hurried on home, brought the Prophet's favorite horse Charley, and met him on foot, weary and covered with dust. The Prophet warmly embraced him, mounted his horse, and rode into Nauvoo. As they drew near the city the people turned out en masse to greet him.

At the time he crossed the river and was making arrangements to go beyond the Rocky Mountains, he said, "I have the promise of life for five years if I listen to the voice of the Spirit."

But when Emma and some of his brethren besought him to return, he said, "If my life is worth nothing to you it is worth nothing to me."

He well knew that he must sacrifice his life for the principles God had revealed through him. Death had no terrors for him although life was dear. I have often heard him say he expected to seal his testimony with his blood. He anticipated great joy in meeting his parents and friends beyond the grave. He believed that as soon as the spirit left the body we were shaking hands with and greeting our friends.

The Prophet Joseph Smith often referred to the feelings that should exist between husbands and wives, that they, his wives, should be his bosom companions, the nearest and dearest objects on earth in every sense of the word. He said men should beware how they treat their wives, that they were given them for a holy purpose, that the myriads of spirits waiting for tabernacles might have pure and healthy bodies. He also said many would awake on the morning of the resurrection sadly disappointed; for they, by transgression, would have neither wives nor children, for they surely would be taken from them and given to those who should prove themselves worthy. Again he said, a woman would have her choice; this was a privilege that could not be denied her.

President Joseph Smith taught me the principle of plural marriage, which, after much serious thought and prayer for many months, I became convinced was a principle revealed from heaven. On the first day of May, 1843, I consented to become the Prophet's wife, and was sealed to him for time and all eternity, at his own house, by Elder William Clayton.

Woman's Exponent, XXXIX, (November, 1910), pp. 33-34; (January, 1911), p. 43.
