Hyrum L. Andrus, Helen Mae Andrus, They Knew the Prophet ( 1974)

William Holmes Walker

My father sent me to Nauvoo on some business with the Prophet. I arrived at his house just as his family was singing, before the accustomed evening prayer. His wife, Emma, was leading the singing. I thought I had never heard such sweet, heavenly music before. I was equally interested in the prayer offered by the Prophet. Much pleased with my visit, and my business accomplished satisfactorily, I returned home in a few days.

Later, I returned to Joseph Smith's and entered his employ, and was a member of his family, taking an interest in his domestic affairs, remaining three years without asking compensation. I went into the hayfield with him and assisted in mowing grass with a scythe many a day, putting in ten hours of good hard work. Very few, if any, were his superior in that kind of work. The more extensive my acquaintance and experience became with him, the more my confidence in him increased.

On one occasion when he was mayor of the city of Nauvoo, it became his duty to fine a Negro for violating the city ordinance with regard to selling liquor. The Negro pleaded for mercy, saying that his object in doing so was to raise money to send for his family. The mayor would not shrink from his duty, and he fined him $75.00, but told him that if he would not be guilty of doing so again he would make him a present of a horse to assist him, which he accepted.

The Urim and Thummim [the Seer Stone?] were once placed in my charge for a time, and many other important trusts were confided to me, which I am happy to say were held sacred to myself.

The Prophet had a great many callers, not merely those of his own faith. True and well-tried friends, and those from different parts of the earth, came to make a permanent home in Nauvoo and were anxious to see him; but strangers from all parts of the country, traveling up and down the river, almost invariably made it a point to call and see "The Prophet," as they called him.

On one occasion a man by the name of Joseph Jackson called. Not finding Joseph at home, I heard him say to Mrs. Smith, "You tell the Prophet that the wickedest man on earth called to see him."

Future developments proved that he told the truth for once.

It was quite a common occurrence in those days for officers to suddenly appear with an arrest for "Old Joe Smith," on some flimsy, trumped-up charge. One day in the summer of 1842, I was sitting at the dinner table with the Prophet, when, without a word being spoken by any person present, he arose suddenly from the table and went out of the room. No sooner had he closed the door than an officer entered by another door. Joseph walked some twenty rods across the block in a path leading to the brick store, in full view of another officer. Then he disappeared, without being discovered by either.

On another occasion some officers came into the city and put up at the hotel, just above his residence. Joseph gave me directions to take his horse "Joe Dunkin" (named after Governor Dunkin) and put on his military bridle, saddle, and portmanteaus (the articles cost $100.00) and ride up Main Street to the upper landing, cross on the ferry boat to Montrose, from there to Keokuk. From that the report started that I had taken the horse to "Joe" Smith, and he had gone on west. Meantime I returned to Nauvoo with the horse, but no one knew that the horse had returned, neither friend or foe.

An incident shows the contempt he had for any person of questionable character. In regard to his private life, as to purity, honesty, virtue, charity, benevolence, liberality, refined and sensitive feelings, and nobility of character, his superior did not exist on earth.

Not long after the Mansion was open as a hotel, a stranger came and registered. Just before supper he insulted one of the hired girls. The Prophet heard of it after the stranger had retired. The next morning he met him as he came down from his room and said, "Sir, I understand that you insulted one of the employees of this house last evening."

The stranger began to make all kinds of apologies, but nothing would answer the purpose. The Prophet told the stranger to get his baggage and to get, in a tone of voice that almost made his hair stand straight on his head. The man offered to pay his bill.

"I want you to get. I want none of your money, or any other man's of your stamp."

Upon that, the stranger struck a lively exit.

In the spring of 1844, President Smith thought it wise, considering that his life was in danger in Nauvoo, to go west with his family and select friends. His wife and some others thought that if they left the city would be laid in ashes, and the people destroyed. They were so zealous they said they would stay and die with them. However, Joseph Smith and his brother started west. Delegation after delegation was sent to him, to prevail on him to return and give himself up.

Sunday morning, three days before the martyrdom, I was in front of the Mansion with Emma. Looking up the street, she exclaimed, "There is lawyer Wood. I am glad. Joseph will have confidence in him and will come back."

Wood had been sent by Governor Ford with a pledge for the Prophet's safety, and fair trial. In answer to the argument for Joseph to give himself up, the Prophet said, "If my life is of no value to my people, it is of no value to me."

Sure enough, about sunset June 23, he and his brother Hyrum returned to the Mansion. I was at the time sitting alone in the private parlor. Joseph was so overcome with grief he could hardly speak at first. As soon as he could control his feelings, he said he was going to give himself up for trial.

Diary of William Holmes Walker, Brigham Young University Library, pp. 3, 7-14.
