Hyrum L. Andrus, Helen Mae Andrus, They Knew the Prophet ( 1974)

Lucy M. Smith

I first met the Prophet Joseph Smith when I landed at the ferry in Nauvoo. The first words he said were, "I guess you are all Latter-day Saints here, by the singing I heard when the boat landed."

He shook hands with each one in the company, and then took his sister's (Lucy Milican) seven-month-old boy in his arms and sat down and wept for joy, as his sister was thought to be in a decline when she left home the year before with her husband. She was the picture of health, and this gave the Prophet double joy in meeting her with her son.

I heard the Prophet preach twice, once at his Mansion and once at the bowery. He spoke on the plurality of gods. He said, "There are lords many and gods many, but to us there is but one God. There are gods to other planets. We read in the Bible, 'Father, Son and Holy Ghost, these three are one.' It should read, 'These three agree.'"

He remarked that he would like to speak to the people two hours, but the rain made such a noise on the umbrellas (it was raining at the time) it would be useless. "But," said he, "I have brought the Laws' and Fosters' prophecy to the ground, as they predicted I should never speak from this stand again; but I have."

He then said, "Brethren and sisters, love one another; love one another and be merciful to your enemies."

He repeated these words in a very emphatic tone of voice, with a loud, "Amen."

Within a few days he went to Carthage; and on the evening of the 27th of June, such a barking and howling of dogs and bellowing of cattle all over the city of Nauvoo I never heard before nor since. I was at Brother David Smith's house. I knelt down and tried to pray for the Prophet, but I was struck speechless, and knew not the cause till next morning. Of course the awful deed was already accomplished, when the Spirit refused to give me utterance to pray the evening before. The next day the bodies were brought to the Mansion. Thousands of men, women and children were weeping all around.

The little children were very much attached to the Prophet, for he used to play with them as one of their equals. Indeed, he was loved best by those who were the most acquainted with him. His daughter, Julia, told me that her papa talked to her before he left, and told her to be a good girl; and he particularly enjoined it upon her to never mistreat any of her playmates, and then he should be happy to meet her again.

"Oh," said she, "how bad I should feel if I thought I should not be prepared to meet my dear papa!"

My two brothers, Freeborn and David Smith, came to Nauvoo in the fall of 1842. They were very much attached to the Prophet Joseph Smith. My brother David was passing his store one the day and he said the man of God ran out, took him by the hand and said, "God bless you, Brother Smith."

He said it made him feel so good to have the Prophet of God take so much pains to come out to shake his hand and bless him, he felt it through his whole system.

The Juvenile Instructor, XXVII (August 1, 1892), pp. 470-471
