Hyrum L. Andrus, Helen Mae Andrus, They Knew the Prophet ( 1974)

Eunice Billings Snow

I went to school with the Prophet Joseph's children. There was an adopted daughter in the family named Murdock, generally called Julia Smith. She was a constant companion of mine, and for that reason I often visited the Prophet's home.

During the persecution of the Prophet, especially when he was in hiding, he would sometimes be allowed to visit his family for an evening, and would request my father and mother to come to sing for him. They would take me with them, and when Joseph found that I could sing a part alone he requested them to bring me. We would sing his favorite hymns: "When Joseph His Brethren Beheld," "Redeemer of Israel," "The Spirit of God," and several others. He would become so inspired with the spirit of the music that he would clap his hands and shout hosanna to the Lord.

He would have me sit close to him, and laying his hands on my head would say, "My little sister, you will be able to sing the songs of Zion as long as you desire."

He also blessed me on different occasions.

I was always very much affected by the Spirit which he manifested. At first I did not know what it was, but my mother told me it was the power which Joseph possessed.

My mother sometimes did knitting for Emma Hale, and one time when I took some work home I was ushered directly into Emma's bedroom, when some person jumped behind the door Emma called to him, it being the Prophet, and said, "Do not be afraid, it is Mrs. Billings' young daughter."

It was the time of a raid. When Joseph appeared from behind the door, he put his hand on my head and remarked, "God bless you, you won't tell where I am, will you?"

I replied, "No, sir, I will not."

I would have suffered any punishment before I would have told where he was. It made me feel so strange at the time when he put his hand on my head, and again I asked my mother why it was, and she said it was the power which he possessed.

Some of the most impressive moments of my life were when I saw the Nauvoo Legion on parade with the Prophet (then General Joseph Smith) with his wife, Emma Hale Smith, on horseback at the head of the troops. It was indeed an imposing sight. He so fair, and she so dark, in their beautiful riding-habits. He in full military suit, and she with her habit trimmed with gold buttons, a neat cap on her head, with a black plume in it, while the Prophet wore a red plume in his, and a red sash across his breast. His coat was black, while his white pants had red stripes on the outside seams. He also wore a sword at his side. His favorite riding-horse was named Charlie, a big black steed.

I remember hearing the Prophet the last time he spoke in Nauvoo. He said, "I go like a lamb to the slaughter," referring to the great shadow, which seemed even then to hover over his life and to foreshadow his impending doom.

On the last day which he spent in Nauvoo, he passed our house with his brother Hyrum, both riding. My mother and I were standing in the dooryard, and as he passed he bowed with uplifted hat to my mother. Hyrum seemed like one in a dream, sad and despondent, taking no notice of anyone. They were on their way to the Carthage jail, and it was the last time I saw the Prophet alive. Shortly after this, my father came home and told my mother that the Prophet and his brother had been murdered, whereupon my mother exclaimed, "How can it be possible? Will the Lord allow anything like that?"

Immediately she sank back in her chair and fainted. When she came to herself, my father lamented the fact with her.

Lucy Mack Smith, Emma Hale Smith, my mother and I, together viewed the bodies, and I shall never forget the impression made upon me when the Prophet's mother saw the bodies of her dead sons. Falling on her knees and clasping her hands, she cried out. "O God, why were my noble sons permitted to be martyred?"

Then controlling herself with a mighty effort, she said, "Thy will, not mine, O Lord, be done."

Woman's Exponent XXXIX (August, 1910), p. 14; (September 1910), p. 22.
