Hyrum L. Andrus, Helen Mae Andrus, They Knew the Prophet ( 1974)

James Palmer

When the Sabbath day came, the Saints assembled in a grove near the Temple where was erected a stand or platform for the speakers. The Prophet did not always address the meetings, but when he did all ears were opened and the most profound silence was observed, and those that spoke in his presence, no matter on what subject, allowed themselves to be corrected if needed, which he did in a kind and Christianlike manner.

It did not take long to win my most profound regard and esteem for this man of God. He could make the gospel so plain to the understanding that you would think you had always known it, whereas you had only just been taught it. While preaching, he had the appearance of one that was heaven-born, who had been sent from the heavenly worlds on a divine mission. He was a man of fine form and stature, measuring over six feet in height. He was of light complexion. His hair was of a flaxen color. He wore no whiskers. His chin was a little tipped; his nose was long and straight; his mouth was narrow, and his upper lip rather long and a little inclined to be thick. He had a large full chest and intelligent eyes, and fine legs. Altogether he presented a very formidable appearance, being a man of gentlemanly bearing. The kindness he manifested in all the walks of life caused him to be beloved by the little boys and girls, who often sought his company, as well as by the many thousands of his people who looked upon him with pride as their leader and director in the great latter-day work.

There were great threats of mob violence by the anti-Mormons who lived in adjoining counties. They wished to drive us from the state because we outnumbered them at the ballot box. On election days, we could elect our county officers. They despised us also because of our religion. They would muster and parade and call it a wolf hunt. Some of our brethren were shot at while quietly at home inside their own houses. At this time, the Prophet proclaimed a day of fasting and prayer through all the wards of the city, praying Almighty God to turn away the anger of our enemies and allow us to live in peace. At the same time he advised us to prepare to protect ourselves if they came upon us.

The Prophet had to hide, for some among us were his avowed enemies. However, he wrote to the Church from time to time, instructing on the ordinance of baptism for the dead and other important matters.

In a public meeting of the Saints near the Temple he said that he had accomplished that which the world could never rob him of. The Church of Christ was established, never more to be cast down or overcome, or given to another people. Said he, "I did translate the Book of Mormon by the gift and power of God, and it is before the world; and all the powers of earth and hell can never rob me of the honor of it."

On another occasion, he spoke of the angel coming forth as recorded in the revelation of Saint John on the Isle of Patmos, which reads: "I saw another angel fly in the midst of heaven, having the everlasting gospel to preach to them that dwell on the earth, and to every nation, and kindred, and tongue, and people, saying with a loud voice, Fear God, and give glory to him; for the hour of his judgment is come." (Revelation 14:6-7.)

The Prophet said this was the angel that appeared unto him and commissioned him to preach the gospel. His was a divine mission that God would honor, and he wished the Saints to understand this, and to be firm and know most assuredly that this was so. Yes, verily so.

This was a testimony that I was glad to hear. It was given in such a kind manner, and with such force and power, that it seemed to me no man could disbelieve such a powerful statement as he made that day, and the Spirit of God seemed to carry his words deep into the hearts of the people. It might be consistently said that all present believed him, for they manifested by signs unmistakable, throughout the entire congregation, that such was the fact.

I was in attendance at a public meeting held in a grove when the Prophet delivered a lengthy discourse on the dreadful war that would be brought about between the Northern and Southern States. He predicted in what state it would commence, and the condition of the contending armies: that many of the slain would not get a decent burial, but would rot upon the ground, and the wolves and turkey buzzards would eat their flesh by thousands. There was a large audience present. I was minus a seat, so I moved quietly to the back of the stand which the Prophet occupied, and there I discovered Theodore Turley pacing to and fro, and strongly contemplating upon the Prophet's discourse as it was then pealing forth from the stand. Said I to him, "What think you of this?"

"Oh," said he, "this is dreadful, and it will all come to pass just as sure as we are here this day."

James Palmer, "Reminiscence and Journal," original handwritten manuscript in Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah, pp. 69, 73-76.
